The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AutoSTL: Automated Spatio-Temporal Multi-Task Learning
Zijian Zhang1,2,3,7 , Xiangyu Zhao2,7 * , Hao Miao4 , Chunxu Zhang1,3 , Hongwei Zhao1,3 , Junbo
Zhang5,6
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
3
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, China
4
Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Denmark
5
JD Intelligent Cities Research, China
6
JD iCity, JD Technology, China
7
Hong Kong Institute for Data Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{zhangzj2114,cxzhang19}@mails.jlu.edu.cn, xianzhao@cityu.edu.hk, haom@cs.aaudk, zhaohw@jlu.edu.cn,
msjunbozhang@outlook.com
2

300

Abstract
Spatio-temporal prediction plays a critical role in smart city
construction. Jointly modeling multiple spatio-temporal tasks
can further promote an intelligent city life by integrating their
inseparable relationship. However, existing studies fail to address this joint learning problem well, which generally solve
tasks individually or a fixed task combination. The challenges
lie in the tangled relation between different properties, the
demand for supporting flexible combinations of tasks and
the complex spatio-temporal dependency. To cope with the
problems above, we propose an Automated Spatio-Temporal
multi-task Learning (AutoSTL) method to handle multiple
spatio-temporal tasks jointly. Firstly, we propose a scalable
architecture consisting of advanced spatio-temporal operations to exploit the complicated dependency. Shared modules and feature fusion mechanism are incorporated to further
capture the intrinsic relationship between tasks. Furthermore,
our model automatically allocates the operations and fusion
weight. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets verified that our model achieves state-of-the-art performance. As
we can know, AutoSTL is the first automated spatio-temporal
multi-task learning method.

200

r1 r2

In flow

r3

Out flow

r1
r2

100
0
03-31

04-01

04-02

04-03

(a) Illustration of in/out flow (b) In/out flow of r1 and r2
Figure 1: Illustration of close relationship between multiple
spatio-temporal properties and regions.

2021), on-demand flow prediction (Feng et al. 2021), traffic speed prediction (Li et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2019), etc.
Most spatio-temporal prediction researches are engaged in
pursuing higher model capacity on a single task. Nevertheless, it is pivotal to propose an architecture that is capable of
jointly handling multiple spatio-temporal prediction tasks.
The properties of different tasks evolve coherently, and addressing the intrinsic information sharing between different
tasks benefits each task (Caruana 1997). Firstly, different
properties of a single region are highly related. As illustrated
in Figure 1(a), traffic in flow and out flow of region r2 are
highly-correlated, which share consistent volume and fluctuation. On the other hand, different properties of different regions share similar characteristics. In Figure 1(b), in flow of
r1 and out flow of r2 vary with similar periodicity and trend.
A similar phenomenon generally appears between multiple
properties as well as nonadjacent regions. Capturing multiple tasks together can benefit both efficiency and efficacy
(Tang et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2022a).
Researchers have been paying growing attention to
Spatio-Temporal Multi-Task Learning (STMTL). The earliest attempt employs convolutional neural network to model
the traffic flow and on-demand flow (Zhang et al. 2019).
LSTM-based method was also incorporated to predict traffic in flow and out flow simultaneously (Zhang et al. 2020).

Introduction
With the conspicuous progress of data mining techniques,
spatio-temporal prediction has unprecedentedly facilitated
today’s society, such as traffic state modeling (Zhang,
Zheng, and Qi 2017; Wang et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2020;
Xu et al. 2016), urban crime prediction (Zhao et al. 2022b;
Zhao and Tang 2017a,b), next point-of-interest recommendation (Guo et al. 2016; Cui et al. 2021), etc.Spatio-temporal
prediction aims to model spatial and temporal patterns from
historical spatio-temporal data, and predict the future states.
Generally, the spatio-temporal prediction tasks are defined and handled individually. Take traffic state modeling, the focus of this paper, as an example, the traffic
state has been divided into multiple tasks, such as traffic flow prediction (Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017; Ye et al.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4902

