The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Deep Evidential Regression
Nis Meinert1 * , Jakob Gawlikowski2 * , Alexander Lavin1
1

Pasteur Labs, 19 Morris Avenue, Brooklyn Navy Yard Building 128, Brooklyn, NY 11205, USA
2
German Aerospace Center, Institute of Data Science, Mälzerstraße 3-5, 07745 Jena, Germany
nis.meinert@simulation.science, jakob.gawlikowski@dlr.de, lavin@simulation.science

Abstract

2009; Kendall and Gal 2017; Hüllermeier and Waegeman
2021). The former quantifies system stochasticity such as
observation and process noise, and the latter is model-based
or subjective uncertainty due to limited data.
The field has largely focused on Bayesian NN approaches
that use Monte Carlo sampling and other approximate inference techniques to estimate uncertainty of deep NN models. A different approach to uncertainty-aware NNs may be
useful to more efficiency quantify, and also to disentangle,
the several types of uncertainties: Deep Evidential Regression (DER) aims to simultaneously predict both uncertainty
types in a single forward pass without sampling or utilization of out-of-distribution data, based on learning evidential distributions for aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties
(Amini et al. 2020). Yet only with simple empirical demonstrations on univariate regression tasks, this technique has
already been applied and recommended in medical and other
safety critical applications (Liu et al. 2021; Soleimany et al.
2021; Cai et al. 2021; Chen, Bromuri, and van Eekelen 2021;
Singh et al. 2022; Petek et al. 2022; Li and Liu 2021). With
an alternative derivation and experimentation, we identify
theoretical shortcomings that do not justify the empirical results let alone the assumed reliability in practice — it can
be vital to understand to what degree the uncertainty estimations are trustworthy.
In the following, we resolve the supposedly unreasonable
effectiveness and relate it to convergence patterns of the predicted uncertainties. Furthermore, we propose re-definitions
of the original approach and discuss generalizations.

There is a significant need for principled uncertainty reasoning in machine learning systems as they are increasingly
deployed in safety-critical domains. A new approach with
uncertainty-aware regression-based neural networks (NNs),
based on learning evidential distributions for aleatoric and
epistemic uncertainties, shows promise over traditional deterministic methods and typical Bayesian NNs, notably with
the capabilities to disentangle aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties. Despite some empirical success of Deep Evidential
Regression (DER), there are important gaps in the mathematical foundation that raise the question of why the proposed
technique seemingly works. We detail the theoretical shortcomings and analyze the performance on synthetic and realworld data sets, showing that Deep Evidential Regression is
a heuristic rather than an exact uncertainty quantification. We
go on to discuss corrections and redefinitions of how aleatoric
and epistemic uncertainties should be extracted from NNs.

1

Introduction

Using neural networks (NNs) for regression tasks is one of
the main applications of modern machine learning. Given a
dataset of (⃗xi , ⃗yi ) pairs, the typical objective is to train a NN
f⃗i ≡ f⃗(⃗xi |ω) w.r.t. ω such that a given loss L(⃗yi , f⃗i ) ≡
Li (ω) becomes minimal for each (⃗xi , ⃗yi ) pair. Traditional
regression-based NNs are designed to output the regression
target, a.k.a., the prediction for ⃗yi , directly which allows a
subsequent minimization, for example of the sum of squares:
2
X
X
min
Li (ω) = min
⃗yi − f⃗(⃗xi |ω) .
(1)
ω

i

ω

i

1.1

⃗
Technically, this is nothing
P but a fit of a model f , parameterized with ω, w.r.t. i Li to data. As with any fit, the
model has to find a balance between being too specific (overfitting) and being too general (under-fitting). In machine
learning this balance is typically evaluated by analyzing the
trained model on a separated part of the given data which
was not seen during training. In practice, no model will be
able to describe this evaluation sample perfectly and deviations can be categorized into two groups: aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties (Hora 1996; Kiureghian and Ditlevsen

Disentangling Aleatoric and Epistemic
Uncertainties

The residual between the genuine and the predicted value
of an imperfect model can be disentangled into an aleatoric
and epistemic contribution. In theory, the former is related to
the noise level in the data and, typically, does not depend on
the sample size. In contrast, the latter scales with the sample
size, and either allows the model to be pulled towards the observed distribution if the sample size is increased in this region, or allows the fit of a more complex model and thus decreasing under-fitting in general. In practice, however, both
types can be non-trivially correlated and disentangling both
without relying on a-priori assumptions is often ambiguous.
Even if both types are uncorrelated, observing a single de-

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9134

