The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Approximations for Indivisible Concave Allocations with Applications to
Nash Welfare Maximization
Nathaniel Kell1 , Kevin Sun2
1

Denison University
2
Elon University
kelln@denison.edu, ksun4@elon.edu

specified utility ui,j for each item j. An algorithm must partition the items into disjoint sets (A1 , A2 , . . . An ), one for
each agent. The overall valuation agent i has for her set is
vi (ui ), where her valuation vi : R+ → R is permitted to
be any monotone (non-decreasing)
concave function of her
P
total additive utility ui =
j∈Ai ui,j . The objective is to
maximize the
P welfare of the allocation, i.e., the sum of agent
valuations i vi (ui ). For ease of comparison to prior work,
we refer to such valuations vi (·) as concave additive.
The focus of this paper is on obtaining efficient allocations for ICA, i.e., designing approximation algorithms.
However, several recent works have established close connections between approximability and fairness guarantees, e.g., see (Barman, Krishnamurthy, and Vaish 2018),
(McGlaughlin and Garg 2020). Indeed, when optimizing
over a concave objective, an efficient allocation must ultimately strike the correct balance between a utilitarian allocation (i.e., assign each item j to agent arg maxi ui,j ) and an
egalitarian allocation (one that maximizes mini ui ), where
the trade off between these two extremes depends on the degree of concavity. Thus, a primary technical goal of our work
is to provide a precise and unified characterization for how
to achieve this balance for the general class of concave additive functions.

Abstract
We study a general allocation setting where agent valuations
are concave additive. In this model, a collection of items
must be uniquely distributed among a set of agents, where
each agent-item pair has a specified utility. The objective is
to maximize the sum of agent valuations, each of which is an
arbitrary non-decreasing concave function of the agent’s total additive utility. This setting was studied by Devanur and
Jain (STOC 2012) in the online setting for divisible items.
In this paper, we obtain both multiplicative and additive approximations in the offline setting for indivisible items. Our
approximations depend on novel parameters that measure the
local multiplicative/additive curvatures of each agent valuation, which we show correspond directly to the integrality
gap of the natural assignment convex program of the problem. Furthermore, we extend our additive guarantees to obtain constant multiplicative approximations for Asymmetric
Nash Welfare Maximization when agents have smooth valuations. This algorithm also yields an interesting tatonnementstyle interpretation, where agents adjust uniform prices and
items are assigned according to maximum weighted bangper-buck ratios.

Introduction
In recent years the study of indivisible allocation has received increasing attention: given a collection of indivisible
items and a set of agents, each with a specified valuation
function, how should items be distributed among the agents
as to maximize a specified measure of overall welfare or fairness? Many classic allocation and market models consider
divisible goods that can be split fractionally among agents.
From an optimization perspective, there are several wellknown methods for computing optimal fractional assignments in polynomial time (e.g., ellipsoid methods), while indivisible variants are often NP-hard. Ensuring fairness also
becomes more complex in the indivisible setting, especially
when agents exhibit diminishing returns in their valuations.
In this paper, we study a general yet natural allocation
model that lies at the intersection of these algorithmic challenges, which we call Indivisible Allocation with ConcaveAdditive Valuations (ICA). As input, we are given a set of
n agents and m indivisible items, where each agent i has a

Model Motivation. ICA is an indivisible variant of the
fractional online problem studied by Devanur and Jain
(2012). This model was primarily motivated by applications
in internet advertising, where agents correspond to advertisers and items correspond to so-called “impressions” (opportunities to show ads to users). In this setting, ui,j translates to
the bid value an advertiser i is willing pay for impression j.
The concave objective is then used to capture common contract features in internet ad systems such as under-delivery
penalties and soft budgets.
However, given the special role concave functions have
played in the economics literature, we believe ICA is a natural problem to consider in its own right. For example, a
standard class of valuations is that of separable concave valuations (Chen et al. 2009; Vazirani and Yannakakis 2011;
Anari et al. 2018; Chaudhury et al. 2018), which can be decomposed into the sum of monotone concave functions over
the amount received from each good (or in the indivisible
settings, the numbers of copies of a single good). Thus, such

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5705

