The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Unsupervised Hierarchical Domain Adaptation for Adverse Weather Optical Flow
Hanyu Zhou1 , Yi Chang1 * , Gang Chen2 , Luxin Yan1 ,
1

National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing, School of Artificial Intelligence
and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
hyzhou@hust.edu.cn, yichang@hust.edu.cn, cheng83@mail.sysu.edu.cn, yanluxin@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
PWC

Optical flow estimation has made great progress, but usually
suffers from degradation under adverse weather. Although
semi/full-supervised methods have made good attempts, the
domain shift between the synthetic and real adverse weather
images would deteriorate their performance. To alleviate this
issue, our start point is to unsupervisedly transfer the knowledge from source clean domain to target degraded domain.
Our key insight is that adverse weather does not change the
intrinsic optical flow of the scene, but causes a significant difference for the warp error between clean and degraded images.
In this work, we propose the first unsupervised framework for
adverse weather optical flow via hierarchical motion-boundary
adaptation. Specifically, we first employ image translation to
construct the transformation relationship between clean and
degraded domains. In motion adaptation, we utilize the flow
consistency knowledge to align the cross-domain optical flows
into a motion-invariance common space, where the optical
flow from clean weather is used as the guidance-knowledge
to obtain a preliminary optical flow for adverse weather. Furthermore, we leverage the warp error inconsistency which
measures the motion misalignment of the boundary between
the clean and degraded domains, and propose a joint intraand inter-scene boundary contrastive adaptation to refine the
motion boundary. The hierarchical motion and boundary adaptation jointly promotes optical flow in a unified framework.
Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments have been
performed to verify the superiority of the proposed method.

PWC

(a) Clean scene

Translation

Adaptation

PWC

?

(b) Rainy scene

(c) Proposed method

Rain

Fog

Snow

(d) Adverse weather optical flow

Figure 1: (a) and (b) Classical PWC-Net obtains good flow
on the clean scene yet fails to produce satisfactory optical
flow under the real degraded scene. (c) The proposed method
HMBA-FlowNet bypasses the difficulty of directly estimating
adverse weather optical flow, and proposes the first unsupervised domain adaptation method to transfer the knowledge
from clean domain. (d) Optical flow could be estimated by
the proposed method under various real adverse scenes.
The existing methods have made attempts to get rid of the
negative influence of adverse weather for optical flow estimation. The optimization-based optical estimation method
(Li, Tan, and Cheong 2018) focuses on specific weather conditions rainy or foggy with sophisticated hand-crafted prior,
which makes them less suitable for various adverse weather.
The learning-based methods require the ground truth labels
of clean image, optical flow (Li et al. 2019) or auxiliary gyroscope information (Li, Luo, and Liu 2021), which are not
easy to be acquired in real-world scenes. Although previous
learning-based methods have achieved great progress, the
domain shift between the synthetic and real adverse weather
images restricts their performance in real adverse scenes.
To overcome the domain shift issue, our start point is to
formulate this task as unsupervised domain adaptation where
we can transfer motion knowledge from source clean domain
to target degraded domain in Fig. 1 (c). To our knowledge,
we are the first to handle adverse weather optical flow in an
unsupervised framework. Our key insight is that the inherent
motion is invariant but the warp error is variant between
clean and degraded images. This intuitive observation is rea-

Introduction
Optical flow is an important task in computer vision, which
aims to estimate per-pixel motion in a video sequence and
has been widely applied for autonomous driving (Sun et al.
2020), object tracking (Fan et al. 2019). Existing optical flow
methods have achieved great progress under good weather
conditions in Fig. 1 (a), but may suffer from challenges under
adverse weather in Fig. 1 (b), such as rain and fog. The main
reason is that degradation factors have unexpectedly violated
the brightness and gradient constancy assumptions. The goal
of this work is to estimate optical flow under adverse weather,
such as rain, fog, and snow as shown in Fig. 1 (d).
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3778

