The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MHCCL: Masked Hierarchical Cluster-Wise Contrastive Learning for
Multivariate Time Series
Qianwen Meng1,2 , Hangwei Qian3 * , Yong Liu4 , Lizhen Cui1,2∗ , Yonghui Xu1,2∗ , Zhiqi Shen4
1

School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research (C-FAIR), Shandong University, Jinan, China
3
Lund University, Sweden
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
mqw sdu@mail.sdu.edu.cn, hangwei.qian@math.lth.se, stephenliu@ntu.edu.sg, clz@sdu.edu.cn, xuyonghui@sdu.edu.cn,
zqshen@ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

data annotations are required before supervised learning approaches can be performed (Qian, Pan, and Miao 2021).
Such an expensive manual labeling process greatly limits
the utilization of time series data. Therefore, unsupervised
learning has emerged and gained the favor of researchers.
There are unsupervised learning methods for time series that
adopt auto-encoders (Malhotra et al. 2017) and seq-to-seq
models (Lyu et al. 2018) to reconstruct the raw time series
through joint training with decoders. However, robust reconstruction of complex time series is challenging in many
cases, especially for the high-frequency physiological signals (Tonekaboni, Eytan, and Goldenberg 2021; Sarkar and
Etemad 2020). In this case, self-supervised learning which
uses the self-generated supervised signals obtained by pretext tasks has been developed as well (Misra and van der
Maaten 2020; Kolesnikov, Zhai, and Beyer 2019).
In this paper, we focus on contrastive learning, which
is a special form of self-supervised learning with instance
discrimination as the pretext task. Contrastive learning has
achieved remarkable advantages in diverse applications such
as image (Chen et al. 2020; Grill et al. 2020; He et al. 2020;
Chen et al. 2021; Dave et al. 2022) and time series classification (Franceschi, Dieuleveut, and Jaggi 2019; Eldele et al.
2021; Yue et al. 2022; Bagnall et al. 2017). Nevertheless,
the aforementioned approaches mainly focus on instancelevel contrast that treats instances independently. They usually regard the augmented view of the same instance as the
unique positive and the remaining views as negatives. Then,
instances are distinguished by pulling representations of the
positive pair together and pushing those of negative pairs
apart. As the unique positive pair is composed of augmented
views generated from the same instance, other instances
with similar higher-level implicit semantics are misjudged as
negative ones. In this case, the false negative instances will
be pushed away in subsequent contrastive learning, which
causes an adverse effect on instance discrimination.
Recently, cluster-wise contrastive learning breaks the independence between instances by exploiting the latent cluster information among instances. The learned representations are expected to retain higher-level semantic information by taking advantage of additional prior information
brought by clustering (Li et al. 2021a). However, existing

Learning semantic-rich representations from raw unlabeled
time series data is critical for downstream tasks such as
classification and forecasting. Contrastive learning has recently shown its promising representation learning capability in the absence of expert annotations. However, existing contrastive approaches generally treat each instance independently, which leads to false negative pairs that share
the same semantics. To tackle this problem, we propose
MHCCL, a Masked Hierarchical Cluster-wise Contrastive
Learning model, which exploits semantic information obtained from the hierarchical structure consisting of multiple
latent partitions for multivariate time series. Motivated by the
observation that fine-grained clustering preserves higher purity while coarse-grained one reflects higher-level semantics,
we propose a novel downward masking strategy to filter out
fake negatives and supplement positives by incorporating the
multi-granularity information from the clustering hierarchy.
In addition, a novel upward masking strategy is designed in
MHCCL to remove outliers of clusters at each partition to refine prototypes, which helps speed up the hierarchical clustering process and improves the clustering quality. We conduct
experimental evaluations on seven widely-used multivariate
time series datasets. The results demonstrate the superiority
of MHCCL over the state-of-the-art approaches for unsupervised time series representation learning.

Introduction
Multivariate time series data are ubiquitous in various domains such as industry, finance and healthcare (Bagnall et al.
2018; Ruiz et al. 2021; Rambhatla, Che, and Liu 2022;
Belkhouja, Yan, and Doppa 2022). Such data record the
changing trends of multiple variables over time. Time series
representation learning is a way to transform the complex
raw time series data into semantic-rich representations (Eldele et al. 2021; Deldari et al. 2022). Since time series data
are usually collected through a large number of sensors or
devices, there are no obvious visual patterns that can be easily recognized by humans. As a result, extensive efforts on
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9153

