The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Adjective Scale Probe: Can Language Models Encode Formal Semantics
Information?
Wei Liu1 , Ming Xiang2 , Nai Ding1 *
1

College of Biomedical Engineering and Instrument Sciences, Zhejiang University
2
Department of Linguistics, The University of Chicago
liuweizju@zju.edu.cn, mxiang@uchicago.edu, ding nai@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Transformer-based language models have approached or
even surpassed human performance in many linguistic tasks
(Devlin et al. 2019; He, Gao, and Chen 2021), but they are
also known to be susceptible to adversarial attacks (Wallace
et al. 2019; Lin, Zou, and Ding 2021) and perform poorly on
some diagnostic datasets (Naik et al. 2018; McCoy, Pavlick,
and Linzen 2019). Therefore, it remains debated to what extent the models truly understand language and what types
of semantic information such models can encode. Language
models represent word meaning as vectors calculated over
the contexts that a word appears. This has the advantage
to capture nuanced relations between words since similar
words tend to occur in similar contexts (Yenicelik, Schmidt,
and Kilcher 2020; Miaschi et al. 2020). It is unclear, however, whether such models can encode more abstract aspects
of the word meaning (Bender and Koller 2020; Bisk et al.

2020). Here, we investigate whether language models can
encode more abstract and complex semantic information by
examining models’ understanding of a major class of words,
i.e., gradable adjectives1 .
On the one hand, gradable adjectives have highly contextsensitive meaning, since the applicability of an adjective to
a noun varies from context to context. The utterance “John
is tall” may be true when John is compared to other high
school students, but the same utterance could be false when
John is compared to a group of basketball players. On the
other hand, in formal semantics, the degree semantics analysis (Cresswell 1976; Stechow 1984; Heim 2000; Kennedy
and McNally 2005; Kennedy 2007) of adjectives postulates
an abstract semantic core underlying the meaning of all adjectives in all contexts, which boils down to a few crucial parameters. Briefly, an utterance in the form “X is Adj” would
map the object X, via a measure function, to a degree on a
relevant scale defined by a particular dimension associated
with the adjective. And the utterance is true if and only if the
degree of X on the scale is larger than a contextually salient
threshold. For example, for the sentence “The elephant is
heavy”, a measure function takes the argument the elephant
and maps it to its weight (i.e. a degree dweight ) on a weight
scale, and it says that the weight of the elephant is greater
than a contextually determined threshold on the same scale
(e.g. the average weight of a set of contextually relevant elephants). As we will show in more detail in Dataset Construction below, the core semantic meaning of adjectives allows
humans to draw inferences between expressions that contain
adjectives, both about the basic meaning of adjectives and
also about other related phenomena, such as when additional
degree operators have been applied to adjectives or when
comparative and superlative constructions are at play. What
is interesting for the current purpose is that although two
different adjectives, for instance straight and warm, may not
necessarily share similar contexts of occurrences due to the
fact that these words are describing very different attributes
of objects in the world, but our understanding of certain abstract aspects of their meaning, such as how they apply to
an argument and the possible resulting inferences we can
draw, can actually be similar across different lexical items.

* Corresponding author: Nai Ding
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We mainly focus on gradable adjectives in our work, which we
will refer to in the text simply as adjectives.

It is an open question what semantic representations
transformer-based language models can encode and whether
they have access to more abstract aspects of semantic meaning. Here, we propose a diagnostic dataset to investigate how
well language models understand the degree semantics of adjectives. In the dataset, referred as the Adjective Scale Probe
(ASP), we semi-automatically generate 8 tests of Natural
Language Inference (NLI) questions to test 8 key capabilities of adjective interpretation. We apply the ASP dataset to
evaluate the performance of 3 language models, i.e., BERT,
DeBERTa, and T0. It is found that language models perform below the majority baseline for most tests of the ASP,
even when the models have been fine-tuned to achieve high
performance on the large-scale MNLI dataset. But after we
fine-tune the pre-trained models on a subset of the ASP, DeBERTa can achieve high performance on the untrained adjectives and untrained tests, suggesting that DeBERTa may have
captured degree semantic information of adjectives through
pre-training but it needs specific training data to learn how to
apply such information to the current tasks. In sum, the ASP
provides an easy-to-use method to test fine-grained formal semantic properties of adjectives, and reveals language models’
abilities to access formal semantic information.

Introduction

13282

