The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Balanced Column-Wise Block Pruning for Maximizing GPU Parallelism
Cheonjun Park1 , Mincheol Park1,2 , Hyun Jae Oh3 , Minkyu Kim1 ,
Myung Kuk Yoon4 , Suhyun Kim2 , and Won Woo Ro1 *
1
Yonsei University
Korea Institute of Science and Technology
3
Samsung Electronics
4
Ewha Womans University
{cheonjun.park, mincheol.park, minkyu.kim, wro}@yonsei.ac.kr, hyunjae.oh@samsung.com,
myungkuk.yoon@ewha.ac.kr, dr.suhyun.kim@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Pruning has been an effective solution to reduce the number
of computations and the memory requirement in deep learning. The pruning unit plays an important role in exploiting the
GPU resources efficiently. The filter is proposed as a simple
pruning unit of structured pruning. However, since the filter
is quite large as pruning unit, the accuracy drop is considerable with a high pruning ratio. GPU rearranges the weight
and input tensors into tiles (blocks) for efficient computation. To fully utilize GPU resources, this tile structure should
be considered, which is the goal of block pruning. However,
previous block pruning prunes both row vectors and column
vectors. Pruning of row vectors in a tile corresponds to filter pruning, and it also interferes with column-wise block
pruning of the following layer. In contrast, column vectors
are much smaller than row vectors and can achieve lower accuracy drop. Additionally, if the pruning ratio for each tile
is different, GPU utilization can be limited by imbalanced
workloads by irregular-sized blocks. The same pruning ratio for the weight tiles processed in parallel enables the actual
inference process to fully utilize the resources without idle
time. This paper proposes balanced column-wise block pruning, named BCBP, to satisfy two conditions: the column-wise
minimal size of the pruning unit and balanced workloads. We
demonstrate that BCBP is superior to previous pruning methods through comprehensive experiments.

Figure 1: Tiling method for computing DNN on GPU which
is provided by NVIDIA cuBLAS (Nvidia 2008). W-Tile denotes weight tile. I-Tile denotes input tile.

developed to reduce the number of nonzero parameters
and computational overhead. However, unstructured pruning solely focuses on reducing weights (Han et al. 2015),
which incurs memory access irregularity and degrades memory access efficiency (Kung et al. 2019; Hill et al. 2017; Yu
et al. 2017). In contrast, structured pruning (He, Zhang, and
Sun 2017) reduces weights maintaining memory access regularity by removing closely located weights together. Their
highly regular patterns can leverage existing general matrix
multiplication (GEMM) kernels so that they can utilize the
GPU’s computational resources effectively. However, due to
the large size of the pruning unit, the accuracy is seriously
reduced as the pruning ratio increases.
The pruning unit size should be selected considering two
main factors: to minimize the loss of representation power,
and to consider the actual feedforward process inside the device. To satisfy the above conditions, we thoroughly delved
into GPU optimization methods when computing DNNs,
such as lowering (im2col) (Chellapilla, Puri, and Simard
2006; Chetlur et al. 2014) and tiling (Kirk and Wen-Mei
2016). First, while computing convolutions on GPUs, the input and weight tensors are flattened and transformed into a
matrix by lowering (im2col) their values. Second, as shown
in Figure 1, tiling divides the matrices into small equal-sized
matrices (block) and distributes them to streaming multiprocessors (SMs), which are independent processing units

Introduction
To achieve higher accuracy in deep neural networks
(DNNs), recent studies proposed the use of deeper networks
with larger datasets (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015). Better
accuracy in DNNs is achieved at the cost of higher computational complexity; therefore, more hardware resources are
required (Sze et al. 2017). Recent graphic processing unit
(GPU) architectures have successfully provided a massive
amount of computational parallelism and can be leveraged
in DNNs (NVIDIA 2022). However, the computation load
still needs to be reduced, and pruning can be an effective solution to reduce the amount of computation as well as the
memory capacity requirement (Han et al. 2015).
Various pruning techniques (Han et al. 2015; He, Zhang,
and Sun 2017; Li et al. 2017; Wen et al. 2016) have been
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9398

