The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Online Symbolic Regression with Informative Query
Pengwei Jin1,2,3 , Di Huang1,2,3 , Rui Zhang1, 3 , Xing Hu1 , Ziyuan Nan1,2,3 , Zidong Du1 ,
Qi Guo1 , Yunji Chen1,2 *
1

State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Cambricon Technologies
{jinpengwei20z, huangdi20b, zhangrui, huxing, nanziyuan21s, duzidong, guoqi, cyj}@ict.ac.cn
points D = {(xi , yi )}N
i=1 as given ones and simply sample them from uniform distributions without exploring the
expressive potential of data. In real-world scientific discovery, however, data can be collected actively by doing specific experiments (Hernandez et al. 2019; Weng et al. 2020),
which is an online setting. Overall, online symbolic regression is a worth-studying and challenging problem that underexplored.
The unique problem introduced by online symbolic regression is how to actively collect informative data that best
distinguish the target expression from other similar expressions. Specifically, this process aims to actively collect data
by generating informative input data x (i.e. queries) and then
querying f to get the output data y = f (x). Considering the
regression process to use data D = {(xi , yi )}N
i=1 for finding the mathematical expression fˆ that best fits the physical
system can be borrowed directly from offline symbolic regression, we mainly focus on the key problem of how to get
the informative data for symbolic regression.
In this paper, we propose QUOSR, a query-based framework that can acquire informative data for online symbolic
regression. QUOSR works in an iterative manner: at each
query step, it receives historical data points, generates new
x, and then queries the target f to get the corresponding y,
where the (x, y) serves as new data points. This process repeats until the maximum number of query steps is reached.
Our contribution is twofold: giving theoretical guidance on
the learning of the query process and implementing QUOSR
for online symbolic regression.
Specifically, we theoretically show the relationship between informative data and mutual information, which can
guide the generation of queries. This relationship can be
proved by modeling the query process as the expansion of
a decision tree, where the nodes correspond to the query selections x, the edges correspond to the responses y, and the
leaves correspond to the physical systems f Although the
computation of mutual information is intractable, we can instead optimize QUOSR by minimizing the InfoNCE loss in
contrastive learning (van den Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018)
which is the lower bound of mutual information.
However, it is still difficult to practically implement QUOSR for online symbolic regression for two reasons. (1)
The amount of information contained in each data point
is so small that, to obtain enough information, the number

Abstract
Symbolic regression, the task of extracting mathematical expressions from the observed data {xi , yi }, plays a crucial role
in scientific discovery. Despite the promising performance of
existing methods, most of them conduct symbolic regression
in an offline setting. That is, they treat the observed data points
as given ones that are simply sampled from uniform distributions without exploring the expressive potential of data.
However, for real-world scientific problems, the data used for
symbolic regression are usually actively obtained by doing
experiments, which is an online setting. Thus, how to obtain
informative data that can facilitate the symbolic regression
process is an important problem that remains challenging.
In this paper, we propose QUOSR, a query-based framework
for online symbolic regression that can automatically obtain
informative data in an iterative manner. Specifically, at each
step, QUOSR receives historical data points, generates new
x, and then queries the symbolic expression to get the corresponding y, where the (x, y) serves as new data points. This
process repeats until the maximum number of query steps
is reached. To make the generated data points informative,
we implement the framework with a neural network and train
it by maximizing the mutual information between generated
data points and the target expression. Through comprehensive experiments, we show that QUOSR can facilitate modern
symbolic regression methods by generating informative data.

Introduction
Symbolic regression plays a central role in scientific discovery, which extracts the underlying mathematical relationship between variables from observed data. Formally, given
a physical system f and N data points D = {(xi , yi )}N
i=1 ,
where xi ∈ Rm and yi = f (xi ) ∈ R, symbolic regression
tries to find a mathematical expression fˆ : Rm → R that
best fits the physical system f .
Conventional symbolic regression methods include genetic evolution algorithms (Augusto and Barbosa 2000;
Schmidt and Lipson 2009; Chen, Luo, and Jiang 2017),
and neural network methods (Udrescu and Tegmark 2020;
Petersen et al. 2020; Valipour et al. 2021). Despite their
promising performance, most of them perform symbolic regression in an offline setting. That is, they take the data
* Yunji Chen (cyj@ict.ac.cn) is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5122

