The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Leveraging Old Knowledge to Continually Learn New Classes in Medical Images
Evelyn Chee1,2 , Mong Li Lee1,2 , Wynne Hsu1,2
1
2

School of Computing, National University of Singapore
Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore
{echee, leeml, whsu}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Class-incremental continual learning is a core step towards
developing artificial intelligence systems that can continuously adapt to changes in the environment by learning new
concepts without forgetting those previously learned. This
is especially needed in the medical domain where continually learning from new incoming data is required to classify an expanded set of diseases. In this work, we focus on
how old knowledge can be leveraged to learn new classes
without catastrophic forgetting. We propose a framework
that comprises of two main components: (1) a dynamic architecture with expanding representations to preserve previously learned features and accommodate new features; and
(2) a training procedure alternating between two objectives
to balance the learning of new features while maintaining the
model’s performance on old classes. Experiment results on
multiple medical datasets show that our solution is able to
achieve superior performance over state-of-the-art baselines
in terms of class accuracy and forgetting.

Figure 1: Sample pathology images of different lymphomas
(El-Mallawany et al. 2012).

(a) CCH5000 (Kather et al. 2016)

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have excelled in many machine learning classification tasks and shown to achieve
human-level performance in medical imaging applications
(McKinney et al. 2020; Ardila et al. 2019; Esteva et al.
2017). However, this is under the condition that all classes
are known prior to training. This assumption is often violated in the medical domain as some diseases are rare and
discovering new disease is not uncommon. In both cases,
not all classes would have readily available data for training the DNN. Figure 1 shows samples of two types of lymphoma with the latter being a rarer disease (El-Mallawany
et al. 2012). A system that has only learn to diagnose the
former can easily misclassify the other as the same type with
high confidence due to their similar appearance. This can
have dire consequences as the treatment strategies for the
two are different and initiating the correct regimen is crucial
to achieve good outcome. Hence, any DNN systems in the
medical domain must be able to continually learn an expanding set of classes as and when new data becomes available.
Further, they should do so without negatively affecting the
performance for diagnosing previously seen diseases.

(b) EyePACS (Kaggle and EyePacs 2015)

Figure 2: Sample images illustrating new class (first image)
have shared features from old classes.

Existing work on class-incremental continual learning focuses on catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen
1989; Goodfellow et al. 2014), where performance of DNNs
degrades significantly on previously learned classes as more
classes are being introduced. For the medical domain, we
should in fact go beyond just alleviating forgetting. As
shown in our previous example, one observation is that diseases tend to have overlapping features. Particularly, classification of a new class could depend on features from various old classes. Figure 2(a) shows the structure of simple
stroma that could be described using combination of texture
from other tissues. Similarly, the progression of a disease includes earlier clinical symptoms. Figure 2(b) shows that the
proliferative stage of diabetic retinopathy includes clinical
signs from mild, moderate and severe stages. This motivates

Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14178

