The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improving End-to-End Speech Translation by Leveraging Auxiliary
Speech and Text Data
Yuhao Zhang1 , Chen Xu1 , Bojie Hu3 , Chunliang Zhang1,2 , Tong Xiao1,2 * , Jingbo Zhu 1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
2
NiuTrans Research, Shenyang, China
3
Tencent Minority-Mandarin Translation, Beijing, China
yoohao.zhang@gmail.com, xuchenneu@outlook.com, bojiehu@tencent.com,
{zhangchunliang, xiaotong, zhujingbo}@mail.neu.edu.cn
Abstract

We present a method for introducing a text encoder into pretrained end-to-end speech translation systems. It enhances
the ability of adapting one modality (i.e., source-language
speech) to another (i.e., source-language text). Thus, the
speech translation model can learn from both unlabeled and
labeled data, especially when the source-language text data
is abundant. Beyond this, we present a denoising method to
build a robust text encoder that can deal with both normal and
noisy text data. Our system sets new state-of-the-arts on the
MuST-C En-De, En-Fr, and LibriSpeech En-Fr tasks.

Lossautoenc

LossMT LossST

Encoder

Decoder

x

s

y

t/x

y

(a) 1 universal encoder (Zheng et al. 2021)
LossASR

Introduction

LossMT LossST

S-Encoder

T-Encoder

Decoder

s

x

y

(b) 2 individual encoders (Li et al. 2021)

In Speech Translation (ST), End-to-End (E2E) neural approaches have gained attraction as a promising line of research towards systems with lower latency and less error propagation. However, developing models of this type
can be challenging because the aligned speech-to-translation
data is scarce (Wang et al. 2020b; Dong et al. 2021b; Zheng
et al. 2021; Tang et al. 2021a). This leads researchers to explore methods that resort to large-scale unlabeled data. A
simple one is to use pre-trained models to encode acoustic and/or textual input (Pino et al. 2020; Ye, Wang, and Li
2021), whereas others train ST models using additional data
of either Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) or Machine
Translation (MT), or both (Wang et al. 2020c; Xu et al. 2021;
Indurthi et al. 2021).
Such a paradigm provides an opportunity to make use
of both labeled and unlabeled data, say, the speech, text,
speech-to-transcription, text-to-text, and speech-to-text data.
For example, one can feed all available data into an autoencoder to train ST models (Zheng et al. 2021). More recently,
it has been found that stronger results can be achieved by
using an explicit text encoder to ease the training on the MT
data (Li et al. 2021).
Here, we take a further step towards more effective use
of both labeled and unlabeled data in ST. We claim that
the source-language text encoder plays an important role in
leveraging ASR and MT although it is not involved in standard end-to-end ST. We then develop a method (named as

LossASR

Losscontrastive

LossMT LossST

T-adapter
S-Encoder

Denoising
T-Encoder

Decoder

s

t/x

y

(c) 2 correlated encoders + denoising (this work)

Figure 1: Model architectures. Dotted boxes mean that the
items are dropped in ST tuning and inference. s = acoustic signal sequence, t = transcription, x = source-language
word sequence, and y = target-language word sequence.
Multi-Step Pre-training for Speech Translation, or MSP-ST
for short) to expose the text encoder to both ASR and MT
learning processes, and force them to assist each other. Having the text encoder as the bridge between ASR and MT
is perhaps helpful: the result ST system can learn acoustic
and textual encoding simultaneously (see Figure 1). Note
that such a design also addresses the role mismatch problem wherein the pre-trained ASR encoder does not behave
like what the target-language decoder expects (Wang et al.
2020b; Xu et al. 2021). To our knowledge, this is the first to
discuss the problem in large-scale pre-training with all ASR,
MT and ST data on end-to-end ST tasks.
Another improvement is that we denoise the text encoder
so that it is robust to the noisy transcription-like input. In this

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13984

