The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Data-Efficient Image Quality Assessment with Attention-Panel Decoder
Guanyi Qin1* , Runze Hu2* , Yutao Liu3 , Xiawu Zheng4,5 , Haotian Liu1 , Xiu Li1† , Yan Zhang5† ,
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, China
2
School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100086, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518066, China
5
Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics, Xiamen University,
Xiamen 361005, China
{qgy21, liu-ht21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {hrzlpk2015, bzhy986}@gmail.com, liuyutao@ouc.edu.cn,
zhengxw01@pcl.ac.cn, li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

LIVE

0.98
Median SRCC

Blind Image Quality Assessment (BIQA) is a fundamental
task in computer vision, which however remains unresolved
due to the complex distortion conditions and diversified image contents. To confront this challenge, we in this paper
propose a novel BIQA pipeline based on the Transformer
architecture, which achieves an efficient quality-aware feature representation with much fewer data. More specifically,
we consider the traditional fine-tuning in BIQA as an interpretation of the pre-trained model. In this way, we further introduce a Transformer decoder to refine the perceptual information of the CLS token from different perspectives. This enables our model to establish the quality-aware
feature manifold efficiently while attaining a strong generalization capability. Meanwhile, inspired by the subjective
evaluation behaviors of human, we introduce a novel attention panel mechanism, which improves the model performance and reduces the prediction uncertainty simultaneously. The proposed BIQA method maintains a lightweight
design with only one layer of the decoder, yet extensive experiments on eight standard BIQA datasets (both synthetic
and authentic) demonstrate its superior performance to the
state-of-the-art BIQA methods, i.e., achieving the SRCC values of 0.875 (vs. 0.859 in LIVEC) and 0.980 (vs. 0.969
in LIVE). Checkpoints, logs and code will be available at
https://github.com/narthchin/DEIQT.

DEIQT
SOTA[80%]

0.97

0.96

20

30

40
50
Train Set Ratio(%)

60

70

Figure 1: Image on top: the performance of the proposed DEIQT varying the amount of training data on the
LIVE dataset. SOTA results are obtained from the TReS
(Golestaneh, Dadsetan, and Kitani 2022) using 80% data.
Our method can achieve the SOTA performance with only
30% data. Images in the medium: the sample images. Images
at bottom: Quality attention map from DEIQT. Our model
can accurately capture the quality degradation areas of an
image. Meanwhile, it ignores the perceptual information that
is related to the image recognition yet less important for the
quality assessment, i.e., the white cars in the second image.

Introduction
The goal of Image Quality Assessment (IQA) approaches
is to automatically evaluate the quality of images in accordance with human subjective judgement. With the increasing growth of computer vision applications, the efficient and
reliable IQA model has increased in importance. It is essential to monitor and improve the visual quality of contents and
can be also adopted as testing criteria or optimization goals
for benchmarking image processing algorithms. Based on
the availability of the pristine reference image, IQA can be
typically divided into full-reference IQA (FR-IQA) (Wang
et al. 2004), reduced-reference IQA (RR-IQA) (Soundararajan and Bovik 2011), and no-reference or blind IQA (BIQA)

(Moorthy and Bovik 2011). The applications of FR and RR
IQA methods tend to be limited, since reference images are
generally unavailable in real-world situations. Correspondingly, the BIQA methods do not require such reference images and thus become more promising yet more challenging.
Current state-of-the-art (SOTA) BIQA methods employ

* Equal contribution, † Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2091

