The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Coarse2Fine: Local Consistency Aware Re-prediction for
Weakly Supervised Object Localization
Yixuan Pan1, 2 , Yao Yao3, 4 , Yichao Cao1, 2 , Chongjin Chen1, 2 , Xiaobo Lu1, 2 *
2

1
School of Automation, Southeast University, Nanjing, China.
Key Laboratory of Measurement and Control of Complex Systems of Engineering, Ministry of Education, Nanjing, China.
3
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Shanghai, China.
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
{yixuanpan, caoyichao}@seu.edu.cn, yaoyao21@mails.ucas.ac.cn, chongjinchen@outlook.com, xblu2013@126.com

Abstract
Weakly supervised object localization aims to localize objects
of interest by using only image-level labels. Existing methods
generally segment the activation map by threshold to obtain
mask and generate a bounding box. However, the activation
map is locally inconsistent, i.e., similar neighboring pixels of
the same object are not equally activated, which leads to the
blurred boundary issue: the localization result is sensitive to
the threshold, and the mask obtained directly from the activation map loses the fine contours of the object, making it
difficult to obtain a tight bounding box. In this paper, we introduce the Local Consistency Aware Re-prediction (LCAR)
framework, which aims to recover the complete fine object
mask from the locally inconsistent activation map and hence
obtain a tight bounding box. To this end, we propose the
self-guided re-prediction module (SGRM), which employs a
novel Aggregation Net with dynamic weights to replace the
post-processing of threshold segmentation. To derive more
reliable pseudo labels from the activation map to supervise
the SGRM, we further design an affinity refinement module
(ARM) that utilizes the original image feature to better align
the activation map with the image contents and design a selfdistillation CAM (SD-CAM) to alleviate the localizer dependence on saliency. Experiments demonstrate that our LCAR
outperforms the state-of-the-art on both the CUB-200-2011
and ILSVRC datasets, achieving 95.9% and 70.7% of GTKnow localization accuracy, respectively.

Figure 1: Blurred boundary issue and comparison of localization results: (a) Original image. (b) (c) The activation map
is locally inconsistent, sensitive to threshold. (d) The output of ARM well aligns with the original appearance. (e)
The output mask of LCAR covers the complete region of
the object and preserves the fine contours. The IoU values
are displayed in white text; the prediction and ground truth
are displayed in red and green, respectively. Best viewed in
color.

Introduction

of adversarial erasing (Zhang et al. 2018a; Choe and Shim
2019; Mai, Yang, and Luo 2020), divergent activation (Xue
et al. 2019), decoupling framework (Zhang, Cao, and Wu
2020; Lu et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2021). Recent methods (Gao
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022) introduce
transformers to further enhance the ability to discover the
complete region of the object with the global modeling capability of self-attention.
Nevertheless, the above methods focus on high-level features while ignoring the object details, which generally
causes the activation maps locally inconsistent, i.e., neighboring pixels belonging to the same object with similar
appearance are not activated equally, thus leading to the
blurred boundary issue: the mask obtained by threshold segmentation is sensitive to the threshold and loses the fine
object contours, making it difficult to get a tight bounding
box. As shown in Figure 1, similar parts on the bird are not

Fully supervised object detection (Bochkovskiy, Wang, and
Liao 2020; Carion et al. 2020) has made great advances in
recent years. However, these methods rely on a large number
of bounding box annotations, which are labor-intensive. Differs from fully supervised methods, weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) uses only image-level annotations
to localize objects, greatly reducing the annotation cost.
Pioneering work CAM (Zhou et al. 2016) performs
weighted aggregation of convolution neural network (CNN)
final features to generate class activation maps for object
localization, but it tends to focus on discriminative region
rather than the overall region of the object. Therefore, existing methods have improved CAM from the perspectives
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2002

