The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Heuristic Search in Dual Space for Constrained Fixed-Horizon POMDPs with
Durative Actions
Majid Khonji, Duoaa Khalifa*
Khalifa University
Abu Dhabi, UAE

Abstract

measure. In many domains, an agent might need to optimize
an objective function while maintaining specific parameters
within certain limits. For instance, a surveillance robot aiming to maximize search coverage may also need to keep
its power consumption below battery capacity. As demonstrated in (Undurti and How 2010), modeling parameter violations as negative reward signals can lead to excessively
risk-taking or risk-averse situations. Additionally, manually
tuning reward signals places extra burden on the algorithm
designer, and it can be challenging to thoroughly test all possible scenarios.
The Constrained POMDP (C-POMDP) is a mathematical
model that addresses multi-criteria requirements by optimizing one criterion while bounding the others (Isom, Meyn,
and Braatz 2008). In risk-sensitive applications, a practical approach is to limit the probability of failure rather
than the expected cost value. For example, a planetary rover
should constrain the probability of adverse events such as
navigating near a cliff or colliding with obstacles (Mausam
et al. 2005). This extension is often referred to as chanceConstrained POMDP (CC-POMDP) (Santana, Thiébaux,
and Williams 2016).
Solution Methods for Constrained POMDPs. The focus
in the literature has been primarily on the fully observable
case, i.e., the constrained MDP (C-MDP). Comprehensive
theoretical analysis is presented in (Altman 1999; Feinberg
and Shwartz 1996). Several efficient algorithms are also proposed in the literature (e.g., see (Ono, Kuwata, and Balaram
2012; Trevizan et al. 2016; Hong et al. 2021; Alyassi and
Khonji 2021)). The partially observable case is more recent (Isom, Meyn, and Braatz 2008), and the research is also
less mature. Current methods span from extensions of dynamic programming (Isom, Meyn, and Braatz 2008), pointbased value iteration (Kim et al. 2011), approximate linear
programming (LP) (Poupart et al. 2015), and more recently,
a heuristic forward search approach for CC-POMDP (Santana, Thiébaux, and Williams 2016). These techniques either
compromise on the optimality (where policies might arbitrarily deviate from the optimal as in (Santana, Thiébaux,
and Williams 2016)), or violate feasibility, as in the approximate methods (e.g., (Poupart et al. 2015)). In this work,
we follow an integer linear programming (ILP) approach
emphasizing risk-sensitive POMDP settings. Current LPbased approaches consider only stochastic policies (Poupart

The Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP) is widely used in probabilistic planning for
stochastic domains. However, current extensions, such as
constrained and chance-constrained POMDPs, have limitations in modeling real-world planning problems because
they assume that all actions have a fixed duration. To address
this issue, we propose a unified model that encompasses
durative POMDP and its constrained extensions. To solve
the durative POMDP and its constrained extensions, we first
convert them into an Integer Linear Programming (ILP)
formulation. This approach leverages existing solvers in the
ILP literature and provides a foundation for solving these
problems. We then introduce a heuristic search approach
that prunes the search space, which is guided by solving
successive partial ILP programs. Our empirical evaluation
results show that our approach outperforms the current
state-of-the-art fixed-horizon chance-constrained POMDP
solver.

1

Introduction

A crucial aspect of intelligent agents is their capacity
to make well-informed decisions in uncertain environments. The Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP) is a mathematical model that enables agents to devise contingency plans aimed at maximizing expected utility (Sondik 1971; Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998).
This model has broad applications across various fields such
as machine learning (Kaelbling, Littman, and Moore 1996),
robotics (Spaan and Spaan 2004), healthcare (Hoey et al.
2014), predictive maintenance (Cassandra 1998), and more.
POMDPs expand upon the well-studied Markov Decision
Process (MDP) model by addressing situations where agents
are unable to accurately observe the underlying state of
the environment (Puterman 2014). Despite the expressive
power, real-world applications often need to make several
assumptions to fit the mathematical model.
Constrained POMDPs. A limitation of the standard
POMDP is its focus on optimizing a single performance
* This work was supported by Khalifa University under Award
Ref. CIRA-2020-286, KKJRC-2019-Trans1, and KUCARS. Majid Khonji and Duoaa Khalifa are with EECS Department (emails:
{majid.khonji, duoaa.khalifa}@ku.ac.ae).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14927

