The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Walkability Optimization: Formulations, Algorithms, and a Case Study of Toronto
Weimin Huang, Elias B. Khalil
Department of Mechanical & Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto
Scale AI Research Chair in Data-Driven Algorithms for Modern Supply Chains
cheryl.huang@mail.utoronto.ca, khalil@mie.utoronto.ca

Abstract

2005; Fischel 2003) – residents have to travel outside their
local communities in order to meet their daily needs. Moreover, historic disinvestment in segregated neighbourhoods
including low-income groups and racial minorities has led
to spatial inequality in walkability. Evidence shows that disadvantaged groups live in neighbourhoods with less accessible physical infrastructure and services (Massey 1990). With
the COVID-19 pandemic reshaping the relationship between
cities and the quality of life, addressing inequities and improving access to services and amenities such as healthcare
and green spaces for vulnerable groups has also accelerated
the need for walkable development (Mouratidis 2021).
Improving walkability is also a powerful way to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) and tackle climate change.
Dense and walkable neighbourhoods encourage active transport (walking, cycling), thus reducing automobile dependence (McIntosh et al. 2014; Brand et al. 2021). Research
shows that technological measures (e.g., increasing the use
of electric vehicles) alone will not be sufficient in reducing
GHG, whereas a shift to a more sustainable mode of transportation can result in a quicker and more significant reduction of emissions from vehicles, particularly in urban areas
(Creutzig et al. 2018; Neves and Brand 2019). Shifting from
motorized transport to active transport is considered one of
the most promising ways to reduce GHG. A study shows
that active walking as a lifestyle change of residents can significantly reduce emissions related to private vehicles, even
in European cities that are already highly walkable (Brand
et al. 2021). Building inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable cities has been highlighted in the Sustainable Development Goal 11 of the United Nations.
Towards this goal, researchers have been interested in improving walkability in cities by converting certain underused
spaces into easily accessible amenities. For instance, some
urban planning research relies on simulation and inspection,
such as converting high-density regions into amenities and
straightening busy routes (Yang, Samaranayake, and Dogan
2020). On the other hand, one common optimization-based
approach is to use a Genetic Algorithm (GA) that encodes
the potential allocation locations (e.g., empty lots where a
grocery store can be built) as fixed-sized vectors and iteratively generate child solutions from a population of candidate solutions (Cichocka 2015; Rakha and Reinhart 2012;
Sonta and Jain 2019; Nagy, Villaggi, and Benjamin 2018;

The concept of walkable urban development has gained increased attention due to its public health, economic, and environmental sustainability benefits. Unfortunately, land zoning and historic under-investment have resulted in spatial inequality in walkability and social inequality among residents.
We tackle the problem of Walkability Optimization through
the lens of combinatorial optimization. The task is to select
locations in which additional amenities (e.g., grocery stores,
schools, restaurants) can be allocated to improve resident access via walking while taking into account existing amenities and providing multiple options (e.g., for restaurants).
To this end, we derive Mixed-Integer Linear Programming
(MILP) and Constraint Programming (CP) models. Moreover, we show that the problem’s objective function is submodular in special cases, which motivates an efficient greedy
heuristic. We conduct a case study on 31 underserved neighborhoods in the City of Toronto, Canada. MILP finds the
best solutions in most scenarios but does not scale well with
network size. The greedy algorithm scales well and finds
high-quality solutions. Our empirical evaluation shows that
neighbourhoods with low walkability have a great potential
for transformation into pedestrian-friendly neighbourhoods
by strategically placing new amenities. Allocating 3 additional grocery stores, schools, and restaurants can improve the
“WalkScore” by more than 50 points (on a scale of 100) for 4
neighbourhoods and reduce the walking distances to amenities for 75% of all residential locations to 10 minutes for all
amenity types. Our code and paper appendix are available at
https://github.com/khalil-research/walkability.

1

Introduction

The concept of walkability in urban planning has gained increased attention as research has shown that good walkability contributes to physical health, economic development,
and environmental sustainability (Zapata-Diomedi et al.
2019). Highly walkable neighbourhoods allow for residents
to easily access amenities such as retail and food in the vicinity, giving rise to the concept of the “15-minute city” (Whittle 2020). However, the zoning regulations introduced in
the early 20th century that separate industrial, commercial,
and residential areas have prevented walkable development
and contributed to automobile-reliant communities (Levine
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14249

