The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Safe Reinforcement Learning via Shielding under Partial Observability
Steven Carr1 , Nils Jansen2 , Sebastian Junges2 , Ufuk Topcu1
1

The University of Texas at Austin
Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
stevencarr@utexas.edu, n.jansen@science.ru.nl, sjunges@cs.ru.nl, utopcu@utexas.edu
2

Abstract
Safe exploration is a common problem in reinforcement learning (RL) that aims to prevent agents from making disastrous
decisions while exploring their environment. A family of approaches to this problem assume domain knowledge in the
form of a (partial) model of this environment to decide upon
the safety of an action. A so-called shield forces the RL agent
to select only safe actions. However, for adoption in various
applications, one must look beyond enforcing safety and also
ensure the applicability of RL with good performance. We
extend the applicability of shields via tight integration with
state-of-the-art deep RL, and provide an extensive, empirical
study in challenging, sparse-reward environments under partial observability. We show that a carefully integrated shield
ensures safety and can improve the convergence rate and final
performance of RL agents. We furthermore show that a shield
can be used to bootstrap state-of-the-art RL agents: they remain safe after initial learning in a shielded setting, allowing
us to disable a potentially too conservative shield eventually.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 1998) is a
technique for decision-making in uncertain environments.
An RL agent explores its environment by taking actions
and perceiving feedback signals, usually rewards and observations on the system state. With success stories such as
AlphaGo (Silver et al. 2016) RL nowadays reaches into areas such as robotics (Kober, Bagnell, and Peters 2013) or
autonomous driving (Sallab et al. 2017).
A significant limitation of RL in safety-critical environments is the high cost of failure. An RL agent explores the
effects of actions – often selected randomly, such as in stateof-the-art policy-gradient methods (Peters and Schaal 2006) –
and will thus inevitably select actions that potentially cause
harm to the agent or its environment. Thus, typical applications for RL are games (Mnih et al. 2013) or assume the
ability to learn on high-fidelity simulations of realistic scenarios (Tao et al. 2019). The problem of unsafe exploration has
triggered research on the safety of RL (Garcıa and Fernández
2015). Safe RL may refer to (1) changing (“engineering”) the
reward function (Laud and DeJong 2003) to encourage the
agent to choose safe actions, (2) adding a second cost function
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14748

(“constraining”) (Moldovan and Abbeel 2012), or (3) blocking (“shielding”) unsafe actions at runtime (Alshiekh et al.
2018). This paper falls into the last category.
Safe RL in partially observable environments suffers from
uncertainty both in the agent’s actions and perception. Such
problems, typically modeled as partially observable Markov
decision processes (POMDPs) (Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998), require histories of observations to extract a
sufficient understanding of the environment. Recent deep RL
approaches for POMDPs, including those that employ recurrent neural networks (Hausknecht and Stone 2015; Wierstra et al. 2007), learn from these histories and can generate
high-quality policies with sufficient data. However, these approaches do not guarantee safety during or after learning.
While shielding for Markov decision processes (MDPs) is
rather well-studied (Könighofer et al. 2017; Alshiekh et al.
2018; Fulton and Platzer 2018; Bouton et al. 2019), there is—
to the best of our knowledge—no approach that integrates
shielding with deep RL.
We contribute a thorough study, implementation, and experimental evaluation on integrating state-of-the-art RL for
POMDPs with shields. We demonstrate effects and insights
using several typical examples and provide detailed information on RL performance as well as videos showing the
exploration and training process. In particular, we integrate
various RL algorithms from Tensorflow (Guadarrama et al.
2018) with a shield that guarantees safety regarding so-called
reach-avoid specifications, a special case of temporal logic
constraints (Pnueli 1977). The computation of the shields is
based on satisfiability solving (Junges, Jansen, and Seshia
2021) and requires only a partial model of the environment.
Specifically, we need to know all potential transitions in the
POMDP, while probabilities and rewards may remain unspecified (Raskin et al. 2007).
Approach. Fig. 1 shows the outline of the safe RL setting.
The gray box shows a typical RL procedure. The environment
in the partially observable setting is described by a POMDP
model that may not be fully known. A shield in this setting
(implicitly) requires access to a form of state estimation to
account for a safety specification. This estimator uses the
partial model of the environment to track in which states the
model may be, based on the observed history. We see the
shield and the state estimator as two knowledge interfaces

