The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

TOT: Topology-Aware Optimal Transport for Multimodal Hate Detection
Linhao Zhang1,2,3 , Li Jin1,2 * , Xian Sun1,2 , Guangluan Xu1,2 , Zequn Zhang1,2 ,
Xiaoyu Li1,2 , Nayu Liu1,2,3 , Qing Liu1,2 , Shiyao Yan1,2,3
1

Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Key Laboratory of Network Information System Technology (NIST), Aerospace Information Research Institute
3
School of Electronic, Electrical and Communication Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
zhanglinhao20@mails.ucas.ac.cn, jinlimails@gmail.com

2

Abstract
Multimodal hate detection, which aims to identify the
harmful content online such as memes, is crucial for
building a wholesome internet environment. Previous
work has made enlightening exploration in detecting explicit hate remarks. However, most of their approaches
neglect the analysis of implicit harm, which is particularly challenging as explicit text markers and demographic visual cues are often twisted or missing. The
leveraged cross-modal attention mechanisms also suffer from the distributional modality gap and lack logical interpretability. To address these semantic gap issues, we propose TOT: a topology-aware optimal transport framework to decipher the implicit harm in memes
scenario, which formulates the cross-modal aligning
problem as solutions for optimal transportation plans.
Specifically, we leverage an optimal transport kernel
method to capture complementary information from
multiple modalities. The kernel embedding provides a
non-linear transformation ability to reproduce a kernel
Hilbert space (RKHS), which reflects significance for
eliminating the distributional modality gap. Moreover,
we perceive the topology information based on aligned
representations to conduct bipartite graph path reasoning. The newly achieved state-of-the-art performance
on two publicly available benchmark datasets, together
with further visual analysis, demonstrate the superiority
of TOT in capturing implicit cross-modal alignment.

Figure 1: Differences between explicit-aligned and implicitaligned memes. The aligning procedure is naturally completed in explicit harmful content, but is indispensable for
implicit cases.

Memes, as a popular kind of social media user-generated
content (UGC), have become a prevalent method for propagating harmful content due to their viral nature. Typically, a
meme is an image embedded with a short piece of text. Although memes have a puckish sense of humor, some implicit
hateful content is concealed. The critical factor in detecting
harmful memes is combining well-aligned visual-linguistic
clues and conducting multimodal reasoning.
Previous works have made remarkable progress in detecting explicit-aligned hate. (Lee et al. 2021; Pramanick
et al. 2021). Their models achieved various kinds of practical
reasoning through external knowledge enhancement (Zhu
2020; Zhou, Chen, and Yang 2021), sophisticated interaction
mechanisms (Lippe et al. 2020) or an ensemble of multiple
visual-linguistic models (Das, Wahi, and Li 2020; Velioglu,
Rose, and Analytics 2020). However, these approaches neglect the nuance of the multimodal aligning process, which
is necessary for subsequent reasoning procedures. Take the
second meme in Figure 1 as an example, which dehumanizes Pakistanis as pigs. Although the word ’Pakistanis’ has
no semantic correspondence with the ’pigs’ in the picture,
a human can easily capture the implicit cross-modal alignment between ’Pakistanis’ and ’pigs’ to perceive the potent offense. Nevertheless, this implicit harm is challenging
for efficient detection. Previous works neglected the aligning procedure and conducted the reasoning process directly

Introduction
The flourishing expansion of social media has facilitated
the exchange of opinions among individuals, different cultural or social communities. However, under the influence
of major events such as the Russian-Ukrainian conflict and
COVID-19, these platforms are flooded with hateful content, disseminating discriminatory statements toward social
groups based on their races, religions or other characteristics. Such hateful content is sowing seeds of disunity to
exacerbate violent and criminal behaviors in conflict areas.
Therefore, the automatic identification of hateful content on
the Internet is a social research issue with great urgency.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4884

