The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Better Peer Grading through Bayesian Inference
Hedayat Zarkoob1 , Greg d’Eon1 , Lena Podina1,2 , Kevin Leyton-Brown1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia
2
Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo
{hzarkoob, gregdeon, kevinlb}@cs.ubc.ca, lpodina@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract

these interrelated challenges has been a topic of academic
study in Computer Science for at least the last two decades.
The first methods for aggregating peer grades—and many
others introduced more recently—produce point estimates
of each assignment’s grade and each grader’s quality (Walsh
2014; Chakraborty, Jindal, and Nath 2018; Prajapati et al.
2020; de Alfaro and Shavlovsky 2014; Hamer, Ma, and
Kwong 2005). At their best, methods that produce point
estimates maximize the likelihood of the data given a model,
e.g., by assigning each grader a “reliability” parameter and
iteratively updating these parameters to best describe the
reported grades. (At worst, they do not even maximize likelihood. In this case they can produce grades and reliabilities
that are inconsistent with each other, such as giving high
weights to graders who are judged unreliable.) Even when
they do maximize likelihood, such point estimates can be
overly confident. This can matter for model accuracy: e.g.,
the data might show that only one of several students is reliable without offering evidence about which is which, making
it likely that the model will commit to the wrong explanation.
It can also limit the way such models are used in real classes:
e.g., an instructor may not want to trust student grades until
the system is confident that a peer grader is reliable.
These problems can be addressed by inferring distributions over grade and reliability estimates rather than point
estimates. A seminal paper due to Piech et al. (2013) introduced the first such system, using graphical models to
simultaneously determine distributions over both grades for
student submission and accuracy assessments for each grader.
Their core “PG1” model assumes that each assignment has a
latent true grade and each peer grader has a latent bias and reliability; these parameters can be estimated from grading data
through Bayesian inference, producing posterior distributions
(and, hence, confidence intervals) on each assignment’s grade
and each student’s grading abilities. Piech et al. also introduced PG2 and PG3 models that respectively permit graders’
biases to change over time and students’ grading reliability to
be correlated with their own assignments’ grades. Follow-up
work by others further extended these models to allow for
more complex reliability-grade correlations (the PG4 and
PG5 models of Mi and Yeung 2015) and to more explicitly
account for differences between a single grader’s reported
grades (the PG6 and PG7 models of Wang et al. 2019).
A key issue in peer grading is that while students are asked

Peer grading systems aggregate noisy reports from multiple
students to approximate a “true” grade as closely as possible. Most current systems either take the mean or median of
reported grades; others aim to estimate students’ grading accuracy under a probabilistic model. This paper extends the state
of the art in the latter approach in three key ways: (1) recognizing that students can behave strategically (e.g., reporting
grades close to the class average without doing the work); (2)
appropriately handling censored data that arises from discretevalued grading rubrics; and (3) using mixed integer programming to improve the interpretability of the grades assigned to
students. We show how to make Bayesian inference practical
in this model and evaluate our approach on both synthetic
and real-world data obtained by using our implemented system in four large classes. These extensive experiments show
that grade aggregation using our model accurately estimates
true grades, students’ likelihood of submitting uninformative
grades, and the variation in their inherent grading error; we
also characterize our models’ robustness.

1

Introduction

Peer grading is a powerful pedagogical tool. It benefits students by helping them to internalize evaluation criteria by
applying them critically to peer work (Lu and Law 2012);
offering them feedback from equal-status learners (Topping
2009); and giving them exposure to others’ perspectives. Just
as importantly, it gives instructors a way to make classes
more scalable by shifting (some) grading workload away
from course staff; this again benefits students by giving them
more opportunities for their work to be evaluated within a
course’s staffing constraints.
In order for peer grading systems to be both useful to
instructors and acceptable to students, they must produce
grades that are sufficiently similar to those that an instructor
would have given. This is a challenging task because individual peer graders will be biased (consistently give generous or
harsh grades); noisy (the same grader could grade an assignment differently on different days); and potentially strategic
(some students will enter insincere peer grades unrelated to a
submission’s quality if they can get away with it). Addressing
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6137

