The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

OPT-GAN: A Broad-Spectrum Global Optimizer for Black-Box Problems by
Learning Distribution
Minfang Lu1,5, * , Shuai Ning1,2, * , Shuangrong Liu3 , Fengyang Sun4 , Bo Zhang1,2 ,
Bo Yang2 , Lin Wang1,†
1

Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Network Based Intelligent Computing, University of Jinan, Jinan 250022, China
2
Quan Cheng Laboratory, Jinan 250100, China
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Suwon, Hwaseong 18323, South Korea
4
Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington 6140, New Zealand
5
Cainiao Network, Hangzhou, China
luminfang.lmf@alibaba-inc.com, hardyning@gmail.com, liusr.constant@gmail.com, fengyang.sun@vuw.ac.nz,
boz.constant@gmail.com, QCL-yangbo@qcl.edu.cn, wangplanet@gmail.com
Rosenbrock

Rastrigin

Gallagher’s Gaussian 101-me Peaks

Conformal Bent Cigar

Abstract
Black-box optimization (BBO) algorithms are concerned
with finding the best solutions for problems with missing
analytical details. Most classical methods for such problems are based on strong and fixed a priori assumptions,
such as Gaussianity. However, the complex real-world
problems, especially when the global optimum is desired,
could be very far from the a priori assumptions because
of their diversities, causing unexpected obstacles. In this
study, we propose a generative adversarial net-based broadspectrum global optimizer (OPT-GAN) which estimates the
distribution of optimum gradually, with strategies to balance
exploration-exploitation trade-off. It has potential to better
adapt to the regularity and structure of diversified landscapes
than other methods with fixed prior, e.g., Gaussian assumption or separability. Experiments on diverse BBO benchmarks and high dimensional real world applications exhibit
that OPT-GAN outperforms other traditional and neural netbased BBO algorithms. The code and Appendix are available
at https://github.com/NBICLAB/OPT-GAN

Early Stage
Low

Early Stage

Later Stage
High

Figure 1: Estimated p(x) using OPT-GAN on four problems
(see Appendix E for the plotting details of p(x)). It reshapes
p(x) progressively according to properties of a landscape.
f (x), toward the Dirac delta distribution δx∗ (x) with a spike
at x∗ . Note that different optimizer reshapes p(x) in different way (see Appendix A for the general framework).
The No Free Lunch Theorem (NFLT) (Wolpert and
Macready 1997) indicates the significance of prior knowledge to a global optimizer, as the performance difference between optimizers depends on how their a priori assumptions
match with the inherent regularities of problem. Although
there are some specialized narrow-spectrum1 optimizers designed for specific problems by utilizing prior knowledge,
e.g., Iterative Closest Point algorithm (Chetverikov et al.
2002) focuses on point-set matching related problems, the
difficulty for obtaining sufficient problem-related information in real world leads to prosperity of broad-spectrum optimizers.
To deal with the challenge of information deficiency, the
broad-spectrum optimizers maximize performance with lit-

Introduction
Optimization is a study of finding the best solutions to a
given problem. In this field, global optimization searches
for the globally best solution among all possible ones. We
are interested in BBO problems:
arg min f (x) : Ω → R, ∀x ∈ Ω ⊂ Rn ,

Later Stage

(1)

where n is the dimensionality of the searching domain Ω.
The “black box” means we have little information about f
but the function value f (x) indicating the quality of the candidate solution x.
In terms of stochastic black-box optimization, we define p(x) as a distribution representing the estimated chance
that the global optimum x∗ can be found at x. Thus, the
optimization can be viewed as progressively reshaping explicit/implicit p(x) based on sampled x and corresponding

1

Inspired by the term broad-spectrum antibiotics, spectrum implies the range of applicable problems of an optimizer. The broadspectrum ones expect to achieve acceptable performance at a wide
range via strong configurability. However, a narrow-spectrum one
aspires to the best performance at specific families of problems.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Lin Wang
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12462

