The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Set of Control Points Conditioned Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction
Inhwan Bae and Hae-Gon Jeon*
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST)
inhwanbae@gm.gist.ac.kr and haegonj@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
Predicting the trajectories of pedestrians in crowded conditions is an important task for applications like autonomous
navigation systems. Previous studies have tackled this problem
using two strategies. They (1) infer all future steps recursively,
or (2) predict the potential destinations of pedestrians at once
and interpolate the intermediate steps to arrive there. However, these strategies often suffer from the accumulated errors
of the recursive inference, or restrictive assumptions about
social relations in the intermediate path. In this paper, we
present a graph convolutional network-based trajectory prediction. Firstly, we propose a control point prediction that divides
the future path into three sections and infers the intermediate
destinations of pedestrians to reduce the accumulated error.
To do this, we construct multi-relational weighted graphs to
account for their physical and complex social relations. We
then introduce a trajectory refinement step based on a spatiotemporal and multi-relational graph. By considering the social
interactions between neighbors, better prediction results are
achievable. In experiments, the proposed network achieves
state-of-the-art performance on various real-world trajectory
prediction benchmarks.

1

Figure 1: An illustration of Graph-TERN. Our Graph-TERN
first constructs a multi-relational pedestrian graph (yellow) to
capture social and temporal relationships, and then predicts a
set of control points (red) to sample hypothetical destinations
of pedestrians in scenes. After that, the proposed refinement
module learns to estimate accurate final trajectories (orange).

approaches still suffer from severe errors in final destination,
because they accumulate the errors inherent to problems in
the recursive predictions.
To overcome this issue, two notable previous attempts have
been made to infer the potential destinations of pedestrians in
scenes. Works (Mohamed et al. 2020; Shi et al. 2021a; Bae
and Jeon 2021) utilize several temporal CNNs that predict
entire sequences in a single shot, which alleviates the accumulation of errors. In (Rehder et al. 2018; Deo and Trivedi
2020; Mangalam et al. 2020, 2021), the potential endpoints of
the local trajectories are defined first, and their intermediate
steps are then interpolated. Although these methods show
promising performance improvements, issues remained. (1)
Long-term predictions are performed without any consideration of events occurring in the intermediate steps, and (2)
social interactions are not regarded in endpoint prediction.
In this paper, we propose a Graph-based pedestrian Trajectory Estimation and Refinement Network (Graph-TERN)
using a set of control points that combines the advantages of
both attempts. Our network consists of three parts: a control
point prediction, trajectory refinement, and a multi-relational
graph convolutional network (MRGCN). Firstly, we divide
each pedestrian’s future path into three sections and infer
each stochastic goal, called control points. Each control point
represents probabilistic decisions about the next future steps
pedestrians will take. Mixture density networks (MDNs) are

Introduction

Predicting the future trajectories of humans in crowds is
an important task, especially for social robots, autonomous
navigation, and surveillance systems. However, this task is
challenging because such predictions require considering the
desired destinations of each pedestrian, and the social norms
of other moving agents, simultaneously.
Early works (Helbing and Molnar 1995; Pellegrini et al.
2009; Mehran, Oyama, and Shah 2009; Yamaguchi et al.
2011; Pellegrini, Ess, and Gool 2010) have attempted to capture social interactions using handcrafted Langevin equations,
however, they often fail to model the complex social interactions that occur in crowded scenes. The recent development
of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and recurrent neural networks (RNNs) combines with social pooling (Alahi
et al. 2016; Gupta et al. 2018) and social attention (Vemula,
Muelling, and Oh 2018), and has improved understanding
of the social interactions among pedestrians. However, these
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6155

