The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Cross-Modal Label Contrastive Learning for Unsupervised Audio-Visual Event
Localization
Peijun Bao1 , Wenhan Yang* 1,2 , Boon Poh Ng1 , Meng Hwa Er1 , Alex C. Kot1
1

Nanyang Technological University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
peijun001@e.ntu.edu.sg, yangwh@pcl.ac.cn, {ebpng, emher, eackot}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Audio
Segments

This paper for the first time explores audio-visual event localization in an unsupervised manner. Previous methods tackle
this problem in a supervised setting and require segment-level
or video-level event category ground-truth to train the model.
However, building large-scale multi-modality datasets with
category annotations is human-intensive and thus not scalable to real-world applications. To this end, we propose crossmodal label contrastive learning to exploit multi-modal information among unlabeled audio and visual streams as selfsupervision signals. At the feature representation level, multimodal representations are collaboratively learned from audio
and visual components by using self-supervised representation learning. At the label level, we propose a novel selfsupervised pretext task i.e. label contrasting to self-annotate
videos with pseudo-labels for localization model training.
Note that irrelevant background would hinder the acquisition of high-quality pseudo-labels and thus lead to an inferior
localization model. To address this issue, we then propose
an expectation-maximization algorithm that optimizes the
pseudo-label acquisition and localization model in a coarseto-fine manner. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
unsupervised approach performs reasonably well compared
to the state-of-the-art supervised methods.

Visual
Segments

Category
of Event

background
invisible

train horn

train horn

an audible and visible event

background

background

visible but inaudible
(only sound of track hitting )

(a) An example of audio-visual event localization
label affinity set

..

..
EM

E Step

unlabeled videos

..

..

Label Contrast
at label level

cross-modal collaborated learning

self-label
annotator

localization
model

at feature level

..

..

M Step
EM algorithm

label repulsion set

(b) The pipeline of cross-modal label contrastive learning with
expectation-maximization

Introduction
Over the last few years, the computer vision community
has witnessed the success of audio-visual event localization (Wang et al. 2021; Tian et al. 2018; Lin, Li, and Wang
2019; Xuan et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2021; Ramaswamy 2020; Ramaswamy and Das 2020). In this task, an
audio-visual event refers as an event that is both visible and
audible in a video. And as illustrated in Fig 1 (a), the goal
is to find which temporal segment contains an audio-visual
event and identify what category the event belongs to.
Existing works tackle the audio-visual localization in a
supervised manner (Wang et al. 2021; Tian et al. 2018; Lin,
Li, and Wang 2019; Xuan et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2020; Zhou
et al. 2021), and the manual annotations of segment-level or
video-level event categories are required to train the model.

Figure 1: We for the first time propose to solve audio-visual
event localization in the unsupervised setting. (a) An example of audio-visual event localization, whose model training relies on heavy annotations. (b) The proposed pipeline
for unsupervised audio-visual event localization, with selfsupervision at both feature/label level, and an EM algorithm.

However, collecting a large number of videos with associated ground-truth labels is often time-consuming and laborintensive, which makes it not scalable to real-world applications. On the contrary, it costs much less human effort to
collect videos in multi-modalities, i.e. RGB frames with audio signals, which can often be easily obtained on web resources. Motivated by this, we pose a question in this paper: is it possible to develop an unsupervised framework for
audio-visual event localization by leveraging the visual and

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

215

