The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

HyperJump: Accelerating HyperBand via Risk Modelling
Pedro Mendes1,2 , Maria Casimiro1,2 , Paolo Romano1 , David Garlan2
1

2

INESC-ID and Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa
Software and Societal Systems Department, Carnegie Mellon University
{pgmendes, mdaloura, dg4d}@andrew.cmu.edu, romano@inesc-id.pt

Abstract

Hyper-parameter tuning is a crucial phase to optimize the
performance of machine learning (ML) models, which is
notoriously expensive given that it typically implies repeatedly training models over large data sets. State-of-the-art solutions address this issue by exploiting cheap, low-fidelity
models (e.g., trained with a fraction of the available data) to
extrapolate the quality of fully trained models.
HyperBand (Li et al. 2018), henceforth referred to as HB,
is one of the most popular solutions in this area. HB is
based upon a randomized search procedure, called Successive Halving (SH) (Jamieson and Talwalkar 2016), which
operates in stages of fixed “budget” R (e.g., training time
or training set size): at the end of stage i, the best performing 1/η configurations are selected to be evaluated in stage
i + 1, where they will be allocated η× larger budget (see
the bottom diagram of Fig. 1). By restarting the SH procedure over multiple, so called, brackets using different initial training budgets, HB provides theoretical guarantees of
convergence to the optimum, incurring negligible computational overheads and outperforming state-of-the-art opti-

mizers (e.g., based on Bayesian Optimization (BO) (Brochu,
Cora, and de Freitas 2010)) that do not exploit low-fidelity
observations. However, the random nature of HB also inherently limits its efficiency, as shown by recent model-based
multi-fidelity approaches (Falkner, Klein, and Hutter 2018;
Klein et al. 2017).
We introduce HyperJump (HJ), a novel hyper-parameter
optimization method that builds upon HB’s robust strategy
and accelerates it via an innovative, model-based technique.
The idea at the basis of HJ is to “jump” (i.e., skip either
partially or entirely) some of HB’s stages (see the top diagram of Fig. 1). HJ exploits, in a synergistic way, three new
mechanisms to minimize the risks due to jumps, while maximizing the attainable gains by favoring earlier jumps:
• Expected Accuracy Reduction (EAR) — a novel modelling technique to predict the risk of jumping. The EAR
exploits the model’s uncertainty in predicting the quality of untested configurations as a basis to estimate the
expected reduction in the accuracy between (i) the best
configuration included in the stage reached after a jump
and (ii) the best configuration discarded due to the jump.
• A criterion for selecting the configurations to include in
the HB stage targeted by a jump, which aims to minimize
the jump’s risk. This is a combinatorial problem1 , which
we tackle via a lightweight heuristic that has logarithmic
complexity with respect to the number of configurations
in the target stage of the jump.
• A method for prioritizing the testing of configurations
that aims to promote future jumps, by favouring the sampling of configurations that are expected to yield the
highest risk reduction for future jumps.
We conduct an ablation study that sheds light on the
contributions of the various mechanisms of HJ on its performance, and compare HJ with a number of state-of-theart optimizers (Li et al. 2018; Klein et al. 2017; Snoek,
Larochelle, and P. Adams 2012; Falkner, Klein, and Hutter
2018; Li et al. 2020) on both hyper-parameter optimization
and neural architecture search (Dong et al. 2021) problems,
for sequential and parallel deployments. We show that HJ
provides up to over one-order of magnitude speed-ups on
deep-learning and kernel-based learning problems.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The number of candidate configuration sets for a jump toa
stage with k configurations from one with n configurations is nk .

In the literature on hyper-parameter tuning, a number of recent solutions rely on low-fidelity observations (e.g., training with sub-sampled datasets) in order to efficiently identify
promising configurations to be then tested via high-fidelity
observations (e.g., using the full dataset). Among these, HyperBand is arguably one of the most popular solutions, due to
its efficiency and theoretically provable robustness.
In this work, we introduce HyperJump, a new approach that
builds on HyperBand’s robust search strategy and complements it with novel model-based risk analysis techniques
that accelerate the search by skipping the evaluation of low
risk configurations, i.e., configurations that are likely to be
eventually discarded by HyperBand. We evaluate HyperJump
on a suite of hyper-parameter optimization problems and
show that it provides over one-order of magnitude speed-ups,
both in sequential and parallel deployments, on a variety of
deep-learning, kernel-based learning and neural architectural
search problems when compared to HyperBand and to several
state-of-the-art optimizers.

Introduction

9143

