The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SWL-Adapt: An Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Model with Sample Weight
Learning for Cross-User Wearable Human Activity Recognition
Rong Hu1 , Ling Chen1,2 * , Shenghuan Miao1 , Xing Tang1
1

2

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Institute of Frontier Technologies, Hangzhou 310027, China
{ronghu, lingchen, shmiao, tangxing}@cs.zju.edu.cn

Abstract

and Dey 2016; Matsui et al. 2017; Rokni, Nourollahi, and
Ghasemzadeh 2018; Mairittha, Mairittha, and Inoue 2020;
Amrani, Micucci, and Napoletano 2021). However, data annotation usually demands user efforts, thereby limiting the
practicality of these solutions under inconvenient situations.
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) has emerged as
a promising solution to cross-user WHAR under annotation
scarcity. UDA transfers the knowledge learned from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain. This is
achieved by aligning samples across domains, which creates
domain-invariant feature representations. A large number of
UDA models have been proposed for cross-user WHAR and
achieved great success, where the source domain contains
the labeled data of training users and the target domain contains the unlabeled data of the new user. UDA models for
cross-user WHAR can mainly be divided into three categories according to the choice of UDA techniques. The first
category minimizes domain discrepancy measures between
the source and target domains (Hosseini et al. 2019; Ding
et al. 2018; Khan, Roy, and Misra 2018); the second category adversarially learns domain-invariant feature representations that fools a domain discriminator (Zhou et al. 2020;
Chen et al. 2019; Wilson, Doppa, and Cook 2020; Ding et al.
2018); and the third category maps source samples to target samples, or the other way around (Gil-Martı́n, AntúnezDurango, and San-Segundo 2020; Soleimani, E. and Nazerfard, E. 2021).
Existing UDA models usually align samples across domains regardless of the difference among samples. However,
the alignment of different samples might contribute to the
target classification task in varying degrees. The differentiation of samples has been explored for special scenarios
(Chakma et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2018; Shu et al. 2019;
Cao et al. 2019), which mainly selects or weights samples
according to two aspects: 1) how well samples are classified,
which is usually evaluated by classification loss or classification confidence. 2) how similar samples are to the other
domain, which is usually evaluated by domain discrimination loss or domain discrimination probability. Samples are
differentiated by the rules customized for each special scenario.
In real applications, we might come across various crossuser WHAR tasks: the user variance between training users
and the new user might be small or large, e.g., the new user

In practice, Wearable Human Activity Recognition (WHAR)
models usually face performance degradation on the new user
due to user variance. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
becomes the natural solution to cross-user WHAR under annotation scarcity. Existing UDA models usually align samples
across domains without differentiation, which ignores the difference among samples. In this paper, we propose an unsupervised domain adaptation model with sample weight learning
(SWL-Adapt) for cross-user WHAR. SWL-Adapt calculates
sample weights according to the classification loss and domain discrimination loss of each sample with a parameterized network. We introduce the meta-optimization based update rule to learn this network end-to-end, which is guided by
meta-classification loss on the selected pseudo-labeled target
samples. Therefore, this network can fit a weighting function
according to the cross-user WHAR task at hand, which is superior to existing sample differentiation rules fixed for special scenarios. Extensive experiments on three public WHAR
datasets demonstrate that SWL-Adapt achieves the state-ofthe-art performance on the cross-user WHAR task, outperforming the best baseline by an average of 3.1% and 5.3% in
accuracy and macro F1 score, respectively.

Introduction
Wearable Human Activity Recognition (WHAR) aims to
infer human activities through signals collected by wearable sensors. Since wearable sensors are non-intrusive and
portable, WHAR is widely applied in many fields, e.g.,
health monitoring (Hong et al. 2010), factory worker assistance (Maekawa et al. 2016), and human-device interaction
(Reed, Reed, and Dascalu 2019).
Achieving high accuracy in real applications has always
been a challenge in WHAR. Due to the distinct physical
condition and behavioral pattern of each user, distribution
shift often exists between the data of different users, which
is known as user variance (Chen, Zhang, and Peng 2020). As
a result, a well trained model might perform poorly on the
new user in real applications. To tackle cross-user WHAR,
some works proposed to adapt WHAR models to the new
user using annotated data from this user (Hong, Ramos,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6012

