The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On Instance-Dependent Bounds for Offline Reinforcement Learning
with Linear Function Approximation
Thanh Nguyen-Tang1 * , Ming Yin2 , Sunil Gupta3 , Svetha Venkatesh3 , Raman Arora1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University
Department of Computer Science and Department of Statistics and Applied Probability, UC Santa Barbara
3
Applied AI Institute, Deakin University

Abstract

et al. 2022a), econometrics (Kitagawa and Tetenov 2018;
Athey and Wager 2021), and more.

Sample-efficient offline reinforcement learning (RL) with
linear function approximation has been studied extensively
recently. Much of the prior work has yielded instanceindependent rates that hold even for the worst-case realization of problem instances. This work seeks to understand
instance-dependent bounds for offline RL with linear function
approximation. We present an algorithm called Bootstrapped
and Constrained Pessimistic Value Iteration (BCP-VI), which
leverages data bootstrapping and constrained optimization on
top of pessimism. We show that under a partial data coverage
assumption, that of concentrability with respect to an optimal policy, the proposed algorithm yields a fast rate for offline RL when there is a positive gap in the optimal Q-value
functions, even if the offline data were collected adaptively.
Moreover, when the linear features of the optimal actions in
the states reachable by an optimal policy span those reachable
by the behavior policy and the optimal actions are unique,
offline RL achieves absolute zero sub-optimality error when
the number of episodes exceeds a (finite) instance-dependent
threshold. To the best of our knowledge, these are the first results that give a fast rate bound on the sub-optimality and an
absolute zero sub-optimality bound for offline RL with linear function approximation from adaptive data with partial
coverage. We also provide instance-agnostic and instancedependent information-theoretical lower bounds to complement our upper bounds.

A large body of literature is devoted to providing generalization bounds for offline reinforcement learning with linear function approximation, wherein the reward and transition probability functions are parameterized as linear functions of a given feature mapping. For such linear MDPs, Jin,
Yang, and Wang (2021) present a pessimistic value iteration (PEVI) algorithm and show that it is sample-efficient.
In particular, Jin, Yang, and Wang (2021) provide a sample complexity bound for PEVI such that under the assumption that each trajectory is independently sampled and the
behaviour policy is uniformly explorative in all dimensions
of the feature mapping, the complexity bound improves to
3/2
2
Õ( d √KH ) where d is the dimension of the feature mapping,
H is the episode length, and K is the number of episodes in
the offline data. In a follow-up work, Xiong et al. (2023);
Yin et al. (2022) leverage variance reduction (to derive a
variance-aware bound) and data-splitting (to circumvent the
uniform concentration argument) to further improve√
the result in Jin, Yang, and Wang (2021) by a factor of O( dH).
Xie et al. (2021) propose a pessimistic framework with general function approximation, and their bound improves
that
√
of (Jin, Yang, and Wang 2021) by a factor of d when
the action space is finite, and the function approximation
is linear. Uehara and Sun (2022) also obtain the √1K rate
for offline RL with general function approximation, but like
(Xie et al. 2021), their results are, in general, not computationally tractable as they require an optimization subroutine over a general function class. Although the √1K rate is
minimax-optimal, in practice, assuming a worst-case setting
is too pessimistic. Indeed, several empirical works suggest
that in such natural settings, we can learn at a rate that is
much faster than √1K (e.g., see Figure 1 in the supplementary). We argue that to circumvent these lower bounds and
explain the rates we observe in practical settings, we should
consider the intrinsic instance-dependent structure of the underlying MDP. Furthermore, most existing works establishing the the minimax-optimal √1K rate still require a strong
assumption of uniform feature coverage and trajectory independence. This motivates us to study tighter instancedependent bounds for offline RL with the mildest data cov-

Introduction
We consider the problem of offline reinforcement learning
(offline RL), where the goal is to learn an optimal policy
from a fixed dataset generated by some unknown behavior
policy (Lange, Gabel, and Riedmiller 2012; Levine et al.
2020). The offline RL problem has recently attracted much
attention from the research community. It provides a practical setting where logged datasets are abundant but exploring
the environment can be costly due to computational, economic, or ethical reasons. It finds applications in a number of important domains including healthcare (Gottesman
et al. 2019; Nie, Brunskill, and Wager 2021), recommendation systems (Strehl et al. 2010; Thomas et al. 2017; Zhang
* Email: nguyent@cs.jhu.edu / thnguyentang@gmail.com
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9310

