The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CSTAR: Towards Compact and Structured Deep Neural Networks with
Adversarial Robustness
Huy Phan1 , Miao Yin1 , Yang Sui1 , Bo Yuan1 , Saman Zonouz2
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rutgers University
Schools of Cybersecurity and Privacy, Georgia Institute of Technology
{huy.phan, miao.yin, yang.sui}@rutgers.edu,
bo.yuan@soe.rutgers.edu, saman.zonouz@gatech.edu

2

Abstract

adversary (Zang et al. 2020; Xie et al. 2020b; Phan et al.
2020, 2022b; Shi et al. 2022; Phan et al. 2022a), especially
to the imperceptible and high-damage adversarial attacks.
To address these emerging challenges and further promote
and democratize the use of DNNs, the machine learning
community has conducted tremendous research activities to
improve the execution efficiency and security of neural networks. In particular, model compression and adversarial defense, as two key techniques that can efficiently reduce the
model size and enhance the model robustness, have been
extensively studied in the existing literature. More specifically, various types of DNN compression approaches, e.g.,
pruning (Han et al. 2015; Sui et al. 2021) and quantization
(Gong et al. 2014), as well as many different DNN defense
methods, e.g., adversarial training (Madry et al. 2017; Wong,
Rice, and Kolter 2020) and input denoising (Prakash et al.
2018), have been developed in both academia and industry.
Co-exploring Model Compactness & Robustness. Considering the co-importance of compactness and robustness
for the DNNs used in the practical applications, an attractive
and natural thought is to develop a method that can generate
neural networks with high compactness and strong robustness simultaneously. Motivated by this idea, several prior
works have explored to examine and further improve the robustness of the compressed DNNs. In particular, because of
the popularity of pruning in many model compression tasks,
most of the existing compactness/robustness co-exploration
efforts (Sehwag et al. 2020, 2019; Ye et al. 2019; Vemparala et al. 2021) focus on efficient approaches to generate
the robust pruned DNN models. To be specific, (Ye et al.
2019) demonstrates that the model robustness and compactness can co-exist for neural networks via concurrent adversarial training and weight pruning. Considering the pruning criterion in (Sehwag et al. 2019) is designed to preserve benign accuracy instead of improving robust accuracy,
(Sehwag et al. 2020) further proposes robust training-aware
pruning to enhance both.
The Dilemma Between Robustness and Structuredness of Compact DNNs. Although the state-of-the-art robust pruning works can simultaneously enable high sparsity and strong robustness for the target DNN models, all
of their best performance comes from performing unstructured pruning. As extensively reported and observed in the
prior literature (Han et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2015; Zhu et al.

Model compression and model defense for deep neural networks (DNNs) have been extensively and individually studied. Considering the co-importance of model compactness
and robustness in practical applications, several prior works
have explored to improve the adversarial robustness of the
sparse neural networks. However, the structured sparse models obtained by the existing works suffer severe performance
degradation for both benign and robust accuracy, thereby
causing a challenging dilemma between robustness and structuredness of compact DNNs.
To address this problem, in this paper, we propose CSTAR, an
efficient solution that simultaneously impose Compactness,
high STructuredness and high Adversarial Robustness on the
target DNN models. By formulating the structuredness and
robustness requirement within the same framework, the compressed DNNs can simultaneously achieve high compression
performance and strong adversarial robustness. Evaluations
for various DNN models on different datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of CSTAR. Compared with the state-of-the-art
robust structured pruning, CSTAR shows consistently better
performance. For instance, when compressing ResNet-18 on
CIFAR-10, CSTAR achieves up to 20.07% and 11.91% improvement for benign accuracy and robust accuracy, respectively. For compressing ResNet-18 with 16× compression ratio on Imagenet, CSTAR obtains 8.58% benign accuracy gain
and 4.27% robust accuracy gain compared to the existing robust structured pruning.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have obtained widespread
popularity in various important intelligent systems, such as
autonomous driving, smart home, computer-aided diagnosis, and so on. Despite their current unprecedented prosperity, DNNs are still facing two severe problems, namely
efficiency challenge and security challenge, which can potentially hinder their future success in many practical applications. Specifically, the efficiency challenge refers to
the high energy/storage/timing costs when deploying the
modern large-scale DNN models in the field, especially on
resource-constrained embedded and mobile devices. Meanwhile, the security challenge mainly refers to the vulnerability of DNN models to the attacks launched by the malicious
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2065

