The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Contrastive Predictive Autoencoders for Dynamic Point Cloud
Self-Supervised Learning
Xiaoxiao Sheng * , Zhiqiang Shen * , Gang Xiao †
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{shengxiaoxiao, shenzhiqiang, xiaogang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
We present a new self-supervised paradigm on point cloud
sequence understanding. Inspired by the discriminative and
generative self-supervised methods, we design two tasks,
namely point cloud sequence based Contrastive Prediction
and Reconstruction (CPR), to collaboratively learn more
comprehensive spatiotemporal representations. Specifically,
dense point cloud segments are first input into an encoder to
extract embeddings. All but the last ones are then aggregated
by a context-aware autoregressor to make predictions for the
last target segment. Towards the goal of modeling multigranularity structures, local and global contrastive learning
are performed between predictions and targets. To further improve the generalization of representations, the predictions
are also utilized to reconstruct raw point cloud sequences by
a decoder, where point cloud colorization is employed to discriminate against different frames. By combining classic contrast and reconstruction paradigms, it makes the learned representations with both global discrimination and local perception. We conduct experiments on four point cloud sequence
benchmarks, and report the results on action recognition and
gesture recognition under multiple experimental settings. The
performances are comparable with supervised methods and
show powerful transferability.

Point Spatiotemporal Encoder

Contrastive Learning

Autoregressor
Decoder

Chamfer Distance

Figure 1: Illustration of our main idea. We combine contrastive predictive coding and reconstruction to establish a
unified self-supervised framework for dynamic point clouds.

or reconstructing the randomly masked patches based on
visible parts to obtain high-level semantics (Zbontar et al.
2021; Bao et al. 2021). For discriminative methods, rich
and diverse sample pairs are usually created. However, it is
likely that the semantic consistency of the augmented dynamic point cloud pairs is difficult to be guaranteed. Furthermore, experimental results in (Xie et al. 2020) also demonstrate that real multi-camera views are more effective than
hand-crafted views for point clouds. For generative selfsupervised methods, the original point coordinates need to
be recovered. However, the corresponding coordinates will
be added to masked tokens as positional embeddings. This
results in information leakage and makes the task less challenging. Based on the above analysis, it is natural to ask a
question: how can we leverage the advantages of discriminative and generative methods for self-supervised learning
on dynamic point clouds?
Considering that point cloud sequences are constantly
evolving with geometric dynamics, we can explore
temporal-related self-supervised signals lying in the sequence itself, rather than relying on massive augmented
data. Contrastive predictive coding is to predict about future based on recent past of the sequences, which has been
successfully validated in speeches and videos (Oord, Li, and

Introduction
The development of depth sensors facilitates the acquisition of dynamic point clouds and makes it widely applied in many scenarios, such as autonomous vehicles and
robots. Currently, processing these real-time point clouds for
surroundings perception still relies on supervised methods.
However, labeling plenty of dynamic point clouds is quite
labor-intensive and error-prone. Meanwhile, self-supervised
methods in images make great success, significantly alleviating annotation requirement and even outperforming supervised pretraining methods in many tasks (Zbontar et al.
2021; He et al. 2020). Inspired by this, this paper focuses
on learning dynamic point cloud representations in a selfsupervised manner.
Classical self-supervised methods in images always rely
on contrasting the samples with strong data augmentations
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Gang Xiao is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9802

