The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

From Understanding the Population Dynamics of the NSGA-II
to the First Proven Lower Bounds
Benjamin Doerr, Zhongdi Qu
Laboratoire d’Informatique (LIX), Ecole Polytechnique, CNRS, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France
doerr@lix.polytechnique.fr, d.q.1124@gmail.com

Abstract

non-trivial lower bound on the runtime. Such bounds are
important since only by comparing upper and lower bounds
for different algorithms can one declare one algorithm superior to another. Such bounds are also necessary to have
tight runtime estimates, from which information about optimal parameter values can be obtained.
The lack of lower bounds for the NSGA-II, naturally, is
caused by the more complicated population dynamics of this
algorithm. While for algorithms like the SEMO or global
SEMO predominantly analyzed in MOEA theory, it follows
right from the definition of the algorithm that there can be
at most one individual per objective value, such structural
information does not exist for the NSGA-II.
In this work, we gain a first deeper understanding of the
population dynamics of the NSGA-II (more precisely, the
mutation-based version regarded in almost all previous runtime results for the NSGA-II). For the optimization of the
O NE M IN M AX and the O NE J UMP Z ERO J UMP benchmark,
we prove that also for relatively large population sizes, only
a constant number of individuals exists on the outer positions of the Pareto front. This information allows us to prove
upper bounds on the speed with which the Pareto front is explored, and finally yields lower bounds on the runtime of the
NSGA-II on these two benchmarks.
More specifically, we prove the following lower bound
for the O NE J UMP Z ERO J UMP benchmark (we do not discuss
here in detail the result for O NE M IN M AX and refer instead
to Theorem 16). Let N denote the population size of the
NSGA-II, n the problem size (length of the bit-string encoding), and k the gap parameter of the O NE J UMP Z ERO J UMP
problem. If N is at least 4 times the size n − 2k + 3 of
the Pareto front and N = o(n2 /k 2 ), then the time to compute the Pareto front of the O NE J UMP Z ERO J UMP problem
is at least ( 3(e−1)
− o(1))N nk fitness evaluations or, equiv8
3(e−1)
alently, ( 8 − o(1))nk iterations. This result shows that
the upper bound of O(N nk ) fitness evaluations or O(nk ) iterations proven by Doerr and Qu (2022a) is asymptotically
tight for broad ranges of the parameters. In particular, this
shows that there is no advantage in using a population size
larger than the smallest admissible one, not even when taking the number of iterations as the performance measure.
This is very different from the single-objective world, where,
for example, the runtime of the (1 + λ) EA on the single-

Due to the more complicated population dynamics of the
NSGA-II, none of the existing runtime guarantees for this
algorithm is accompanied by a non-trivial lower bound. Via
a first mathematical understanding of the population dynamics of the NSGA-II, that is, by estimating the expected
number of individuals having a certain objective value, we
prove that the NSGA-II with suitable population size needs
Ω(N n log n) function evaluations to find the Pareto front
of the O NE M IN M AX problem and Ω(N nk ) evaluations on
the O NE J UMP Z ERO J UMP problem with jump size k. These
bounds are asymptotically tight (that is, they match previously shown upper bounds) and show that the NSGA-II here
does not even in terms of the parallel runtime (number of iterations) profit from larger population sizes. For the O NE J UMP Z ERO J UMP problem and when the same sorting is used for
the computation of the crowding distance contributions of the
two objectives, we even obtain a runtime estimate that is tight
including the leading constant.

Introduction
Many real-world problems have several, often conflicting
objectives. For such multi-objective optimization problems,
it is hard to compute a single solution. Instead, one usually computes a set of incomparable, interesting solutions
from which a decision maker can select the most preferable
one. Due to their population-based nature, evolutionary algorithms (EAs) are well suited for such problems, and in
fact, are intensively used in multi-objective optimization.
The most accepted multi-objective evolutionary algorithm
(MOEA) in practice (Zhou et al. 2011) is the non-dominated
sorting genetic algorithm II (NSGA-II) proposed by Deb
et al. (2002). It uses a fixed population size N , generates N
new solutions per iteration, and selects the next population
according to the non-dominated sorting of the combined parent and offspring population and the crowding distance. Due
to this complex structure, no mathematical runtime analyses
existed for this algorithm until the work (Zheng, Liu, and
Doerr 2022), which was soon followed by (Zheng and Doerr
2022; Bian and Qian 2022; Doerr and Qu 2022a).
Interestingly, and different from the previous runtime
analyses of other MOEAs, none of these works proved a
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12408

