The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Simple Yet Effective Subsequence-Enhanced Approach for Cross-Domain NER
Jinpeng Hu1 , DanDan Guo2 , Yang Liu1,∗ , Zhuo Li1 , Zhihong Chen1 ,
Xiang Wan1,3,∗ , Tsung-Hui Chang1,2
1

Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, 510330, China
{jinpenghu, zhuoli3, zhihongchen, yangliu5}@link.cuhk.edu.cn,
{guodandan, changtsunghui}@cuhk.edu.cn, wanxiang@sribd.cn
Abstract

Cross-domain named entity recognition (NER), aiming to address the limitation of labeled resources in the target domain, is
a challenging yet important task. Most existing studies alleviate the data discrepancy across different domains at the coarse
level via combing NER with language modelings or introducing domain-adaptive pre-training (DAPT). Notably, source
and target domains tend to share more fine-grained local information within denser subsequences than global information
within the whole sequence, such that subsequence features are
easier to transfer, which has not been explored well. Besides,
compared to token-level representation, subsequence-level information can help the model distinguish different meanings
of the same word in different domains. In this paper, we propose to incorporate subsequence-level features for promoting
the cross-domain NER. In detail, we first utilize a pre-trained
encoder to extract the global information. Then, we re-express
each sentence as a group of subsequences and propose a novel
bidirectional memory recurrent unit (BMRU) to capture features from the subsequences. Finally, an adaptive coupling unit
(ACU) is proposed to combine global information and subsequence features for predicting entity labels. Experimental results on several benchmark datasets illustrate the effectiveness
of our model, which achieves considerable improvements.

Introduction
Named entity recognition (NER) is a fundamental task in
text processing, which provides the necessary elements for
many downstream tasks, such as relation extraction (Liu et al.
2022b,a), knowledge graph (Fan et al. 2020), summarization
(Hu et al. 2022a), etc. Due to the lack of labeled datasets and
the expensive cost of human labeling, cross-domain NER has
attracted substantial attention over the past years. It aims to
adapt the model learned from a source domain with relatively
large data to a target domain with limited data.
Recently, many approaches have been proposed for improving the cross-domain NER (Jia, Liang, and Zhang 2019;
Liu et al. 2020, 2021b; Jia and Zhang 2020). For example,
(Jia, Liang, and Zhang 2019) built a parameter generation
network to perform the cross-domain and cross-task knowledge transfer, combining the language modeling and NER.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*
Corresponding author.

12890

Afterward, (Liu et al. 2021b) introduced a new cross-domain
NER dataset containing five diverse domains and provided a
domain-related corpus, which can be used to train language
models for improving NER in the target domain. Although
these efforts can reduce the domain discrepancy, they typically focus on improving the extraction of sentence-level
features that belong to the category of coarse-grained level
information and pay less attention to exploring the dense
fine-grained subsequence information. From the perspective
of data sparsity, the coarse-grained level features are more
sparse than the fine-grained level ones between two different
domains. For example, finding the same sentences in two
datasets belonging to distinct domains is almost impossible,
while identical subsequences are easier to find. Although
these subsequences belong to different domains, they tend to
share similar semantic meanings, which is why we believe
that subsequence-level features are easier to transfer between
different domains. Besides, there are also some studies focusing on single token transfer (Lin and Lu 2018). However,
some tokens usually have different meanings when they appear in different domains. For example, the token “nuclear”
from the news domain is usually attended to the “powers”
and “disarmament” with a larger probability. However, due
to limited training data in the target domain in cross-domain
NER, the high correlation between “nuclear” and “powers”
might still be preserved, which is not the case in the medical domain. Instead, “nuclear” tends to have close relation
with “factor” or “transcription”. Thus, the neighborhood of
a token (e.g., subsequence feature) is also crucial to provide
strong evidence to help the model distinguish similarities and
differences between different domains.
In this paper, we propose to incorporate subsequence-level
features to improve the feature adaptation for cross-domain
NER. Specially, we first utilize a pre-trained model to extract
coarse-level features from the sequence. Then, we split the
sequence as a group of subsequences with the same length
as the sequence, and each token in the sequence has a corresponding subsequence. Afterward, we utilize a bidirectional
sliding window to extract fine-grained local features from
these subsequences. Finally, we propose an adaptive coupling
unit (ACU) to integrate fine-grained subsequence features
and coarse-grained global information to predict the NER
labels. In doing so, for one thing, denser subsequence-level
information can be more effectively transferred from the

