The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SMT Safety Verification of Ontology-Based Processes
Diego Calvanese1,2 , Alessandro Gianola1 , Andrea Mazzullo1 , Marco Montali1
1

Faculty of Engineering, Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Italy,
2
Computing Science Department, Umeå University, Sweden
{calvanese, gianola, mazzullo, montali}@inf.unibz.it

Abstract

the working memory. Verification of such systems is challenging, not only because the working memory in general
evolves through infinitely many different configurations, but
also because the desired verification properties should hold
regardless of the content of the read-only database, thus calling for a particular form of parameterised verification (Damaggio, Deutsch, and Vianu 2012; Deutsch, Li, and Vianu
2019; Calvanese et al. 2019b, 2020).
In this paper, we study for the first time ontology-based
processes, i.e., semantically-enriched artifact systems where
the read-only database is substituted by a description logic
(DL) ontology (Baader et al. 2003), which stores background, incomplete information about the artifacts. In this
setting, two possible notions of parameterisation may be
studied: one where the evolution of the system is verified
against all possible choices for the ABox (i.e., the extensional component of the ontology), another where verification is against all possible models of a fixed ABox. In this
work, we adopt the latter, and thus verify whether the system
enjoys desired properties irrespectively of how the information explicitly provided by the ABox is completed through
the assertions in the TBox (i.e., the intensional component
of the ontology).
More in detail, we consider an extensively studied model
of such artifact systems, called simple artifact system (SAS)
by Calvanese et al. (2020), where the artifact working memory consists of a fixed set of artifact variables (Deutsch
et al. 2009; Damaggio, Deutsch, and Vianu 2012; Calvanese
et al. 2020). On top of this basis, we study the verification
of safety properties in the case where the ontology is specified in (a slight extension of) RDFS (Brickley and Guha
2014), a schema/ontology language for the Semantic Web
formalized by the W3C, and where the transitions that update the working memory are expressed over the ontology
signature. For this setting, we provide an SMT-based backward reachability procedure to decide safety, showing that
the problem is in PS PACE. To apply this machinery, the underlying DL must enjoy suitable model-theoretic properties.
In particular, to this end, we prove for the first time that this
DL admits a model completion (Chang and Keisler 1990).
Showing the existence of model completions is not trivial:
it requires a careful algebraic analysis of the class of all
models. At the same time, we give indications on which DL
constructs break our verification machinery: indeed, model

In the context of verification of data-aware processes, a formal approach based on satisfiability modulo theories (SMT)
has been considered to verify parameterised safety properties.
This approach requires a combination of model-theoretic notions and algorithmic techniques based on backward reachability. We introduce here Ontology-Based Processes, which
are a variant of one of the most investigated models in this
spectrum, namely simple artifact systems (SASs), where, instead of managing a database, we operate over a description
logic (DL) ontology. We prove that when the DL is expressed
in (a slight extension of) RDFS, it enjoys suitable modeltheoretic properties, and that by relying on such DL we can
define Ontology-Based Processes to which backward reachability can still be applied. Relying on these results we are
able to show that in this novel setting, verification of safety
properties is decidable in PSPACE.

Introduction
Verifying and reasoning about dynamic systems that integrate processes and data is a long-standing challenge that
attracted considerable attention, and that led to a flourishing
series of results, within business process management (Reichert 2012; Calvanese et al. 2019a; Ghilardi et al. 2020) and
data management (Vianu 2009; Calvanese, De Giacomo,
and Montali 2013; Bagheri Hariri et al. 2013a; Deutsch,
Hull, and Vianu 2014; Deutsch, Li, and Vianu 2019). Among
the several conceptual models studied in this area, datacentric systems and in particular artifact-centric systems
have been brought forward as a principled approach where
relevant (business) objects are elicited, and actions evolving
them through their lifecycle are defined (Hull 2008). Different formal models have been proposed to capture artifact systems and study their verification (Calvanese, De Giacomo, and Montali 2013). One of the most studied settings
considers artifact systems as being composed of: (i) a readonly database storing background information about artifacts that does not change during the system evolution; (ii) a
working memory, used to store data that can be modified in
the course of the evolution; and (iii) transitions (also called
actions or services) that query the read-only database and
the working memory and use the retrieved data to update
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6271

