The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Parametric Surface Constrained Upsampler Network for Point Cloud
Pingping Cai, Zhenyao Wu, Xinyi Wu, Song Wang

Clean

University of South Carolina, USA
{pcai,zhenyao,xinyiw}@email.sc.edu, songwang@cec.sc.edu

Abstract

Noisy

Designing a point cloud upsampler, which aims to generate a
clean and dense point cloud given a sparse point representation, is a fundamental and challenging problem in computer vision. A line of attempts achieves this goal by establishing a point-to-point mapping function via deep neural
networks. However, these approaches are prone to produce
outlier points due to the lack of explicit surface-level constraints. To solve this problem, we introduce a novel surface
regularizer into the upsampler network by forcing the neural network to learn the underlying parametric surface represented by bicubic functions and rotation functions, where
the new generated points are then constrained on the underlying surface. These designs are integrated into two different networks for two tasks that take advantages of upsampling layers – point cloud upsampling and point cloud completion for evaluation. The state-of-the-art experimental results on both tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. The implementation code will be available at
https://github.com/corecai163/PSCU.

(a) Input

(b) EAR

(c) PU-GCN

(d) Ours

(e) Ground Truth

Figure 1: The double-layer lid can be clearly upsampled by
our method, while the traditional EAR (Huang et al. 2013)
fails to distinguish the two nearby layers and the previous
SOTA method PU-GCN (Qian et al. 2021) generates many
noisy and outlier points. Please zoom in for more details.

2013; Wu et al. 2015; Preiner et al. 2014) rely on geometric priors to upsample the point cloud but often fail when
the input is complex and have been outperformed by recent
deep learning methods. These well-designed deep learning
methods can be further divided into two categories based on
their adopted upsampler: 1) feature-based upsampling methods and 2) folding-based upsampling methods. The featurebased methods (Zhang, Yan, and Xiao 2020; Huang et al.
2020; Wu, Zhang, and Huang 2019; Ye et al. 2022; Qian
et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2018; Xiang et al. 2021) first extract
shape features from input points and expand the number of
points by upscaling the shape features in the feature space.
These upsampled features are then fed into a coordinate regression block (MLPs) to predict their coordinates. A pointwise loss function, i.e., Chamfer Distance (Fan, Su, and
Guibas 2017), is usually used to train the network. However,
this loss function only measures the point-wise distance and
can not measure the difference of underlying surfaces between point clouds. As a result, these methods often fail to
generate points that are located accurately on the underlying surfaces. Folding-based methods (Yang et al. 2018; Yuan
et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2020, 2022; Long et al. 2021; Luo and
Hu 2020) expand the number of points by introducing a predefined 2D grid for each point and then concatenating them
with shape features to regress for their coordinates via MLPs
– they can be viewed as a mimic of a morphing/surface function that transforms the 2D grid to target surfaces. While
they attempt to preserve a better surface structure, they can
only learn an overfitted point-point mapping with point-wise
loss functions (Williams et al. 2019), but not the accurate

Introduction
Point cloud is an efficient data structure to represent 3D
objects. But, due to the limitation of sensors, the collected
point clouds are usually sparse and incomplete. Therefore,
point cloud upsampling (Li et al. 2019; Qian et al. 2021;
Yu et al. 2018; Qian et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2019) is introduced to generate denser point clouds for better scene
representation, which benefits many computer vision applications such as autonomous driving (Zeng et al. 2018; Li
et al. 2021), 3D object classification (Li et al. 2020; Qi et al.
2017b), semantic segmentation (Zhang et al. 2020; Landrieu
and Simonovsky 2018; Engelmann et al. 2017) and robotics
(Rusu et al. 2008). For point cloud upsampling, it is expected
that the generated dense points can well represent the shape
and surface underlying the point cloud. However, obtaining
such property is challenging, and even previous state-of-theart (SOTA) methods may generate many noisy and outlier
points (see Figure 1).
Many sophisticated methods have been proposed to solve
this challenging problem. Traditional optimization based
methods (Alexa et al. 2003; Lipman et al. 2007; Huang et al.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

250

