The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Exploring Tuning Characteristics of Ventral Stream’s Neurons for Few-Shot
Image Classification
Lintao Dong, Wei Zhai, Zheng-Jun Zha*
University of Science and Technology of China
{dlintao, wzhai056}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhazj@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

training paradigms and classifiers, which are not fully explored in few-shot image classification.
Briefly speaking, tuning characteristics of ventral stream’s
neurons can be divided into 5 groups (Kruger et al. 2012)
- tuning characteristics about shape, color, motion, depth
and belongingness. We don’t consider tuning characteristics
about motion and depth in this paper, as the data used in
image classification is static and monocular.
For tuning characteristics about shape and color, we computationally model the neurons in ventral stream tuned to
shape cues and color cues, which are summarized in Figure 1. With these neuron models, we can regularize the backbone of a few-shot model to make it produce more generic
and robust features. To the best of our knowledge, we are
the first to utilize the computational models of neurons to
benefit few-shot learning, thus building a bridge to fertilize
few-shot learning from the development of computational
neuroscience. To achieve this, one way is to use distillation:
firstly we use neuron models’ responses to images and their
corresponding labels to train a classification model. Then
we distill the knowledge from this classification model to a
normally trained classification model fed by original image
data to get the improved few-shot model. While this distillation method can successfully transfer the knowledge from
ventral stream to few-shot model, it omits the hierarchy of
ventral stream’s neurons (V1→V2→V4). To also exploit the
hierarchy information, we propose the hierarchical feature
regularization method, as shown in the lower part of Figure 2. Firstly we group the neuron models according to the
visual areas they lie in. Then we use the responses of neurons from V1, V2, V4 areas to respectively regularize features of different layers in the backbone of few-shot model
and these layers regularized should have the same hierarchy as the neurons, by which the backbone not only captures the tuning characteristics of ventral stream’s neurons,
but also maintains the same hierarchical structure of the ventral stream. If this hierarchy is reversed, the effect of feature
regularization will be discounted, which can be seen from
the experiment section.
For tuning characteristic of belongingness, existed
method (Luo et al. 2021) has explored the similar problem of
detecting the foreground object without supervision. Their
method is based on the prior knowledge that features of foreground objects in images should be the most common fea-

Human has the remarkable ability of learning novel objects
by browsing extremely few examples, which may be attributed to the generic and robust feature extracted in the ventral stream of our brain for representing visual objects. In this
sense, the tuning characteristics of ventral stream’s neurons
can be useful prior knowledge to improve few-shot classification. Specifically, we computationally model two groups of
neurons found in ventral stream which are respectively sensitive to shape cues and color cues. Then we propose the hierarchical feature regularization method with these neuron models to regularize the backbone of a few-shot model, thus making it produce more generic and robust features for few-shot
classification. In addition, to simulate the tuning characteristic that neuron firing at a higher rate in response to foreground stimulus elements compared to background elements,
which we call belongingness, we design a foreground segmentation algorithm based on the observation that the foreground object usually does not appear at the edge of the picture, then multiply the foreground mask with the backbone
of few-shot model. Our method is model-agnostic and can be
applied to few-shot models with different backbones, training
paradigms and classifiers.

Introduction
Few-shot image classification aims to learn new visual concepts from extremely limited examples, which can’t be
achieved without prior knowledge. As for human beings,
we can learn a novel object quickly with only a glance at
it. This remarkable ability implies that there is a generic
and robust encoder in our brain which can extract features
to effectively represent the visual information of an object.
According to the two-streams hypothesis (Schneider 1969;
Mishkin and Ungerleider 1982; Goodale et al. 1991), human’s brain possesses two distinct pathways for visual perception - the ventral stream and the dorsal stream. Of these
two pathways, the ventral stream is thought to be responsible for transform-invariant visual object and face recognition, which can be seen as the generic and robust encoder
mentioned previously. As a result, tuning characteristics of
ventral stream’s neurons can be useful prior knowledge to
improve existed few-shot models with different backbones,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

534

