The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

TransPath: Learning Heuristics For Grid-Based Pathfinding via Transformers
Daniil Kirilenko1 , Anton Andreychuk2 , Aleksandr Panov1, 2 , Konstantin Yakovlev1, 2
1

Federal Research Center for Computer Science and Control of Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
2
AIRI, Moscow, Russia
anedanman@gmail.com, andreychuk@airi.net, panov@airi.net, yakovlev@isa.ru

Map

Abstract
Heuristic search algorithms, e.g. A*, are the commonly used
tools for pathfinding on grids, i.e. graphs of regular structure that are widely employed to represent environments in
robotics, video games, etc. Instance-independent heuristics
for grid graphs, e.g. Manhattan distance, do not take the obstacles into account, and thus the search led by such heuristics
performs poorly in obstacle-rich environments. To this end,
we suggest learning the instance-dependent heuristic proxies that are supposed to notably increase the efficiency of the
search. The first heuristic proxy we suggest to learn is the correction factor, i.e. the ratio between the instance-independent
cost-to-go estimate and the perfect one (computed offline at
the training phase). Unlike learning the absolute values of
the cost-to-go heuristic function, which was known before,
learning the correction factor utilizes the knowledge of the
instance-independent heuristic. The second heuristic proxy is
the path probability, which indicates how likely the grid cell
is lying on the shortest path. This heuristic can be employed
in the Focal Search framework as the secondary heuristic,
allowing us to preserve the guarantees on the bounded suboptimality of the solution. We learn both suggested heuristics
in a supervised fashion with the state-of-the-art neural networks containing attention blocks (transformers). We conduct
a thorough empirical evaluation on a comprehensive dataset
of planning tasks, showing that the suggested techniques i)
reduce the computational effort of the A* up to a factor of 4x
while producing the solutions, whose costs exceed those of
the optimal solutions by less than 0.3% on average; ii) outperform the competitors, which include the conventional techniques from the heuristic search, i.e. weighted A*, as well as
the state-of-the-art learnable planners.
The project web-page is: https://airi-institute.github.io/
TransPath/.

A*

S
G

Path probability map
(PPM)

Focal search
with PPM

Figure 1: The difference between A* and our approach. The
expanded nodes are shown in green, while the path is highlighted in red. Blue regions are predicted by the neural network to contain path cells with high probability.

Path planning on a grid is commonly accomplished by
a heuristic search algorithm, e.g. A* (Hart, Nilsson, and
Raphael 1968) or one of its numerous modifications. Performance of such algorithms is heavily dependent on the input heuristic that comes in the form of a function that estimates the cost of the path to the goal for each node of the
graph (cost-to-go heuristic). If the heuristic is perfect, i.e.,
for every node its value equals the cost of the shortest path,
a search algorithm explores only the nodes that lie on one of
the minimum-cost paths. However, such a perfect heuristic
is instance-dependent and cannot be encoded in the closedloop form. In practice, instance-independent heuristics, e.g.
Manhattan distance, are typically used for grid-based path
planning. These heuristics do not take obstacles into account

Introduction
Path planning for a mobile agent in the static environment
is a fundamental problem in AI that is often framed as a
graph search problem. Within this approach, first, an agent’s
workspace is discretized to a graph. Second, a search algorithm is invoked on this graph to find a path from start to
goal. Arguably, 2k -connected grids (Rivera et al. 2020) are
the most widely used graphs for path planning in a variety
of applications (robotics, video games, etc.).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial

Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12436

