The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Human Assisted Learning by Evolutionary Multi-Objective Optimization
Dan-Xuan Liu1 , Xin Mu2 , Chao Qian1
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518000, China
{liudx, qianc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, mux@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract

whether these comments satisfy some requirements (e.g., no
racial or sex discrimination), while their fatigue will probably make some non-compliant comments overlooked.
Machine learning models, which are trained from data,
can make decisions automatically, and have achieved significant successes, liberating manpower greatly. Though achieving or even exceeding the average performance of human
experts, the machine models may still make worse decisions
than humans on some instances. HAL is then naturally introduced (Raghu et al. 2019), whose goal is to develop machine
learning models that are optimized to take decisions for most
instances, and outsource the remaining ones to humans. By
outsourcing a small number of tricky instances to human experts for decision-making, HAL can reduce the difficulty of
model training, and lead to the performance improvement
without using too many expert resources.
HAL is quite different from active learning (Sabato and
Munos 2014; Hashemi et al. 2019) and human-machine collaboration (Tschiatschek et al. 2019; Kamalaruban et al.
2019). The goal of active learning is to select a valuable
subset of instances for human labeling, such that the trained
supervised model can have a good generalization ability. Active learning requires the trained model to perform well over
the entire instance space, while HAL only requires that it
can perform well on those instances similar to that assigned
to the machine during training, while delivering the other
instances to human experts. Human-machine collaboration
focuses more on the interaction between machine and human, where the model training may need the help of humans,
while HAL is mainly to decide which instance is suitable for
model prediction and which is suitable for human prediction.
Most previous works usually develop a heuristic policy
for deciding which instance should be outsourced to humans (Raghu et al. 2019; Wilder, Horvitz, and Kamar 2020;
Mozannar and Sontag 2020; Bordt and von Luxburg 2020).
For example, Raghu et al. (2019) proposed two algorithms
for human assisted classification, i.e., triage based on algorithmic uncertainty and predicted error. The former trains
the classification model on the whole training set and outsources to humans the top k test instances with the highest
classification uncertainty of the model. The latter also trains
the classification model on the whole training set, but outsources to humans the top k test instances with the highest
difference between the prediction of models and humans.

Machine learning models have liberated manpower greatly in
many real-world tasks, but their predictions are still worse
than humans on some specific instances. To improve the performance, it is natural to optimize machine learning models to
take decisions for most instances while delivering a few tricky
instances to humans, resulting in the problem of Human Assisted Learning (HAL). Previous works mainly formulated
HAL as a constrained optimization problem that tries to find
a limited subset of instances for human decision such that the
sum of model and human errors can be minimized; and employed the greedy algorithms, whose performance, however,
may be limited due to the greedy nature. In this paper, we
propose a new framework HAL-EMO based on Evolutionary
Multi-objective Optimization, which reformulates HAL as a
bi-objective optimization problem that minimizes the number of selected instances for human decision and the total errors simultaneously, and employs a Multi-Objective Evolutionary Algorithm (MOEA) to solve it. We implement HALEMO using two MOEAs, the popular NSGA-II as well as the
theoretically grounded GSEMO. We also propose a specific
MOEA, called BSEMO, with biased selection and balanced
mutation for HAL-EMO, and prove that for human assisted
regression and classification, HAL-EMO using BSEMO can
achieve better and same theoretical guarantees than previous greedy algorithms, respectively. Experiments on the tasks
of medical diagnosis and content moderation show the superiority of HAL-EMO (with either NSGA-II, GSEMO or
BSEMO) over previous algorithms, and that using BSEMO
leads to the best performance of HAL-EMO.

Introduction
To solve complex real-world problems, one often needs human experts to make decisions, which, however, has several
limitations. For example, some decisions with significant
consequences require to be made quickly, while the expert
resources may be in short supply. Taking medical diagnosis
as an example, patients may need to wait for months to be diagnosed by a specialist. Furthermore, the massive decisions
to be made may increase the tiredness of experts, affecting
the quality of decision-making. Taking content moderation
as an example, reviewers of social network platforms need
to review a large number of comments every day to check
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12453

