The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On the Vulnerability of Backdoor Defenses for Federated Learning
Pei Fang1 , Jinghui Chen2
1

Tongji University
Pennsylvania State University
greilfang@gmail.com, jzc5917@psu.edu
2

Abstract

hard to detect from the server’s perspective. The feasibility of backdoor attacks on plain federated learning has been
studied in (Bhagoji et al. 2019; Bagdasaryan et al. 2020;
Xie et al. 2019; Zhang* et al. 2022). Such backdoor attacks can be effectively implemented by replacing the global
FL model with the attackers’ malicious model through carefully scaling model updates with well-designed triggers, and
the attacks can successfully evade many different FL setups (McMahan et al. 2017; Yin et al. 2018).

Federated Learning (FL) is a popular distributed machine
learning paradigm that enables jointly training a global model
without sharing clients’ data. However, its repetitive serverclient communication gives room for backdoor attacks with
aim to mislead the global model into a targeted misprediction when a specific trigger pattern is presented. In response
to such backdoor threats on federated learning, various defense measures have been proposed. In this paper, we study
whether the current defense mechanisms truly neutralize the
backdoor threats from federated learning in a practical setting
by proposing a new federated backdoor attack method for
possible countermeasures. Different from traditional training (on triggered data) and rescaling (the malicious client
model) based backdoor injection, the proposed backdoor attack framework (1) directly modifies (a small proportion of)
local model weights to inject the backdoor trigger via sign
flips; (2) jointly optimize the trigger pattern with the client
model, thus is more persistent and stealthy for circumventing
existing defenses. In a case study, we examine the strength
and weaknesses of recent federated backdoor defenses from
three major categories and provide suggestions to the practitioners when training federated models in practice.

1

The possible backdoor attacks in federated learning
arouse a large number of interest on possible defenses that
could mitigate the backdoor threats. Based on the different defense mechanisms they adopt, the federated backdoor defenses can be classified into three major categories: model-refinement, robust-aggregation, and certifiedrobustness. Model-refinement defenses attempt to refine the
global model to erase the possible backdoor, through methods such as fine-tuning (Wu et al. 2020) or distillation (Lin
et al. 2020; Sturluson et al. 2021). Intuitively, distillation or
pruning-based FL can also be more robust to current federated backdoor attacks as recent studies on backdoor defenses
(Li et al. 2021; Liu, Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2018) have
shown that such methods are effective in removing backdoor
from general (non-FL) backdoored models. On the other
hand, different from FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017) and its
variants (Karimireddy et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Wang et al.
2020b) which directly average the participating clients’ parameters, the robust-aggregation defenses exclude the malicious (ambiguous) weights and gradients from suspicious
clients through anomaly detection, or dynamically re-weight
clients’ importance based on certain distance metrics (geometric median, etc.). Examples include Krum (Blanchard
et al. 2017), Trimmed Mean (Yin et al. 2018), Bulyan (Guerraoui, Rouault et al. 2018) and Robust Learning Rate (Ozdayi, Kantarcioglu, and Gel 2020). Note that some of the
robust-aggregation defenses are originally proposed for defending model poisoning attack (Byzantine robustness) yet
they may also be used for defending backdoors. The last
kind, certified robustness aims at providing certified robustness guarantees that for each test example, i.e., the prediction would not change even some features in local training
data of malicious clients have been modified within certain
constraint. For example, CRFL (Xie et al. 2021) exploits
clipping and smoothing on model parameters, which yields a

Introduction

In recent years, Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al.
2017; Zhao et al. 2018) prevails as a new distributed machine learning paradigm, where many clients collaboratively
train a global model without sharing clients’ data. FL techniques have been widely applied to various real-world applications including keyword spotting (Leroy et al. 2019),
activity prediction on mobile devices (Hard et al. 2018; Xu
et al. 2021), smart sensing on edge devices (Jiang et al.
2020), etc. Despite FL’s collaborative training capability,
it usually deals with heterogeneous (non-i.i.d.) data distribution among clients and its formulation naturally leads
to repetitive synchronization between the server and the
clients. This gives room for attacks from potential malicious
clients. Particularly, backdoor attack (Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and
Garg 2019), which aims to mislead the model into a targeted
misprediction when a specific trigger pattern is presented
by stealthy data poisoning, can be easily implemented and
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11800

