The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Semantics-Aware Dynamic Localization and Refinement for
Referring Image Segmentation
Zhao Yang1 , Jiaqi Wang2 , Yansong Tang3 , Kai Chen2 , Hengshuang Zhao4 , Philip H.S. Torr1
1

University of Oxford,
Shanghai AI Laboratory,
3
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University,
4
The University of Hong Kong
2

Input
Text:

Abstract
Referring image segmentation segments an image from a language expression. With the aim of producing high-quality
masks, existing methods often adopt iterative learning approaches that rely on RNNs or stacked attention layers to
refine vision-language features. Despite their complexity,
RNN-based methods are subject to specific encoder choices,
while attention-based methods offer limited gains. In this
work, we introduce a simple yet effective alternative for progressively learning discriminative multi-modal features. The
core idea of our approach is to leverage a continuously updated query as the representation of the target object and at
each iteration, strengthen multi-modal features strongly correlated to the query while weakening less related ones. As the
query is initialized by language features and successively updated by object features, our algorithm gradually shifts from
being localization-centric to segmentation-centric. This strategy enables the incremental recovery of missing object parts
and/or removal of extraneous parts through iteration. Compared to its counterparts, our method is more versatile—it can
be plugged into prior arts straightforwardly and consistently
bring improvements. Experimental results on the challenging
datasets of RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and G-Ref demonstrate
its advantage with respect to the state-of-the-art methods.

1

“pile of green apples
center of display”

Ground Truth

Input
Image:

…
Iteration 1

Iteration 2

Iteration n

Figure 1: Top half: Referring image segmentation aims to
predict a mask delineating a target area described by a language expression. Bottom half: Our method tackles this
problem in iterations, where it continuously improves upon
its previous prediction based on accumulated object context,
finally producing a highly accurate mask.

powerful cross-modal feature fusion methods, which align
linguistic meanings and visual cues in a common feature
space. Intuitively, learning accurate cross-modal alignments
can be a daunting task as abundant noise is present in both
the language and the vision inputs. In this context, iterative
learning becomes a characteristic approach that is adopted
by many methods, which mitigates that difficulty: By performing cross-modal feature fusion in several rounds, alignments can be incrementally established and refined, subsequently leading to higher segmentation accuracy.
Existing state-of-the-art methods generally perform iterative learning via recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Liu
et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2019) or stacked attention layers (Luo et al. 2020a). RNN-based methods exploit the sequential property of the input data, either that
of a sentence encoded step by step by a recurrent language
model (Liu et al. 2017), or that of an image encoded into a
feature pyramid by a hierarchical vision backbone network
(Li et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2019). Though having the potential of capturing helpful dependencies, they have several
drawbacks. Recurrent language models (e.g., (Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014)) are disadvantaged against the preva-

Introduction

Given an image and a natural language expression that describes an object from the image, the task of referring image
segmentation is to predict a pixel-wise mask that delineates
that object (Cheng et al. 2014; Hu, Rohrbach, and Darrell
2016). It has applications in a broad range of areas such
as image editing, augmented reality, robotics, etc. Different
from the more conventional semantic/instance segmentation
tasks where targets fall into a pre-defined set of categories,
this task requires an algorithm to not only predict an accurate mask for the target, but infer what the target is from a
free-form language expression.
Taking advantage of a fully convolutional architecture
(Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), current state-of-theart methods (Liu et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2019;
Luo et al. 2020a; Liu et al. 2021a; Ding et al. 2021; Yang
et al. 2022) jointly address both requirements by developing
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3222

