The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SHUNIT: Style Harmonization for Unpaired Image-to-Image Translation
Seokbeom Song1 , Suhyeon Lee1 , Hongje Seong1 , Kyoungwon Min2 , Euntai Kim1 *
1

Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea
Korea Electronics Technology Institute, Seongnam, Korea
{lgs5751, hyeon93, hjseong, etkim}@yonsei.ac.kr, minkw@keti.re.kr
2

Abstract

and Efros 2016; Zhang et al. 2017), and image inpainting (Iizuka, Simo-Serra, and Ishikawa 2017; Pathak et al.
2016).
In the I2I translation, the biggest problem is how to deal
with the style variations among objects or classes. In other
words, when a global style gap is applied to an entire image as in Fig. 1a, the I2I translation often results in unrealistic images because each class has different the style gaps
between the source domain and target domain. Recent advanced methods (Shen et al. 2019; Bhattacharjee et al. 2020;
Jeong et al. 2021; Kim et al. 2022) addressed the problem
by leveraging additional object annotations. They simplify
the task into class-level I2I translation and then perform perclass source-to-target style mapping. This enables the networks to explicitly estimate class-wise target styles, but it
has a critical limitation: An object in each class consists
of multiple components, and all the sub-object components
might also have different characteristics. Let us consider the
example given in Fig. 1b.
Understandably, when a road image taken on a sunny day
is translated into a night image, head and tail lamps in a car
should be brighter while the rest of the components, such as
car body, tires, and windows, should be darker than before.
Therefore, each component in a car should be handled separately for realistic I2I translation. However, if the previous
approaches are applied to perform per-class source-to-target
style mapping, they will translate all head and tail lamps into
white lights, making unrealistic images, as shown in Fig. 1b.
Here, one might think that this issue can be addressed by annotating more detailed sub-object components than the simple object categories, but it is actually impossible. A brief
example is as follows. A car consists of body, window, and
tires. A tire consists of wheel and gum. In this way, subobject components can be divided endlessly.
To solve the above limitation of the previous class-level
I2I methods, we present Style Harmonization for unpaired
I2I translation (SHUNIT). The key idea of SHUNIT is to bypass the sub-object component annotations by leveraging the
original style of the input image because the original style
will include the information about the characteristics of the
sub-object components. Thus, instead of mapping sourceto-target style directly, SHUNIT harmonizes the source and
target styles to realize realistic and practical I2I translation.
As illustrated in Fig. 1c, SHUNIT uses not only the per-

We propose a novel solution for unpaired image-to-image
(I2I) translation. To translate complex images with a wide
range of objects to a different domain, recent approaches often use the object annotations to perform per-class source-totarget style mapping. However, there remains a point for us to
exploit in the I2I. An object in each class consists of multiple
components, and all the sub-object components have different characteristics. For example, a car in CAR class consists
of a car body, tires, windows and head and tail lamps, etc.,
and they should be handled separately for realistic I2I translation. The simplest solution to the problem will be to use
more detailed annotations with sub-object component annotations than the simple object annotations, but it is not possible.
The key idea of this paper is to bypass the sub-object component annotations by leveraging the original style of the input image because the original style will include the information about the characteristics of the sub-object components.
Specifically, for each pixel, we use not only the per-class
style gap between the source and target domains but also the
pixel’s original style to determine the target style of a pixel.
To this end, we present Style Harmonization for unpaired I2I
translation (SHUNIT). Our SHUNIT generates a new style
by harmonizing the target domain style retrieved from a class
memory and an original source image style. Instead of direct
source-to-target style mapping, we aim for source and target
styles harmonization. We validate our method with extensive
experiments and achieve state-of-the-art performance on the
latest benchmark sets. The source code is available online:
https://github.com/bluejangbaljang/SHUNIT.

Introduction
Unpaired image-to-image (I2I) translation aims to learn
source-to-target style mapping, where source and target images are unpaired. It can be applied to data augmentation (Antoniou, Storkey, and Edwards 2017; Mariani et al.
2018; Huang et al. 2018a; Xie et al. 2020), domain adaptation (Hoffman et al. 2018; Murez et al. 2018) and various image editing applications, such as style transfer (Gatys, Ecker,
and Bethge 2016; Huang and Belongie 2017; Ulyanov,
Vedaldi, and Lempitsky 2017), colorization (Zhang, Isola,
* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2292

