The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Simple and Efficient Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network
Xiaocheng Yang1 , Mingyu Yan* 1 , Shirui Pan2 , Xiaochun Ye1 , Dongrui Fan1,3
1

State Key Lab of Processors, Institute for Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University, Australia
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{yangxiaocheng, yanmingyu}@ict.ac.cn, s.pan@griffith.edu.au, {yexiaochun, fandr}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

entities and relations among them are embodied by various types of nodes and edges, respectively. For example,
as shown in Figure 1, the citation network ACM includes
several types of nodes: Paper (P), Author (A), and Subject (S), as well as many relations with different semanwrites
cites
tic meanings, such as Author−−−−→Paper, Paper−−−→Paper,

Heterogeneous graph neural networks (HGNNs) have the
powerful capability to embed rich structural and semantic
information of a heterogeneous graph into node representations. Existing HGNNs inherit many mechanisms from graph
neural networks (GNNs) designed for homogeneous graphs,
especially the attention mechanism and the multi-layer structure. These mechanisms bring excessive complexity, but seldom work studies whether they are really effective on heterogeneous graphs. In this paper, we conduct an in-depth and
detailed study of these mechanisms and propose the Simple and Efficient Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network (SeHGNN). To easily capture structural information, SeHGNN
pre-computes the neighbor aggregation using a light-weight
mean aggregator, which reduces complexity by removing
overused neighbor attention and avoiding repeated neighbor
aggregation in every training epoch. To better utilize semantic information, SeHGNN adopts the single-layer structure
with long metapaths to extend the receptive field, as well as
a transformer-based semantic fusion module to fuse features
from different metapaths. As a result, SeHGNN exhibits the
characteristics of a simple network structure, high prediction
accuracy, and fast training speed. Extensive experiments on
five real-world heterogeneous graphs demonstrate the superiority of SeHGNN over the state-of-the-arts on both accuracy
and training speed.

belongs to

Paper−−−−−−→Subject. These relations can be composited with each other to form high-level semantic relations, which are represented as metapaths (Sun et al. 2011;
Sun and Han 2012). For example, the 2-hop metapath
Author-Paper-Author (APA) represents the co-author relationship, while the 4-hop metapath Author-Paper-SubjectPaper-Author (APSPA) describes that the two authors have
been engaged in the research of the same subject. Heterogeneous graphs contain more comprehensive information and
rich semantics and require specifically designed models.
Various heterogeneous graph neural networks (HGNNs)
have been proposed to capture semantic information, achieving great performance in heterogeneous graph representation learning (Dong et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2020; Wang et al.
2020; Zheng et al. 2022; Yan et al. 2022). HGNNs are at the
heart of a broad range of applications such as social network
analysis (Liu et al. 2018), recommendation (Fan et al. 2019;
Niu et al. 2020), and knowledge graph inference (Bansal
et al. 2019; Vashishth et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021a).
Figure 1 depicts the two main categories of HGNNs.
Metapath-based methods (Schlichtkrull et al. 2018; Zhang
et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Fu et al. 2020) capture the
structural information of the same semantic first and then
fuse different semantic information. These models first aggregate neighbor features at the scope of each metapath to
generate semantic vectors, and then fuse these semantic vectors to generate the final embedding vector. Metapath-free
methods (Zhu et al. 2019; Hong et al. 2020; Hu et al. 2020b;
Lv et al. 2021) capture structural and semantic information
simultaneously. These models aggregate messages from a
node’s local neighborhood like traditional GNNs, but use extra modules (e.g. attentions) to embed semantic information
such as node types and edge types into propagated messages.
Existing HGNNs inherit many mechanisms from GNNs
over homogeneous graphs, especially the attention mechanism and the multi-layer structure, as illustrated in Figure 1, but seldom work studies whether these mechanisms

Introduction
Recent years witness explosive growth in graph neural networks (GNNs) in pursuit of performance improvement of
graph representation learning (Wu et al. 2020; Liu et al.
2022b; Lin et al. 2022). GNNs are primarily designed for
homogeneous graphs associated with a single type of nodes
and edges, following a neighborhood aggregation scheme to
capture structural information of a graph, where the representation of each node is computed by recursively aggregating the features of neighbor nodes (Kipf and Welling 2017).
However, GNNs are insufficient to deal with heterogeneous graphs which possess rich semantic information in
addition to structural information (Shi et al. 2016). Many
real-world data in complex systems are naturally represented as heterogeneous graphs, where multiple types of
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10816

