The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Federated Generative Model on Multi-Source Heterogeneous Data in IoT
Zuobin Xiong, Wei Li, and Zhipeng Cai*
Department of Computer Science, Georgia State University, 25 Park Place, Atlanta, Georgia, 30303 USA
zxiong2@student.gsu.edu, {wli28, zcai}@gsu.edu

Abstract

ing data quality, and detecting abnormal samples. In (Lv
et al. 2018; Tschuchnig, Ferner, and Wegenkittl 2020; Chen
et al. 2021; Mohammadi, Al-Fuqaha, and Oh 2018; Wu,
Huang, and Heng 2023), generative models have been used
for traffic data generation, traffic modeling, traffic prediction, and traffic control in smart cities. Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)-based models have been designed to
generate and analyze medical data in smart medication systems (Vaccari et al. 2021; Chang et al. 2020; Qu et al. 2020).
In video surveillance systems, many generative models are
designed to support object recognition (Fabbri, Calderara,
and Cucchiara 2017), movement capture (Shi, Liu, and Li
2017), anomaly detection (Ganokratanaa, Aramvith, and
Sebe 2019), and super resolution tasks (Lee et al. 2018).
Yet, most of the existing works implement the centralized generative models, which first collect data from IoT devices to a central server and then train generative models to
achieve generation goals. These centralized generative models may be vulnerable to the issues of single point failure
and privacy leakage. Moreover, users’ willingness to share
data with a central server may be declined because of their
privacy concerns, increasing the difficulty in data collection
and hindering the further development of IoT applications.
On the other hand, transmitting such a massive amount of
data to a central server brings expensive communication
cost to IoT. To break down the obstacles of privacy concerns and communication cost, designing distributed generative models should be a better solution. The integration
of distributed generative models into IoT can benefit individuals and society in many aspects. For examples, in smart
health, distributed generative models can be used to synthesize the pattern of a special tumor’s MRI/CT scanning result without privacy violation, where the synthetic data can
be used for data visualization and training dataset for other
tasks; due to the existence of unaccessible data, pre-training
a distributed generative model to collect features from underlying datasets can help model developers understand the
dataset, such as checking the data sanity, detecting bias in
the dataset, and debugging misclassified samples (Augenstein et al. 2019); and when multiple datasets on IoT devices are non-i.i.d. distributed, learning a distributed generative model can learn a mixed distribution and generate data
with more diversity (Li et al. 2019; Hong et al. 2022).
Currently, only limited works have developed the dis-

The study of generative models is a promising branch of deep
learning techniques, which has been successfully applied to
different scenarios, such as Artificial Intelligence and the Internet of Things. While in most of the existing works, the
generative models are realized as a centralized structure, raising the threats of security and privacy and the overburden of
communication costs. Rare efforts have been committed to
investigating distributed generative models, especially when
the training data comes from multiple heterogeneous sources
under realistic IoT settings. In this paper, to handle this challenging problem, we design a federated generative model
framework that can learn a powerful generator for the hierarchical IoT systems. Particularly, our generative model framework can solve the problem of distributed data generation on
multi-source heterogeneous data in two scenarios, i.e., feature
related scenario and label related scenario. In addition, in our
federated generative models, we develop a synchronous and
an asynchronous updating methods to satisfy different application requirements. Extensive experiments on a simulated
dataset and multiple real datasets are conducted to evaluate
the data generation performance of our proposed generative
models through comparison with the state-of-the-arts.

Introduction
Generative models have become a popular research direction in the field of deep learning thanks to its compelling
ability to generate realistic data plausibly drawn from an existing data distribution. Different from discriminative models, a generative model can generate unlimited synthetic data
to fulfill expected tasks by using the trained generator once
it has been trained. So far, the breakthrough brought by generative models has rapidly produced a revolutionary impact
on different fields, and this impact has already flourished in
various real applications in the Internet of Things (IoT). In
IoT environments, a variety of devices are interconnected to
generate, collect, share, and process heterogeneous data for
data-driven applications (Liu et al. 2023; Xiong et al. 2021a;
Cai et al. 2021). With the help of the generative models, the
generated data can facilitate the procedures of data collection and process in different aspects, such as reducing tedious data collection time, imputing missing data, augment* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10537

