The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Privacy-Preserved Evolutionary Graph Modeling
via Gromov-Wasserstein Autoregression
Yue Xiang1 , Dixin Luo2 , Hongteng Xu3, 4 *
2

1
School of Statistics, Renmin University of China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
xiangyue@ruc.edu.cn, dixin.luo@bit.edu.cn, hongtengxu@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract

JODIE (Kumar, Zhang, and Leskovec 2019), VGRNN (Hajiramezanali et al. 2019) and DynAERNN (Goyal, Chhetri,
and Canedo 2020), formulate the problem as a link prediction task, capturing the topological dynamics of evolutionary
graphs by predicting the connections between arbitrary two
nodes based on their historical behaviors. Although these
methods achieve encouraging performance on evolutionary
graph modeling, they often suffer from a risk of private information leakage. In particular, the above methods require
the correspondence across the observed graphs, making the
temporal behaviors of each node become accessible. It has
been demonstrated that the privacy of nodes (e.g., the profiles of users in a network) can be inferred from their temporal behaviors (Cheng, Caverlee, and Lee 2010; Paul and
Dredze 2011; Wang et al. 2013; Luo et al. 2014).
To accomplish privacy protection, we need to model evolutionary graph from unaligned graph sequences — the correspondence between arbitrary two graphs’ nodes is unknown. Such a privacy-preserved evolutionary graph modeling task is meaningful in practice. Take social network
modeling as an example. With the registration of new accounts and the expiration of old ones, the topological change
of a social network comprises both nodes and edges. At different timestamps, not only the edges between the accounts
but also the accounts themselves may change. Modeling and
predicting the evolution of such social networks are significant for both the commercial operation of service providers
and the supervision of third parties, and how to protect user
privacy throughout the modeling phase is one of the primary
challenges associated with the above activities.
In this work, we propose a Gromov-Wasserstein autoregressive (GWAR) model, treating unaligned evolutionary
graph modeling as a statistically-interpretable graph generation task. As illustrated in Figure 1, our GWAR model consists of two autoregressions oriented to the number of nodes
(a.k.a, graph size) and graph structure, respectively. Given
a sequence of observed graphs, the size-oriented autoregression predicts the number of nodes for the future graph. After determining the graph size, the structure-oriented autoregression predicts the probabilities of nodes and edges, in
which the historical graphs are aligned and merged together.
In particular, the joint alignment of the historical graphs is
achieved as a fused Gromov-Wasserstein (FGW) barycenter
problem (Vayer et al. 2020) under a novel inductive fused

Real-world graphs like social networks are often evolutionary over time, whose observations at different timestamps
lead to graph sequences. Modeling such evolutionary graphs
is important for many applications, but solving this problem often requires the correspondence between the graphs
at different timestamps, which may leak private node information, e.g., the temporal behavior patterns of the nodes.
We proposed a Gromov-Wasserstein Autoregressive (GWAR)
model to capture the generative mechanisms of evolutionary
graphs, which does not require the correspondence information and thus preserves the privacy of the graphs’ nodes. This
model consists of two autoregressions, predicting the number
of nodes and the probabilities of nodes and edges, respectively. The model takes observed graphs as its input and predicts future graphs via solving a joint graph alignment and
merging task. This task leads to a fused Gromov-Wasserstein
(FGW) barycenter problem, in which we approximate the
alignment of the graphs based on a novel inductive fused
Gromov-Wasserstein (IFGW) distance. The IFGW distance
is parameterized by neural networks and can be learned under mild assumptions, thus, we can infer the FGW barycenters without iterative optimization and predict future graphs
efficiently. Experiments show that our GWAR achieves encouraging performance in modeling evolutionary graphs in
privacy-preserving scenarios.

Introduction
Graphs are capable of describing relational and structured
information hidden in data. In many real-world scenarios,
such as social networks (Tantipathananandh, Berger-Wolf,
and Kempe 2007) and financial networks (Durante and Dunson 2014), the topological structure of a graph is often evolutionary — the graph size, the attributes of its nodes, and
the edges between the nodes may change over time according to the temporal behaviors of nodes. Such evolutionary
graphs (also known as dynamic graphs or temporal graphs)
are recorded as sequences of observed graphs.
The key problem of evolutionary graph modeling is
predicting future graphs given a sequence of observed
graphs. Currently, most existing modeling methods, e.g.,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14566

