The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fair Division with Prioritized Agents
Xiaolin Bu1 , Zihao Li2 , Shengxin Liu3 * , Jiaxin Song1 , Biaoshuai Tao1
1

School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
lin bu@sjtu.edu.cn, zihao003@e.ntu.edu.sg, sxliu@hit.edu.cn, sjtu xiaosong@sjtu.edu.cn, bstao@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

be computed via a discrete and bounded protocol (Aziz and
Mackenzie 2016).
Recent research focuses more on allocations of indivisible items (Lipton et al. 2004; Budish 2011; Conitzer, Freeman, and Shah 2017; Caragiannis et al. 2019; Bu et al.
2022b; Amanatidis et al. 2022; Li, Bei, and Yan 2022). Obviously, violation of fairness is unavoidable in some scenarios, e.g., when the number of items is less than the number
of agents (in which case some agents will receive an empty
set). This necessitates the relaxation of fairness. To relax
envy-freeness, Lipton et al. (2004) and Budish (2011) proposed the notion envy-freeness up to one item (EF1) which
allows an agent i to envy another agent j, as long as there
exists an item in j’s allocated bundle whose (hypothetical)
removal eliminates the envy from i to j.1 EF1 has then been
one of the most widely-studied fairness notions for indivisible item allocation, and is guaranteed to exist (Lipton et al.
2004; Caragiannis et al. 2019).
While an allocation that gives advantages to some agents
over the others is perhaps justifiable by the inherent unfairness in the allocation of indivisible items, in many applications, it is desirable that a specified set of agents with higher
priority are favored. The examples abound: it is natural to
prioritize those agents who are not favored in the past allocations (due to the intrinsic unfairness of item-allocation); for
applicants with equal qualifications, job positions are given
to those applicants in underrepresented groups first. These
motivate the proposal of new fairness solution concepts that
not only mitigates the unfairness but also ensures that those
prioritized agents are favored if unfairness is inevitable.
In the context of envy-freeness, although EF1 mitigates
the unfairness by restricting envy to “up to one item”, it
does not consider agents’ priorities. To incorporate this feature, we propose a new fairness notion called envy-freeness
with prioritized agents (EF PRIOR). Given a set of prioritized
agents, an EF PRIOR allocation requires that 1) the allocation
as a whole is EF1 and 2) strict envy-freeness from each prioritized agent to each non-prioritized agent is ensured.
As an important remark, by introducing prioritized agents,
our solution concept EF PRIOR does not create unfairness.
Instead, we are seeking for allocations that prioritize a pre-

We consider the fair division problem of indivisible items. It
is well-known that an envy-free allocation may not exist, and
a relaxed version of envy-freeness, envy-freeness up to one
item (EF1), has been widely considered. In an EF1 allocation, an agent may envy others’ allocated shares, but only up
to one item. In many applications, we may wish to specify a
subset of prioritized agents where strict envy-freeness needs
to be guaranteed from these agents to the remaining agents,
while ensuring the whole allocation is still EF1. Prioritized
agents may be those agents who are envious in a previous
EF1 allocation, those agents who belong to underrepresented
groups, etc. Motivated by this, we propose a new fairness notion named envy-freeness with prioritized agents EF PRIOR,
and study the existence and the algorithmic aspects for the
problem of computing an EF PRIOR allocation. With additive
valuations, the simple round-robin algorithm is able to compute an EF PRIOR allocation. In this paper, we mainly focus
on general valuations. In particular, we present a polynomialtime algorithm that outputs an EF PRIOR allocation with most
of the items allocated. When all the items need to be allocated, we also present polynomial-time algorithms for some
well-motivated special cases.

1

Introduction

The fair division problem studies how to fairly allocate a set
of resources to a set of agents who have heterogeneous preferences over the resources. Starting with Steinhaus (1948),
the fair division problem has been receiving significant attention from mathematicians, economists, and computer scientists in the past decades. Among different fairness interpretations, envy-freeness (Foley 1967) is the most studied
fairness criterion which requires that each agent believes she
receives a share that has weakly more value than the share
allocated to each of the other agents (i.e., each agent does
not envy any other agents). Classical work in fair division
has been focused on resources that are infinitely divisible,
which is also known as cake-cutting problem (Even and Paz
1984; Brams and Taylor 1995; Chen et al. 2013; Bei et al.
2012, 2017; Tao 2022) . Envy-free allocations always exist
in the cake-cutting setting (Brams and Taylor 1995) and can
* Shengxin Liu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
EF1 was implicitly mentioned by Lipton et al. (2004), and explicitly formulated by Budish (2011).

5540

