The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Hierarchical ConViT with Attention-Based Relational Reasoner for Visual
Analogical Reasoning
Wentao He1 , Jialu Zhang1 , * Jianfeng Ren1,2 , Ruibin Bai1,2 , Xudong Jiang3
1

2

The Digital Port Technologies Lab, School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham Ningbo China
Nottingham Ningbo China Beacons of Excellence Research and Innovation Institute, University of Nottingham Ningbo China
3
School of Electrical & Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
{scxwh1,sgxjz1,jianfeng.ren,ruibin.bai}@nottingham.edu.cn, exdjiang@ntu.edu.sg
Global

Local

Abstract

ViT

ViT

ConViT

ConViT

Conv

Conv

Stage N
…

ViT
ConViT

…

Conv

…

ARR

ARR

Local

Stage 2

Global

Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPMs) have been widely used
to evaluate the visual reasoning ability of humans. To tackle
the challenges of visual perception and logic reasoning on
RPMs, we propose a Hierarchical ConViT with Attentionbased Relational Reasoner (HCV-ARR). Traditional solution
methods often apply relatively shallow convolution networks
to visually perceive shape patterns in RPM images, which
may not fully model the long-range dependencies of complex pattern combinations in RPMs. The proposed ConViT
consists of a convolutional block to capture the low-level attributes of visual patterns, and a transformer block to capture
the high-level image semantics such as pattern formations.
Furthermore, the proposed hierarchical ConViT captures visual features from multiple receptive fields, where the shallow
layers focus on the image fine details while the deeper layers
focus on the image semantics. To better model the underlying reasoning rules embedded in RPM images, an Attentionbased Relational Reasoner (ARR) is proposed to establish the
underlying relations among images. The proposed ARR well
exploits the hidden relations among question images through
the developed element-wise attentive reasoner. Experimental
results on three RPM datasets demonstrate that the proposed
HCV-ARR achieves a significant performance gain compared
with the state-of-the-art models. The source code is available
at: https://github.com/wentaoheunnc/HCV-ARR.

Stage 1

ARR

Figure 1: RPM problems are challenging as both local
attributes such as Color, Type and Size and global
attributes on pattern combinations such as Number and
Position need to be extracted simultaneously and a different rule may be applied on each attribute. The proposed
HCV-ARR consists of a set of ConViT blocks that can simultaneously perceive local attributes through convolutional
blocks and global attributes through transformer blocks. An
element-wise attention-based relational reasoner is then designed to exploit reasoning rules among different attributes.

Raven’s Progressive Matrix (RPM) problem is one of the
frequently-used tests on human’s visual analogical reasoning in cognitive psychology (Raven 2000). An RPM problem is formed by a 3 × 3 pictorial matrix with the last one
left blank, as shown in Fig. 1. The objective is to identify the
missing entry from eight candidate answers based on the visual context and inductive rules. To minimize the impact of
language barrier and culture bias, the pictorial matrices are
often composed of regular polygons. Several RPM databases
(Barrett et al. 2018; Benny, Pekar, and Wolf 2021; Hu et al.
2021; Sekh et al. 2020; Teney et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2019a) have been developed to evaluate the model capability
of visual reasoning, i.e., not only visually understand image
scenes, but also logically conduct inductive reasoning over
pictures (Barrett et al. 2018; Sekh et al. 2020; Teney et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2019a). Most existing models for visual
reasoning (Benny, Pekar, and Wolf 2021; Hu et al. 2021;
Spratley, Ehinger, and Miller 2020; Zhuo and Kankanhalli
2021) contain two modules, a perception module that visually perceives the RPM panels to explicitly/implicitly extract
the visual attributes, and a logic reasoning module that conducts reasoning over the perceived visual information.

Introduction
Research in computer vision has advanced significantly recently (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; He et al. 2016; Zhang et al.
2022). The research focus is shifting from visual recognition
of individual objects to visual understanding of image/video
scenes (Zellers et al. 2019). Visual reasoning, as one of the
visual understanding tasks, usually consists of two related
tasks, “visual perception” and “logical reasoning”. The former perceives the image/video through a perception system
(Dosovitskiy et al. 2021), and the latter discovers reasoning
rules through a cognition system (Crouse et al. 2021). A lot
of research efforts have been devoted to developing a system
that can not only visually recognize objects from scenes, but
also conduct logical reasoning over the perceived visual information (Sekh et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2019a).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22

