The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Progressive Deep Multi-View Comprehensive Representation Learning
Cai Xu1 , Wei Zhao1 * , Jinglong Zhao1 , Ziyu Guan1 , Yaming Yang1 , Long Chen2 , Xiangyu Song3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, China
2
Xi’an University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
3
Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, Australia
{cxu@, ywzhao@mail., jinglong@stu., zyguan@, yym@}xidian.edu.cn, chenlong@xupt.edu.cn, xsong@swin.edu.au

Abstract

deep multi-view classification (Han et al. 2021; Xu et al.
2022), deep multi-view contrastive learning (Lin et al. 2021;
Li et al. 2023). This work is concerned with the fundamental problem of most deep multi-view learning methods, the
deep Multi-view Comprehensive Representation Learning
(MCRL) problem, which aims to fuse the consistent and
complementary information of all views to obtain the comprehensive representation.
Prevalent deep MCRL methods can be roughly divided into Multi-View Synergistic Representation Learning
(MSRL) and Multi-View Aligned Representation Learning
(MARL). MSRL usually first learns separate view-specific
representations and synergizes them through some criteria,
then concatenates them to construct the multi-view comprehensive representation (Vendrov et al. 2016). However, the
performances of most MSRL methods inevitably degenerate or even fail when partial views are missing for some instances in real-world applications. Another line is MARL,
which usually first learns aligned view-specific representations of all views, then (weighted) averages them to construct multi-view comprehensive representation (Wen et al.
2020b). In general, deep MARL methods use the Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to model the mappings from viewspecific data to aligned view-specific representations. However, most existing deep MARL methods cannot fully exploit the complementarity of multi-view data, i.e., some
views may contain information that other views do not have.
For example, in Figure 1, the image view contains the lesion
size and location information, but can not provide the content of leucocyte. Hence the dimensions of the comprehensive representation reflecting the content of leucocyte should
not connect with the image view.
Recently, in order to explicitly consider the complementarity of multi-view data, researchers propose some new
deep MCRL paradigms. Wang et al. (Wang et al. 2020) propose a novel dimension exchange strategy for MARL. They
regard a dimension of the aligned view-specific representations as the complementary dimension if it is less than
a preset threshold. The complementary dimensions would
be replaced by the average of the corresponding dimensions
of other views. However, this method may unstable since
an inferior initialization would extremely influent the model
training. In (Nagrani et al. 2021), Nagrani et al. propose a
bottleneck-based fusion method, which can be deem as the

Multi-view Comprehensive Representation Learning
(MCRL) aims to synthesize information from multiple
views to learn comprehensive representations of data items.
Prevalent deep MCRL methods typically concatenate
synergistic view-specific representations or average aligned
view-specific representations in the fusion stage. However,
the performance of synergistic fusion methods inevitably
degenerate or even fail when partial views are missing in realworld applications; the aligned based fusion methods usually
cannot fully exploit the complementarity of multi-view data.
To eliminate all these drawbacks, in this work we present
a Progressive Deep Multi-view Fusion (PDMF) method.
Considering the multi-view comprehensive representation
should contain complete information and the view-specific
data contain partial information, we deem that it is unstable
to directly learn the mapping from partial information to
complete information. Hence, PDMF employs a progressive
learning strategy, which contains the pre-training and finetuning stages. In the pre-training stage, PDMF decodes the
auxiliary comprehensive representation to the view-specific
data. It also captures the consistency and complementarity
by learning the relations between the dimensions of the
auxiliary comprehensive representation and all views. In
the fine-tuning stage, PDMF learns the mapping from the
original data to the comprehensive representation with the
help of the auxiliary comprehensive representation and
relations. Experiments conducted on a synthetic toy dataset
and 4 real-world datasets show that PDMF outperforms
state-of-the-art baseline methods. The code is released at
https://github.com/winterant/PDMF.

Introduction
Many real-world applications involve multiple views. For
example, doctors diagnose the disease of a patient according to his the blood test, the radiology test, etc. These views
often exhibit consistent and complementary information of
the same data. Synthesizing multi-view data could boost
the performance of many tasks. In recent years, the rapid
growth of deep learning researches leads to many popular deep multi-view learning research topics, such as deep
multi-view clustering (Wen et al. 2022, 2020b,a), trusted
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10557

