The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Actional Atomic-Concept Learning for Demystifying
Vision-Language Navigation
†

Bingqian Lin1* , Yi Zhu2 , Xiaodan Liang1,3 , Liang Lin4 , Jianzhuang Liu2
1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
PengCheng Laboratory
4
Sun Yat-sen University
linbq6@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zhuyi36@huawei.com, liangxd9@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
linliang@ieee.org, liu.jianzhuang@huawei.com
Abstract

successful navigation, a VLN agent needs to align complicated visual observations to language instructions to reach
the required target point. For example, when asking to “turn
left to the bathroom”, the agent should choose the right
observation which not only contains the mentioned object
“bathroom” but also indicates the direction “turn left”.
Most of early VLN approaches adopt the LSTM-based
encoder-decoder framework (Fried et al. 2018; Tan, Yu, and
Bansal 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Ma et al. 2019; Zhu et al.
2020), which encodes both the visual observations and language instructions and then generates the action sequence.
With the development of large-scale cross-modal pretraining models in vision-language tasks (Li et al. 2020a,b; Chen
et al. 2020; Lu et al. 2019), emerging works attempt to introduce them into VLN tasks (Hao et al. 2020; Hong et al.
2021; Chen et al. 2021; Moudgil et al. 2021). However, both
the non-pretraining-based or pretraining-based approaches
represent the visual observations by raw directional features
and visual features trained using one-hot labels, which are
difficult to be aligned to the linguistic instruction features
due to the large semantic gap among them. This direct alignment process also leads to poor interpretability of action decision and therefore makes the VLN agents unreliable to be
deployed to real environments.
In this work, we aim to mitigate the semantic gap and simplify the alignment in VLN by proposing a new framework,
called Actional Atomic-Concept Learning (AACL). Since
the instructions usually consist of atomic action concepts,
e.g., “turn right”, and object concepts1 , e.g., “kitchen”,
in AACL, the visual observations are mapped to actional
atomic concepts, which are natural language phrases each
containing an action and an object. The actions are extracted
from a predefined atomic action set. These actional atomic
concepts, which can be viewed as the bridge between observations and instructions, effectively facilitate the alignment
as well as provide good interpretability for action decision.
AACL consists of three main components. Firstly, a concept mapping module is constructed to map each single view observation to the actional atomic concept. For
deriving the object concept, we resort to the recently

Vision-Language Navigation (VLN) is a challenging task
which requires an agent to align complex visual observations to language instructions to reach the goal position. Most
existing VLN agents directly learn to align the raw directional features and visual features trained using one-hot labels
to linguistic instruction features. However, the big semantic
gap among these multi-modal inputs makes the alignment
difficult and therefore limits the navigation performance. In
this paper, we propose Actional Atomic-Concept Learning
(AACL), which maps visual observations to actional atomic
concepts for facilitating the alignment. Specifically, an actional atomic concept is a natural language phrase containing an atomic action and an object, e.g., “go up stairs”. These
actional atomic concepts, which serve as the bridge between
observations and instructions, can effectively mitigate the semantic gap and simplify the alignment. AACL contains three
core components: 1) a concept mapping module to map the
observations to the actional atomic concept representations
through the VLN environment and the recently proposed
Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) model, 2)
a concept refining adapter to encourage more instructionoriented object concept extraction by re-ranking the predicted
object concepts by CLIP, and 3) an observation co-embedding
module which utilizes concept representations to regularize
the observation representations. Our AACL establishes new
state-of-the-art results on both fine-grained (R2R) and highlevel (REVERIE and R2R-Last) VLN benchmarks. Moreover, the visualization shows that AACL significantly improves the interpretability in action decision. Code will be
available at https://gitee.com/mindspore/models/tree/master/
research/cv/VLN-AACL.

Introduction
Vision-Language Navigation (VLN) (Anderson et al. 2018;
Ku et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2019; Nguyen and Daumé
2019) has attracted increasing interests in robotic applications since an instruction-following navigation agent is practical and flexible in real-world scenarios. For accomplishing
* Part of this work was done during an internship in Huawei

Noah’s Ark Lab.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
In this work, we also treat the scene concept, e.g., “bathroom”,
as the object concept.

1568

