The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robust Causal Graph Representation Learning against Confounding Effects
Hang Gao1,2 * , Jiangmeng Li1,2 * † , Wenwen Qiang1,2 , Lingyu Si1,2 , Bing Xu3 ,
Changwen Zheng1 , Fuchun Sun4
1

Science and Technology on Integrated Information System Laboratory,
Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
China Communications Technology Information Group Co., Ltd.
4
Tsinghua University
{gaohang, jiangmeng2019, qiangwenwen, lingyu, changwen}@iscas.ac.cn,
xubing@ccccltd.cn, fcsun@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
ROC-AUC (%)

Abstract

64.8

60.9
Complete

Pruned

Prune

The prevailing graph neural network models have achieved
significant progress in graph representation learning. However, in this paper, we uncover an ever-overlooked phenomenon: the pre-trained graph representation learning
model tested with full graphs underperforms the model tested
with well-pruned graphs. This observation reveals that there
exist confounders in graphs, which may interfere with the
model learning semantic information, and current graph representation learning methods have not eliminated their influence. To tackle this issue, we propose Robust Causal Graph
Representation Learning (RCGRL) to learn robust graph
representations against confounding effects. RCGRL introduces an active approach to generate instrumental variables
under unconditional moment restrictions, which empowers
the graph representation learning model to eliminate confounders, thereby capturing discriminative information that
is causally related to downstream predictions. We offer theorems and proofs to guarantee the theoretical effectiveness
of the proposed approach. Empirically, we conduct extensive
experiments on a synthetic dataset and multiple benchmark
datasets. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
and generalization ability of RCGRL. Our codes are available
at https://github.com/hang53/RCGRL.

65
64
63
62
61
60

......
Figure 1: Comparisons achieved by the baseline, i.e., Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM). We fix the GNN model
trained on Mol-BBBP (Hu et al. 2020) and then randomly
select a batch of data from the test set of Mol-BBBP. The results of Complete and Pruned variants are obtained by ERM
on complete and pruned test graphs, respectively.

Introduction

To this end, we revisit the learning paradigm of state-ofthe-art methods and conclude that the improvements according to GNNs mainly include 1) the message passing process, which is the operation to transform and aggregate features from a node’s graph neighborhood, e.g., Graph Convolution Networks (Kipf and Welling 2016), Graph Isomorphism Networks (Xu et al. 2018), Graph Attention Networks
(Veličković et al. 2017), and so on; 2) the readout function,
which is the process to pool the node representations into the
graph representation, e.g., Adaptive Structure Aware Pooling (Ranjan, Sanyal, and Talukdar 2020), Top-k Pool (Gao
and Ji 2019a), SAG Pool (Lee, Lee, and Kang 2019), etc.
Benchmark methods focus on learning semantic information
from complete graphs by proposing elaborate GNN structures. However, are all substructures in a graph valuable for
predicting downstream tasks? We borrow benchmark learning paradigms from other fields. In the field of visual classifi-

“Graph” is a derived discrete data structure consisting of vertices and edges, which can be leveraged to model and solve
various general problems. Benefitting from the embedding
of human knowledge, graphs are semantically dense data. In
contrast, native data structures, such as images and videos,
are usually semantically sparse data. Therefore, effectively
using graphs to model and learn valuable information for
downstream tasks is a compelling area of research. The impressive success in Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf
and Welling 2016; Xu et al. 2018; Veličković et al. 2017)
provokes the exploration to sufficiently learn discriminative
representations from graphs.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7624

