The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SCI: A Spectrum Concentrated Implicit Neural Compression for Biomedical Data
Runzhao Yang1 , Tingxiong Xiao1 , Yuxiao Cheng1 , Qianni Cao2 , Jinyuan Qu1 , Jinli Suo1 , Qionghai
Dai1
1

2

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Department of Electrical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
jlsuo@tsinghua.edu.cn

× 104

Raw data

Abstract
Massive collection and explosive growth of biomedical data,
demands effective compression for efficient storage, transmission and sharing. Readily available visual data compression techniques have been studied extensively but tailored for
natural images/videos, and thus show limited performance on
biomedical data which are of different features and larger
diversity. Emerging implicit neural representation (INR) is
gaining momentum and demonstrates high promise for fitting diverse visual data in target-data-specific manner, but
a general compression scheme covering diverse biomedical
data is so far absent. To address this issue, we firstly derive
a mathematical explanation for INR’s spectrum concentration property and an analytical insight on the design of INR
based compressor. Further, we propose a Spectrum Concentrated Implicit neural compression (SCI) which adaptively
partitions the complex biomedical data into blocks matching
INR’s concentrated spectrum envelop, and design a funnel
shaped neural network capable of representing each block
with a small number of parameters. Based on this design,
we conduct compression via optimization under given budget
and allocate the available parameters with high representation
accuracy. The experiments show SCI’s superior performance
to state-of-the-art methods including commercial compressors, data-driven ones, and INR based counterparts on diverse biomedical data. The source code can be found at https:
//github.com/RichealYoung/ImplicitNeuralCompression.git.

Heart

6

Lung

Brain

Kidney

5
4
3
2

Spectrum

0.2

32%

30%

16%

3%

0.15
0.1
0.05

Residue

0
× 104
2

59.40dB

51.40dB

51.27dB

35.88dB

1.5
1
0.5
0

Figure 1: INR’s diverse compression capability on different
biomedical data (from HiP-CT dataset), under 64× compression ratio. Top: several representative CT data of different organs, which are of increasing complexities from left
to right. Middle: the corresponding spectrum (Fourier coefficients), with the percentage of non-zero entries labeled.
Bottom: the residue after compression, which increases dramatically with the spreading range of the spectrum, with the
reconstruction fidelity labeled in terms of PSNR.

Neural Representation (INR), which uses a neural network
to parameterize the data with an implicit continuous function. Specifically, for a visual data, the intensity at a voxel
coordinate can be described by a neural function. Different from conventional discrete grid-based representations,
INR is defined over a continuous space, and thus better
matches the continuity property of the target visual information and is intrinsically independent of the discretization levels. Besides, according to the universal approximation theorem of neural networks, an INR implemented with
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) can fit arbitrarily complex
functions given sufficient parameters (Gallant and White
1988; Hornik, Stinchcombe, and White 1989; Hornik 1991;
Cybenko 1989; Leshno et al. 1993; Pinkus 1999), which
promises high fidelity representation (Hornik, Stinchcombe,
and White 1989). Under the INR representation, if we can
model the underlying correlations among the neural functions of a target visual data at a set of positions, a compact
INR representation can be achieved (Lu et al. 2021; Chen
et al. 2021). Such INR based compression is obtaining bet-

Introduction
Over decades, digital visual information is most commonly
represented as discrete intensity values over a regularly
spaced grid. Such straightforward representation is highly
redundant, so a bunch of compression tools have been developed, such as MPEG/JPEG (Wallace 1992), H.264 (Wiegand et al. 2003), HEVC (Sullivan et al. 2012), etc. In spite
of their successful applications and widespread acceptance,
most of these compression techniques are tailored for natural
images/videos and of limited performance in many domain
specific visual data, such as biomedical images/volumes,
which are of different characteristics and larger diversity
than natural scenes.
With the resurgence of deep neural networks, a type
of new representation of visual data is emerging—Implicit
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4774

