The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Abstract Argumentation Framework with Conditional Preferences
Gianvincenzo Alfano, Sergio Greco, Francesco Parisi, Irina Trubitsyna
Department of Informatics, Modeling, Electronics and System Engineering,
University of Calabria, Italy
{g.alfano, greco, fparisi, i.trubitsyna}@dimes.unical.it

Abstract
fish

Dung’s abstract Argumentation Framework (AF) has
emerged as a central formalism in the area of knowledge representation and reasoning. Preferences in AF allow to represent the comparative strength of arguments in a simple yet
expressive way. Preference-based AF (PAF) has been proposed to extend AF with preferences of the form a > b,
whose intuitive meaning is that argument a is better than b.
In this paper we generalize PAF by introducing conditional
preferences of the form a > b ← body that informally state
that a is better than b whenever the condition expressed by
body is true. The resulting framework, namely Conditional
Preference-based AF (CPAF), extends the PAF semantics under three well-known preference criteria, i.e. democratic, elitist, and KTV. After introducing CPAF, we study the complexity of the verification problem (deciding whether a set
of arguments is a “best” extension) as well as of the credulous and skeptical acceptance problems (deciding whether
a given argument belongs to any or all “best” extensions, respectively) under multiple-status semantics (that is, complete,
preferred, stable, and semi-stable semantics) for the abovementioned preference criteria.

meat

white

red

fish

meat

white

red

Figure 1: AF Λ1 at the basis of the CPAF of Example 1 (left)
and its rewriting Λ01 (right).
accepted if it occurs in all extensions under a given semantics). To cope with such situations, a possible solution is to
provide means for preferring one argument to another, as
shown in the following example.
Example 1. Consider the AF Λ1 shown in Figure 1 (left),
describing what a customer is going to have for lunch. (S)he
will have either fish or meat, and will drink either white
wine or red wine. Assume now that the customer expresses
some preferences about the menus: if (s)he will have meat
then would prefer to have red wine, whereas if (s)he will
have fish then would prefer to have white wine. Intuitively, these preferences can be expressed by means of the
following conditional preferences (CPs):
red > white ← meat
white > red ← fish

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed intensive formal study, development and application of Dung’s abstract Argumentation
Framework (AF) in various directions (Gabbay et al. 2021).
An AF consists of a set A of arguments and an attack relation Ω ⊆ A × A that specifies conflicts over arguments (if
argument a attacks argument b, then b is acceptable only if a
is not). Thus, an AF can be viewed as a directed graph whose
nodes represent arguments and edges represent attacks. The
meaning of an AF is given in terms of argumentation semantics, e.g. the well-known grounded (gr), complete (co),
preferred (pr), stable (st), and semi-stable (ss) semantics,
which intuitively tell us the sets of arguments (called σextensions, with σ ∈ {gr, co, pr, st, ss}) that can collectively be accepted to support a point of view in a dispute.
For instance, for AF hA, Ωi = h{a, b}, {(a, b), (b, a)}i having two arguments, a and b, attacking each other, there are
two stable extensions, {a} and {b}, and neither argument a
nor b is skeptically accepted (as it will be clear after providing formal definitions, an argument is said to be skeptically

Λ1 has four stable extensions (which are also preferred and
semi-stable): E1 = {fish, white}, E2 = {fish, red},
E3 = {meat, white} and E4 = {meat, red}, representing
four alternative menus. However, only E1 and E4 are “best”
extensions according to CPs expressed by the customer. 
An AF with a set of conditional preferences will be
called Conditional Preference-based AF (CPAF). The CPAF
of Example 1, consisting of AF Λ1 and the two abovementioned conditional preferences, could be rewritten into
an equivalent AF Λ01 obtained from Λ1 by adding the attacks
(meat, white) and (fish, red) (see Figure 1 (right)). Then,
AF Λ01 has only two stable (as well as preferred and semistable) extensions, namely E1 and E4 , that correspond to the
best ones of the CPAF. In fact, E2 and E3 are no more extensions for Λ01 as they now contain conflicting arguments.
However, in general, AF and preferences represent different pieces of knowledge, such as objective evidences and
subjective beliefs, which should be clearly distinguishable.
In fact, an AF represents a set of arguments and conflicts
among them that leads to a set of consistent sets of argu-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6218

