The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Single Image Defocus Deblurring with Misaligned Training Pairs
Yu Li1 , Dongwei Ren1 * , Xinya Shu1 , Wangmeng Zuo1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
liyuhit@outlook.com, rendongweihit@gmail.com, shuxinyahit@outlook.com, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
By adopting popular pixel-wise loss, existing methods for defocus deblurring heavily rely on well aligned training image
pairs. Although training pairs of ground-truth and blurry images are carefully collected, e.g., DPDD dataset, misalignment is inevitable between training pairs, making existing
methods possibly suffer from deformation artifacts. In this
paper, we propose a joint deblurring and reblurring learning (JDRL) framework for single image defocus deblurring
with misaligned training pairs. Generally, JDRL consists of a
deblurring module and a spatially invariant reblurring module, by which deblurred result can be adaptively supervised
by ground-truth image to recover sharp textures while maintaining spatial consistency with the blurry image. First, in the
deblurring module, a bi-directional optical flow-based deformation is introduced to tolerate spatial misalignment between
deblurred and ground-truth images. Second, in the reblurring
module, deblurred result is reblurred to be spatially aligned
with blurry image, by predicting a set of isotropic blur kernels
and weighting maps. Moreover, we establish a new single image defocus deblurring (SDD) dataset, further validating our
JDRL and also benefiting future research. Our JDRL can be
applied to boost defocus deblurring networks in terms of both
quantitative metrics and visual quality on DPDD, RealDOF
and our SDD datasets.

IB

IB

IS

IS
(a) DPDD

(b) RealDOF

Figure 1: Misaligned image pairs of ground-truth IS and
blurry IB in DPDD and RealDOF datasets. Although
ground-truth and blurry image pairs in these datasets are designed to be aligned, slight misalignment still exists.

challenging task, which is the focus of this work. A typical
solution to single image defocus deblurring is to estimate a
defocus blur map at first, and then non-blind deconvolution
(Krishnan and Fergus 2009; Fish et al. 1995) can be adopted
to predict the latent sharp image (Shi, Xu, and Jia 2015; Yi
and Eramian 2016; DAndrs et al. 2016; Karaali and Jung
2017; Lee et al. 2019; Park et al. 2017). However, methods
in this line yield unsatisfactory performance in real-world
scenes due to inaccurate estimation of defocus maps.
Recently, deep learning has boosted the performance of
defocus deblurring methods (Abuolaim and Brown 2020;
Son et al. 2021; Lee et al. 2021), making the acquirement
of abundant training data an urgent need. A common choice
for expanding training sources is data synthesis, yet the domain gap between real-world scenes and synthesized ones
makes it inappropriate for training defocus deblurring networks. Currently, DPDD (Abuolaim and Brown 2020) is
the most popular real-world defocus deblurring dataset. Although originally targeted at dual-pixel defocus deblurring,
DPDD also provides pairwise blurry and sharp images, thus
benchmarking single image defocus deblurring. In DPDD,
training pairs are intended to be well aligned by adjusting camera aperture via remote control. However, misalignment between blurry and sharp images are still inevitable as
shown in Fig. 1. In another testing dataset RealDOF (Lee
et al. 2021), a dual-camera system is established to capture
image pairs, but spatial misalignment can still be observed.
By adopting pixel-wise loss, e.g., MSE or ℓ1 -norm, spatial
deformation is also learned by network, possibly yielding
deformation artifacts in deblurred image, as shown in Fig. 7.
In this work, we propose a joint deblurring and reblurring

Introduction
Defocus blur occurs when the Depth of Field (DoF) of a
camera is not enough to cover the whole captured scene.
Although having potential benefits in photography aesthetics, defocus blur degrades visual quality of images, thereby
bringing difficulty for downstream tasks like object detection (Kong et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2022) and tracking
(Sun et al. 2022). Defocus deblurring is a challenging task
due to spatially variant blur kernels. According to the input data type, existing defocus deblurring methods can be
categorized into single image defocus deblurring and dualpixel defocus deblurring. Compared with dual-pixel defocus deblurring (Abuolaim and Brown 2020; Pan et al. 2021;
Abuolaim et al. 2021; Xin et al. 2021) that requires specialized hardware (Śliwiński and Wachel 2013; Herrmann et al.
2020), single image defocus deblurring is a more general yet
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1495

