The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multi-Modal Knowledge Hypergraph for Diverse Image Retrieval
Yawen Zeng1 , Qin Jin2 * , Tengfei Bao1 , Wenfeng Li1
1

ByteDance AI Lab
School of Information, Renmin University of China
yawenzeng11@gmail.com, qjin@ruc.edu.cn, {baotengfei,liwenfeng.x}@bytedance.com
2

Abstract

Query: “Golden Rider”

The task of keyword-based diverse image retrieval has
received considerable attention due to its wide demand in
real-world scenarios. Existing methods either rely on a multistage re-ranking strategy based on human design to diversify
results, or extend sub-semantics via an implicit generator,
which either relies on manual labor or lacks explainability.
To learn more diverse and explainable representations, we
capture sub-semantics in an explicit manner by leveraging the
multi-modal knowledge graph (MMKG) that contains richer
entities and relations. However, the huge domain gap between
the off-the-shelf MMKG and retrieval datasets, as well as
the semantic gap between images and texts, make the fusion
of MMKG difficult. In this paper, we pioneer a degree-free
hypergraph solution that models many-to-many relations to
address the challenge of heterogeneous sources and heterogeneous modalities. Specifically, a hyperlink-based solution,
Multi-Modal Knowledge Hyper Graph (MKHG) is proposed,
which bridges heterogeneous data via various hyperlinks
to diversify sub-semantics. Among them, a hypergraph
construction module first customizes various hyperedges
to link the heterogeneous MMKG and retrieval databases.
A multi-modal instance bagging module then explicitly
selects instances to diversify the semantics. Meanwhile, a
diverse concept aggregator flexibly adapts key sub-semantics.
Finally, several losses are adopted to optimize the semantic
space. Extensive experiments on two real-world datasets
have well verified the effectiveness and explainability of our
proposed method.

Filtering

(semantic, attribute,
location, knowledge)

Image Database

Clustering
Selection
Ranking
Semantic Space

(a) Multi-Stage Ranking
Query: “Golden Rider”
Image Database

Diversity
Generator
Multi-Instance Bag

(b) Multi-Semantic Representation
Query: “Golden Rider”

Semantic Space

Frederick
Augustus I

Golden
Rider

Golden Rider

Image Database

Germany Tarot
Deck

Knowledge
Hypergraph

Multi-Instance Bag

Germany
Tarot
Deck

Semantic Space

(c) Multi-Modal Knowledge Hypergraph (Ours)

Figure 1: Examples of the multi-stage, multi-instance and
our multi-modal knowledge hypergraph solution.
et al. 2017; Cao et al. 2020; Zeng 2022). Therefore, the task
of keyword-based diverse image retrieval, which aims to
diversify the retrieved image results for a given short query,
has attracted much research attention.
Previous works on keyword-based diverse image retrieval
can be roughly divided into two branches: multi-stage
ranking based approaches and multi-semantic representation based approaches. Multi-stage ranking based methods
follow ”first filter then rank”, where manual strategies are
designed in the ranking stage to adjust the order of retrieved
images (Seddati et al. 2017; Peng et al. 2017). As shown in
Fig. 1(a), such methods rely heavily on human experience
and are prone to cascading errors. On the other hand,
multi-semantic representation based methods directly learn
diverse semantics via multiple instance learning (Song and
Soleymani 2019; Zeng et al. 2022b), i.e. enrich a query with
multiple sub-semantics (or called instances). However, as
shown in Fig. 1(b), these type of approaches are mostly
implicit, which cannot explain what an instance means
(explainability), and how many instances are sufficient
to cover a keyword-based query with broad semantics
(quality). Along the multiple instance learning direction, in
this work, we aim to learn more diverse and better semantic
representations to improve both quality and explainability.

Introduction
Keyword-based image retrieval has been a classic task
in the multimedia field, because in real-world applications (Ionescu et al. 2021), using keywords as queries is
the most convenient and effective retrieval manner for users.
Due to the relatively broad semantics of keywords, the diversity of retrieval results is particularly important for keywordbased image retrieval to meet the needs of users. In fact,
keyword-based queries are usually short and semantically
incoherent (e.g. 2.7 words on average in the Div150AdHoc
dataset), which imposes higher diversity requirements than
general retrieval (queries with more than 20 words) (Wang
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3376

