The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Similarity Distribution based Membership Inference Attack on Person
Re-Identification
Junyao Gao1 , Xinyang Jiang2 , Huishuai Zhang2 , Yifan Yang2 , Shuguang Dou1 ,
Dongsheng Li2 , Duoqian Miao1 , Cheng Deng3 , Cairong Zhao* 1
2

1
Tongji University
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Xidian University

Abstract

One common methodology to quantify the privacy risk of
a trained model is using the attack success rate of membership inference (MI) attack (Shokri et al. 2017; Yeom et al.
2018; Salem et al. 2018; Long et al. 2018; Nasr, Shokri, and
Houmansadr 2018b; Song, Shokri, and Mittal 2019; Chen
et al. 2021). MI attack algorithm infers whether a record belongs to the training set by some information of target model
and is generally described as a binary classification problem.
Most of existing MI attack methods focus on classification task (Shokri et al. 2017; Yeom et al. 2018; Sablayrolles
et al. 2019), where the attacker infers the membership of a
sample based on its corresponding model outputs, such as
logits (i.e. prediction confidence of each category) or loss
(inferred from logits and ground-truth label), as shown in
Figure 1.
However, compared to classification, Re-ID follows a totally different training and inference paradigm, bringing new
challenges to existing MI attack methods. State-of-the-art
(SOTA) Re-ID methods first extract visual features from
each pedestrian image and then conduct recognition by retrieving images based on the relative similarity between image pairs. During training, SOTA Re-ID methods add an extra identity classifier after the feature extractor, which are
not available during inference. As a result, the attacker generally only gets the feature embedding of individual images,
while the commonly used logits or loss for MI attack on classification are not available in the Re-ID task. As validated
by previous works (Nasr, Shokri, and Houmansadr 2018a),
compared to logits and loss, feature embedding contains
more information irrelevant to training data and does not
characterize the training-test generalization gap well. Furthermore, compared to the general classification, Re-ID is
a more challenging fine-grained recognition task, leading to
a more complex and less discriminative feature distribution
for MI attacks.
As a result, in this paper, instead of the conventional
model outputs like feature, logits and loss, we aim at finding
a new set of features specifically for MI attack on person reidentification. Compared to classification tasks that focus on
the semantics of individual samples, Re-ID is a metric learning task modelling the relative relationship between image
pairs. Thus, instead of looking at the features of individual
images, we tackle these challenges by elaborately exploring
the inter-sample correlation between different images and

While person Re-identification (Re-ID) has progressed
rapidly due to its wide real-world applications, it also causes
severe risks of leaking personal information from training
data. Thus, this paper focuses on quantifying this risk by
membership inference (MI) attack. Most of the existing MI
attack algorithms focus on classification models, while ReID follows a totally different training and inference paradigm.
Re-ID is a fine-grained recognition task with complex feature
embedding, and model outputs commonly used by existing
MI like logits and losses are not accessible during inference.
Since Re-ID focuses on modelling the relative relationship
between image pairs instead of individual semantics, we conduct a formal and empirical analysis which validates that the
distribution shift of the inter-sample similarity between training and test set is a critical criterion for Re-ID membership
inference. As a result, we propose a novel membership inference attack method based on the inter-sample similarity
distribution. Specifically, a set of anchor images are sampled
to represent the similarity distribution conditioned on a target
image, and a neural network with a novel anchor selection
module is proposed to predict the membership of the target
image. Our experiments validate the effectiveness of the proposed approach on both the Re-ID task and conventional classification task.

Introduction
Nowadays, the deep learning model has made remarkable
progress with wide applications but also exposes risks of
leaking personal information from its training set (Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart 2015; Wu et al. 2016; Shokri et al.
2017), especially for tasks where the data source is sensitive like person re-identification (Re-ID). Re-ID is an image
retrieval task that identifies a specific person in different images or video sequence scenes. A Re-ID training set contains
pedestrian images, and leaking information from it causes
serious social security and ethical risks. For example, the
attacker could access the movements of a particular person
in different places to conspire some evil plots. Therefore, it
becomes necessary to quantify the information leakage of
Re-ID data.
* Corresponding Author (zhaocairong@mail.tongji.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14820

