The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SharpSSAT: A Witness-Generating Stochastic Boolean Satisfiability Solver
Yu-Wei Fan1 , Jie-Hong R. Jiang1,2
1

Graduate Institute of Electronics Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
{r11943096, jhjiang}@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract

ElimSSAT (Wang et al. 2022), mostly focus on the first
task. Specifically, DC-SSAT is a divide-and-conquer SSAT
solver that solves an SSAT formula by decomposing it into
smaller sub-problems. Prime exploits model counting techniques, including component analysis and advanced caching
schemes, for SSAT solving. ClauSSat tackles SSAT solving based on the clause selection (Janota and MarquesSilva 2015) framework. ElimSSAT proposes a quantifierelimination approach to SSAT solving. Regarding the second task, the witness can be crucial for practical application.
For example, the witness may correspond to an access control policy between organizations (Freudenthal and Karamcheti 2003), and a feasible plan for planning (Littman, Majercik, and Pitassi 2001). Unfortunately, none of the existing SSAT solvers can provide a Skolem-function witness.
We note that although DC-SSAT can maintain solution tree
structures during solving, it still lacks a complete procedure
to generate a full Skolem-function witness.

Stochastic Boolean satisfiability (SSAT) is a formalism allowing decision-making for optimization under quantitative
constraints. Although SSAT solvers are under active development, existing solvers do not provide Skolem-function witnesses, which are crucial for practical applications. In this
work, we develop a new witness-generating SSAT solver,
SharpSSAT, which integrates techniques, including component caching, clause learning, and pure literal detection.
It can generate a set of Skolem functions witnessing the attained satisfying probability of a given SSAT formula. We
also equip the solver ClauSSat with witness generation
capability for comparison. Experimental results show that
SharpSSAT outperforms current state-of-the-art solvers and
can effectively generate compact Skolem-function witnesses.
The new witness-generating solver may broaden the applicability of SSAT to practical applications.

1

Introduction

Efficient solving techniques for Boolean satisfiability (SAT)
problems have led to tremendous success in formal verification, synthesis, electronic design automation, and other domains that rely on Boolean reasoning. The growing complexity of verification and variety of applications have motivated researchers to investigate logical formalisms and problems beyond SAT. Recently, stochastic Boolean satisfiability
(SSAT) has drawn attention from the field of probabilistic
planning (Salmon and Poupart 2019), verification for probabilistic design (Lee and Jiang 2018), and fairness analysis
of machine-learning models (Ghosh, Basu, and Meel 2021).
It provides a convenient language to compactly encode decision and optimization problems under uncertainty. As more
applications of SSAT emerge, developing effective solving
techniques becomes crucial.
Solving a given SSAT formula involves two important tasks: One is to determine the maximum satisfying
probability of the formula. The other is to generate a
Skolem-function witness, i.e., Skolem functions for existential variables, that witnesses the maximum satisfying
probability. To date, existing SSAT solvers, e.g., DC-SSAT
(Majercik and Boots 2005), Prime (Salmon and Poupart
2019), ClauSSat (Chen, Huang, and Jiang 2021), and

In this paper, a new SSAT solver, named SharpSSAT, is
developed based on the model counter SharpSAT (Thurley 2006). Different from Prime, in addition to component analysis and caching, SharpSSAT further combines
clause learning and pure literal detection. To bridge the
gap between SSAT solving and witness genreration, we
propose two different witness generation algorithms under
SharpSSAT and ClauSSat. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first time that witness generation is supported
for SSAT solvers. Experiments on various benchmarks show
the superiority in performance SharpSSAT to state-ofthe-art solvers, including DC-SSAT, Prime, ClauSSat,
and ElimSSAT. The witness generation overhead and
witness quality are compared between SharpSSAT and
ClauSSat. The results suggest that SharpSSAT can generate more compact strategies with less run-time but more
memory overhead than ClauSSat.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The required
preliminaries are provided in Section 2 The SSAT solving
and witness generation algorithms of SharpSSAT are detailed in Section 3 and Section 4, respectively. Section 5
elaborates the witness generation algorithm for ClauSSat.
Section 6 evaluates SharpSSAT with experimental results.
Section 7 concludes this work and outline some future work.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3949

