The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

End-to-End Learning for Optimization via Constraint-Enforcing Approximators
Rares Cristian1 , Pavithra Harsha2 , Georgia Perakis1 , Brian L Quanz2 , Ioannis Spantidakis1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
IBM T. J Watson Research Center
raresc@mit.edu, pharsha@us.ibm.com, georgiap@mit.edu, blquanz@us.ibm.com, yspant@mit.edu

Abstract

on their respective objectives. Indeed, independently solving
the forecasting and decision-making problems can give rise
to significantly suboptimal decisions (Cameron et al. 2021).
Recent work that has focused on combining the prediction (learning) stage with the downstream optimization task
(the decision making) investigates ways to perform gradient
descent through the end-to-end optimization problem itself.
One challenge for a large class of decision making problems, linear programs, stems from the fact that the gradient
of the optimal solution with respect to the predicted quantities, e.g., the cost vector of the decision problem, is zero or
undefined. This is because a small change in the cost vector
either results in the same optimal solution, or a discontinuous jump to a new vertex. Linear programming constitutes
a major class of problems of interest. (Dobkin, Lipton, and
Reiss 1979) among others have showed that linear programming is P-complete from which it follows that every problem
in P has an LP-formulation of polynomial size. This includes
for instance the shortest path problem, maximum matching,
etc.
Thus, much existing literature has focused on this setting. To deal with the differentiability issue, (Elmachtoub
and Grigas 2022) constructs a convex and differentiable approximation of the objective. In the case of unconstrained
quadratic objectives, (Kao, Roy, and Yan 2009) trains a
model to directly minimize task loss. Crucially this did not
take into account constraints in the optimization problem.
This work was finally extended in (Amos and Kolter 2017)
to constrained quadratic optimization by analyzing KKT optimality conditions. Donti, Amos, and Kolter (2017) further
apply this methodology to stochastic programming problems with probabilistic constraints. Additionally, (Wilder,
Dilkina, and Tambe 2019) applies the OptNet methodology
to linear optimization problems by adding a quadratic regularization term in order to obtain approximate solutions.
They also use this approach to a new setting of submodular maximization problems. Furthermore, the method of analyzing the KKT conditions was extended to more general
convex optimization problems in (Agrawal et al. 2019). See
for instance (Mandi and Guns 2020), (Vlastelica et al. 2020),
(Berthet et al. 2020), (Niepert, Minervini, and Franceschi
2021) for various other methods to approximate the objective function and produce nonzero gradients. A major shortcoming of these approaches is that they are computationally

In many real-world applications, predictive methods are used
to provide inputs for downstream optimization problems. It
has been shown that using the downstream task-based objective to learn the intermediate predictive model is often better than using only intermediate task objectives, such as prediction error. The learning task in the former approach is referred to as end-to-end learning. The difficulty in end-to-end
learning lies in differentiating through the optimization problem. Therefore, we propose a neural network architecture that
can learn to approximately solve these optimization problems, particularly ensuring its output satisfies the feasibility
constraints via alternate projections. We show these projections converge at a geometric rate to the exact projection.
Our approach is more computationally efficient than existing
methods as we do not need to solve the original optimization
problem at each iteration. Furthermore, our approach can be
applied to a wider range of optimization problems. We apply this to a shortest path problem for which the first stage
forecasting problem is a computer vision task of predicting
edge costs from terrain maps, a capacitated multi-product
newsvendor problem, and a maximum matching problem. We
show that this method out-performs existing approaches in
terms of final task-based loss and training time.

Introduction
In many practical problems, several input quantities are predicted from historical data prior to decision making. For instance, travel times in a vehicle routing problem, the demand
distribution in a supply chain inventory optimization problem, etc. A popular approach is to estimate these quantities
using a machine learning model from historical data along
with observed contextual features such as seasonal trends,
location information and prices among others. This machine
learning model is used to create a forecast for a new observation which is subsequently used for decision making.
In these problems, the more important part is the quality of
the business objectives, such as the overall costs in the supply chain problem, compared to the accuracy of the machine
learning models, such as the mean square error of the demand estimate. But in many organizations, the forecasting
and decision making teams are siloed with each focusing
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7253

