The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On Error and Compression Rates for Prototype Rules
Omer Kerem1 , Roi Weiss2
1

Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
2
Ariel University
omerkere at post dot bgu.ac.il, roiw at ariel dot ac.il

Abstract

discriminator can achieve zero population error—the number of support vectors can be taken to be at most d, leading to ultrafast optimal error and compression rates of order O(d/n), where d is the dimension of the instance space
Rd and n is the number of independent labeled samples in
the dataset. More generally in the parametric setting, similar
optimal rates are achieved when one can construct a stable
compression scheme of size d that is guaranteed to obtain
zero sample error for all n while retaining only up to d samples (Bousquet et al. 2020).
In the more general non-parametric setting, however, it is
well known that for any learning rule, the rate at which its
error converges to the optimal one can be arbitrarily slow
without further assumptions on the data distribution (Devroye, Györfi, and Lugosi 1996). The same holds for the
achievable sample compression rates of accurate rules. Results on the jointly achievable error and compression rates in
the non-parametric setting in terms of the properties of the
data distribution and the instance space are scarce and still
not well understood. Here we aim at narrowing this gap.

We study the close interplay between error and compression in the non-parametric multiclass classification setting in
terms of prototype learning rules. We focus in particular on
a recently proposed compression-based learning rule termed
OptiNet. Beyond its computational merits, this rule has been
recently shown to be universally consistent in any metric instance space that admits a universally consistent rule—the
first learning algorithm known to enjoy this property. However, its error and compression rates have been left open.
Here we derive such rates in the case where instances reside in Euclidean space under commonly posed smoothness
and tail conditions on the data distribution. We first show that
OptiNet achieves non-trivial compression rates while enjoying near minimax-optimal error rates. We then proceed to
study a novel general compression scheme for further compressing prototype rules that locally adapts to the noise level
without sacrificing accuracy. Applying it to OptiNet, we show
that under a geometric margin condition, further gain in the
compression rate is achieved. Experimental results comparing the performance of the various methods are presented.

Prototype learning rules. A large family of nonparametric learning rules suitable for studying the errorcompression interplay are prototype learning rules (Devroye, Györfi, and Lugosi 1996, Chapter 19). Such rules
compress the data into a small number of prototypes and pair
each prototype with a suitable label as computed from the
dataset. A new instance is then labeled according to the label paired to its nearest prototype in the compressed dataset.
The various prototype rules then differ in the way the prototypes and the paired labels are computed.
The simplest prototype rule is the 1-nearest-neighbor
rule (1-NN) whose prototype-label set is simply the whole
dataset. This rule, however, is known to be inconsistent in
general—its error does not necessarily converge to the optimal one as the sample size grows. It is also known that the
k-NN rule, which labels a new instance according to the label having the most counts among its k nearest neighbors in
the dataset, is consistent for any data distribution, provided
k → ∞ such that k/n → 0. In other words, k-NN is universally consistent in Rd for any d > 0 (Devroye, Györfi, and
Lugosi 1996).
Beyond universal consistency, for several large families
of data distributions, k-NN with a properly tuned k achieves

Introduction
The interplay between learning and compression has long
been recognized, popularized by Occam’s razor rule of
thumb (Ariew 1976), and rigorously studied in several
frameworks, including in information theory in terms of
the minimum description length principal and Kolmogorov
complexity (Cover 1999; Li, Vitányi et al. 2008), and more
recently in terms of sample compression schemes in the
PAC statistical learning framework (Littlestone and Warmuth 1986; Floyd and Warmuth 1995; Graepel, Herbrich,
and Shawe-Taylor 2005; Gottlieb, Kontorovich, and Nisnevitch 2014; David, Moran, and Yehudayoff 2016; Hanneke and Kontorovich 2019; Hanneke, Kontorovich, and
Sadigurschi 2019; Bousquet et al. 2020; Hanneke and Kontorovich 2021; Alon et al. 2021).
Consider for example the well-known support vector machine (SVM) (Vapnik 2013). Given a binary labeled dataset,
SVM retains only the samples constituting the support vectors. In the linearly realizable case—where a hyperplane
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8228

