The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Low-Resource Personal Attribute Prediction from Conversations
Yinan Liu1 , Hu Chen1 , Wei Shen1 ∗ , Jiaoyan Chen2
1 TKLNDST, College of Computer Science, Nankai University, Tianjin 300350, China
2 Department of Computer Science, The University of Manchester

{liuyn,2120210473}@mail.nankai.edu.cn, shenwei@nankai.edu.cn, jiaoyan.chen@manchester.ac.uk

Abstract

from users’ conversation data on a lot of platforms such as
social media. To draw the personal attribute knowledge embedded in conversations, personal attribute prediction from
conversations becomes an increasingly important task.
Given multiple users of a conversational system, a personal attribute, and utterances of these users, the task of personal attribute prediction from conversations aims to predict
the ranking of the given personal attribute values for each
user. It is noted that this task focuses on the case that the
personal attribute values are not explicitly mentioned in utterances, and the given attribute values are ranked based on
the underlying semantics of utterances, which is different
from the common information extraction task. For example,
we could rank the attribute values scientist and teacher high
with regard to the profession attribute when the user mentions the words “research”, “lab”, “teaching” and “educator” in user utterances. However, this task is challenging due
to the following aspects: (1) compared with formal documents, user utterances are often short, noisy, colloquial and
have diverse topics, and the textual cues in utterances are
too implicit to seize; (2) the construction of training data via
manually annotating user utterances is time-consuming and
labor-intensive; (3) for the personal attribute with too many
attribute values (e.g., profession), its several attribute values (e.g., student and teacher) may be related and difficult
to distinguish as they often co-occur with the same words in
utterances.
Recently, some neural network based models have been
explored for this task. These models resort to labeled utterances (Tigunova et al. 2019), external data (e.g., Wikipedia
and Web pages) (Liu, Chen, and Shen 2022) or both (Tigunova et al. 2020) as resources of training data. However,
there exist three issues in these previous works: (1) they rely
on many resources of training data but these resources are
not always available and expensive to fetch, which limits
their adaptability to new domains or new data; (2) the attribute knowledge embedded in the unlabeled utterances is
underutilized; (3) their performance over some difficult personal attributes (e.g., profession and hobby) is still unsatisfactory. Additionally, it is found that text classification methods (Mekala and Shang 2020; Wang, Mekala, and Shang
2021; Zhang et al. 2021) which are adept in mining the textual cues could be used to address this task directly. Unfortunately, they also fail to achieve good performance when

Personal knowledge bases (PKBs) are crucial for a broad
range of applications such as personalized recommendation
and Web-based chatbots. A critical challenge to build PKBs
is extracting personal attribute knowledge from users’ conversation data. Given some users of a conversational system,
a personal attribute and these users’ utterances, our goal is to
predict the ranking of the given personal attribute values for
each user. Previous studies often rely on a relative number
of resources such as labeled utterances and external data, yet
the attribute knowledge embedded in unlabeled utterances is
underutilized and their performance of predicting some difficult personal attributes is still unsatisfactory. In addition, it
is found that some text classification methods could be employed to resolve this task directly. However, they also perform not well over those difficult personal attributes. In this
paper, we propose a novel framework PEARL to predict personal attributes from conversations by leveraging the abundant personal attribute knowledge from utterances under a
low-resource setting in which no labeled utterances or external data are utilized. PEARL combines the biterm semantic
information with the word co-occurrence information seamlessly via employing the updated prior attribute knowledge
to refine the biterm topic model’s Gibbs sampling process in
an iterative manner. The extensive experimental results show
that PEARL outperforms all the baseline methods not only
on the task of personal attribute prediction from conversations over two data sets, but also on the more general weakly
supervised text classification task over one data set.

Introduction
Personal knowledge bases (PKBs) (Balog and Kenter 2019;
Yen, Huang, and Chen 2019)-structured information about
entities personally related to the users, their attributes, and
the relations between them-are popular nowadays. They can
supply plentiful personal background knowledge for a broad
range of downstream applications like Web-based chatbots
(Ghazvininejad et al. 2018), personalized recommendation
(Balog, Radlinski, and Arakelyan 2019; Luo et al. 2019),
and personalized search (Lu et al. 2020). A potential resource for building such PKBs is the personal attribute
knowledge (e.g., hobbies and medical conditions) extracted
∗ Wei Shen is the corresponding author.

Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4507

