The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On Undisputed Sets in Abstract Argumentation
Matthias Thimm
Artificial Intelligence Group,
University of Hagen, Germany
matthias.thimm@fernuni-hagen.de

Abstract

Rienstra, and van der Torre 2020; Dondio and Longo 2019).
The notion of admissibility (Dung 1995) refers to the property of a set of arguments to defend itself against all attacks: for every argument that is attacking an argument of
the set, there must be an argument in the set that attacks back
(we will provide formal definitions in Section 2). Semantics based on notions such as weak admissibility (Baumann,
Brewka, and Ulbricht 2020b; Dauphin, Rienstra, and van der
Torre 2020)—see also (Kakas and Mancarella 2013) for an
earlier treatment of the same idea—or undecidedness blocking (Dondio and Longo 2019) take a more relaxed stand on
this constraint, insofar only attacks from relevant arguments
must be defended. How this aspect of relevance is defined,
differs in the aforementioned works. However, a particular
example (where all these approaches also agree on) is that
an attack from a self-attacking argument is deemed irrelevant. While we will provide a deeper discussion of the pros
and cons of these approaches in Section 3, let us just note
that the formal definition of those semantics can be quite involved and opaque, in contradiction to the general aim of
having explainable models in AI. In addition to that, the semantical notion of weak admissibility (Baumann, Brewka,
and Ulbricht 2020b) also comes with the additional caveat
of being computationally very hard, (Dvořák, Ulbricht, and
Woltran 2021) shows that all interesting reasoning problems
for weak admissibility are PSPACE-complete.

We introduce the notion of an undisputed set for abstract argumentation frameworks, which is a conflict-free set of arguments, such that its reduct contains no non-empty admissible
sets. We show that undisputed sets, and the stronger notion
of strongly undisputed sets, provide a meaningful approach
to weaken admissibility and deal with the problem of attacks
from self-attacking arguments, in a similar manner as the recently introduced notion of weak admissibility. We investigate the properties of our new semantical notions and show
certain relationships to classical semantics, in particular that
undisputed sets are a generalisation of preferred extensions
and strongly undisputed sets are a generalisation of stable extensions. We also investigate the computational complexity
of standard reasoning tasks with these new notions and show
that they lie on the second and third level of the polynomial
hierarchy, respectively.

1

Introduction

Computational models of argumentation (Baroni et al. 2018;
Gabbay et al. 2021) are formal approaches to knowledge
representation and reasoning that focus on the representation
of arguments and their interaction with each other. In particular, abstract argumentation frameworks (AFs) model argumentative scenarios as a directed graph where arguments
are identified as vertices and a directed edge from one argument to another is interpreted as an attack (Dung 1995).
Formal semantics for abstract argumentation (Baroni, Caminada, and Giacomin 2018) capture conditions that should
be imposed on a set of arguments in order to deem this set
a plausible outcome of the argumentation (also called an extension). Many different semantics have been proposed over
the years, many based on this notion of an extension, but also
based on different concepts such as rankings (Amgoud and
Ben-Naim 2013; Skiba et al. 2021), weights (Dunne et al.
2011; Bistarelli and Santini 2021), or probabilities (Li, Oren,
and Norman 2011; Hunter et al. 2021).
This work continues the investigation on primal reasons
why arguments should be deemed acceptable and what
should form an extension. We are particularly interested in
the family of non-admissible semantics (Kakas and Mancarella 2013; Baumann, Brewka, and Ulbricht 2020b; Dauphin,

Our aim is to define a new notion of a non-admissible semantics that captures the intuition of the works above but is
conceptually simple and enjoys better computational complexity (in particular better than PSPACE-completeness).
Our core concept to this aim is that of an undisputed set,
which is a conflict-free set of arguments, such that its
reduct—i. e., the part of the argumentation framework that
remains when we remove the set and all arguments attacked
by it—contains no non-empty admissible sets anymore. We
show that this notion is actually a generalisation of preferred
extensions (Dung 1995), which are subset-maximal admissible sets, and we show that it enjoys further desirable properties. We then investigate a special case of undisputed sets,
namely strongly undisputed sets that additionally demand
that their reduct does not contain a non-empty undisputed
set as well. We show that the strongly undisputed semantics
behaves identical on all examples from (Baumann, Brewka,
and Ulbricht 2020b) and therefore poses a conceptually sim-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6550

