The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multi-Mask Label Mapping for Prompt-Based Learning
Jirui Qi1 , Richong Zhang1,2 * , Jaein Kim1 , Junfan Chen1 , Wenyi Qin1 , Yongyi Mao3
1

SKLSDE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
3
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
{qijr,zhangrc,chenjf}@act.buaa.edu.cn, {jaein,wenyiqin}@buaa.edu.cn, ymao@uottawa.ca

Abstract

Xu, and McAuley 2022) which adds extra classification networks on the top of CLMs. But the randomly initialized parameters in these classification networks cannot be trained
well due to scarce labeled instances (Brown et al. 2020).
Some previous works have demonstrated that promptbased learning can effectively exploit the rich knowledge
in CLM, which is compressed in CLM’s parameters during the pre-training process (Trinh and Le 2018; Davison,
Feldman, and Rush 2019; Petroni et al. 2019). The vanilla
prompt-based approach consists of two components, namely
text reformation and label mapping. In the text reformation
process, input texts are wrapped by a pre-defined classification template with a {mask} slot. For example, for sentiment
classification, the text ‘Boring starting but overall ok and
worth watching.’, is wrapped into a template ‘{TEXT} It
was {mask}.’2 . After being encoded with CLM, the hidden
vector of {mask} is used to calculate the word-occurrence
probability that each word in the vocabulary is filled in the
{mask} slot based on its context.
Bridging the gap between the word-occurrence probability with the ground-truth label is significant in the label mapping process. To achieve this, verbalizers are proposed in recent work to assign one or multiple representative word(s) to
each label (Gao, Fisch, and Chen 2021; Cui et al. 2022; Hu
et al. 2022). With the help of verbalizers, the label prediction problem is transferred to comparing the averaged wordoccurrence probability of each label at the {mask} slot.
In existing label mapping models, only a single context is
considered for filling each {mask} slot. This could lead to a
wrong prediction if a misleading lexical cue is contained in
the given sentence. In specific, it is studied in recent work
that many large language models like BERT or RoBERTa
are often heavily dependent on specific lexical cues for decision making (Kavumba, Takahashi, and Oda 2022). For
example, in a wrapped sentence ‘Boring starting but overall
ok and worth watching. It was {mask}.’ , the lexical cues are
boring, ok and worth. From the human perspective, we can
easily judge that the sentence should be classified as a positive label rather than a negative label. However, a language
model may consider boring as the greatest impact on the

Prompt-based Learning has shown significant success in fewshot classification. The mainstream approach is to concatenate a template for the input text to transform the classification task into a cloze-type task where label mapping plays an
important role in finding the ground-truth labels. While current label mapping methods only use the contexts in one single input, it could be crucial if wrong information is contained
in the text. Specifically, it is proved in recent work that even
the large language models like BERT/RoBERTa make classification decisions heavily dependent on a specific keyword
regardless of the task or the context. Such a word is referred
to as a lexical cue and if a misleading lexical cue is included
in the instance it will lead the model to make a wrong prediction. We propose a multi-mask prompt-based approach with
Multi-Mask Label Mapping (MMLM) to reduce the impact
of misleading lexical cues by allowing the model to exploit
multiple lexical cues. To satisfy the conditions of few-shot
learning, an instance augmentation approach for the clozetype model is proposed and the misleading cues are gradually
excluded through training. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of MMLM by both theoretical analysis and empirical studies, and show that MMLM outperforms other existing label
mapping approaches.

Introduction
With the popularity of pre-trained language models like
GPT-3 in the NLP domain (Brown et al. 2020), promptbased learning has demonstrated its excellent ability to handle numerous few-shot tasks (Liu et al. 2021), such as sentiment classification (Gao, Fisch, and Chen 2021), text classification, and commonsense reasoning (Wei et al. 2022).
Among them, prompt-based learning with Cloze-type Language Models (CLMs)1 have shown their excellence on fewshot classification tasks (Gao, Fisch, and Chen 2021; Hu
et al. 2022). Recent works confirm that prompt-based learning significantly outperforms the traditional fine-tuning approaches (Gao, Fisch, and Chen 2021; Hu et al. 2022; Wang,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
More commonly, they are called Masked Language Models
(MLMs), but here we use the term CLM to distinguish their abbreviation from MMLM.

2

We will omit the {TEXT} symbol in the template for the rest
of this paper for clarity since we only adopt the concatenation operation in wrapping.

13465

