The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Provably Efficient Primal-Dual Reinforcement Learning for CMDPs with
Non-stationary Objectives and Constraints
Yuhao Ding, Javad Lavaei
UC Berkeley, Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
{yuhao_ding, lavaei}@berkeley.edu

Abstract

essential to guarantee safety, such as collision-avoidance and
contingency, while handling time-varying conditions related
to traffic and load demands. Similarly, in most safety-critical
human-computer interaction applications, e.g., automated
medical care, human behavior changes over time. In such
scenarios, if the automated system is not adapted to take such
changes into account, then the system could quickly violate
the safety constraint and incur a severe loss (Chandak et al.
2020; Moore et al. 2014). Despite the importance of nonstationary safe RL problems, the literature lacks provably
efficient algorithms and theoretical results.
In this work, we formulate a general non-stationary safe
exploration problem as an episodic CMDP in which the transition model is unknown and non-stationary, the reward/utility
feedback after each episode is bandit and non-stationary, and
the variation budget is known. The goal is to design an algorithm that can perform a non-stationary safe exploration,
that is, to adaptively explore the unknown and time-varying
environment and learn to satisfy time-varying constraints in
the long run.
The safe exploration in non-stationary CMDPs is more
challenging since the utilities and dynamics are time-varying
and unknown a priori. Thus, it is difficult/impossible to guarantee a small/zero constraint violation without knowing how
CMDPs will change. Previous constraint violation analyses
(Ding et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021) strongly rely on the conditions of having the same transition dynamics and rewards
over all episodes, which are not applicable to non-stationary
CMDPs. In view of the aforementioned challenges, we propose a new primal-dual method and develop novel techniques
to decouple the optimality gap and the constraint violation.
Our main contributions are summarized below:

We consider primal-dual-based reinforcement learning (RL)
in episodic constrained Markov decision processes (CMDPs)
with non-stationary objectives and constraints, which plays
a central role in ensuring the safety of RL in time-varying
environments. In this problem, the reward/utility functions
and the state transition functions are both allowed to vary arbitrarily over time as long as their cumulative variations do
not exceed certain known variation budgets. Designing safe
RL algorithms in time-varying environments is particularly
challenging because of the need to integrate the constraint
violation reduction, safe exploration, and adaptation to the
non-stationarity. To this end, we identify two alternative conditions on the time-varying constraints under which we can
guarantee the safety in the long run. We also propose the
Periodically Restarted Optimistic Primal-Dual Proximal Policy Optimization (PROPD-PPO) algorithm that can coordinate with both two conditions. Furthermore, a dynamic regret
bound and a constraint violation bound are established for the
proposed algorithm in both the linear kernel CMDP function
approximation setting and the tabular CMDP setting under
two alternative conditions. This paper provides the first provably efficient algorithm for non-stationary CMDPs with safe
exploration.

Introduction
Safe reinforcement learning (RL) studies how an agent learns
to maximize its expected total reward by interacting with an
unknown environment over time while dealing with restrictions/constraints arising from real-world problems (Amodei
et al. 2016; Dulac-Arnold, Mankowitz, and Hester 2019;
Garcıa and Fernández 2015). A standard approach for modeling the safe RL is based on Constrained Markov Decision Processes (CMDPs) (Altman 1999), where one seeks
to maximize the expected total reward under a safety-related
constraint on the expected total utility.
While classical safe RL and CMDPs assume that an agent
interacts with a time-invariant (stationary) environment, both
the reward/utility functions and transition kernels can be
time-varying for many real-world safety-critical applications.
For example, in autonomous driving (Sallab et al. 2017) or
power grid control (Ding, Lavaei, and Arcak 2021), it is

• We identify two alternative conditions on the time-varying
constraints under which we can guarantee the safety in the
long run. The first assumption requires the knowledge of
the local variation budgets of the constraint for each epoch,
while the second assumption needs the strict feasibility
of the constraint at each episode and the knowledge of a
uniform strict feasibility threshold.
• We develop a new periodically restarted policy-based
primal-dual method, which can coordinate with both two
conditions, for general non-stationary CMDP problems.
• We study the proposed algorithm under two alternative

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7396

