The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Uncertainty-Aware Self-training for Low-Resource Neural Sequence Labeling
Jianing Wang1 , Chengyu Wang2 , Jun Huang2 , Ming Gao1,3 * , Aoying Zhou1
1

School of Data Science and Engineering, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
3
KLATASDS-MOE, School of Statistics, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
lygwjn@gmail.com, {chengyu.wcy, huangjun.hj}@alibaba-inc.com, {mgao, ayzhou}@dase.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

ios, such as over-fitting on limited labeled data and privacy
constraints.
Recently, a branch of the semi-supervised learning (SSL)
paradigm (Chawla and Karakoulas 2005; van Engelen and
Hoos 2020; Yang et al. 2021) arises to bypass the aforementioned issues, which aims to utilize effectively large-scale
unlabeled data in addition to the few-shot labeled data. Selftraining is one of the typical SSL techniques which can be
viewed as teacher-student training (Grandvalet and Bengio
2004; Amini et al. 2022). Concretely, a teacher model is
trained over the labeled data and then be used to generate
pseudo labels on the unlabeled data. After that, a student
model can be optimized by the augmented data, and be used
to initialize a new teacher.
Benefit from self-training, previous methods make a remarkable success on a series of instance-level classification
tasks, such as image classification (Zhou et al. 2021; Wang
et al. 2022a; Liu et al. 2021) and text classification (Meng
et al. 2020; Mukherjee and Awadallah 2020; Yu et al. 2021;
Hu and Khan 2021; Tsai, Lin, and Fu 2022; Kim, Son,
and Han 2022). In contrast to instance-level classification,
we observe that there are two challenges in applying standard self-training to NSL. On one hand, the task of NSL is
based on the token-level classification, which requires the
model to capture the inherent token-wise label dependency.
On the other hand, the teacher model inevitably generates
some noisy labels that cause error accumulation (Wang et al.
2021a). Some sample selection strategies (e.g., model confidence, uncertainty estimation) and consistency regularization mitigate the effect of noisy labels and alleviate the problem of confirmation bias (Do, Tran, and Venkatesh 2021;
Cao et al. 2021; Rizve et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021b; Andersen and Maalej 2022). However, it is unclear how these
methods can be applied to token-level classification.
To remedy this dilemma, we develop SeqUST, a novel
semi-supervised learning framework for NSL, which improves standard self-training via two decomposed processes,
i.e., reliable token selection and robust learning. Specifically, we first pseudo annotate the unlabeled data. Then, a
Monte Carlo (MC) dropout technique, which is the approximation technique in Bayesian Neural Network (BNN) (Gal
and Ghahramani 2016; Wang and Yeung 2016), is used to estimate the uncertainty of each language token derived from
the teacher model. We judiciously select the reliable tokens

Neural sequence labeling (NSL) aims at assigning labels for
input language tokens, which covers a broad range of applications, such as named entity recognition (NER) and slot
filling, etc. However, the satisfying results achieved by traditional supervised-based approaches heavily depend on the
large amounts of human annotation data, which may not
be feasible in real-world scenarios due to data privacy and
computation efficiency issues. This paper presents SeqUST,
a novel uncertain-aware self-training framework for NSL to
address the labeled data scarcity issue and to effectively utilize unlabeled data. Specifically, we incorporate Monte Carlo
(MC) dropout in Bayesian neural network (BNN) to perform
uncertainty estimation at the token level and then select reliable language tokens from unlabeled data based on the model
confidence and certainty. A well-designed masked sequence
labeling task with a noise-robust loss supports robust training,
which aims to suppress the problem of noisy pseudo labels.
In addition, we develop a Gaussian-based consistency regularization technique to further improve the model robustness
on Gaussian-distributed perturbed representations. This effectively alleviates the over-fitting dilemma originating from
pseudo-labeled augmented data. Extensive experiments over
six benchmarks demonstrate that our SeqUST framework effectively improves the performance of self-training, and consistently outperforms strong baselines by a large margin in
low-resource scenarios.

Introduction
Neural sequence labeling (NSL) is one of the fundamental
tasks in natural language processing (NLP) with a broad
range of applications, including named entity recognition
(NER) (Li et al. 2022) and slot filling (Liu et al. 2022), which
aims at classifying language tokens into a pre-defined set of
classes (Shen et al. 2021; Agarwal 2022). Previous works
have achieved satisfying performance by developing welldesigned deep architectures and/or fine-tuning pre-trained
language models (PLMs) (Ma and Hovy 2016; Li et al.
2020; Zhou, Li, and Li 2022; Zhang et al. 2022). Yet, these
approaches heavily depend on massive labeled data, which
could be even more bothersome in some real-world scenar* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13682

