The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Metric Residual Networks for Sample Efficient
Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning
Bo Liu1 , Yihao Feng2 , Qiang Liu1 , Peter Stone1,3
1

The University of Texas at Austin
2
Salesforce Research
3
Sony AI
{bliu, yihao, lqiang, pstone}@cs.utexas.edu
Abstract

cation. Similarly, robot navigation can be viewed as a GCRL
problem where the goal can be any navigation destination.
Although GCRL has a straightforward reward formulation, it inherits the challenges associated with sparse reward
learning: unlike in the dense reward setting, the reward signal is only informative when the agent reaches the goal.
Therefore, sample efficiency is a major challenge in GCRL,
meaning that the agent typically needs a large number of interactions with the environment to make meaningful learning progress. To address this problem, an active line of research focuses on designing novel learning algorithms that
efficiently use the data. One popular approach is hindsight
experience replay (HER) (Andrychowicz et al. 2017), which
relabels the agent’s trajectories as if they were aiming to
reach the state that they in fact reached, thus rendering every
trajectory an example of a successful goal achievement.
One relatively under-explored direction is the design
of better neural architectures for GCRL. For actor-criticlike methods, prior work has proposed decomposing the
critic function (a.k.a the action-value function Q(s, a, g),
see Sec. ) into a bilinear network, e.g., either Q(s, a, g) =
f (s, a)⊤ ϕ(g) (Schaul et al. 2015) or Q(s, a, g) =
f (s, a)⊤ ϕ(s, g) (Hong, Yang, and Agrawal 2022), where
f and g are separate neural modules. The principle behind
these designs is to inject useful inductive bias into the architecture. Although empirically found to be effective, it remains unclear why such a decomposition works and whether
it can be improved upon.
In this work, we argue that one fundamental inductive bias
is that under the sparse reward setting, the negated optimal
action-value (e.g., −Q∗ (s, a, g)) must satisfy the triangle inequality in a specific sense. While there exists prior work on
neural architectures that respect the triangle inequality (Pitis
et al. 2020), we make the following novel contributions:

Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL) has a wide
range of potential real-world applications, including manipulation and navigation problems in robotics. Especially in
such robotics tasks, sample efficiency is of the utmost importance for GCRL since, by default, the agent is only rewarded
when it reaches its goal. While several methods have been
proposed to improve the sample efficiency of GCRL, one relatively under-studied approach is the design of neural architectures to support sample efficiency. In this work, we introduce a novel neural architecture for GCRL that achieves significantly better sample efficiency than the commonly-used
monolithic network architecture. The key insight is that the
optimal action-value function must satisfy the triangle inequality in a specific sense. Furthermore, we introduce the
metric residual network (MRN) that deliberately decomposes
the action-value function into the negated summation of a
metric plus a residual asymmetric component. MRN provably approximates any optimal action-value function, thus
making it a fitting neural architecture for GCRL. We conduct comprehensive experiments across 12 standard benchmark environments in GCRL. The empirical results demonstrate that MRN uniformly outperforms other state-of-the-art
GCRL neural architectures in terms of sample efficiency. The
code is available at https://github.com/Cranial-XIX/metricresidual-network.

Introduction
Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL) refers to
the problem in which an agent learns to solve a set of tasks
indicated by different “goals” via trial and error. In contrast
to the standard reinforcement learning (RL) setting, in which
the per-step reward the agent receives can be an arbitrary
fixed scalar function, the reward function in GCRL is usually an indicator function identifying whether the agent has
achieved the goal but with a varying goal. As a result, GCRL
enables the learning of a whole family of tasks with relatively little human effort toward reward design and thus has
many potential real-world applications. For instance, robot
manipulation tasks like picking and placing an object in a
target location can be viewed as a GCRL problem where the
underlying task family is parameterized by the target goal lo-

• We are the first to show that the discounted Q∗ (s, a, g) in
the standard GCRL setting (See Sec. ), when the goal is
a deterministic onto mapping from the state, satisfies the
triangle inequality.
• Motivated by the first point, we introduce the metric
residual network (MRN) that deliberately decomposes
the negative action-value function (e.g., −Q) into the
sum of a metric and an asymmetric residual component,

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8799

