The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

An Operator Theoretic Approach for Analyzing Sequence Neural Networks
Ilan Naiman, Omri Azencot
Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel
naimani@post.bgu.ac.il, azencot@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract

points (Sussillo and Barak 2013), leading to work that interprets trained RNNs for tasks such as sentiment analysis
(Maheswaranathan et al. 2019).
However, the local nature of these methods is a limiting
factor which may lead to inconsistent results. Specifically,
their approach is based on fixed-point analysis which allows
to study the dynamical system in the neighborhood of a fixedpoint. In contrast, our approach is global—it does not depend
on a set of fixed-points, and it facilitates the exploration of
the dynamics near and further away from fixed points.
Over the past few years, a family of data-driven methods was developed, allowing to analyze complex dynamical
systems based on Koopman theory (1931). These methods
exploit a novel observation by which nonlinear systems may
be globally encoded using infinite-dimensional but linear
Koopman operators. In practice, Koopman-based approaches
are lossy as they compute a low-rank approximation of the
full operator. Nevertheless, it has been shown in the fluid
dynamics (Mezić 2005; Azencot et al. 2020) and geometry
processing (Ovsjanikov et al. 2012; Sharma and Ovsjanikov
2020) communities that the dominant features of general nonlinear dynamical systems can be captured via a single matrix
per system, allowing e.g., to forecast dynamics (Azencot,
Yin, and Bertozzi 2019; Cohen et al. 2021), and to align time
series data (Rahamim and Talmon 2021). Thus, we pose the
following research question: can we design and employ a
Koopman-based approach to analyze and develop a fundamental understanding of deep neural models?
Given a trained sequence neural network and a procedure
to extract its hidden states, our Koopman-based method generates a moderate size matrix which faithfully describes the
dynamics in the latent space. Unlike existing work, our approach is global and independent of a particular latent sample,
and thus it can be virtually applied to any hidden state. A key
advantage of our framework is that we can directly employ
linear analysis tools on the approximate Koopman operator to
reason about the associated neural network. In particular, we
show that the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the Koopman
matrix are instrumental for understanding the decision mechanisms of the model. For instance, we show in our results that
the dominant eigenvectors carry crucial semantic knowledge
related to the problem at hand. Koopman-based methods such
as ours are backed by rich theory and practice, allowing us to
exploit the recent advances in Koopman inspired techniques

Analyzing the inner mechanisms of deep neural networks is
a fundamental task in machine learning. Existing work provides limited analysis or it depends on local theories, such
as fixed-point analysis. In contrast, we propose to analyze
trained neural networks using an operator theoretic approach
which is rooted in Koopman theory, the Koopman Analysis of
Neural Networks (KANN). Key to our method is the Koopman
operator, which is a linear object that globally represents the
dominant behavior of the network dynamics. The linearity of
the Koopman operator facilitates analysis via its eigenvectors
and eigenvalues. Our method reveals that the latter eigendecomposition holds semantic information related to the neural
network inner workings. For instance, the eigenvectors highlight positive and negative n-grams in the sentiments analysis
task; similarly, the eigenvectors capture the salient features of
healthy heart beat signals in the ECG classification problem.

Introduction
Understanding the inner workings of predictive models is an
essential requirement in many fields across science and engineering. This need is even more important nowadays with
the emergence of neural networks whose visualization and
interpretation is inherently challenging. Indeed, modern computational neural models often lack a commonly accepted
knowledge regarding their governing mathematical principles. Consequently, while deep neural networks may achieve
remarkable results on various complex tasks, explaining their
underlying decision mechanisms remains a challenge. The
goal of this paper is to help bridge this gap by proposing a
new framework for the approximation, reasoning, and understanding of sequence neural models.
Sequence models are designed to handle time series data
originating from images, text, audio, and other sources of
information. One approach to analyzing sequence neural
networks is through the theory and practice of dynamical
systems (Doya 1993a; Pascanu, Mikolov, and Bengio 2013).
For instance, the temporal asymptotic behavior of a dynamical system can be described using the local analysis of its
attractor states (Strogatz 2018). Similarly, recurrent models
have been investigated in the neighborhood of their fixed
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9268

