The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Heterogeneous-Branch Collaborative Learning for Dialogue Generation
Yiwei Li, Shaoxiong Feng, Bin Sun, Kan Li*
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology
{liyiwei,shaoxiongfeng,binsun,likan}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract

What profession do you want to take up after your education?

With the development of deep learning, advanced dialogue
generation methods usually require a greater amount of computational resources. One promising approach to obtaining
a high-performance and lightweight model is knowledge
distillation, which relies heavily on the pre-trained powerful teacher. Collaborative learning, also known as online
knowledge distillation, is an effective way to conduct onestage group distillation in the absence of a well-trained large
teacher model. However, previous work has a severe branch
homogeneity problem due to the same training objective and
the independent identical training sets. To alleviate this problem, we consider the dialogue attributes in the training of network branches. Each branch learns the attribute-related features based on the selected subset. Furthermore, we propose
a dual group-based knowledge distillation method, consisting of positive distillation and negative distillation, to further diversify the features of different branches in a steadily
and interpretable way. The proposed approach significantly
improves branch heterogeneity and outperforms state-of-theart collaborative learning methods on two widely used opendomain dialogue datasets.

The goal of my life is to become a data scientist.
I’ve just been to the cinema and had a grand time.

Coherence

I want to be a professor. It’s an interesting profession.
Professor.

Informativeness

My ambition is to be a lawyer.
I’m not sure of that.

Specificity

Figure 1: Dialogue examples with two levels related to three
dialogue attributes. The response quality can be assessed by
multiple perspectives.

plex teacher model is time-consuming and a high-capacity
model may not always be available.
With a view to overcoming traditional limitations, online
knowledge distillation (Anil et al. 2018; Lan, Zhu, and Gong
2018), also called collaborative learning (Zhang et al. 2018c;
Song and Chai 2018), is currently receiving considerable
attention. Instead of pre-training a high-capacity teacher,
collaborative learning conducts a single-stage group-based
knowledge distillation that transfers the knowledge between
less-parameterized student branches simultaneously. Aside
from accelerating model learning efficiency over conventional KD, another major advantage of collaborative learning is the ability to find a more robust local minimum when
compared to a single model learning method. It is important to note, however, that the homogeneity problem among
branches along with training will lead to early saturation,
thereby affecting the effectiveness of group distillation. To
alleviate this problem, Chen et al. (2020) impeded homogenization by equipping a diversity holding mechanism; Wu
and Gong (2021) randomly enhanced the input to guarantee
the discrepancy between branches; Feng et al. (2021a) proposed random routing to improve the diversity of features.
Even though the aforementioned approaches have demonstrated their superiority, one major drawback remains to
limit further branch heterogenization: previous work only
focused on the classification task, resulting in the same training objective (i.e. classification accuracy) for all branches of
the framework with independent identical distribution (i.i.d.)
training data. It will make different branches tend to converge to similar feature representations (Li et al. 2016c; Lan,

Introduction
Open-domain Neural dialogue generation (Sordoni et al.
2015; Vinyals and Le 2015; Shang, Lu, and Li 2015),
aiming to generate diverse and coherent responses, has
gained increasing attention and achieved impressive performance. It is important to recognize, however, that these
considerable improvements typically come at the expense
of over-parameterized networks, inhibiting their development on real-world resource-limited scenarios such as mobile chatbot applications. Knowledge distillation is an appropriate knowledge-transfer methodology to resolve this issue, which uses predicted distributions (Hinton, Vinyals, and
Dean 2015), hidden states (Sun et al. 2019), or attention matrices (Jiao et al. 2020), etc. of a teacher model as targets to
induce the student to imitate. A conventional distillation process involves two stages that begin with a cumbersome pretrained teacher model and then distill the knowledge to the
compact student model. Unfortunately, training such a com* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13148

