The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Attention-Based Depth Distillation with 3D-Aware Positional Encoding
for Monocular 3D Object Detection
Zizhang Wu1 * , Yunzhe Wu1 * , Jian Pu2 , Xianzhi Li3 , Xiaoquan Wang1
1

ZongmuTech
Fudan University
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
wuzizhang87@gmail.com, {nelson.wu, rockywin.wang}@zongmutech.com, jianpu@fudan.edu.cn, xzli@hust.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Monocular 3D object detection is a low-cost but challenging task, as it requires generating accurate 3D localization
solely from a single image input. Recent developed depthassisted methods show promising results by using explicit
depth maps as intermediate features, which are either precomputed by monocular depth estimation networks or jointly
evaluated with 3D object detection. However, inevitable errors from estimated depth priors may lead to misaligned semantic information and 3D localization, hence resulting in
feature smearing and suboptimal predictions. To mitigate this
issue, we propose ADD, an Attention-based Depth knowledge Distillation framework with 3D-aware positional encoding. Unlike previous knowledge distillation frameworks
that adopt stereo- or LiDAR-based teachers, we build up our
teacher with identical architecture as the student but with extra ground-truth depth as input. Credit to our teacher design,
our framework is seamless, domain-gap free, easily implementable, and is compatible with object-wise ground-truth
depth. Specifically, we leverage intermediate features and responses for knowledge distillation. Considering long-range
3D dependencies, we propose 3D-aware self-attention and
target-aware cross-attention modules for student adaptation.
Extensive experiments are performed to verify the effectiveness of our framework on the challenging KITTI 3D object
detection benchmark. We implement our framework on three
representative monocular detectors, and we achieve state-ofthe-art performance with no additional inference computational cost relative to baseline models. Our code is available
at https://github.com/rockywind/ADD.

Figure 1: Moderate level BEV average precision (%) on different baselines with (red bar) or without (blue bar) training
the networks with our distillation framework on the KITTI
validation split. Significant improvements are observed on
three representative networks. More comparison results are
presented in the Experiment Section.
problems, the community has begun to pay more attention
to monocular 3D object detection, which is much lower-cost
and easily implementable.
To address the task of monocular 3D object detection,
most deep-learning-based works adopt 2D-3D correspondences (Shi et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2021; Zhang, Lu, and Zhou
2021; Li et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021; Liu, Xue, and Wu 2022;
Chen et al. 2021a; Lian, Li, and Chen 2022) to constrain
the learning of monocular images and directly estimate 3D
bounding boxes. However, because of the lack of explicit
3D measurements, their localization accuracy degenerates
dramatically compared with LiDAR- or stereo-based methods. To address this problem, some prior works (Wang et al.
2019b; Ma et al. 2019, 2020) take monocular depth estimation networks (Fu et al. 2018) to precompute depth estimations as extra inputs. Some other works (Park et al. 2021;
Reading et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022) take depth estimation as an auxiliary task to introduce depth-aware features
for object detection. However, inevitable depth estimation
errors result in easily affected high-level features, thus leading to feature smearing and suboptimal predictions.
To mitigate this issue, we propose an attention-based
depth knowledge distillation (KD) framework with 3Daware positional encoding (PE) to provide students with

Introduction
3D object detection is a primary foundation in 3D perception and has made evident contributions to autonomous driving, robot navigation and augmented reality. To reach accurate 3D localization, some methods use LiDAR sensors
(Shi, Wang, and Li 2019; Lang et al. 2019; Shi et al. 2020;
He et al. 2020) or stereo cameras (Wang et al. 2019b; Li,
Chen, and Shen 2019; Chen et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2020)
to provide accurate range measurements. However, cost and
complexity increases caused by using extra sensors result in
limited generalization in downstream tasks. To solve these
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2892

