The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ACL-Net: Semi-supervised Polyp Segmentation via Affinity Contrastive Learning
Huisi Wu* , Wende Xie, Jingyin Lin, Xinrong Guo
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
hswu@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Automatic polyp segmentation from colonoscopy images is
an essential prerequisite for the development of computerassisted therapy. However, the complex semantic information
and the blurred edges of polyps make segmentation extremely
difficult. In this paper, we propose a novel semi-supervised
polyp segmentation framework using affinity contrastive
learning (ACL-Net), which is implemented between student
and teacher networks to consistently refine the pseudo-labels
for semi-supervised polyp segmentation. By aligning the
affinity maps between the two branches, a better polyp region
activation can be obtained to fully exploit the appearancelevel context encoded in the feature maps, thereby improving the capability of capturing not only global localization
and shape context, but also the local textural and boundary
details. By utilizing the rich inter-image affinity context and
establishing a global affinity context based on the memory
bank, a cross-image affinity aggregation (CAA) module is
also implemented to further refine the affinity aggregation
between the two branches. By continuously and adaptively
refining pseudo-labels with optimized affinity, we can improve the semi-supervised polyp segmentation based on the
mutually reinforced knowledge interaction among contrastive
learning and consistency learning iterations. Extensive experiments on five benchmark datasets, including Kvasir-SEG,
CVC-ClinicDB, CVC-300, ColonDB and ETIS, demonstrate
the effectiveness and superiority of our method. Codes are
available at https://github.com/xiewende/ACL-Net.

Figure 1: Challenges in semi-supervised polyp segmentation. (a)-(d) denote various scales, colors and textures of
polyps. (c)-(f) illustrate the low contrast between polyps and
surrounding tissues.

Second, the low contrast between the polyp and the background mucosa produces a blurred boundary (Figure 1 (e)(f)), which may reduce the discrimination of object features
and thus increase the possibility of incorrect segmentation.
Recently, supervised deep learning methods achieved remarkable success in polyp segmentation (Zhou et al. 2018;
Fan et al. 2020; Kim, Lee, and Kim 2021; Wei et al. 2021).
However, as the pixel-wise labeling process is particularly
expensive and time consuming, the segmentation accuracy is
still cannot guaranteed without enough high quality labelled
datasets. To tackle this limitation, semi-supervised semantic
segmentation methods are proposed to reduce the reliance
on labels (Ke et al. 2020; Ouali, Hudelot, and Tami 2020).
Current state-of-the-art (SOTA) semi-supervised learning
is mainly based on consistency regularization (Miyato et al.
2018; Mittal, Tatarchenko, and Brox 2019; Ouali, Hudelot,
and Tami 2020; Liu et al. 2022; Seibold et al. 2022; Zhang
et al. 2022) and contrastive learning (Zhao et al. 2022; Lai
et al. 2021; Kwon and Kwak 2022; Wang et al. 2022b). Although these techniques can substantially improve the performance of semi-supervised semantic segmentation, they
share a common drawback: weak learning ability at the initialization may carry bias due to less reliable pseudo-labels
generated from the relatively poorer predictions of unlabeled
images. Several existent methods are proposed to combine
both contrastive learning and consistency learning, but they
are usually optimized in different directions without knowledge transfer during the training process. However, different optimized directions may lead to a counterproductive effect. More recently, medical semi-supervised segmentation
methods (Wu et al. 2021; Seibold et al. 2022) also simply

Introduction
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a common malignant tumor in
the gastrointestinal tract and has become the third most common cancer in the world (Silva et al. 2014). Fortunately,
CRC can be effectively prevented if polyps are removed
in time. With the development of technology, automated
segmentation of polyp plays a key role in the computeraided diagnosis of CRC. Colonoscopy is an essential polyp
detection method that can help doctors locate and remove
polyps. However, precisely segmentation of polyps from
colonoscopy videos is still a challenging task. First, the
characteristics of polyps are highly variable, including various scales, locations, colors and textures (Figure 1(a)-(d)).
* Corresponding author. Email: hswu@szu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2812

