The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Generalizing Multiple Object Tracking to Unseen Domains by Introducing
Natural Language Representation
En Yu1 * , Songtao Liu3 * , Zhuoling Li 2 , Jinrong Yang 1 , Zeming Li3 , Shoudong Han1† , Wenbing
Tao1†
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
2
Tsinghua University,
3
Megvii(Face++) Inc
{yuen, yangjinrong, shoudonghan, wenbingtao}@hust.edu.cn
Abstract
Although existing multi-object tracking (MOT) algorithms
have obtained competitive performance on various benchmarks, almost all of them train and validate models on the
same domain. The domain generalization problem of MOT
is hardly studied. To bridge this gap, we first draw the observation that the high-level information contained in natural
language is domain invariant to different tracking domains.
Based on this observation, we propose to introduce natural
language representation into visual MOT models for boosting the domain generalization ability. However, it is infeasible to label every tracking target with a textual description.
To tackle this problem, we design two modules, namely visual context prompting (VCP) and visual-language mixing
(VLM). Specifically, VCP generates visual prompts based on
the input frames. VLM joints the information in the generated
visual prompts and the textual prompts from a pre-defined
Trackbook to obtain instance-level pseudo textual description, which is domain invariant to different tracking scenes.
Through training models on MOT17 and validating them on
MOT20, we observe that the pseudo textual descriptions generated by our proposed modules improve the generalization
performance of query-based trackers by large margins.

Training set

Testing set

(a) How the MOT17 dataset is split.

(b) Cross-domain comparision

Figure 1: (a) Since the training set and testing set of existing
MOT datasets (such as MOT16 and MOT17) are usually created by splitting the same videos, they are completely from
the same domains. (b) Compared with other counterparts,
our method presents outstanding generalization ability when
evaluated on an unseen domain.

Introduction
As a fundamental vision perception task, multi-object tracking (MOT) has been extensively deployed in broad applications, e.g., autonomous driving, video analysis and intelligent robots (Bewley et al. 2016; Wojke, Bewley, and Paulus
2017). There exist numerous works studying how to track
targets well (Bergmann, Meinhardt, and Leal-Taixe 2019;
Peng et al. 2020; Pang et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020). The
early methods usually first detect targets using either anchorbased or keypoint-based detectors, and then associate the detected targets based on extracted appearance representation
(Wang, Weng, and Kitani 2020; Zhang et al. 2021) or predicted motion (Bergmann, Meinhardt, and Leal-Taixe 2019;
Peng et al. 2020). Recently, some researchers apply vision
transformer (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Carion et al. 2020)
to MOT for implementing the models in a more end-to-end
fashion (Meinhardt et al. 2021; Zeng et al. 2021).

Although previous MOT methods have achieved promising performance to some extent, almost all of them only consider training and evaluating models in the same domain.
In fact, as shown in Fig. 1 (a), the training and testing sets
of commonly employed MOT datasets, such as MOT17 and
MOT20, are mostly produced by spliting the identical videos
into two parts. Thus the existing models are only evaluated
in the same domain as the training set. When we test some
of them (i.e., TransTrack, TraDeS, and CenterTrack) in another unseen domain, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (b), their performance drops dramastically, leading to generalization bottleneck. And to our best knowledge, this domain generalization
problem of MOT is hardly studied in literature.
In this work, we aim to tackle the poor generalization ability of exist trackers where the cross-domain training data is
unattainable. Inspired by the recent works of multi-modal

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3304

