The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improvement-Focused Causal Recourse (ICR)
Gunnar König1,2 , Timo Freiesleben4,5,6 , Moritz Grosse-Wentrup2,3
1

Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), LMU Munich
2
Research Group Neuroinformatics, University of Vienna
3
Data Science @ Uni Vienna, Vienna CogSciHub
4
Munich Center for Mathematical Philosophy (MCMP), LMU Munich
5
Cluster of Excellence Machine Learning, University of Tübingen
6
Graduate School of Systemic Neurosciences, LMU Munich
g.koenig.edu@pm.me
Abstract

vaccinated

Algorithmic recourse recommendations inform stakeholders
of how to act to revert unfavorable decisions. However, existing methods may recommend actions that lead to acceptance
(i.e., revert the model’s decision) but do not lead to improvement (i.e., may not revert the underlying real-world state). To
recommend such actions is to recommend fooling the predictor.
We introduce a novel method, Improvement-Focused Causal
Recourse (ICR), which involves a conceptual shift: Firstly, we
require ICR recommendations to guide toward improvement.
Secondly, we do not tailor the recommendations to be accepted
by a specific predictor. Instead, we leverage causal knowledge
to design decision systems that predict accurately pre- and
post-recourse, such that improvement guarantees translate into
acceptance guarantees. Curiously, optimal pre-recourse classifiers are robust to ICR actions and thus suitable post-recourse.
In semi-synthetic experiments, we demonstrate that given correct causal knowledge ICR, in contrast to existing approaches,
guides toward both acceptance and improvement.

Ŷ : diagnosis

1

symptoms

counterfactual
expl. (CE)

vaccinated
Ŷ : diagnosis

vaccinated
Y : Covid

symptoms

causal recourse
(CR)

Ŷ : diagnosis

symptoms

improvement-focused CR
(ICR)

Figure 1: Causal graph illustrating the perspectives of counterfactual expl. (CE, left) and causal recourse (CR, center)
in contrast to improvement-focused CR (ICR, right). Green
edges represent real-world causal links, and blue edges the
prediction model. Gray nodes represent covariates, and the
red (yellow) node is the primary (secondary) recourse target.
CR respects causal relationships but solely between features;
only ICR takes Y into account. While CE and CR aim to
revert the prediction Ŷ , ICR aims to revert the target Y .

Introduction

Predictive systems are increasingly deployed for high-stakes
decisions, for instance in hiring (Raghavan et al. 2020), judicial systems (Zeng, Ustun, and Rudin 2017), or when distributing medical resources (Obermeyer and Mullainathan
2019). A range of work (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell
2017; Ustun, Spangher, and Liu 2019; Karimi, Schölkopf,
and Valera 2021) develops tools that offer individuals possibilities for so-called algorithmic recourse (i.e., actions that
revert unfavorable decisions). Joining previous work in the
field, we distinguish between reverting the model’s prediction
Ŷ (acceptance) and reverting the underlying real-world state
Y (improvement) and argue that recourse should lead to acceptance and improvement (Ustun, Spangher, and Liu 2019;
Barocas, Selbst, and Raghavan 2020). Existing methods, such
as counterfactual explanations (CE; Wachter, Mittelstadt, and
Russell (2017)) or causal recourse (CR; Karimi, Schölkopf,
and Valera (2021)), ignore the underlying real-world state
and only optimize for acceptance. Since ML models are not
designed to predict accurately in interventional environments
(i.e., environments where actions have changed the data distribution), acceptance does not necessarily imply improvement.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Let us consider an example. We aim to predict whether hospital visitors without test certificate are infected with Covid
to restrict access to tested and low-risk individuals. Here, the
model’s prediction Ŷ represents whether someone is classified to be infected, whereas the target Y represents whether
someone is actually infected. Target and prediction differ in
how they are affected by actions: Intervening on the symptoms may change the model’s diagnosis Ŷ , but will not affect
whether someone is infected (Y ).
Both counterfactual explanations (CE) and causal recourse
(CR) only target Ŷ (Figure 1). Therefore, CE and CR may
suggest altering the symptoms (e.g., by taking cough drops)
and thereby may recommend to game the predictor: Although
the intervention leads to acceptance, the actual Covid risk Y
is not improved.1
One may argue that this is an issue of the prediction model
and may adapt the predictor to make gaming less lucrative
than improvement (Miller, Milli, and Hardt 2020). However,
such adaptions would come at the cost of predictive performance – even in light of causal knowledge. The reason
is that gameable variables can be highly predictive (Shavit,
Edelman, and Axelrod 2020); In our example, the model’s reliance on the symptom state would need to be reduced. Thus,
1

11847

In E.1, the case is formally demonstrated.

