The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

RobustLoc: Robust Camera Pose Regression in Challenging Driving Environments
Sijie Wang1 * , Qiyu Kang1 * , Rui She1 * , Wee Peng Tay1 ,
Andreas Hartmannsgruber2 , Diego Navarro Navarro2
1

Continental-NTU Corporate Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
Continental Automotive Singapore
{wang1679@e.; qiyu.kang@; rui.she@; wptay@}ntu.edu.sg,
{andreas.hartmannsgruber; diego.navarro.navarro}@continental.com

Abstract
Camera relocalization has various applications in autonomous
driving. Previous camera pose regression models consider
only ideal scenarios where there is little environmental perturbation. To deal with challenging driving environments that
may have changing seasons, weather, illumination, and the
presence of unstable objects, we propose RobustLoc, which
derives its robustness against perturbations from neural differential equations. Our model uses a convolutional neural
network to extract feature maps from multi-view images, a
robust neural differential equation diffusion block module to
diffuse information interactively, and a branched pose decoder
with multi-layer training to estimate the vehicle poses. Experiments demonstrate that RobustLoc surpasses current stateof-the-art camera pose regression models and achieves robust
performance in various environments. Our code is released at:
https://github.com/sijieaaa/RobustLoc

spatially/temporally nearby
frames of a single vehicle

frames shared from other spatially
nearby transportation agents

Figure 1: Multi-view camera pose regression with neighboring information, without the need for any database.

information. On the other hand, the computation and storage requirements are proportionate to the number of sample
points in the database. To decouple relocalization from the
need for a database, there has been a recent surge of research
interest in the second category CPR.
The pioneering work PoseNet (Kendall, Grimes, and
Cipolla 2015) uses a convolutional neural network (CNN) to
extract features from a single image as vector embeddings,
and the embeddings are directly regressed to the 6-DoF poses.
To further improve the regression performance in driving scenarios, multi-view-based models extend the input from a
single image to multi-view images. MapNet (Brahmbhatt
et al. 2018) leverages pre-computed visual odometry to postprocess the output pose trajectory. GNNMapNet (Xue et al.
2020) integrates a graph neural network (GNN) into CNN to
make image nodes interact with neighbors.
The above-mentioned multi-view-based models show
promising performance in benign driving environments. To
operate well in challenging environments, the model must be
robust to environmental perturbations (e.g., changing seasons,
weather, illumination, and unstable objects), and effectively
leverage neighboring information from spatially or temporally nearby frames of a single vehicle or multi-view images
shared from other spatially nearby agents (e.g., using V2X
communication) as shown in Fig. 1. Images sharing such
neighboring information are said to be covisible.
Recently, neural Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs)
(Chen et al. 2018) and Partial Differential Equations (PDEs)
(Chamberlain et al. 2021b,a) have demonstrated their robustness against input perturbations (Yan et al. 2018; Kang et al.
2021). Moreover, GNNs can effectively aggregate neighborhood information. We thus propose RobustLoc that not only

Introduction
Accurate camera relocalization plays an important role in
autonomous driving. Given query images, the camera relocalization task aims at estimating the camera poses for which the
images are taken. In recent years, many camera relocalization
approaches have been proposed. Generally speaking, they
fall into two categories.
1. One solution is to treat relocalization as a matching task.
This solution assumes the availability of a database or a
map that stores prior information (e.g., 3D point clouds,
images, or descriptors) of sample points. Given a query
image, the matching model finds the best match between
the query and the database based on a similarity score. The
estimated camera pose is then inferred from the matched
prior information in the database.
2. Another solution does not assume the availability of a
database and uses only neural networks to regress the
camera poses of the query images. This approach constructs an implicit relation between images and poses,
which is called camera pose regression (CPR).
The prerequisite of a database on the one hand can boost the
accuracy of the camera relocalization by storing useful prior
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6209

