The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

LaCAM: Search-Based Algorithm for Quick Multi-Agent Pathfinding
Keisuke Okumura
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Tokyo, Japan
okumura.k@coord.c.titech.ac.jp

Abstract

To this end, this paper proposes a novel algorithm called
lazy constraints addition search for MAPF (LaCAM). From
the theoretical side, LaCAM is complete. It returns a solution for solvable instances, otherwise reports the nonexistence. From the empirical side, we demonstrate that LaCAM can solve a variety of MAPF instances in a very short
time, including instances with large maps (e.g., 1491 × 656
four-connected grid), instances with massive agents (e.g.,
10, 000), or dense situations. For instance, LaCAM solved
all instances with 400 agents on a 32 × 32 grid with 20% obstacles from the MAPF benchmark (Stern et al. 2019), with
a median runtime of 1 s. In contrast, baseline sub-optimal
MAPF algorithms (Silver 2005; Standley 2010; Okumura
et al. 2022; Li, Ruml, and Koenig 2021; Li et al. 2022)
mostly failed to solve the instances with the timeout of 30 s.
LaCAM has an easily extensible structure, which comprises a two-level search. At the high-level, it searches a sequence of configurations, where a configuration is a tuple
of locations for all agents. At the low-level, it searches constraints that specify which agents go where in the next configuration. Successors at the high-level (i.e., configurations)
are generated in a lazy manner while following constraints
from the low-level, leading to a dramatic reduction of the
search effort. Similar to the popular CBS algorithm (Sharon
et al. 2015), due to its simplicity, we consider that LaCAM
can apply to many domains not limited to MAPF such as
multi-robot motion planning (Solis et al. 2021).
Throughout the paper, we focus on sub-optimal LaCAM.
The discussion of optimal LaCAM appears at the end, together with a qualitative discussion of why LaCAM is quick.
In what follows, we present problem formulation, the algorithm, evaluation, and related work in order. The supplementary material is available on https://kei18.github.io/lacam.

We propose a novel complete algorithm for multi-agent
pathfinding (MAPF) called lazy constraints addition search
for MAPF (LaCAM). MAPF is a problem of finding collisionfree paths for multiple agents on graphs and is the foundation
of multi-robot coordination. LaCAM uses a two-level search
to find solutions quickly, even with hundreds of agents or
more. At the low-level, it searches constraints about agents’
locations. At the high-level, it searches a sequence of all
agents’ locations, following the constraints specified by the
low-level. Our exhaustive experiments reveal that LaCAM
is comparable to or outperforms state-of-the-art sub-optimal
MAPF algorithms in a variety of scenarios, regarding success
rate, planning time, and solution quality of sum-of-costs.

1

Introduction

The multi-agent pathfinding (MAPF) problem (Stern et al.
2019) aims to assign collision-free paths on graphs to each
agent, which is the foundation of multi-robot coordination.
In MAPF applications such as fleet operations in automated
warehouses (Wurman, D’Andrea, and Mountz 2008), it is
necessary to solve MAPF with thousands of agents in a realtime manner.
In general, the design of MAPF algorithms needs to consider a trade-off between quality and speed. From the quality side, solving MAPF optimally is NP-hard in various criteria (Yu and LaValle 2013). Although many effective optimal algorithms have been developed, it is still challenging to handle a few hundred of agents in real-time (i.e.,
short timeframes in this context) even with state-of-the-art
methods (Li et al. 2021b; Lam et al. 2022). From the speed
side, sub-optimal algorithms can quickly solve large MAPF
instances while compromising solution quality. However,
in real-time applications (i.e., scenarios with deadlines for
planning time in this context) or in instances with massive agents such that optimal algorithms never handle, there
is no choice but to use sub-optimal algorithms. In addition, recently proposed frameworks can effectively refine the
quality of known MAPF solutions (Okumura, Tamura, and
Défago 2021; Li et al. 2021a). Consequently, the development of quick sub-optimal algorithms has practical value.

2

Preliminaries

Problem Definition An MAPF instance is defined by a
graph G = (V, E), a set of agents A = {1, . . . , n}, a tuple of
distinct starts S = (s1 , . . . , sn ) and goals G = (g1 , . . . , gn ),
where si , gi ∈ V .
Given an MAPF instance, let πi [t] ∈ V denote the location of an agent i at discrete time t ∈ N≥0 . At each
timestep t, i can move to an adjacent vertex, or can stay at its
current vertex, i.e., πi [t + 1] ∈ neigh(πi [t]) ∪ {πi [t]}, where
neigh(v) is the set of vertices adjacent to v ∈ V . Agents

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11655

