The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Conditional Syntax Splitting for Non-monotonic Inference Operators
Jesse Heyninck1 , Gabriele Kern-Isberner2 , Thomas Meyer3,4 , Jonas Philipp Haldimann5 ,
Christoph Beierle5
1
Open Universiteit, the Netherlands
Technische Universität Dortmund, Germany
3
University of Cape Town and CAIR, South-Africa
4
Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research (CAIR), South-Africa
5
FernUniversität in Hagen, Germany
jesse.heyninck@ou.nl
2

Example 1. Usually, bikes are chain-driven (c|b), usually
chain-driven bikes have multiple gears (g|c), and usually
a bike frame consists of four pipes (f |b). The form of the
frame is independent of whether a bike is chain driven and
how many gears it has. However, syntax splitting as defined
in (Kern-Isberner, Beierle, and Brewka 2020) does not allow
us to restrict attention to {(f |b)} when we want to make
inferences about the form of a bike frame, as the common
atom b prevents us from splitting the belief base into two
syntactically unrelated parts.
An intuitively related problem that was surprisingly
shown to be independent of syntax splitting in (Heyninck,
Kern-Isberner, and Meyer 2022) is the so-called drowning
problem. It consists of the fact that with some inductive inference relations, abnormal individuals do not inherit any
properties. It is best illustrated using the Tweety-example:
Example 2 (The Drowning Problem, (Pearl 1990; Benferhat, Dubois, and Prade 1993)). The drowning problem is illustrated by using the following conditional belief base ∆ =
{(f |b), (b|p), (¬f |p), (e|b)}, which represents the Tweetyexample, i.e. that birds typically fly, penguins are typically
birds, and penguins typically don’t fly, together with the
additional conditional “birds typically have beaks”. The
drowning problem is predicated on the fact that some inductive inference operators, such as system Z, do not infer
Z
that penguins typically have beaks (p |∼ ∆ b), i.e. the abnormality of penguins w.r.t. flying drowns inferences about the
beaks of penguins. It is well-known that lexicographic inference does not suffer from the drowning problem (Lehmann
1995).
The drowning problem seems to be related to syntax splitting. Intuitively, {(e|b)} is unrelated to the rest of the belief base, in the sense that, as long as we know we are talking about birds, having beaks has nothing to do with flying
or having wings. However, (unconditional) syntax splitting
does not allow capturing this kind of independence, since the
atom b prohibits the belief base from being split into information about flying and wings on the one hand, and information about beaks on the other hand. It is exactly this kind
of conditional independencies between conditionals that we
seek to formally capture and study in this paper.
The definition of conditional independence is of major
practical relevance. Over the last decades, conditional in-

Abstract
Syntax splitting is a property of inductive inference operators
that ensures we can restrict our attention to parts of the conditional belief base that share atoms with a given query. To apply syntax splitting, a conditional belief base needs to consist
of syntactically disjoint conditionals. This requirement is often too strong in practice, as conditionals might share atoms.
In this paper we introduce the concept of conditional syntax splitting, inspired by the notion of conditional independence as known from probability theory. We show that lexicographic inference and system W satisfy conditional syntax
splitting, and connect conditional syntax splitting to several
known properties from the literature on non-monotonic reasoning, including the drowning effect.

1

Introduction

Inductive inference operators generate non-monotonic inference relations |∼ ∆ on the basis of a set of conditionals
∆ of the form (ψ|φ), read as “if φ holds, then typically
ψ holds”. Examples of inductive inference operators include rational closure (also known as system Z) (Goldszmidt
and Pearl 1996), lexicographic inference (Lehmann 1995),
system W (Komo and Beierle 2022) and c-representations
(Kern-Isberner 2002). For these systems, known complexity
results point to a high computational complexity (Eiter and
Lukasiewicz 2000). Syntax splitting for inference operators
(Kern-Isberner, Beierle, and Brewka 2020) is a property requiring that, for a belief base which can be split syntactically
into two parts (i.e. there exists two sub-signatures such that
every conditional in the belief base is built up entirely from
one of the two sub-signatures), restricting attention to the
sub-signature does not result in a loss or addition of inferences. In other words, syntax splitting ensures we can safely
restrict our attention to parts of the belief base that share
atoms with a given query, thus seriously decreasing the computational strain for many specific queries. However, this
presupposes that parts of a conditional belief base are syntactically independent, meaning that no common atoms are
allowed. This might be an overly strong requirement, as the
two parts of the belief base might have common elements.
Consider the following example:
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6416

