The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Out-Of-Distribution Detection Is Not All You Need
Joris Guérin1, 2 , Kevin Delmas3 , Raul Ferreira2 , Jérémie Guiochet2
1

Espace-Dev, IRD, Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France
2
LAAS-CNRS, Université de Toulouse, Toulouse, France,
3
ONERA, Toulouse, France
joris.guerin@ird.fr, kevin.delmas@onera.fr, rsenaferre@laas.fr, jeremie.guiochet@laas.fr

Abstract

hand, the field of Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) detection aims
at identifying input data that are not from the training distribution (Wang et al. 2022; Sun, Guo, and Li 2021; Schorn
and Gauerhof 2020). On the other, several works consider
directly the problem of identifying input data that lead to errors of the monitored DNN (Granese et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2020; Kang et al. 2018). In this work, we name this second
view Out-of-Model-Scope (OMS) detection. In practice, the
approaches to address OOD and OMS detection are not different and follow the same workflow: they use the DNN
training dataset to build a one-class classifier (the monitor)
to characterize safe data instances and use it to reject unsafe samples (Figure 1). These two paradigms only differ
in their objectives (definition of normal data samples), and
by extension in how new approaches are evaluated. We emphasize that OOD and OMS are evaluation settings and not
monitoring approaches per se.
In this work, we claim that the real goal of a DNN runtime monitor is to tackle the OMS problem, i.e., to identify
prediction errors before they can propagate through the system. We argue that OOD detection was designed as a proxy
task for OMS detection, based on the belief that what the
DNN knows is equivalent to the information contained in
the dataset that was used to train it. The first objective of
this paper is to discuss the conceptual differences between
the OOD and OMS detection settings. Then, we conduct experiments to determine whether OOD detection is a good
proxy for OMS detection. In other words, we want to know
whether the OMS performance of a runtime monitor can be
correctly assessed under the OOD setting. Finally, based on
the insights gained from these discussions, we formalize a
good practice to train better monitors. We show experimentally that, when fitting the monitor, it is better to remove erroneous samples from the DNN training dataset.
This paper is organized as follows. In section 2, notations are introduced and the concepts of OMS and OOD are
clearly defined. In section 3, we present the existing literature about OMS and OOD detection. In section 4, we discuss
the differences between OOD and OMS and explain why
the OOD setting can lead to an inaccurate perceived performance of a monitor. In section 5, we conduct experiments to
verify whether these limitations of OOD detection actually
occur in practical scenarios. Finally, in section 6, we introduce a new training trick to build better monitors.

The usage of deep neural networks in safety-critical systems
is limited by our ability to guarantee their correct behavior.
Runtime monitors are components aiming to identify unsafe
predictions and discard them before they can lead to catastrophic consequences. Several recent works on runtime monitoring have focused on out-of-distribution (OOD) detection,
i.e., identifying inputs that are different from the training data.
In this work, we argue that OOD detection is not a well-suited
framework to design efficient runtime monitors and that it
is more relevant to evaluate monitors based on their ability
to discard incorrect predictions. We call this setting out-ofmodel-scope detection and discuss the conceptual differences
with OOD. We also conduct extensive experiments on popular datasets from the literature to show that studying monitors
in the OOD setting can be misleading: 1. very good OOD
results can give a false impression of safety, 2. comparison
under the OOD setting does not allow identifying the best
monitor to detect errors. Finally, we also show that removing
erroneous training data samples helps to train better monitors.

1

Introduction

With the recent progress in machine learning (ML) research,
deep neural network (DNN) architectures are now used to
address safety-critical tasks, e.g., self-driving cars (Stocco
et al. 2020), surgical robots (Haidegger 2019), drones landing (Guerin, Delmas, and Guiochet 2022). Online fault tolerance approaches, or runtime monitors, are promising research directions to improve the safety of such systems. A
runtime monitor is a component aiming to identify and reject unsafe data encountered at inference time. As in most of
the recent literature, this paper focuses on the unsupervised
setting, where we do not have access to examples of “unsafe
input data” during monitor training. In other words, to separate safe data instances from unsafe ones, we need to fit a
one-class classifier (Khan and Madden 2014) using only the
DNN training dataset. Figure 1 illustrates the life cycle of a
DNN runtime monitor (training and inference phases).
Many approaches have been proposed to tackle the DNN
runtime monitoring problem defined above. However, in the
literature, they are found under different names as they adopt
different definitions of “unsafe data instances”. On the one
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14829

