The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

From Width-Based Model Checking to Width-Based Automated Theorem Proving
Mateus de Oliveira Oliveira1,2 , Farhad Vadiee2
1

Department of Computer and System Sciences, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden
2
Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
oliveira@dsv.su.se, farhad.vadiee@uib.no

Problem 1 (Width-Based ATP). Given a graph property P
and a positive integer k, is it the case that every graph of
width at most k belongs to P?

Abstract
In the field of parameterized complexity theory, the study of
graph width measures has been intimately connected with
the development of width-based model checking algorithms
for combinatorial properties on graphs. In this work, we
introduce a general framework to convert a large class of
width-based model-checking algorithms into algorithms that
can be used to test the validity of graph-theoretic conjectures
on classes of graphs of bounded width. Our framework
is modular and can be applied with respect to several
well-studied width measures for graphs, including treewidth
and cliquewidth. As a quantitative application of our framework, we prove analytically that for several long-standing
graph-theoretic conjectures, there exists an algorithm that
takes a number k as input and correctly determines in time
double-exponential in kO(1) whether the conjecture is valid
on all graphs of treewidth at most k. These upper bounds,
which may be regarded as upper-bounds on the size of
proofs/disproofs for these conjectures on the class of graphs
of treewidth at most k, improve significantly on theoretical
upper bounds obtained using previously available techniques.

1
1.1

Problem 1 provides a width-based approach to the field
of automated theorem proving (ATP). For instance, consider
Tutte’s celebrated 5-flow conjecture (Tutte 1954), which
states that every bridgeless graph has a nowhere-zero 5flow. Let HasBridge be the set of all graphs that have a
bridge, and NZFlow(5) be the set of all graphs that admit
a nowhere-zero 5-flow. Then, proving Tutte’s 5-flow conjecture is equivalent to showing that every graph belongs
to the graph property HasBridge ∨ NZFlow(5). Since
Tutte’s conjecture has been unresolved for many decades,
one possible approach for gaining understanding about the
conjecture is to try to determine, for gradually increasing values of k, whether every graph of width at most
k, with respect to some fixed width-measure, belongs to
HasBridge ∨ NZFlow(5). What makes this kind of question interesting from a proof theoretic point of view is that
several important classes of graphs have small width with respect to some width measure. For instance, trees and forests
have treewidth at most 1, series-parallel graphs and outerplanar graphs have treewidth at most 2, k-outerplanar graphs
have treewidth at most 3k −1, co-graphs have cliquewidth at
most 2, any distance hereditary graph has cliquewidth 3, etc
(Biedl 2015; Bodlaender 1998; Brandstädt, Le, and Spinrad 1999; Bodlaender 1986; Bodlaender and Koster 2008;
Kammer 2007). Therefore, proving the validity of a given
conjecture on classes of graphs of small width corresponds
to proving the conjecture on interesting classes of graphs.

Introduction

Motivation

When mathematicians are not able to solve a conjecture
about a given class of mathematical objects, it is natural
to try to test the validity of the conjecture on a smaller, or
better behaved class of objects. In the realm of graph theory, a common approach is to try analyze the conjecture on
restricted classes of graphs, defined by fixing some structural parameter. In this work, we push forward this approach
from a computational perspective by focusing on parameters derived from graph width measures. Prominent examples of such parameters are the treewidth of a graph, which
intuitively quantifies how much a graph is similar to a tree
(Robertson and Seymour 1984; Bertele and Brioschi 1973;
Halin 1976) and the cliquewidth of a graph, which intuitively quantifies how much a graph is similar to a clique
(Courcelle and Olariu 2000). More specifically, we are concerned with the following problem:

1.2

Our Results

In this work, we introduce a general and modular framework
that allows one to convert width-based dynamic programming algorithms for the model checking of graph properties
into algorithms that can be used to address Problem 1. More
specifically, our main contributions are threefold.
1. We start by defining the notions of a treelike decomposition class (Definition 2) and of a treelike width-measure
(Definition 3). These two notions can be used to express several classic, well studied width measures for
graphs, such as treewidth (Bodlaender 1997), pathwidth
(Korach and Solel 1993), carving width (Thilikos, Serna,

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6297

