The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Entity-Agnostic Representation Learning for Parameter-Efficient
Knowledge Graph Embedding
Mingyang Chen1 * , Wen Zhang2 * , Zhen Yao2 , Yushan Zhu1 , Yang Gao4 ,
Jeff Z. Pan5 , Huajun Chen1,3,6†
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
3
Donghai Laboratory
4
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
5
School of Informatics, The University of Edinburgh
6
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies
{mingyangchen, zhang.wen, yz0204, yushanzhu, huajunsir}@zju.edu.cn,
frank.gaoyang@huawei.com, j.z.pan@ed.ac.uk
Conventional (Entity-Related) KGE Entity-Agnostic KGE

Abstract

Entity
Relation

en
Entity Embedding

r1
r2

r1
r2
Relation Embedding

OUTPUTғ

en

ŏŏ

Entity Embedding

{

ŏŏ

INPUTғ

ŏŏ

e1
e2

Distinguishable Info.

1

e1
e2
e3

{

We propose an entity-agnostic representation learning
method for handling the problem of inefficient parameter
storage costs brought by embedding knowledge graphs. Conventional knowledge graph embedding methods map elements in a knowledge graph, including entities and relations,
into continuous vector spaces by assigning them one or multiple specific embeddings (i.e., vector representations). Thus
the number of embedding parameters increases linearly as
the growth of knowledge graphs. In our proposed model,
Entity-Agnostic Representation Learning (EARL), we only
learn the embeddings for a small set of entities and refer to
them as reserved entities. To obtain the embeddings for the
full set of entities, we encode their distinguishable information from their connected relations, k-nearest reserved entities, and multi-hop neighbors. We learn universal and entityagnostic encoders for transforming distinguishable information into entity embeddings. This approach allows our proposed EARL to have a static, efficient, and lower parameter
count than conventional knowledge graph embedding methods. Experimental results show that EARL uses fewer parameters and performs better on link prediction tasks than baselines, reflecting its parameter efficiency.

ŏŏ

Components
of DPRGHO
Entity-agnostic
encoder
Embedding

#Param(EntEmb + RelEmb) !! #Param(Entity-Agnostic Encoder + RelEmb)

Figure 1: A conventional KGE model (left) learns a specific
embedding for each entity, and the model’s components (i.e.,
entity embeddings) are related to entities. An entity-agnostic
KGE model (right) learns an encoding approach for transforming entities’ distinguishable information to their embeddings, avoiding maintaining a large embedding matrix.
nection (i.e., relation) between two entities / concepts. However, since the incompleteness of KGs (Chen et al. 2022c), a
fundamental problem is knowledge graph completion (Bordes et al. 2013; Sun et al. 2019; Wiharja et al. 2020). Many
knowledge graph embedding (KGE) methods (Ji et al. 2022)
have been proposed and are theoretically and empirically
shown to be effective forsolving the problem of knowledge
graph completion. Conventionally, KGE methods map entities and relations from a KG into continuous vector spaces
and predict missing links based on the computations of vector representations to complete knowledge graphs.
In KGE methods, entities and relations are often mapped
into vectors with a specific dimension. For example, TransE
(Bordes et al. 2013) maps both entities and relations to the
same d-dimensional vector space, namely Rd , and the total embedding matrix is in R(|E|+|R|)×d , where |E| and |R|
are number of entities and relations, respectively. In practice, since |E| is much larger than |R|, the number of embedding parameters scales linearly to the number of entities.

Introduction

Recently, many knowledge graphs (KGs) (Pan et al. 2017),
including Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008), NELL (Carlson
et al. 2010), Wikidata (Vrandečić and Krötzsch 2014), and
YAGO (Tanon, Weikum, and Suchanek 2020) have been
used as the knowledge resource for a myriad of applications in the field of natural language processing (Xiong et al.
2020; Yu et al. 2022), as well as in the study of computer vision (Huang et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021b).
Typically, knowledge graphs contain a large number of
factual triples in the form of (head entity, relation, tail entity), or (h, r, t) for short. A triple reflects a specific con* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4182

