The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Lifting (D)QBF Preprocessing and Solving Techniques to (D)SSAT
Che Cheng1 , Jie-Hong R. Jiang1,2
1

Graduate Institute of Electronics Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
{b07901012, jhjiang}@ntu.edu.tw

uncertainty to be modeled (Hnich et al. 2011; Lee and Jiang
2018).
Recently, Lee and Jiang (2021) formulated dependency
SSAT (DSSAT) to capture decision-making under both uncertainty and partial information. With its NEXPTIME-hard
complexity and the counting nature inherited from SSAT,
DSSAT can compactly encode complex problems such as
probabilistic partial equivalence checking (Lee and Jiang
2021). Due to its recent formulation, no solver has been developed for DSSAT. On the other hand, SSAT solvers have been
actively developed, and it has been shown that techniques
developed for QBF solving, such as clause selection (Janota
and Marques-Silva 2015), may be extended to SSAT solving (Chen, Huang, and Jiang 2021).
The success in SAT, QBF, and DQBF solving is partly due
to efficient preprocessing techniques (Eén and Biere 2005;
Manthey 2012; Giunchiglia, Marin, and Narizzano 2010;
Biere, Lonsing, and Seidl 2011; Wimmer, Scholl, and Becker
2019). Preprocessing is a fast procedure that aims to simplify a given formula in terms of its variable count, clause
count, and dependency structure, while keeping the overhead
minimized. Although there are prior efforts on preprocessing of propositional model counting (Lagniez and Marquis
2014; Lagniez, Lonca, and Marquis 2016), there is no known
preprocessor for SSAT to the best of our knowledge. Given
the importance of preprocessing in SAT, QBF, and DQBF
solving, questions such as which of the techniques can be
applied to (D)SSAT, and whether existing SSAT solvers may
benefit from preprocessing arise naturally. Moreover, when a
problem is computationally more complex, the time spent on
preprocessing becomes less significant compared to the main
solving procedure, and we may thus benefit from more expensive preprocessing techniques. As solving DSSAT is highly
complex, developing preprocessing techniques for DSSAT is
highly motivated.
The main results of this work are as follows. First, we
propose a dependency-elimination algorithm that converts
DSSAT formulas to SSAT formulas, ready to be solved by
SSAT solvers. Combining the algorithm with an existing
SSAT solver forms a solution to DSSAT solving. Second, we
examine (D)QBF preprocessing techniques for their potential
extensions to (D)SSAT and develop the first standalone preprocessor for SSAT and DSSAT formulas. The feasibility and
effectiveness of the DSSAT solving flow and the preprocessor

Abstract
Dependency stochastic Boolean satisfiability (DSSAT) generalizes stochastic Boolean satisfiability (SSAT) in existential
variables being Henkinized allowing their dependencies on
randomized variables to be explicitly specified. It allows NEXPTIME problems of reasoning under uncertainty and partial
information to be compactly encoded. To date, no decision
procedure has been implemented for solving DSSAT formulas.
This work provides the first such tool by converting DSSAT
into SSAT with dependency elimination, similar to converting
dependency quantified Boolean formula (DQBF) to quantified Boolean formula (QBF). Moreover, we extend (D)QBF
preprocessing techniques and implement the first standalone
(D)SSAT preprocessor. Experimental results show that solving
DSSAT via dependency elimination is highly applicable and
that existing SSAT solvers may benefit from preprocessing.

1

Introduction

Boolean satisfiability (SAT) solving has become an indispensable computation engine in various applications, such
as artificial intelligence (Nilsson 1982) and formal verification (Vizel, Weissenbacher, and Malik 2015). Its success
has triggered solver development for tackling problems with
complexities beyond NP. For instance, MAX-SAT (Li and
Manya 2021) enables the encoding of optimization problems
that is suitable for encoding various constrained optimization
problems (Safarpour et al. 2007); quantified Boolean formula
(QBF) (Kleine Büning and Bubeck 2009) allows universal
and existential quantification on the Boolean variables; dependency quantified Boolean formula (DQBF) (Scholl and
Wimmer 2018) generalizes QBF by allowing incomparable
dependencies using Henkin quantifiers.
Another widely explored field takes the idea of counting
into consideration. In particular, (un)weighted propositional
model counting (Gomes, Sabharwal, and Selman 2009) is
concerned with computing the number of satisfying assignments to a Boolean formula. This formalism allows encoding
of probabilistic inference (Sang, Bearne, and Kautz 2005).
Furthermore, stochastic Boolean satisfiability (SSAT) (Papadimitriou 1985; Littman, Majercik, and Pitassi 2001) generalizes QBF by replacing universal quantifiers with randomized ones, allowing decision and optimization problems under
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3906

