The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Diversified and Realistic 3D Augmentation via
Iterative Construction, Random Placement, and HPR Occlusion
Jungwook Shin1, 2 , Jaeill Kim1 , Kyungeun Lee1 , Hyunghun Cho1 , Wonjong Rhee1, 3, 4
1

Department of Intelligence and Information, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, South Korea
2
SK Telecom Co., Ltd, Seoul, 04539, South Korea
3
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence (IPAI), Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, South Korea
4
Artificial Intelligence Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, South Korea
{jungwook.shin, jaeill0704, ruddms0415, webofthink, wrhee}@snu.ac.kr
Abstract

all points in a valid point cloud range. Oversampling (Yan,
Mao, and Li 2018) is another conventional method that has
been suggested to alleviate the extreme imbalance between
the foreground and background classes. Although global
augmentation and oversampling can improve the detection
performance, they are straightforward methods that do not
consider enhancing object-level diversity.
There have been efforts to provide object-level diversity
by adopting 2D image augmentation methods such as random rotation and translation (Zhou and Tuzel 2018; Lang
et al. 2019; Engelcke et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2019; Yang
et al. 2019). The domain gap between 2D image and 3D
point cloud, however, is significant and the 2D augmentation methods do not fully utilize the properties specific to
3D (Choi, Song, and Kwak 2021). Therefore, it is crucial to
focus on the distinct properties of point-cloud and develop
specialized augmentation methods.
Point clouds have special properties that are distinct from
those of images. Most importantly, point clouds exhibit
complex occlusion because the viewpoint from LiDAR is
fixed. For images, occluded pixels can be easily found by
correspondence. For point clouds, there are two obstacles for
manipulating occlusions (Xu, Zhong, and Neumann 2022).
At a local object level, one part of the object is occluded
by another part of the same object (self-occlusion). At the
global level, the limitation can be extended to the entire
frame where a given object can be occluded by another object (external-occlusion). Other properties of point cloud include point density and intensity. In point cloud, the number
of points per a unit volume is dependent on the distance to
LiDAR and each point has its own intensity which is not
easy to simulate (Yue et al. 2018).
To deal with the properties of 3D point cloud, we propose DR.CPO (Diversified and Realistic 3D augmentation via iterative Construction, random Placement, and HPR
Occlusion). It can generate infinitely diverse frames with
diversified objects, placements, and occlusions without requiring the expense of additional data collection or computational overhead. DR.CPO consists of three steps: (1) iterative construction, (2) random placement, and (3) HPR (Hidden Point Removal) occlusion. First, we generate a wholebody object in a stochastic manner using the objects from the
real point cloud’s ground-truth database. Second, we randomly rotate and place objects to anywhere inside the Li-

In autonomous driving, data augmentation is commonly used
for improving 3D object detection. The most basic methods
include insertion of copied objects and rotation and scaling
of the entire training frame. Numerous variants have been
developed as well. The existing methods, however, are considerably limited when compared to the variety of the real
world possibilities. In this work, we develop a diversified and
realistic augmentation method that can flexibly construct a
whole-body object, freely locate and rotate the object, and
apply self-occlusion and external-occlusion accordingly. To
improve the diversity of the whole-body object construction,
we develop an iterative method that stochastically combines
multiple objects observed from the real world into a single
object. Unlike the existing augmentation methods, the constructed objects can be randomly located and rotated in the
training frame because proper occlusions can be reflected to
the whole-body objects in the final step. Finally, proper selfocclusion at each local object level and external-occlusion at
the global frame level are applied using the Hidden Point
Removal (HPR) algorithm that is computationally efficient.
HPR is also used for adaptively controlling the point density
of each object according to the object’s distance from the LiDAR. Experiment results show that the proposed DR.CPO
algorithm is data-efficient and model-agnostic without incurring any computational overhead. Also, DR.CPO can improve mAP performance by 2.08% when compared to the best
3D detection result known for KITTI dataset.

1

Introduction

3D object detection using point cloud has become an important research topic (Zhou and Tuzel 2018; He et al. 2020; Shi
and Rajkumar 2020; Yang, Luo, and Urtasun 2018; Pan et al.
2021), especially in the field of autonomous driving (Geiger
et al. 2013). While there has been a large improvement in
designing network backbone (Zhou and Tuzel 2018; Lang
et al. 2019; Yan, Mao, and Li 2018; Shi et al. 2019, 2020,
2021) and detection head (Yin, Zhou, and Krahenbuhl 2021;
Zheng et al. 2021; Hu et al. 2022), there has been relatively
less effort on devising augmentation methods specific to the
point cloud (Fang et al. 2020, 2021; Hu et al. 2020).
In 3D object detection, most of the models utilize global
data augmentation that is a conventional method applied to
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2282

