The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Toward Robust Diagnosis: A Contour Attention Preserving Adversarial Defense
for COVID-19 Detection
Kun Xiang1 * , Xing Zhang2 * , Jinwen She1 , Jinpeng Liu1 ,
Haohan Wang3 , Shiqi Deng1 , Shancheng Jiang14†
1
Sun Yat-sen University
Shuguang Hospital, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine
3
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
4
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Fire Science and Technology
{xiangk,shejw3,dengshq5}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zhangxing2012@shutcm.edu.cn, liujp22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
haohanw@illinois.edu, jiangshch3@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

To alleviate this problem, plenty of defense methods have
been proposed, including well designed models (Zhou et al.
2022), detection techniques (Lee et al. 2018) and regularization strategies (Chan et al. 2019), etc. Besides, adversarial training (AT) and its variants (Madry et al. 2017;
Wong, Rice, and Kolter 2020; Rade and Moosavi-Dezfooli
2021) stand out and become the powerful weapons to defend adversarial attacks. They generally produce artificial
noise bounded in ϵ-ball and formulate the key objective as a
mini-max optimization problem. Despite their progress, due
to the scarcity of medical images and the similarity of textures between classes, existing AT based methods are difficult to maintain attention to salient region or diagnostic
points in medical imaging applications especially for diagnosis of COVID-19 based on CT scans. As shown in Figure
1, model under vanilla training can only provide rough and
incomplete information about the infection localization. Despite TRADES (Zhang et al. 2019), as a representative AT
method, improves the refined perception of local details, the
model does not learn structured semantic features. For example, Figure 1c focuses too much attention on the central
spine which is unlikely to be infected.

As the COVID-19 pandemic puts pressure on healthcare systems worldwide, the computed tomography image based AI
diagnostic system has become a sustainable solution for early
diagnosis. However, the model-wise vulnerability under adversarial perturbation hinders its deployment in practical situation. The existing adversarial training strategies are difficult
to generalized into medical imaging field challenged by complex medical texture features. To overcome this challenge,
we propose a Contour Attention Preserving (CAP) method
based on lung cavity edge extraction. The contour prior features are injected to attention layer via a parameter regularization and we optimize the robust empirical risk with hybrid distance metric. We then introduce a new cross-nation
CT scan dataset to evaluate the generalization capability of
the adversarial robustness under distribution shift. Experimental results indicate that the proposed method achieves
state-of-the-art performance in multiple adversarial defense
and generalization tasks. The code and dataset are available
at https://github.com/Quinn777/CAP.

Introduction
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has
emerged as one of the pre-eminent global health crises of
this century. After the earlier success in many fields(Ker
et al. 2017; Anwar et al. 2018; Xiang et al. 2021), various deep neural network-based frameworks (e.g. vision
transformer) are proposed as primary screening tools for
CT image-based medical diagnosis. However, recent studies
found that these systems have exposed vulnerabilities under carefully crafted adversarial perturbations which is usually imperceptible to the human eyes (Szegedy et al. 2013).
It raises serious security concerns about their deployment,
e.g., health insurance fraud and privacy disclosure, and even
aggravating bias against AI-based Computer Aided Diagnosis system (CAD) (Mangaokar et al. 2020; Finlayson et al.
2019).

In addition, it has been observed that there is a significant
robustness generalization gap under data distribution shift
(Rice, Wong, and Kolter 2020; Raghunathan et al. 2019).
Some studies provide a frequency-based explanation to reveal the unintuitive generalization behaviors between people and networks (Wang et al. 2020b). Other findings try to
improve the model input-robustness with out-of-distribution
(OoD) generalization, e.g., data augmentation(Cubuk et al.
2018), feature mixup (Xu et al. 2020) and adversarial domain adaptation(Song et al. 2018). However, existing adversarial robustness researches mainly focus on adapting the
distribution discrepancy in natural image. In medical image data, the diverse distributions caused by different patients race, sampling equipment and post-processing methods, etc., usually result in a severer performance degeneration of models. Although the previous data driven methods
introduce a larger data latent space, the excessive augmentation for lesion area could destroy the intrinsic structural
information, such as lung outline and lesion margin.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2928

