The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Human-in-the-Loop Vehicle ReID
Zepeng Li1 , Dongxiang Zhang1 * , Yanyan Shen2 , Gang Chen1
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Computing Based Big Data of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang University
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{lizepeng,zhangdongxiang,cg}@zju.edu.cn, shenyy@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Vehicle ReID has been an active topic in computer vision,
with a substantial number of deep neural models proposed
as end-to-end solutions. In this paper, we solve the problem from a new perspective and present an interesting variant called human-in-the-loop vehicle ReID to leverage interactive (and possibly wrong) human feedback signal for performance enhancement. Such human-machine cooperation
mode is orthogonal to existing ReID models. To avoid incremental training overhead, we propose an Interaction ReID
Network (IRIN) that can directly accept the feedback signal as an input and adjust the embedding of query image in
an online fashion. IRIN is offline trained by simulating the
human interaction process, with multiple optimization strategies to fully exploit the feedback signal. Experimental results
show that even by interacting with flawed feedback generated
by non-experts, IRIN still outperforms state-of-the-art ReID
models by a considerable margin. If the feedback contains no
false positive, IRIN boosts the mAP in Veri776 from 81.6%
to 95.2% with only 5 rounds of interaction per query image.

Figure 1: An example of human-in-the-loop vehicle ReID.
matching vehicles through their appearance is also challenging for human beings1 . Figure 1 depicts a toy example to
deliver the overall idea. In the initial step, a list of images
is returned and ranked by the similarity to the query image,
using any existing ReID models. Afterwards, users are allowed to employ an operation to provide feedback signal on
the results. To avoid incurring cumbersome efforts for human intervention, we define the operation as picking a positive match from a small set of uncertain candidates. Our goal
is to develop a mechanism to effectively take advantage of
the feedback signal and update the order of images in the
rank list. In the next-round interaction, a new subset of uncertain images will be selected for human verification. This
process is repeated until the final results are satisfactory or a
maximum number of iterations is reached.
A straightforward approach to leverage human feedback
is to treat the human-picked positive sample as a new observation and apply incremental learning to update the ReID
results. For instance, we can adopt the online incremental
learning framework proposed in (He et al. 2020) to maintain an exemplar set for each vehicle class. In each iteration,
this set is updated to incorporate new training samples derived from human feedback. The network retains previous
knowledge as part of the final classifier and is re-trained us-

Introduction
Given a query image and an image gallery harnessed across
multiple surveillance cameras, vehicle ReID retrieves images that refer to the same real-world vehicle. The problem is challenging due to the presence of different viewpoints (Lou et al. 2019), low-image resolution (Zhao et al.
2021), illumination changes (Liu et al. 2016a) and partial
occlusions (Rao et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022). To overcome these challenges, state-of-the-art methods typically resort to devising advanced neural networks (Rao et al. 2021;
Zhao et al. 2021) or effective loss functions (Yan et al.
2020; Quispe et al. 2021) to extract discriminative visual
features and establish remarkable performance in the benchmark datasets. Nonetheless, new breakthrough via model
improvement has become more and more challenging.
In this paper, we jump out of the box and propose a new
paradigm called human-in-the-loop vehicle ReID. It is orthogonal to existing ReID models and works in a humanmachine cooperative mode to leverage iterative feedback
for further performance improvement. Note that the quality of feedback could be unreliable, because identifying two

1

The annotation of vehicle ReID benchmark datasets often
needs to rely on additional clues such as vehicle plate or travel
routes.

* Corresponding author

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6048

