The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Deep Spiking Neural Networks with High Representation Similarity Model Visual
Pathways of Macaque and Mouse
Liwei Huang1,2 , Zhengyu Ma2 * , Liutao Yu2 , Huihui Zhou2 , Yonghong Tian1,2 *
1

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University, China
2
Department of Networked Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
huanglw20@stu.pku.edu.cn, {mazhy, yult, zhouhh}@pcl.ac.cn, yhtian@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

2016). They have been successful at predicting the neural responses in primate visual cortex, matching the hierarchy of
ventral visual stream (Güçlü and van Gerven 2015; Kubilius
et al. 2019; Nayebi et al. 2018; Kietzmann et al. 2019), and
even controlling neural activity (Bashivan, Kar, and DiCarlo
2019; Ponce et al. 2019). Moreover, as training paradigms
of mice (Zoccolan et al. 2009) and techniques for collecting neural activity (de Vries et al. 2020) have been greatly
improved, there is a strong interest in exploring mouse visual cortex. Deep neural networks also play an important
role in revealing the functional mechanisms and structures
of mouse visual cortex (Shi, Shea-Brown, and Buice 2019;
Cadena et al. 2019; Nayebi et al. 2022; Bakhtiari et al. 2021;
Conwell et al. 2021).
Compared to biological networks, Artificial Neural Networks discard the complexity of neurons (Pham, Packianather, and Charles 2008). Spiking Neural Networks, incorporating the concept of time and spikes, are more biologically plausible models (Maass 1997). To be more specific,
because of their capabilities of encoding information with
spikes, capturing the dynamics of biological neurons, and
extracting spatio-temporal features, deep SNNs are highly
possible to yield brain-like representations (Hodgkin and
Huxley 1952; Gerstner and Kistler 2002; Izhikevich 2004;
Brette et al. 2007; Kasabov et al. 2013). However, deep
SNNs have not been employed to model visual cortex due to
the immaturity of training algorithms. Recently, a state-ofthe-art directly trained deep SNN (Fang et al. 2021), makes
it possible to use deep SNNs as visual cortex models.
Contributions. In this work, we conduct large-scale neural representation similarity experiments on SNNs and other
high-performing deep neural networks to study the brain’s
visual processing mechanisms, with three datasets and three
similarity metrics (Figure 1). Specifically, to the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to use deep SNNs to fit complex
biological neural representations and explore the biological
visual cortex. We summarize our main contributions in four
points as follows.
• We find that SNNs outperform their counterparts of
CNNs with the same depth and almost the same architectures in almost all experiments. In addition, even
with very different depths and architectures, SNNs can
achieve top performance in most conditions.
• By making a more direct comparison between macaques

Deep artificial neural networks (ANNs) play a major role in
modeling the visual pathways of primate and rodent. However, they highly simplify the computational properties of
neurons compared to their biological counterparts. Instead,
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are more biologically plausible models since spiking neurons encode information with
time sequences of spikes, just like biological neurons do.
However, there is a lack of studies on visual pathways with
deep SNNs models. In this study, we model the visual cortex with deep SNNs for the first time, and also with a wide
range of state-of-the-art deep CNNs and ViTs for comparison. Using three similarity metrics, we conduct neural representation similarity experiments on three neural datasets collected from two species under three types of stimuli. Based on
extensive similarity analyses, we further investigate the functional hierarchy and mechanisms across species. Almost all
similarity scores of SNNs are higher than their counterparts
of CNNs with an average of 6.6%. Depths of the layers with
the highest similarity scores exhibit little differences across
mouse cortical regions, but vary significantly across macaque
regions, suggesting that the visual processing structure of
mice is more regionally homogeneous than that of macaques.
Besides, the multi-branch structures observed in some top
mouse brain-like neural networks provide computational evidence of parallel processing streams in mice, and the different performance in fitting macaque neural representations
under different stimuli exhibits the functional specialization
of information processing in macaques. Taken together, our
study demonstrates that SNNs could serve as promising candidates to better model and explain the functional hierarchy
and mechanisms of the visual system.

Introduction
Originally, the prototype of deep neural networks is inspired
by the biological vision system (Hubel and Wiesel 1959,
1962). To date, deep neural networks not only occupy an
unassailable position in the field of computer vision (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015), but also become better models of the biological visual cortex compared to traditional
models in the neuroscience community (Khaligh-Razavi and
Kriegeskorte 2014; Yamins et al. 2014; Yamins and DiCarlo
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

31

