The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MIMO Is All You Need : A Strong Multi-in-Multi-Out Baseline
for Video Prediction
Shuliang Ning1,2 * , Mengcheng Lan2 * , Yanran Li3 , Chaofeng Chen4 , Qian Chen5 ,
Xunlai Chen5† , Xiaoguang Han2,1† , Shuguang Cui2,1
1

FNii, CUHKSZ
SSE, CUHKSZ
3
The University of Edinburgh
4
Nanyang Technological University
5
Shenzhen Meteorological Bureau
shuliangning@link.cuhk.edu.cn, {lanmengchengds, chaofenghust}@gmail.com, yli19@ed.ac.uk,
{chenqian, chenxunlai}@weather.sz.gov.cn, {hanxiaoguang, shuguangcui}@cuhk.edu.cn
2

Abstract
The mainstream of the existing approaches for video prediction builds up their models based on a Single-In-Single-Out
(SISO) architecture, which takes the current frame as input
to predict the next frame in a recursive manner. This way often leads to severe performance degradation when they try to
extrapolate a longer period of future, thus limiting the practical use of the prediction model. Alternatively, a Multi-InMulti-Out (MIMO) architecture that outputs all the future
frames at one shot naturally breaks the recursive manner and
therefore prevents error accumulation. However, only a few
MIMO models for video prediction are proposed and they
only achieve inferior performance due to the date. The real
strength of the MIMO model in this area is not well noticed
and is largely under-explored. Motivated by that, we conduct
a comprehensive investigation in this paper to thoroughly exploit how far a simple MIMO architecture can go. Surprisingly, our empirical studies reveal that a simple MIMO model
can outperform the state-of-the-art work with a large margin
much more than expected, especially in dealing with longterm error accumulation. After exploring a number of ways
and designs, we propose a new MIMO architecture based on
extending the pure Transformer with local spatio-temporal
blocks and a new multi-output decoder, namely MIMO-VP,
to establish a new standard in video prediction. We evaluate our model in four highly competitive benchmarks. Extensive experiments show that our model wins 1st place on all
the benchmarks with remarkable performance gains and surpasses the best SISO model in all aspects including efficiency,
quantity, and quality. A dramatic error reduction is achieved
when predicting 10 frames on Moving MNIST and Weather
datasets respectively. We believe our model can serve as a
new baseline to facilitate the future research of video prediction tasks. The code will be released.

Figure 1: Illustration of MIMO and SISO on Moving
MNIST: The Errors are from (a) PhyDNet (Guen and Thome
2020) (b) Our model. Figures with solid and dashed frames
denote the ground-truth and predicted images respectively.
The red arrows indicate the different error propagation way.

Introduction

ing the future is such a fundamental capability for intelligent
agents, video prediction has received increasing attention
and benefited many applications such as precipitation forecasting (Xingjian et al. 2015), autonomous driving (Kwon
and Park 2019), and action recognition (Liu et al. 2017). In
the practical scenario of these real-life applications, an accurate prediction of the longer-term future will be greatly

Video prediction aims to forecast future frames of a video
sequence conditioned on previous frames. Since anticipat* These authors contributed equally.
†

Both are Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1975

