The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Dialogue Rewriting via Skeleton-Guided Generation
Chunlei Xin1,3 , Hongyu Lin1, * , Shan Wu1,3 , Xianpei Han1,2 ,
Bo Chen1,5,6 , Wen Dai4 , Shuai Chen4 , Bin Wang4 , Le Sun1,2, *
1

Chinese Information Processing Laboratory, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Xiaomi AI Lab, Xiaomi Inc., Beijing, China
5
School of Information Engineering, Minzu University of China, Beijing, China
6
National Language Resources Monitoring and Research Center for Minority Languages, Beijing, China
{chunlei2021, hongyu, wushan2018, xianpei, chenbo, sunle}@iscas.ac.cn
{daiwen, chenshuai3, wangbin11}@xiaomi.com

2

Abstract
Dialogue rewriting aims to transform multi-turn, contextdependent dialogues into well-formed, context-independent
text for most NLP systems. Previous dialogue rewriting
benchmarks and systems assume a fluent and informative utterance to rewrite. Unfortunately, dialogue utterances from
real-world systems are frequently noisy and with various
kinds of errors that can make them almost uninformative. In
this paper, we first present Real-world Dialogue Rewriting
Corpus (RealDia), a new benchmark to evaluate how well
current dialogue rewriting systems can deal with real-world
noisy and uninformative dialogue utterances. RealDia contains annotated multi-turn dialogues from real scenes with
ASR errors, spelling errors, redundancies and other noises
that are ignored by previous dialogue rewriting benchmarks.
We show that previous dialogue rewriting approaches are neither effective nor data-efficient to resolve RealDia. Then this
paper presents Skeleton-Guided Rewriter (SGR), which can
resolve the task of dialogue rewriting via a skeleton-guided
generation paradigm. Experiments show that RealDia is a
much more challenging benchmark for real-world dialogue
rewriting, and SGR can effectively resolve the task and outperform previous approaches by a large margin.

Figure 1: An example shows how dialogue rewriting handles
multi-turn dialogues. Key information restored from the dialogue is marked in blue, and the automatic speech recognition error and its correction are in red.

mechanisms which can take richer context information into
consideration (Wu et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2019; Wang
et al. 2021). However, dialogue-specialized models are usually hard to design, and it is time-consuming and unacceptably costly to construct dialogue-specialized models for various downstream tasks. Therefore, how to more effectively
deal with noisy, heavily context-dependent utterances in dialogues is a critical challenge for dialogue understanding.
Recently, the task of dialogue rewriting was proposed to
resolve the above-mentioned challenge. Dialogue rewriting
transforms inter-dependent and informal utterances in multiturn dialogues into well-formed, context-independent and
semantically completed sentences, and therefore dialogue
utterances can be seamlessly restructured into well-formed
inputs for current NLP systems. For example, given the utterance “Its manufacturer?” of utterance S2 in Figure 1, dialogue rewriting models need to distill relevant information
“the car” and “the max horsepower”, and output the sentence
“What is the manufacturer of the car with the max horsepower?”, which can accurately express the speaker intent of
the original utterance under the dialogue context.

Introduction
Dialogue is the primary mechanism for human interaction,
which is multi-turn, context-dependent, and frequently informal (Pangaro and Dubberly 2014). People tend to produce brief, fragmented utterances in dialogues rather than
longer, completed sentences in normal documents (Carbonell 1983). Therefore, many utterances in dialogues can
only be understood when they are put in the entire dialogue
context. Unfortunately, most NLP systems are designed for
well-formed, context-independent texts, which makes them
inappropriate to deal with informal and context-dependent
dialogues. To narrow the gap, current studies mostly focus
on developing dialogue-specialized paradigm, which expands specific downstream tasks from single-sentence inputs to multi-turn dialogue inputs, and designs complicated
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13825

