The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

T-distributed Spherical Feature Representation for Imbalanced Classification
Xiaoyu Yang1 , Yufei Chen1 * , Xiaodong Yue2,3,4 , Shaoxun Xu1 , Chao Ma5
1

College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
3
Artificial Intelligence Institute of Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
4
VLN Lab, NAVI MedTech Co., Ltd. Shanghai, China
5
Department of Radiology, Changhai Hospital of Shanghai, Shanghai, China
yufeichen@tongji.edu.cn
Abstract

resent categories with a lot of samples, and the tail categories denote categories with only a few samples. Due to
the limitation of sampling, the head categories with abundant samples are in minority, and the most of categories
only have a few samples, which are tail categories. Under
the extremely imbalanced condition, the classifier will fall
into the local optimal solution, that only improves the accuracy of head categories and ignores the tail categories. In
the most extreme case, the classifier will fail to train that
all samples are predicted as the class with the largest number. Especially as large-scale classification problems, such
as Image-Net (Russakovsky et al. 2015) and iNaturalist (Cui
et al. 2018), become more granular and sophisticated, the
head categories will dominate the whole classifier, resulting
in a strong bias in the eigenspace that totally ignores the tail
categories. To address this critical issue, a number of methods are proposed for extremely imbalanced recognition. The
current mainstream methods are mainly divided into three
categories: class re-balance, decoupling and domain adaptation.
Class re-balance. There are two main aspects of class rebalance: re-sampling and re-weighting. Re-sampling (Chou
et al. 2020; Yang and Xu 2020) alleviates the extremely
imbalanced problem by simply oversampling the tail categories and undersampling the head categories. The class
re-weighting (Byrd and Lipton 2019; Cao et al. 2019; Cui
et al. 2019a; Jamal et al. 2020) believes that as the training
samples number of one certain category increases, the improvement of accuracy will gradually decrease. Therefore,
the loss function is used to assign different weights to different numbers of categories to improve the accuracy of the
tail categories. However, the re-balance method improves
the performance of the tail categories at the cost of the head
categories, that abundant samples in head categories are not
fully utilized.
Decoupling. BBN (Zhou et al. 2020) and LWS (Kang
et al. 2019) are representative of the method of decoupling.
They think that the distribution of image features and the distribution of category labels are essentially uncoupled. So the
essence of the decoupling method should separate the distribution of image features from the distribution of categories.
(Kang et al. 2019; Zhong et al. 2021) use a two-stage strategy. In the first stage, a traditional model is normally trained
upon the imbalanced data to construct the feature space. In

Real-world classification tasks often show an extremely imbalanced problem. The extreme imbalance will cause a strong
bias that the decision boundary of the classifier is completely
dominated by the categories with abundant samples, which
are also called the head categories. Current methods have alleviated the imbalanced impact from mainly three aspects:
class re-balance, decoupling and domain adaptation. However, the existing criterion with the winner-take-all strategy
still leads to the crowding problem in the eigenspace. The
head categories with many samples can extract features more
accurately, but occupy most of the eigenspace. The tail categories sharing the rest of the narrow eigenspace are too
crowded together to accurately extract features. Above these
issues, we propose a novel T-distributed spherical metric for
equalized eigenspace in the imbalanced classification, which
has the following innovations: 1) We design the T-distributed
spherical metric, which has the characteristics of high kurtosis. Instead of the winner-take-all strategy, the T-distributed
spherical metric produces a high logit only when the extracted feature is close enough to the category center, without
a strong bias against other categories. 2) The T-distributed
spherical metric is integrated into the classifier, which is able
to equalize the eigenspace for alleviating the crowding issue
in the imbalanced problem. The equalized eigenspace by the
T-distributed spherical classifier is capable of improving the
accuracy of the tail categories while maintaining the accuracy of the head, which significantly promotes the intraclass
compactness and interclass separability of features. Extensive experiments on large-scale imbalanced datasets verify
our method, which shows superior results in the long-tailed
CIFAR-100/-10 with the imbalanced ratio IR = 100/50.
Our method also achieves excellent results on the large-scale
ImageNet-LT dataset and the iNaturalist dataset with various
backbones. In addition, we provide a case study of the real
clinical classification of pancreatic tumor subtypes with 6 categories. Among them, the largest number of PDAC accounts
for 315 cases, and the least CP has only 8 cases. After 4-fold
cross-validation, we achieved a top-1 accuracy of 69.04%.

Introduction
In visual classification, the extremely imbalanced problem
is increasingly a critical challenge. The head categories rep* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10825

