The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Design Amortization for Bayesian Optimal Experimental Design
Noble Kennamer 1 , Steven Walton 2 , Alexander Ihler 1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California Irvine
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Oregon
nkenname@uci.edu

d, possible experimental outcomes y and latent variables θ.
The EIG is then defined to be:

Abstract
Bayesian optimal experimental design is a sub-field of statistics focused on developing methods to make efficient use
of experimental resources. Any potential design is evaluated in terms of a utility function, such as the (theoretically well-justified) expected information gain (EIG); unfortunately however, under most circumstances the EIG is intractable to evaluate. In this work we build off of successful
variational approaches, which optimize a parameterized variational model with respect to bounds on the EIG. Past work
focused on learning a new variational model from scratch for
each new design considered. Here we present a novel neural architecture that allows experimenters to optimize a single
variational model that can estimate the EIG for potentially infinitely many designs. To further improve computational efficiency, we also propose to train the variational model on a
significantly cheaper-to-evaluate lower bound, and show empirically that the resulting model provides an excellent guide
for more accurate, but expensive to evaluate bounds on the
EIG. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our technique on
generalized linear models, a class of statistical models that
is widely used in the analysis of controlled experiments. Experiments show that our method is able to greatly improve
accuracy over existing approximation strategies, and achieve
these results with far better sample efficiency.

1

EIG(d) = Ep(y|d) [H[p(θ)] − H[p(θ|y, d)]]

(1)

where H[·] is the entropy function. The experimenter then
seeks the solution to argmaxd∈D EIG(d), where D is the
set of all feasible designs. The EIG has sound theoretical
justifications, proven to be optimal in certain settings (Sebastiani and Wynn 2000; Bernardo and Smith 2009).
While powerful, this framework is limited by the difficulty in evaluating the EIG due to the intractability of the
posterior distribution p(θ|y, d). Foster et al. (2019) proposed
four variational bounds for efficiently approximating the
EIG. The method involves defining a variational distribution, qϕ (·) that will approximate either the posterior distribution p(θ|y, d) or the marginal likelihood p(y|d). The parameters ϕ of this variational distribution are optimized according to the proposed bounds. In principle their method
allows for estimating the EIG for arbitrarily complex models
using flexible variational models, however their implementations focused on simpler variational forms that required
fitting a new variational model for every possible design. In
this work we focus on design amortization by proposing a
novel deep learning architecture based on conditional normalizing flows (NF) (Papamakarios et al. 2021; Kobyzev,
Prince, and Brubaker 2020) and set invariant models (Zaheer et al. 2017) to define a flexible variational distribution
qϕ (·|d) that only needs to be trained once, but can then accurately estimate the EIG for potentially infinitely many designs. Our experiments will show how design amortization
can dramatically improve computational efficiency and how
our more flexible variational form can make much more accurate approximations to the EIG over competing methods.
We provide our code here1 .

Introduction

Conducting experiments is often a resource-intensive endeavour, motivating experimenters to design their experiments to be maximally informative given the resources
available. Optimal experimental design (OED) aims to address this challenge by developing approaches to define a
utility, U (d), of a possible designs, d, and algorithms for
evaluating and optimizing this utility over all feasible designs D. OED has been used widely across science and engineering, including systems biology (Liepe et al. 2013),
geostatistics (Diggle and Lophaven 2006), manufacturing
(Antony 2001) and more (Goos and Jones 2011).
In this work we focus on evaluating the expected information gain (EIG), a commonly used utility function in
Bayesian optimal experiment design (BOED) (Chaloner and
Verdinelli 1995; Ryan et al. 2016). We specify our model,
composed of a likelihood and prior p(y|θ, d)p(θ) for design

2

Background

Scientists consistently face the challenge of having to conduct experiments under limited resources, and must design
their experiments to use these resources as efficiently as possible. BOED provides a conceptually clear framework for
doing so. We assume we are given a model with design variables d, experimental outcomes y and latent parameters θ

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8220

https://github.com/NobleKennamer/amortized boed

