The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Domain Decorrelation with Potential Energy Ranking
Sen Pei1,2 , Jiaxi Sun1,2 , Richard Yi Da Xu4 , Shiming Xiang1,2 , and Gaofeng Meng1,2,3 *
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAIR, HK Institute of Science and Innovation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Hong Kong Baptist University
{peisen,sunjiaxi}2020@ia.ac.cn, xuyida@hkbu.edu.hk, {smxiang,gfmeng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Machine learning systems, especially the methods based on
deep learning, enjoy great success in modern computer vision tasks under ideal experimental settings. Generally, these
classic deep learning methods are built on the i.i.d. assumption, supposing the training and test data are drawn from
the same distribution independently and identically. However, the aforementioned i.i.d. assumption is, in general, unavailable in the real-world scenarios, and as a result, leads
to sharp performance decay of deep learning algorithms. Behind this, domain shift is one of the primary factors to be
blamed. In order to tackle this problem, we propose using
Potential Energy Ranking (PoER) to decouple the object feature and the domain feature in given images, promoting the
learning of label-discriminative representations while filtering out the irrelevant correlations between the objects and the
background. PoER employs the ranking loss in shallow layers
to make features with identical category and domain labels
close to each other and vice versa. This makes the neural networks aware of both objects and background characteristics,
which is vital for generating domain-invariant features. Subsequently, with the stacked convolutional blocks, PoER further uses the contrastive loss to make features within the same
categories distribute densely no matter domains, filtering out
the domain information progressively for feature alignment.
PoER reports superior performance on domain generalization benchmarks, improving the average top-1 accuracy by
at least 1.20% compared to the existing methods. Moreover,
we use PoER in the ECCV 2022 NICO Challenge, achieving top place with only a vanilla ResNet-18 and winning the
jury award. The code has been made publicly available at:
https://github.com/ForeverPs/PoER.

(a) category-wise

(b) domain-wise

Figure 1: Feature distribution of the proposed PoER. A
vanilla ResNet-18 (He et al. 2016) is trained on PACS (Li
et al. 2017) dataset, and the above images show the categorywise and domain-wise feature distribution. We remove the
conventional classification head and perform clustering using the outputted feature. (a): Feature distribution across different categories. It is clear that the final outputs of PoER are
pure label-related representations. (b): Feature distribution
across different domains. PoER makes the feature extractor
aware of the characteristic of both label-related and domainrelated information first and filters out the domain appearance progressively with the stacked convolutional blocks,
achieving feature alignment for better generalization ability.
ios, it is difficult to guarantee that the i.i.d. assumption always holds, and as a result, leads to sharp performance drop
in the presence of inputs from unseen domains. Formally,
the aforementioned problem is termed domain generalization (DG). Given several labeled domains (a.k.a. source domains), DG aims to train classifiers only with data from
these labeled source domains that can generalize well to any
unseen target domains. Different from the closely related domain adaptation (DA) task, DG has no access to the data
from target domains while DA can use that for finetuning,
namely the adaptation step.
Commonly, a straightforward way to deal with the domain generalization problem is to collect as much data as
possible from diverse domains for training. However, this
solution is costly and impractical in some fields, and it is
actually inevitable that the deep neural networks deployed
in open-world scenarios will encounter out-of-distribution
(OOD) inputs that are never exposed in the training phase no
matter how much data you collect. Except for the aforementioned solution, the schemes aiming to mitigate the negative
effects of domain shifts can be roughly divided into three

Introduction
Deep learning methods have been proved to be increasingly
effective in many complex machine learning tasks, such as
large-scale image classification, objects detection and image
generation, to name a few. Generally, the human-surpassing
performance that deep neural networks enjoy is greatly benefited from the i.i.d. assumption, supposing the training and
the test data are drawn from the same distribution independently and identically. Unfortunately, in open-world scenar* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2020

