The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fine-Grained Position Helps Memorizing More,
a Novel Music Compound Transformer Model with Feature Interaction Fusion
Zuchao Li, Ruhan Gong, Yineng Chen, and Kehua Su*
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China
{zcli-charlie, ruhjgs, chernyn, skh}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract

useful information from music and categorize it based on
music understanding. The most common tasks in music information retrieval are genre classification, velocity prediction, composer classification, emotion classification, and so
on. Rather, music generation generates musical symbol sequences based on certain requirements, such as emotion,
theme, and prompt. It is said that what cannot be understood
cannot be made, so musical understanding is also crucial to
generation.
Recent studies have demonstrated the success of pretrained models (e.g., BERT) in handling natural language
processing tasks and learning general language representations from unlabeled texts. Due to the great success
of pre-trained models using Transformers (Vaswani et al.
2017), many attempts have been made to introduce the
Transformer-like architectures to symbolic music understanding tasks. Unlike tokens in natural language processing, musical sequences in symbolic music usually involve
tokens of various types such as pitch, duration, and velocity. There are two typical represetations: REMI (Huang and
Yang 2020) and CP (Hsiao et al. 2021). In REMI representation, different token types can be placed in the same
sequence, making the symbolic music exactly the same as
the natural language for input. While in CP representation,
different types of tokens are placed in different sequences
for short lengths. In other words, multiple token types are
grouped at a single position in the input sequence, resulting
in the symbolic music having inputs with multiple subsequences.
Although
the
Compound
Word
Transformer
(CP+Transformer) has achieved performance improvements on music understanding, the grouping mechanism
of CP and the characteristics of music symbols still leave
room for improvement. On the one hand, there is a lack of
interaction between the various types of token features after
grouping. This does not exist in the REMI representation,
since various types of tokens are placed in the same sequence and interacted when encoding. Since a music event
is composed of multiple related attributes, like structural
(e.g., bar, sub-beat) and diverse information (e.g., tempo,
and pitch), it is unwise to separate event attribute tokens.
On the other hand, the difficulty in understanding music
sequences is not only caused by the sequence being too
long. This is because music sequences are more sensitive

Due to the particularity of the simultaneous occurrence of
multiple events in music sequences, compound Transformer
is proposed to deal with the challenge of long sequences.
However, there are two deficiencies in the compound Transformer. First, since the order of events is more important for
music than natural language, the information provided by the
original absolute position embedding is not precise enough.
Second, there is an important correlation between the tokens in the compound word, which is ignored by the current
compound Transformer. Therefore, in this work, we propose
an improved compound Transformer model for music understanding. Specifically, we propose an attribute embedding
fusion module and a novel position encoding scheme with
absolute-relative consideration. In the attribute embedding
fusion module, different attributes are fused through feature
permutation by using a multi-head self-attention mechanism
in order to capture rich interactions between attributes. In the
novel position encoding scheme, we propose RoAR position
encoding, which realizes rotational absolute position encoding, relative position encoding, and absolute-relative position
interactive encoding, providing clear and rich orders for musical events. Empirical study on four typical music understanding tasks shows that our attribute fusion approach and RoAR
position encoding brings large performance gains. In addition, we further investigate the impact of masked language
modeling and casual language modeling pre-training on music understanding.

Introduction
Music, an important art form that permeates human’s daily
life, is usually expressed with symbols for preserving. Like
natural language, symbolic music is also composed of a series of symbols associated with each other according to certain rules, which makes music artificial intelligence adopt
using similar techniques as natural language. A growing
database of music over the past years have provided the conditions for the researches of music understanding including music information retrieval (Casey et al. 2008), music generation (Huang et al. 2019; Sheng et al. 2021), etc.
The purpose of music information retrieval is to retrieve
* Corresponding author. This work is supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62272354.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5203

