The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Asynchronous Event Processing with Local-Shift Graph Convolutional Network
Linhui Sun1,2,3 , Yifan Zhang1,2,3, * , Jian Cheng1,2,3 , Hanqing Lu1,2
2

1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100190, Beijing, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100049, Beijing, China
3
AIRIA, 211135, Nanjing, China
sunlinhui2018@ia.ac.cn, yfzhang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, jcheng@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, luhq@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Event cameras are bio-inspired sensors that produce sparse
and asynchronous event streams instead of frame-based images at a high-rate. Recent works utilizing graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have achieved remarkable performance in recognition tasks, which model event stream as
spatio-temporal graph. However, the computational mechanism of graph convolution introduces redundant computation
when aggregating neighbor features, which limits the lowlatency nature of the events. And they perform a synchronous
inference process, which can not achieve a fast response to
the asynchronous event signals. This paper proposes a localshift graph convolutional network (LSNet), which utilizes
a novel local-shift operation equipped with a local spatiotemporal attention component to achieve efficient and adaptive aggregation of neighbor features. To improve the efficiency of pooling operation in feature extraction, we design
a node-importance based parallel pooling method (NIPooling) for sparse and low-latency event data. Based on the calculated importance of each node, NIPooling can efficiently
obtain uniform sampling results in parallel, which retains
the diversity of event streams. Furthermore, for achieving a
fast response to asynchronous event signals, an asynchronous
event processing procedure is proposed to restrict the network
nodes which need to recompute activations only to those affected by the new arrival event. Experimental results show
that the computational cost can be reduced by nearly 9 times
through using local-shift operation and the proposed asynchronous procedure can further improve the inference efficiency, while achieving state-of-the-art performance on gesture recognition and object recognition.

(a) Spatial graph convolutional network.

(b) Local-shift graph convolutional network.

Figure 1: Feature aggregation way of spatial graph convolutional network and local-shift graph convolutional network.

resolution (µs), and high dynamic range (140 dB vs 60 dB
of traditional cameras). Due to these excellent properties,
event cameras are more advantageous over traditional cameras for visual tasks that require fast response, limited power
consumption, robustness to high speed motion, and variable
lighting. Therefore, event cameras have a wide range of applications, such as gesture recognition (Amir et al. 2017; Li
et al. 2021; Yao et al. 2021), object recognition (Cannici
et al. 2019; Sironi et al. 2018; Deng et al. 2022), optical
flow estimation (Ding et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2022), pose relocalization (Nguyen et al. 2019; Sekikawa et al. 2019), video
reconstruction (Rebecq et al. 2021a,b), autonomous driving
(Cheng et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020a), etc.
For taking advantage of event-based data in downstream
tasks, designing models to effectively extract features from
sparse and asynchronous event streams is a key step. Previous methods (Liu et al. 2020; Amir et al. 2017) introduce spiking neural networks (SNNs) for event processing,
which exploit the sparsity nature of event data and can asynchronously respond to events. However, these methods have
limited performance in high-level tasks mainly due to the
lacking of general and robust learning rules. Since GCNs
and PointNet-like frameworks are suitable for feature ex-

Introduction
Event camera (Lichtsteiner et al. 2008; Brandli et al. 2014)
is bio-inspired sensor that utilizes asynchronous and sparse
event streams to represent spatio-temporal visual information. It asynchronously triggers an individual event when
the brightness changes of a pixel exceed a preset threshold, which distinguishes it from frame-based cameras. Benefiting from the mechanism of generating data, compared
with traditional cameras, event cameras own many attractive
properties, including low latency, low power, high temporal
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2402

