The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PrimeNet: Pre-training for Irregular Multivariate Time Series
Ranak Roy Chowdhury1 , Jiacheng Li1 , Xiyuan Zhang1 ,
Dezhi Hong2 , Rajesh K. Gupta1 , Jingbo Shang1
1

University of California, San Diego
2
Amazon
{rrchowdh, j9li, gupta, jshang}@eng.ucsd.edu, {xiyuanzh}@ucsd.edu, hondezhi@amazon.com

Abstract

which can be leveraged to learn the task better. For example, to predict whether a patient is sick or healthy based
on their schedule of doctor visits and medical test results,
the frequency of visits may be a useful signal, in addition
to the physiological variables, i.e. sick patients visit doctors more frequently than healthy ones. However, no regular time series models, whether fully- (Chowdhury et al.
2022), semi- (Zerveas et al. 2021) or un- (Tonekaboni, Eytan, and Goldenberg 2021) supervised, encode time information. They assume constant time intervals between all
consecutive observations in a sequence (regularity) with all
features observed at any given time (synchronicity) (Marlin et al. 2012). Hence, simply adapting pre-trained regular
time-series methods for irregular time-series is sub-optimal.
Recently, ODE- (Rubanova, Chen, and Duvenaud 2019),
attention- (Shukla and Marlin 2021), and set- (Horn et al.
2020) based models that directly learn time information and
encode irregularity have outperformed regular time series
models on irregular data. However, most of these irregular
methods are fully- (Rubanova, Chen, and Duvenaud 2019)
or semi- (Shukla and Marlin 2021) supervised, requiring
large amounts of labeled data. Data labeling in IoT is timeconsuming and both cost and labor-intensive as it involves
physical sensor deployment and human annotators with domain expertise. Moreover, accessing labeled data in healthcare may raise security and privacy concerns.
To this end, we propose PrimeNet, the first pre-trained
model for irregular multivariate time series. Specifically, we
design two time-sensitive tasks based on contrastive learning
and data reconstruction to build a self-supervised representation from completely unlabeled irregular time series data.
Time-slicing (Franceschi, Dieuleveut, and Jaggi 2019),
which chunks a time series into slices containing equal number of readings, is commonly used to augment regular timeseries data for contrastive learning. However, it cannot generate representative sub-sequences for an irregular time series as irregular time series exhibit significant variations in
sampling density over time and the sampling density of a
given time slice may not mirror that of the entire time series (Figure 3). A common approach would be to randomly
sample observations from an irregular time series to construct a sub-sequence. However, an irregular time series may
also exhibit significant imbalanced occurrences of dense and
sparse observations. Hence, random sampling will lead to

Real-world applications often involve irregular time series,
for which the time intervals between successive observations
are non-uniform. Irregularity across multiple features in a
multi-variate time series further results in a different subset of features at any given time (i.e., asynchronicity). Existing pre-training schemes for time-series, however, often assume regularity of time series and make no special treatment
of irregularity. We argue that such irregularity offers insight
about domain property of the data—for example, frequency
of hospital visits may signal patient health condition—that
can guide representation learning. In this work, we propose
PrimeNet to learn a self-supervised representation for irregular multivariate time-series. Specifically, we design a timesensitive contrastive learning and data reconstruction task to
pre-train a model. Irregular time-series exhibits considerable
variations in sampling density over time. Hence, our triplet
generation strategy follows the density of the original data
points, preserving its native irregularity. Moreover, the sampling density variation over time makes data reconstruction
difficult for different regions. Therefore, we design a data
masking technique that always masks a constant time duration to accommodate reconstruction for regions of different
sampling density. We learn with these tasks using unlabeled
data to build a pre-trained model and fine-tune on a downstream task with limited labeled data, in contrast with existing
fully supervised approach for irregular time-series, requiring
large amounts of labeled data. Experiment results show that
PrimeNet significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods
on naturally irregular and asynchronous data from Healthcare
and IoT applications for several downstream tasks, including
classification, interpolation, and regression.

Introduction
Many real-world applications generate data with nonuniform time-interval between successive observations. For
example, sensors are triggered at irregular intervals driven
by events in real-life. Further, not all sensors are triggered at
the same time. Thus, irregularity (in time) and asynchronicity (across sensors) are natural characteristics of many time
series that provide rich insights into real-world events.
Naturally occurring irregularity in many datasets reflect
intrinsic domain property about the underlying system,
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7184

