The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Cross-Domain Graph Anomaly Detection via
Anomaly-Aware Contrastive Alignment
Qizhou Wang1 , Guansong Pang* 2 , Mahsa Salehi1 , Wray Buntine3,1 , Christopher Leckie4
1

Monash University
Singapore Management University
3
VinUniversity
4
The University of Melbourne
{qizhou.wang, mahsa.salehi, wray.buntine}@monash.edu, gspang@smu.edu.sg, caleckie@unimelb.edu.au
2

Abstract
Cross-domain graph anomaly detection (CD-GAD) describes
the problem of detecting anomalous nodes in an unlabelled
target graph using auxiliary, related source graphs with labelled anomalous and normal nodes. Although it presents a
promising approach to address the notoriously high false positive issue in anomaly detection, little work has been done
in this line of research. There are numerous domain adaptation methods in the literature, but it is difficult to adapt them
for GAD due to the unknown distributions of the anomalies
and the complex node relations embedded in graph data. To
this end, we introduce a novel domain adaptation approach,
namely Anomaly-aware Contrastive alignmenT (ACT), for
GAD. ACT is designed to jointly optimise: (i) unsupervised
contrastive learning of normal representations of nodes in
the target graph, and (ii) anomaly-aware one-class alignment
that aligns these contrastive node representations and the representations of labelled normal nodes in the source graph,
while enforcing significant deviation of the representations
of the normal nodes from the labelled anomalous nodes in the
source graph. In doing so, ACT effectively transfers anomalyinformed knowledge from the source graph to learn the complex node relations of the normal class for GAD on the target
graph without any specification of the anomaly distributions.
Extensive experiments on eight CD-GAD settings demonstrate that our approach ACT achieves substantially improved
detection performance over 10 state-of-the-art GAD methods.
Code is available at https://github.com/QZ-WANG/ACT.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: t-SNE visualisation of a CD-GAD dataset before
(a) and after (b) our anomaly-aware contrastive alignment.
Compared to (a) where the two domains show clear discrepancies in different aspects like anomaly distribution, in (b)
our domain alignment approach effectively aligns the normal class, while pushing away the anomalous nodes in both
source and target domains from the normal class.

We instead explore cross-domain (CD) anomaly detection
approaches to address this long-standing issue. CD-GAD
describes the problem of detecting anomalous nodes in an
unlabelled target graph using auxiliary, related source graphs
with labelled anomalous and normal nodes. The ground
truth information in the source graph can provide important
knowledge of true anomalies for GAD on the target graph
when such supervision information from the source domain
can be properly adapted to the target domain. The detection
models can then be trained in an anomaly-informed fashion
on the target graph, resulting in GAD models with substantially improved anomaly-discriminative capability, and thus
greatly reducing the detection errors. Although such CD approaches can be a promising solution, little work has been
done in this line of research.
There are numerous unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA) methods in the literature (Wilson and Cook 2020),
but it is difficult to adapt them for GAD due to some unique
challenges in GAD. The first challenge is that the distribution of different anomalies can vary within a dataset and
across different datasets, and thus, the anomaly distribution often remains unknown in a target dataset. This challenges the popular assumption in UDA that the source and
target domains have similar conditional probability distributions. Secondly, graph data contains complex node relations due to its topological structure and node attribute se-

Introduction
Detection of nodes that deviate significantly from the majority of nodes in a graph is a key task in graph anomaly detection (GAD). It has drawn wide research attention due to
its numerous applications in a range of domains such as intrusion detection in cybersecurity, fraud detection in fintech
and malicious user account detection in social network analysis. There are many shallow and deep methods (Akoglu,
Tong, and Koutra 2015; Pang et al. 2021) that are specifically
designed, or can be adapted for GAD. However, they are
fully unsupervised approaches and often have notoriously
high false positives due to the lack of knowledge about the
anomalies of interest.
* Corresponding author: Guansong Pang (gspang@smu.edu.sg).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4676

