The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Kalman Bayesian Neural Networks for Closed-Form Online Learning
Philipp Wagner1 * , Xinyang Wu1 * , Marco F. Huber1,2
1

Department Cyber Cognitive Intelligence (CCI), Fraunhofer Institute for Manufacturing Engineering and Automation IPA,
Stuttgart, Germany
2
Institute of Industrial Manufacturing and Management IFF, University of Stuttgart, Germany
philipp.wagner@ipa.fraunhofer.de, xinyang.wu@ipa.fraunhofer.de, marco.huber@ieee.org

Abstract

and several iterations. Due to these characteristics, the mentioned methods are not directly applicable in online learning settings (Parisi et al. 2019), but first approaches using a
data memory exist (Nguyen et al. 2018; Kurle et al. 2019).
In addition, gradient-based methods may suffer from poor
choices of the optimization hyper-parameters or bad local
minima (Bengio 2012). This behavior is mitigated by adaptive learning rates, stochastic gradient descent (SGD), and
modern optimizers, but still persists.
In this paper we develop a novel online learning approach
for Bayesian Neural Networks (BNN) (MacKay 1992) that
is named Kalman Bayesian Neural Network (KBNN). The
key idea is to train the BNN via sequential Bayesian filtering
without the need of gradient-based optimization. Bayesian
filtering is commonly used to estimate probability density
functions (PDF) from noisy observations in Markov chains
(Särkkä 2013; Huber 2015). Many NN architectures like the
one studied in this paper also form a Markov chain (Achille
and Soatto 2018). Our approach is motivated by the work of
Puskorius and Feldkamp (2001), in which the training procedure is also treated as a filtering problem, which however
uses local linearization based on backpropagated gradient
information to compute weight updates. While the special
case of online training of a single perceptron is discussed by
Huber (2020), we aim at constructing a learning algorithm
for a universal multilayer perceptron (MLP).
The KBNN consists of a forward pass for inferring the
output distribution given an input sample and a backward
pass to adjust the network parameters given a corresponding
output sample. A part of the backward pass is visualized in
Fig. 1. By assuming that the weights and outputs of each network layer are Gaussian distributed, it is sufficient to compute the mean and covariance in a moment matching fashion. In doing so, it is possible to provide closed-form expressions for the forward pass as well as the update equations of
the weights in the backward pass for commonly used activation functions like sigmoid or ReLU. The main contributions
of this paper are: (a) We introduce an approach that strictly
follows Bayesian inference. Thus, learning the network parameters is not reformulated as optimization problem. The
use of Bayesian filtering and smoothing techniques instead
enables native online training of BNNs, where we show the
relationship to the famous Kalman filtering and smoothing
equations (Kalman 1960; Rauch, Tung, and Striebel 1965).

Compared to point estimates calculated by standard neural
networks, Bayesian neural networks (BNN) provide probability distributions over the output predictions and model parameters, i.e., the weights. Training the weight distribution of
a BNN, however, is more involved due to the intractability
of the underlying Bayesian inference problem and thus, requires efficient approximations. In this paper, we propose a
novel approach for BNN learning via closed-form Bayesian
inference. For this purpose, the calculation of the predictive
distribution of the output and the update of the weight distribution are treated as Bayesian filtering and smoothing problems, where the weights are modeled as Gaussian random
variables. This allows closed-form expressions for training
the network’s parameters in a sequential/online fashion without gradient descent. We demonstrate our method on several
UCI datasets and compare it to the state of the art.

1

Introduction

Deep Learning has been continuously attracting researchers
for its applicability in many fields such as medical diagnostics (Amisha, Pathania, and Rathaur 2019), autonomous
control (Zeng et al. 2020), or intelligent mass-productions
(El-Shamouty et al. 2019). However, conventional deep
Neural Networks (NNs) usually perform maximum likelihood estimation, which results solely in a point estimate
without consideration of uncertainty in the data and the
learned model. In domains with high safety standards or financial risks this approach is not sufficient and limits the
number of possible applications. Bayesian methods offer
ways to overcome this issue by quantifying uncertainties using Bayes’ rule and probabilistic reasoning, which results in
a distribution over network parameters and predictions instead of point estimates. A quantification of the uncertainty
indicates whether the predictions are trustworthy and reliable (Begoli, Bhattacharya, and Kusnezov 2019). Popular
approaches like Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) are
computationally demanding, whereas variational inference
(VI) or ensemble methods rely on noisy gradient computations and need to be trained using batched training data
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10069

