The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PUnifiedNER: A Prompting-Based Unified NER System for Diverse Datasets
Jinghui Lu1 , Rui Zhao1 , Brian Mac Namee2,3 , Fei Tan1 *
1
SenseTime Research
The Insight Centre for Data Analytics, University College Dublin
3
School of Computer Science, University College Dublin
{lujinghui1, zhaorui, tanfei}@sensetime.com, brian.macnamee@ucd.ie
2

Abstract

the e-commerce domain such as “company” and “commodity” but not named entities from other domains such as “location”, “organisation”, etc. As a result, such NER methods
can not scale up well as each new dataset demands a new
model to be trained and stored.
We believe that it is more appealing to have a versatile
model handle all scenarios. Besides, a unified model can
achieve better performance than dataset-specific models if
the unified model can be trained jointly, incorporating label
information from different datasets. To be specific, although
most NER datasets focus on corpora from various domains
with different entity types, the underlying semantics or entity recognition are shared across corpora and exploiting this
shared semantic information can enhance model robustness.
We hypothesise that this enhancement is derived from
two aspects: commonality and diversity of label information. The enhancement from commonality refers to the fact
that the model can see more relevant phrases from the same
entity type. For example, several datasets with the “location” entity can capture most of the keywords belonging
to the “location” entity in the real world. The enhancement
from diversity means that the model can perceive more polysemous words. For example, “apple” could be a “company” entity (Apple Inc.) in a financial NER dataset, but
may be a “commodity” entity (fruit apple) in an e-commerce
dataset. Access to both senses during training will potentially strengthen the robustness of a model with regard to
the polysemy problem. Moreover, when applying an NER
model to specific text, users are not always interested in
all of the entity types embedded in the text. Existing NER
models typically always output all entity types that they
can recognise, which is not an ideal delivery mode. One
on-demand model that flexibly recognises requested entity
types should be attractive to many users.
In this work, we develop a versatile model that can handle
multiple NER datasets simultaneously, addressing all of the
challenges mentioned above — the Prompting-based Unified NER system (PUnifiedNER). Empowered by prompt
learning, PUnifiedNER is built upon the recently proposed
T5 language model (Raffel et al. 2020), and an overview of
the model is shown in Figure 1. We jointly train the model on
eight different datasets, supporting a total of 37 entity types.
An obvious benefit of a prompting-based design is that the
prompts can be served as instructions to guide the model to

Much of named entity recognition (NER) research focuses
on developing dataset-specific models based on data from
the domain of interest, and a limited set of related entity
types. This is frustrating as each new dataset requires a new
model to be trained and stored. In this work, we present a
“versatile” model—the Prompting-based Unified NER system (PUnifiedNER)—that works with data from different domains and can recognise up to 37 entity types simultaneously,
and theoretically it could be as many as possible. By using
prompt learning, PUnifiedNER is a novel approach that is
able to jointly train across multiple corpora, implementing intelligent on-demand entity recognition. Experimental results
show that PUnifiedNER leads to significant prediction benefits compared to dataset-specific models with impressively
reduced model deployment costs. Furthermore, the performance of PUnifiedNER can achieve competitive or even better performance than state-of-the-art domain-specific methods for some datasets. We also perform comprehensive pilot
and ablation studies to support in-depth analysis of each component in PUnifiedNER.

Introduction
The Named Entity Recognition (NER) task involves the automatic recognition of entities in text with specific meaning,
and so includes both entity extraction and entity classification. The recent rise of transformer-based, pre-trained language models (Devlin et al. 2019; Raffel et al. 2020; Tan
et al. 2020, 2021; Lu et al. 2022a; Mao et al. 2022) has led
to significant performance improvements in NER for various
scenarios (Fries et al. 2022; Parmar et al. 2022).
Modern NER models perform self-supervised learning
on large unlabelled text datasets to learn generic linguistic
representations, and then are fine-tuned for a specific NER
task on domain-specific datasets. The output of these approaches, however, is still a single dataset-specific model
capable of recognising a few entity types, rather than a “versatile” model that can handle multiple domains and a large
number of entity types simultaneously. This is unsatisfactory in practice: for example, an NER model trained on an
e-commerce dataset can only extract entity types related to
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13327

