The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Let Graph Be the Go Board: Gradient-Free Node Injection Attack
for Graph Neural Networks via Reinforcement Learning
Mingxuan Ju1 , Yujie Fan2 , Chuxu Zhang3 , Yanfang Ye1
1

University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106
3
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02453
1
{mju2, yye7}@nd.edu; 2 yxf370@case.edu; 3 chuxuzhang@brandeis.edu
2

Abstract

and node features simultaneously for node representation
learning. Specifically, the majority of popular GNNs (Kipf
and Welling 2016; Veličković et al. 2017) follow a neural message-passing scheme to learn node embeddings via
recursively aggregating and propagating neighbor information. Along with their great success, the robustness of GNNs
has also attracted increasing attentions in recent years, and
it has been proved that such a message-passing scheme is
vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Zügner, Akbarnejad, and
Günnemann 2018; Chen et al. 2022).
Existing research efforts on graph adversarial attack
mainly concentrate on graph structure perturbations via
modifying edges (Dai et al. 2018; Wang and Gong 2019;
Zügner, Akbarnejad, and Günnemann 2018). Despite their
promising performance, these attack strategies have narrow
applications since the adversaries are required to manipulate
the existing graph topology, which is impractical under most
circumstances. Besides graph structural perturbations, another trend of research focuses on the node injection attacks
(Tao et al. 2021; Zou et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2020). They
explore a more practical setting where attacks are launched
by injecting new nodes into the existing graphs, and hence
the authorities of modifying the existing graph structures are
unnecessary. Considering spam detection in the social networks as an example, where adversaries aim at tricking the
victim model into misclassifying the spam accounts (i.e., target nodes). In many circumstances, they do not have permission to add or remove the friendships already formed
among the existing users (i.e., modifying connections between existing nodes). However, adversaries can easily create accounts with new profiles and establish new links with
the existing users to fulfill the attack purposes (i.e., injecting
new malicious nodes to deceive the victim model). Apparently, the node injection attacks are more feasible compared
with the attacks via graph perturbations.
Nevertheless, node injection attacks are challenging, and
the adversaries should consider: (i) how to generate imperceptible yet malicious features for the injected nodes? and
(ii) how to establish links between an injected node and the
existing nodes? Current related works (Tao et al. 2021; Zou
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2019) fulfill these
purposes according to the gradient from the victim model
in the white-box setting or the simulated gradient from the
surrogate model in the black-box setting. Though promis-

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have drawn significant attentions over the years and been broadly applied to essential applications requiring solid robustness or vigorous security standards, such as product recommendation and user
behavior modeling. Under these scenarios, exploiting GNN’s
vulnerabilities and further downgrading its performance become extremely incentive for adversaries. Previous attackers
mainly focus on structural perturbations or node injections
to the existing graphs, guided by gradients from the surrogate models. Although they deliver promising results, several limitations still exist. For the structural perturbation attack, to launch a proposed attack, adversaries need to manipulate the existing graph topology, which is impractical
in most circumstances. Whereas for the node injection attack, though being more practical, current approaches require
training surrogate models to simulate a white-box setting,
which results in significant performance downgrade when the
surrogate architecture diverges from the actual victim model.
To bridge these gaps, in this paper, we study the problem
of black-box node injection attack, without training a potentially misleading surrogate model. Specifically, we model the
node injection attack as a Markov decision process and propose Gradient-free Graph Advantage Actor Critic, namely
G2 A2C, a reinforcement learning framework in the fashion of advantage actor critic. By directly querying the victim model, G2 A2C learns to inject highly malicious nodes
with extremely limited attacking budgets, while maintaining a similar node feature distribution. Through our comprehensive experiments over eight acknowledged benchmark
datasets with different characteristics, we demonstrate the superior performance of our proposed G2 A2C over the existing
state-of-the-art attackers. Source code is publicly available at:
https://github.com/jumxglhf/G2A2C.

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs), a class of deep learning
methods designed to perform inference on graph data, have
achieved outstanding performance in various real-world applications, such as recommendation system (Ying et al.
2018), user behavior modeling (Pal et al. 2020) and drug
discovery (Jiang et al. 2021). The success of GNNs relies on
their powerful capability of integrating the graph structure
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4383

