The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Let the Data Choose: Flexible and Diverse Anchor Graph Fusion for Scalable
Multi-View Clustering
Pei Zhang1 , Siwei Wang1 , Liang Li1 , Changwang Zhang2 , Xinwang Liu1 ∗ , En Zhu1 ∗ ,
Zhe Liu3 , Lu Zhou3 , Lei Luo1 *
1

School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China, 410073
2
Huawei Poisson Lab, Shenzhen, China, 518129
3
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China, 210000
{zhangpei,wangsiwei13}@nudt.edu.cn, lianglee@alumni.hust.edu.cn, changwangzhang@foxmail.com,
{xinwangliu,enzhu}@nudt.edu.cn, {zhe.liu, lu.zhou}@nuaa.edu.cn, l.luo@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract

and Li 2017; Liu et al. 2018). Multi-view graph clustering
(MVGC) (Zhang et al. 2022b; Sun et al. 2021), multi-kernel
clustering (MKC) (Zhang et al. 2022a,c; Li et al. 2022) and
multi-view matrix factorization clustering (MVMFC) (Liu
et al. 2013; Zhao, Ding, and Fu 2017; Yang et al. 2020;
Zhang et al. 2021a) are three common solutions for MVC
task. Among them, MVGC methods aim at constructing one
or multiple similarity matrices (Cao et al. 2015; Li et al.
2019; Kang et al. 2020a). These approaches explore local or
global relationships between samples to establish connections across views. Despite the promising performance of
MVGC method, their capability to scale up is severely constrained by the high complexity. Therefore, it is essential to
design efficient algorithms to tackle large-scale MVC issues
in the current era of big data. Recently, researchers propose
the anchor-based MVGC approaches to alleviate the complexity of traditional multi-view graph clustering (Li et al.
2015; Kang et al. 2020b; Li et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021b). The basic goal of
these methods is to construct the anchor graph between anchors and the entire samples instead of constructing the full
graph. In this way, the time expenditures O(n3 ) is reduced
to O(n). For instance, Kang et al. use the pre-defined clustering centers as the anchor to obtain the anchor graph for
each view independently. Sun et al. and Wang et al. further
incorporate anchor into the optimization framework and finally obtain a unified anchor graph across multiple views. Li
et al. provide a parameter-free and adaptive weighted fusion
framework to obtain a joint graph.

In the past few years, numerous multi-view graph clustering algorithms have been proposed to enhance the clustering performance by exploring information from multiple views. Despite the superior performance, the high time
and space expenditures limit their scalability. Accordingly,
anchor graph learning has been introduced to alleviate the
computational complexity. However, existing approaches can
be further improved by the following considerations: (i)
Existing anchor-based methods share the same number of
anchors across views. This strategy violates the diversity
and flexibility of multi-view data distribution. (ii) Searching for the optimal anchor number within hyper-parameters
takes much extra tuning time, which makes existing methods impractical. (iii) How to flexibly fuse multi-view anchor graphs of diverse sizes has not been well explored
in existing literature. To address the above issues, we propose a novel anchor-based method termed Flexible and Diverse Anchor Graph Fusion for Scalable Multi-view Clustering (FDAGF) in this paper. Instead of manually tuning optimal anchor with massive hyper-parameters, we propose to optimize the contribution weights of a group of
pre-defined anchor numbers to avoid extra time expenditure
among views. Most importantly, we propose a novel hybrid
fusion strategy for multi-size anchor graphs with theoretical proof, which allows flexible and diverse anchor graph fusion. Then, an efficient linear optimization algorithm is proposed to solve the resultant problem. Comprehensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency
of our proposed framework. The source code is available at
https://github.com/Jeaninezpp/FDAGF.

Although the anchor-based MVGC has improved the efficiency of algorithms, it can still be enhanced in the following
ways. Firstly, current anchor-based MVGC approaches require all views to share the same number of anchors, which
violates the diversity principle in multi-view data distribution. In this case, the optimal number of anchors is determined by hyper-parameter traversal in a wide range for each
dataset, intensively degrading model efficiency and application. Therefore, how to automatically choose the diverse anchor number for different views is worthwhile to investigate.
Secondly, the problem of multi-size anchor fusion brought
by the flexible number of anchors has not received enough
attention. Therefore, designing a flexible and scalable anchor fusion algorithm is an urgent need in MVGC.

Introduction
Nowadays, many contrastive learning methods employ augmented views to enhance the learning of original data (Yang
et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022b). However, the data itself
can be represented from multiple views thanks to the improvement in data collection and feature extraction techniques. Multi-view clustering (MVC) is an important unsupervised learning method in machine learning and data
mining, which is based on the concept of integrating complementary and diverse information across views (Nie, Cai,
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11262

