The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Supervised Graph Learning for Long-Tailed Cognitive Diagnosis
Shanshan Wang1,2 , Zhen Zeng1 , Xun Yang3 , Xingyi Zhang1 *

0.4
Number of students(%)

Abstract
Cognitive diagnosis is a fundamental yet critical research task
in the field of intelligent education, which aims to discover
the proficiency level of different students on specific knowledge concepts. Despite the effectiveness of existing efforts,
previous methods always considered the mastery level on
the whole students, so they still suffer from the Long Tail
Effect. A large number of students who have sparse interaction records are usually wrongly diagnosed during inference. To relieve the situation, we proposed a Self-supervised
Cognitive Diagnosis (SCD) framework which leverages the
self-supervised manner to assist the graph-based cognitive diagnosis, then the performance on those students with sparse
data can be improved. Specifically, we came up with a graph
confusion method that drops edges under some special rules
to generate different sparse views of the graph. By maximizing the cross-view consistency of node representations,
our model could pay more attention on long-tailed students.
Additionally, we proposed an importance-based view generation rule to improve the influence of long-tailed students.
Extensive experiments on real-world datasets show the effectiveness of our approach, especially on the students with
much sparser interaction records. Our code is available at
https://github.com/zeng-zhen/SCD.

1

junyi_student
ASSIST_student
junyi_interaction
ASSIST_interaction

0.3
0.2

0.8
0.6
0.4

0.1

0.2

35

5

0

-3
30

5

-3
25

0

-2
20

-2

5
-1

15

10

0-

10

0
5

0

Number of interactions(%)

1
Anhui University, HeFei, China
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, HeFei, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China, HeFei, China
wang.shanshan@ahu.edu.cn, q21201141@stu.ahu.edu.cn,
xyang21@ustc.edu.cn, xyzhanghust@gmail.com

5-

2

Number of interactions per student in the group

Figure 1: Statistics of the number of students and interactions grouping by interaction records. The horizontal coordinate is the number of interactions per student in each group.
The left vertical coordinates indicate the percentage of students in each group to the total students. And the right vertical coordinate indicates the percentage of interactions of all
students in each group to the total interactions.

ever, according to our research, there is a serious long-tailed
problem in student-exercise interactions, which is largely
overlooked by existing efforts. Statistics of two real-word
datasets, i.e., junyi (Chang, Hsu, and Chen 2015) and ASSIST (Feng, Heffernan, and Koedinger 2009), are showed in
figure 1. Specifically, a minority students have the vast majority interaction records. Existing models based on overall
optimization will favor these students and ignore the longtailed students.
In order to address the long-tailed problem in cognitive diagnosis, the long-tailed nodes that occupy much sparser interaction records should be paid more attention during training. Inspired by the SGL (Wu et al. 2021), we aim to generate sparse views of the original student-exercise interaction graph. In the specially designed sparse views, the graph
dropped edges based on the degree of nodes, so that the longtailed nodes could achieve a stronger influence. Additionally, we use the sparse views to construct an auxiliary selfsupervised task, the information discarded in the process of
edge dropout will have few impact on other nodes. Specifically, we construct a graph contrastive learning for cognitive
diagnosis, which provides self-supervised signals by performing self-discrimination of nodes on sparse views. The

Introduction
Cognitive diagnosis (CD) is an essential part of the intelligent education system (Liu 2021; Anderson et al. 2014).
Further works in intelligent education, i.e., knowledge tracking (Piech et al. 2015), exercise recommendation (Wu et al.
2020) are based on the results of cognitive diagnosis. In the
cognitive diagnosis system, there are a series of students,
exercises, and knowledge concepts. For a given student, the
cognitive diagnosis task aims to predict the knowledge mastery level on knowledge concepts based on his historical interaction records (Lord 1952; Wang et al. 2020).
There has been a great development on cognitive diagnosis, such as linear model ITR (Lord 1952), MIRT (Reckase
2009), and neural network-based model NCD (Wang et al.
2020). Recent work RCD (Gao et al. 2021) explored the application of graph convolutional networks (GCN) on cognitive diagnosis and achieved the state-of-the-art results. How* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

110

