The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning from Training Dynamics: Identifying Mislabeled Data
beyond Manually Designed Features
Qingrui Jia1,2* , Xuhong Li2* , Lei Yu1,3 , Jiang Bian2 , Penghao Zhao2 , Shupeng Li2 ,
†
Haoyi Xiong2 , Dejing Dou4
1

Sino-French Engineer School, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Baidu Inc. Beijing, China
3
Beihang Hangzhou Innovation Institute Yuhang, Hangzhou, China
4
BCG Greater China, Beijing, China
{jiaqingrui, lixuhong, xionghaoyi}@baidu.com, {jiaqr, yulei}@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

and Gupta 2015; Xiao et al. 2015; Joulin et al. 2016; Li et al.
2017a), which certainly leads to a larger amount of noises.
According to recent studies (Zhang et al. 2021; Arpit et al.
2017; Arora et al. 2019), datasets with poor-quality labels,
including mislabeled and ambiguously labeled training samples, would negatively affect the generalization performance
of deep models.

While mislabeled or ambiguously-labeled samples in the
training set could negatively affect the performance of deep
models, diagnosing the dataset and identifying mislabeled
samples helps to improve the generalization power. Training dynamics, i.e., the traces left by iterations of optimization algorithms, have recently been proved to be effective
to localize mislabeled samples with hand-crafted features. In
this paper, beyond manually designed features, we introduce
a novel learning-based solution, leveraging a noise detector, instanced by an LSTM network, which learns to predict
whether a sample was mislabeled using the raw training dynamics as input. Specifically, the proposed method trains the
noise detector in a supervised manner using the dataset with
synthesized label noises and can adapt to various datasets
(either naturally or synthesized label-noised) without retraining. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the proposed method. We train the noise detector based on the synthesized label-noised CIFAR dataset and test such noise detector on Tiny ImageNet, CUB-200, Caltech-256, WebVision
and Clothing1M. Results show that the proposed method precisely detects mislabeled samples on various datasets without further adaptation, and outperforms state-of-the-art methods. Besides, more experiments demonstrate that the mislabel
identification can guide a label correction, namely data debugging, providing orthogonal improvements of algorithmcentric state-of-the-art techniques from the data aspect.

To address the label noises, two lines of researches have
been proposed. One is from the algorithm aspect (Song et al.
2020), including robust objective functions (Pereyra et al.
2017; Ghosh, Kumar, and Sastry 2017; Wang et al. 2019),
sample reweight (Patrini et al. 2017; Jiang et al. 2018) and
hybrid approaches (Li, Socher, and Hoi 2020; Nguyen et al.
2020; Nishi et al. 2021; Xia et al. 2021). Another line is from
the data aspect, focusing on identifying mislabeled samples
and improving the quality of datasets. A series of methods
following this line are based on the observation that in the
context of Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), hand-crafted
features on training dynamics are able to separate the mislabeled samples from clean ones (Toneva et al. 2019; Pleiss
et al. 2020; Swayamdipta et al. 2020; Paul, Ganguli, and Dziugaite 2021). Subtle differences on the training dynamics
can be discerned, as in Figure 1, where the averaged probability of being classified into the labeled category (givenlabel probability) across mislabeled samples is lower and
their variance is higher compared to the clean ones. More
distinguishable features of training dynamics can even characterize the learning difficulty of each training sample (Hacohen, Choshen, and Weinshall 2020; Baldock, Maennel,
and Neyshabur 2021).

Introduction
Deep learning models have achieved remarkable performances across various tasks (Salakhutdinov 2014) due to the
rapid development of paralleled devices, advanced network
architectures and learning algorithms, as well as the large
dataset collection and high-quality annotations (Deng et al.
2009a; Li et al. 2017a; Zhou et al. 2018). However, the difficulty and expensiveness of acquiring high-quality labels inevitably leave an amount of label noises on the datasets. In
many real-world settings, training samples and their labels
are collected through proxy variables or web scraping (Chen

However, the aforementioned distinguishable features are
usually extracted manually from the training dynamics with
prior knowledge and domain expertise, and it is not always
fitting well and being efficient. Tracing back the history
of machine learning, the deep learning methods are much
more effective than traditional learning with handcraft features, by learning features from raw data and solving the
learning tasks in end-to-end fashions. In light of the evolution of machine learning, we propose a novel solution
through learning from training dynamics to identify mislabeled samples. Beyond manually designed features, our

* The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8041

