The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Target-Free Text-Guided Image Manipulation
Wan-Cyuan Fan1 , Cheng-Fu Yang2 , Chiao-An Yang3 , Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1, 4
1

National Taiwan University
2
UCLA
3
Purdue University
4
NVIDIA
r09942092@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract

Existing text-to-image manipulation works can be divided
into two categories: object-centric image editing and scenelevel image manipulation (Shetty, Fritz, and Schiele 2018).
For object-centric image editing (Choi et al. 2018; Li et al.
2019, 2020b,a), existing works focus on modifying visual
attributes (e.g., color or texture) of particular objects (e.g.,
face or bird) in the image, or to change its style (e.g., age
or expression) to match the given description (not necessarily instruction). With such image-description pairs observed
during training, the text-guided editing process can be simply achieved by mapping the information between the images and the corresponding descriptions. While ground truth
target image is not necessarily required, such models require
descriptions for both images before and after editing.
As for scene-level image manipulation (El-Nouby et al.
2019; Shetty, Fritz, and Schiele 2018; Zhang et al. 2021;
Dhamo et al. 2020), its goal is to reorganize the composition of the input image (e.g., moving, adding, and removing
objects in the images). Since the input image might contain multiple objects in the scene, to localize “where” to
edit would be a difficult task to handle. Moreover, instead
of changing attributes of a given object, the model needs to
generate objects or introduce a background on the location
of interest. Thus, Zhang et al. (Zhang et al. 2021) decompose
the above manipulation process into two stages: localization
and generation. With target images as supervision, TIMGAN (Zhang et al. 2021) is trained to manipulate the reference image with visual realism and semantic correctness.
However, since the ground truth target image might not always be available, Adversarial Scene Editing (ASE) (Shetty,
Fritz, and Schiele 2018) chooses a weakly supervised setting with image-level labels as weak guidance. Nevertheless,
ASE only allows one to remove an object in the scene and
cannot easily be applied to operations like adding or changing an attribute.
In this paper, we propose a cyclic-Manipulation GAN
(cManiGAN) for target-free image manipulation. Due to the
absence of ground truth target image during training, it is
extremely challenging to identify where and how to edit the
input reference image, so that the output would be semantically correct. To tackle the above two obstacles, our cManiGAN exploits self-supervised learning for enforcing the semantic correctness, while pixel-level guidance can be automatically observed. More specifically, the image editor of

We tackle the problem of target-free text-guided image manipulation, which requires one to modify the input reference
image based on the given text instruction, while no ground
truth target image is observed during training. To address this
challenging task, we propose a Cyclic-Manipulation GAN
(cManiGAN) in this paper, which is able to realize where
and how to edit the image regions of interest. Specifically, the
image editor in cManiGAN learns to identify and complete
the input image, while cross-modal interpreter and reasoner
are deployed to verify the semantic correctness of the output
image based on the input instruction. While the former utilizes factual/counterfactual description learning for authenticating the image semantics, the latter predicts the “undo”
instruction and provides pixel-level supervision for the training of cManiGAN. With such operational cycle-consistency,
our cManiGAN can be trained in the above weakly supervised setting. We conduct extensive experiments on the
datasets of CLEVR and COCO, and the effectiveness and
generalizability of our proposed method can be successfully
verified. Project page: sites.google.com/view/wancyuanfan/
projects/cmanigan.

Introduction
Image manipulation by text instruction (or text-guided image manipulation) aims to edit the input reference image
based on the given instruction that describes the desirable modification to the image. This task not only benefits a variety of applications including computer-aided design (El-Nouby et al. 2019; Viazovetskyi, Ivashkin, and
Kashin 2020), face generation (Xia et al. 2021b,a) and image
editing (Zhang et al. 2021; Shetty, Fritz, and Schiele 2018;
Li et al. 2020a; Wang et al. 2021; Patashnik et al. 2021; Li
et al. 2020b), the developed algorithm can be further applied
as a data augmentation technique for learning deep neural
networks. In addition to the need to output high-quality images, the main challenges in text-guided image manipulation
are to identify “where” and to know “how” to edit the image based on the given instruction. In other words, how to
bridge the gap between semantic and linguistic information
during image manipulation process requires the efforts from
researchers in related fields.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

588

