The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Latent Autoregressive Source Separation
Emilian Postolache* 1 , Giorgio Mariani∗1 , Michele Mancusi∗1 , Andrea Santilli1 ,
Luca Cosmo†2,3 , Emanuele Rodolà†1
1

Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Italy
3
University of Lugano, Switzerland
postolache@di.uniroma1.it, mariani@di.uniroma1.it, mancusi@di.uniroma1.it
2

Abstract

the standard practice is to fine-tune the model or, in alternative, elicit prompting by scaling training (Wei et al. 2021;
Sanh et al. 2022). The former is usually the default option,
but it requires additional optimization steps or modifications
to the model. The latter is challenging on non-trivial tasks,
especially in domains different from natural language (Yang
et al. 2022; Hertz et al. 2022).
This paper aims to tackle one of such tasks, namely
source separation, leveraging existing vector-quantized autoregressive models without requiring any gradient-based
optimization or architectural modifications. The task of separating two or more sources from a mixture signal has recently received much attention following the success of
deep learning, especially in the audio domain, ranging
from speech (Dovrat, Nachmani, and Wolf 2021), music
(Défossez 2021), and universal source separation (Wisdom
et al. 2021; Postolache et al. 2022). Although not as prominent as its audio counterpart, image source separation has
been addressed in literature (Halperin, Ephrat, and Hoshen
2019). Most successful approaches use explicit supervision to achieve notable results (Luo and Mesgarani 2019;
Défossez et al. 2019), or leverage large-scale unsupervised
regression (Wisdom et al. 2020).
We propose a generative approach to perform source separation via autoregressive prior distributions trained on a
latent VQ-VAE domain (when class information is used,
the approach is weakly supervised; otherwise, it is unsupervised). A non-parametric sparse likelihood function is
learned by counting the occurrences of latent mixed tokens
with respect to the sources’ tokens, obtained by mapping the
data-domain sum signals and the relative addends via the
VQ-VAE. This module is not invasive, neither for the VQVAE nor for the autoregressive priors, given that the representation space of the VQ-VAE does not change while learning the likelihood function. Finally, the likelihood function
is combined with the estimations of the autoregressive priors at inference time via the Bayes formula, resulting in a
posterior distribution. The separations are obtained from the
posterior distributions via standard discrete samplers (e.g.,
ancestral, beam search). We call our method LASS (Latent
Autoregressive Source Separation).
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

Autoregressive models have achieved impressive results over
a wide range of domains in terms of generation quality and
downstream task performance. In the continuous domain, a
key factor behind this success is the usage of quantized latent
spaces (e.g., obtained via VQ-VAE autoencoders), which allow for dimensionality reduction and faster inference times.
However, using existing pre-trained models to perform new
non-trivial tasks is difficult since it requires additional finetuning or extensive training to elicit prompting. This paper
introduces LASS as a way to perform vector-quantized Latent Autoregressive Source Separation (i.e., de-mixing an input signal into its constituent sources) without requiring additional gradient-based optimization or modifications of existing models. Our separation method relies on the Bayesian
formulation in which the autoregressive models are the priors, and a discrete (non-parametric) likelihood function is
constructed by performing frequency counts over latent sums
of addend tokens. We test our method on images and audio with several sampling strategies (e.g., ancestral, beam
search) showing competitive results with existing approaches
in terms of separation quality while offering at the same time
significant speedups in terms of inference time and scalability
to higher dimensional data.

Introduction
Autoregressive models have achieved impressive results in a
plethora of domains ranging from natural language (Brown
et al. 2020) to densely-valued domains such as audio (Dhariwal et al. 2020) and vision (Razavi, van den Oord, and
Vinyals 2019; Esser, Rombach, and Ommer 2021), including multimodal joint spaces (Ramesh et al. 2021; Yu et al.
2022). In the dense setting, it is typical to train autoregressive models over discrete latent representations obtained
through the quantization of continuous data, possibly using VQ-VAE autoencoders (van den Oord, Vinyals, and
Kavukcuoglu 2017). This way, generating higher resolution
samples while simultaneously reducing inference time is
possible. Additionally, the learned latent representations are
useful for downstream tasks (Castellon, Donahue, and Liang
2021). However, in order to perform new non-trivial tasks,
* Equal contribution. Listing order is random.
†

Shared last authorship.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We introduce LASS as a Bayesian inference method for
source separation that can leverage existing pre-trained
9444

