The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Detecting Sources of Healthcare Associated Infections
Hankyu Jang1 , Andrew Fu2 , Jiaming Cui3 , Methun Kamruzzaman4 , B. Aditya Prakash3 , Anil
Vullikanti2, 4 , Bijaya Adhikari1 , Sriram V. Pemmaraju1
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Iowa
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia
3
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
4
Biocomplexity Institute, University of Virginia
Email: {hankyu-jang, bijaya-adhikari, sriram-pemmaraju}@uiowa.edu, {af9pn, hkz8wk, vsakumar}@virginia.edu,
{jiamingcui1997, badityap}@gatech.edu
2

Abstract

and CDI have complex transmission pathways (Plipat et al.
2013; Li et al. 2009; Jang et al. 2019) that involve contaminated surfaces in addition to direct person-to-person contacts. As a result, HAIs have been difficult to model, detect,
and control. Recent work, e.g., (Plipat et al. 2013; Jang et al.
2019), has shown that standard SEIR type models (Hethcote
2000) are not very suitable for modeling HAI spread; we
will describe a load sharing model (Jang et al. 2019) later.
Most hospitals have limited testing and when some infections are detected in the hospital, a lot of effort is invested
into rapidly identifying the source of infection. This is done
so that strategies such as isolation precautions can be imposed in order to limit the spread of the infection. This,
of course, corresponds to the classical “source detection”
problem, which has been studied extensively in data mining
and network science, e.g., (Prakash, Vreeken, and Faloutsos
2014; Shah and Zaman 2010; Lappas et al. 2010). However,
all prior work on source detection problems has been restricted to Susceptible-Exposed-Infected-Recovered (SEIR)
type compartmental models, and cannot be easily adapted
for HAIs. For instance, the Minimum Description Length
(MDL) approach of (Prakash, Vreeken, and Faloutsos 2014)
is crucially tied to the structure of SEIR type models. Thus
the source detection problem remains open for HAIs, and is
the focus of our paper.
Motivated by the approach of (Lappas et al. 2010), we
use a risk minimization type formulation for the source detection problem on load sharing models for HAIs. We describe this informally below and more formally later. Let
G = (G0 , G1 , . . . , GT −1 ) be a temporal network, where the
network Gt = (Pt , Lt , Et ) represents interactions among a
set Pt of people (e.g., patients, nurses, physicians) and between people and a set of locations Lt , in time step t. Let
P os be the set of observed positive HAI cases
S during the
time window [0, T − 1], and let N eg = ( t Pt ) \ P os.
Let M be an instance of S
a load sharing model. For a source
set S, let InfM (S) ⊆ t Pt denote the (random) subset
of people who get infected according
S to model M due to
disease starting at S. For any v ∈ t Pt , let α(v, S) :=
Prob[v ∈ InfM (S)]. To measure how good the source set
S is, at explaining P
the observations P os, we define two
quantities: g(S) := v∈P os α(v, S), the expected number
of infections
P according to M, that are also observed, and
f (S) :=
v∈N eg α(v, S), the expected number of infec-

Healthcare acquired infections (HAIs) (e.g., Methicillinresistant Staphylococcus aureus infection) have complex
transmission pathways, spreading not just via direct personto-person contacts, but also via contaminated surfaces. Prior
work in mathematical epidemiology has led to a class of models – which we call load sharing models – that provide a
discrete-time, stochastic formalization of HAI-spread on temporal contact networks. The focus of this paper is the source
detection problem for the load sharing model. The source detection problem has been studied extensively in SEIR type
models, but this prior work does not apply to load sharing
models.
We show that a natural formulation of the source detection
problem for the load sharing model is computationally hard,
even to approximate. We then present two alternate formulations that are much more tractable. The tractability of our
problems depends crucially on the submodularity of the expected number of infections as a function of the source set.
Prior techniques for showing submodularity, such as the “live
edge” technique are not applicable for the load sharing model
and our key technical contribution is to use a more sophisticated “coupling” technique to show the submodularity result.
We propose algorithms for our two problem formulations by
extending existing algorithmic results from submodular optimization and combining these with an expectation propagation heuristic for the load sharing model that leads to ordersof-magnitude speedup. We present experimental results on
temporal contact networks based on fine-grained EMR data
from three different hospitals. Our results on synthetic outbreaks on these networks show that our algorithms outperform baselines by up to 5.97 times. Furthermore, case studies
based on hospital outbreaks of Clostridioides difficile infection show that our algorithms identify clinically meaningful
sources.

Introduction
Healthcare acquired infections (HAIs) such as Methicillinresistant Staphylococcus aureus infection (MRSA) and
Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) pose a significant
burden on our healthcare infrastructure (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention 2019). Unlike respiratory infections
such as SARS-CoV-2 and Influenza, HAIs such as MRSA
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4347

