The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Continuous Trajectory Generation Based on Two-Stage GAN
Wenjun Jiang1 , Wayne Xin Zhao4 , Jingyuan Wang1, 2, 3 * , Jiawei Jiang1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Economics and Management, Beihang University, Beijing, China
4
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China

Abstract

in such cases, it is important to generate synthetic trajectories with good data utility.
In the last decades, the problem of trajectory generation
has been widely studied. In the early stage, the researchers
aim to build model-based methods to model the regularity of human mobility (Chaoming et al. 2010; Jiang et al.
2016), such as temporal periodicity, spatial continuity. These
methods assume that human mobility can be described by
specific mobility patterns and thus can be modeled with finite parameters with explicit physical meanings. However,
in fact, human mobility behaviors exhibit complex sequential transition regularities, which can be time-dependent and
high-ordered. Thus, although these model-based methods
have the advantage of being interpretable by design, their
performance is limited due to the simplicity of the implemented mechanisms. To address the above limitation, the researchers propose model-free methods (Dan, Qing, and Liran 2018; Ouyang et al. 2018), mainly using neural network
generative paradigms such as generative adversarial network
and variational autoencoder. Unlike model-based methods,
model-free methods abandon the extraction of specific human mobility patterns, and instead directly build a neural
network to learn the distribution of the real data and generate trajectories from the same distribution.
However, comparing the above approaches, there are several key challenges remaining to be solved: (1) First, the
problem of the continuity of the generated trajectories is ignored. The trajectories generated by current methods are not
continuous routes on the road network, which makes these
synthetic trajectories unusable for downstream applications
like traffic simulation. (2) Second, those model-free methods without utilizing prior knowledge of human mobility fail
to effectively generate continuous trajectories. (3) Third, the
stochastic generation process of existing methods has the error accumulation problem, where the trajectory is randomly
generated according to the probability given by the generator. However, once the generator predicts wrong, the process continues to generate under the wrong premise, which
reduces the quality of the generated trajectory.
In this paper, we propose TS-TrajGen, a novel two-stage
generative adversarial framework with spatial-temporal oriented designs in the generator, discriminator and generation
process to tackle the above challenges. Specifically, we build
the generator based on the human mobility hypothesis of the

Simulating the human mobility and generating large-scale
trajectories are of great use in many real-world applications,
such as urban planning, epidemic spreading analysis, and
geographic privacy protect. Although many previous works
have studied the problem of trajectory generation, the continuity of the generated trajectories has been neglected, which
makes these methods useless for practical urban simulation
scenarios. To solve this problem, we propose a novel twostage generative adversarial framework to generate the continuous trajectory on the road network, namely TS-TrajGen,
which efficiently integrates prior domain knowledge of human mobility with model-free learning paradigm. Specifically, we build the generator under the human mobility hypothesis of the A* algorithm to learn the human mobility behavior. For the discriminator, we combine the sequential reward with the mobility yaw reward to enhance the effectiveness of the generator. Finally, we propose a novel two-stage
generation process to overcome the weak point of the existing
stochastic generation process. Extensive experiments on two
real-world datasets and two case studies demonstrate that our
framework yields significant improvements over the state-ofthe-art methods.

Introduction
Modeling human mobility and generating synthetic yet realistic trajectories is crucial in many applications. On the
one hand, synthetic trajectories are fundamental for urban planning(Ji et al. 2022b; Wang et al. 2020, 2018),
epidemic spreading analysis(Ren, Wang, and Zhao 2022;
Wang, Wang, and Wu 2018), and traffic control(Ji et al.
2022a; Wang et al. 2016), e.g., simulating changes in urban mobility in the presence of new infrastructure or international events. On the other hand, generating synthetic
trajectories is a viable solution to protect the privacy of human mobility trajectory data (Pellungrini et al. 2017). The
difficulty of open source sharing of trajectory data today is
heavily due to privacy concerns, which hinders most existing data-driven studies. Using synthetic trajectories instead
of real trajectories can not only preserve the utility of trajectory data, but also avoid leakage of user privacy. Therefore,
* Corresponding author: jywang@buaa.edu.cn

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4374

