The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

The Effect of Modeling Human Rationality Level
on Learning Rewards from Multiple Feedback Types
Gaurav R. Ghosal1 * , Matthew Zurek2 * , Daniel S. Brown3 , Anca D. Dragan1
1

University of California, Berkeley
University of Wisconsin, Madison
3
University of Utah
{gauravrghosal,anca}@berkeley.edu, matthewzurek@cs.wisc.edu, dsbrown@cs.utah.edu
2

Abstract

entropy) distribution, where the human actions are exponentially more probable the higher value they are (Baker,
Tenenbaum, and Saxe 2007; Ramachandran and Amir 2007;
Ziebart et al. 2008; Henry et al. 2010; Vasquez, Okal, and
Arras 2014; Kretzschmar et al. 2016; Kitani et al. 2012;
Wulfmeier, Ondruska, and Posner 2015; Brown and Niekum
2018; Christiano et al. 2017; Finn, Levine, and Abbeel 2016;
Mainprice, Hayne, and Berenson 2015). Often this model
would have a ”rationality” coefficient β 1 meant to capture
how good of an optimizer the human is—setting β to 0
would yield the uniform distribution capturing a random human, while β → ∞ would put all the probability mass on
optimal actions.
Inspired by the way economists look at preferences, the
field then started looking beyond learning from demonstrations to learning from comparisons (Wirth et al. 2017; Christiano et al. 2017; Bıyık et al. 2020). The model was similar: still a Boltzmann distribution, but over two trajectories/actions, instead of over all possible trajectories/actions.
Other researchers started looking at a deluge of feedback
types: comparisons (Wirth et al. 2017), language (Matuszek
et al. 2012), demonstrations (Ng, Russell et al. 2000), trajectory rankings (Brown et al. 2020), corrections (Bajcsy et al.
2017), critiques (Cui and Niekum 2018), e-stops (HadfieldMenell et al. 2017a), binary feedback (Knox and Stone
2009), and proxy rewards (Hadfield-Menell et al. 2017b).
Recently, it was shown that all of these can be interpreted
as noisy-rational (Boltzmann) choices (Jeon, Milli, and Dragan 2020), opening the door to learning from all of these
feedback types in combination, and even enabling robots to
actively select feedback types.
Boltzmann-rationality’s ability to unify different feedback
types is useful, but the model comes with this one parameter, β, which begs the question: what should we set that
to? Prior work often either omits β (implicitly setting it to
1) (Finn, Levine, and Abbeel 2016; Christiano et al. 2017;
Ibarz et al. 2018) or sets it to a fixed, often heuristic, value
across all feedback types (Ramachandran and Amir 2007;
Shah et al. 2019; Bıyık et al. 2020; Jeon, Milli, and Dragan
2020). But demonstrations are sometimes easier or harder
to give, depending on the task and the interface, suggesting
that β should be adapted to the domain. And comparisons

When inferring reward functions from human behavior (be
it demonstrations, comparisons, physical corrections, or estops), it has proven useful to model the human as making
noisy-rational choices, with a “rationality coefficient” capturing how much noise or entropy we expect to see in the human behavior. Prior work typically sets the rationality level
to a constant value, regardless of the type, or quality, of human feedback. However, in many settings, giving one type of
feedback (e.g. a demonstration) may be much more difficult
than a different type of feedback (e.g. answering a comparison query). Thus, we expect to see more or less noise depending on the type of human feedback. In this work, we advocate that grounding the rationality coefficient in real data
for each feedback type, rather than assuming a default value,
has a significant positive effect on reward learning. We test
this in both simulated experiments and in a user study with
real human feedback. We find that overestimating human rationality can have dire effects on reward learning accuracy
and regret. We also find that fitting the rationality coefficient
to human data enables better reward learning, even when the
human deviates significantly from the noisy-rational choice
model due to systematic biases. Further, we find that the rationality level affects the informativeness of each feedback
type: surprisingly, demonstrations are not always the most
informative—when the human acts very suboptimally, comparisons actually become more informative, even when the
rationality level is the same for both. Ultimately, our results
emphasize the importance and advantage of paying attention to the assumed human-rationality-level, especially when
agents actively learn from multiple types of human feedback.

1

Introduction

Reward learning started from the inverse optimal control
idea that we can recover the underlying objective when observing optimal behavior (Kalman 1964), and transitioned
into AI with the introduction of inverse reinforcement learning (Ng, Russell et al. 2000). While initial research assumed
optimal demonstrators (Ng, Russell et al. 2000; Ratliff, Bagnell, and Zinkevich 2006), the field quickly moved to the
noisy-rational human model (Morgenstern and Von Neumann 1953): a number of simultaneous works, with different motivations, converged on a Bolzmann (maximum
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5983

Sometimes denoted by α and sometimes as the inverse (1/β).

