The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Supervised Learning for Anomalous Channel Detection in EEG Graphs:
Application to Seizure Analysis
Thi Kieu Khanh Ho, Narges Armanfard
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University
Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada
{thi.k.ho, narges.armanfard}@mcgill.ca

Abstract

2018). EEG measures the voltage changes between electrodes by the ionic currents flowing within the brain neurons and provides spatial-temporal information of the brain.
However, detecting seizures in EEGs requires a direct examination by experienced EEG readers that requires a huge
amount of time and effort. Moreover, different opinions of
experts can cause discrepant diagnostic results (Yan et al.
2018). Therefore, the development of automated and objective methods for epileptic seizure detection is needed.
Although many studies have proposed deep learning (DL)
based models for automated seizure detection (Saab et al.
2020; Shoeibi et al. 2021; Abdelhameed and Bayoumi 2021;
Thuwajit et al. 2021; Khalkhali et al. 2021; Rashed-AlMahfuz et al. 2021; Mahajan, Somaraj, and Sameer 2021;
Saichand et al. 2021; Shen et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2022),
several challenges still remain unsolved. First, these studies train their proposed model in a supervised approach –
i.e. availability of labeled seizure data during training is required. This does not address the challenge from a clinical
perspective as seizure labels obtaining is difficult and labour
expensive during the process of manually seizure marking,
hence very scarce in real-world applications.
Second, these studies apply deep convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) directly to the time-series signals or spectrograms hence ignore the critically important information
physical distance-based connectivity and functional-based
connectivity between different brain regions. Several studies
have recently proposed graph learning techniques to capture
the relationships between EEG electrodes (aka EEG nodes)
(Wang et al. 2020; Wagh and Varatharajah 2020; Saboksayr, Mateos, and Cetin 2021; Tang et al. 2021; Saboksayr,
Mateos, and Cetin 2021; Mathur and Chakka 2022). However, they all fail to take into consideration the local patterns (e.g. local sub-graphs and sub-structures) when learning EEG graphs. Such local information could be effective
when detecting anomalies in EEG graphs. The effectiveness
of such local information has been recently demonstrated in
applications such as analyzing social, traffic, citation, and
financial transaction networks (Liu et al. 2021a,b; Zheng
et al. 2021). However, its effectiveness in analyzing EEG
signals, that are inherently non-stationary and dynamic, has
remained unexplored to date.
Third, as is discussed before, in real-world applications,
there is not enough training data from seizure class; while

Electroencephalogram (EEG) signals are effective tools towards seizure analysis where one of the most important challenges is accurate detection of seizure events and brain regions in which seizure happens or initiates. However, all existing machine learning-based algorithms for seizure analysis
require access to the labeled seizure data while acquiring labeled data is very labor intensive, expensive, as well as clinicians dependent given the subjective nature of the visual qualitative interpretation of EEG signals. In this paper, we propose to detect seizure channels and clips in a self-supervised
manner where no access to the seizure data is needed. The
proposed method considers local structural and contextual
information embedded in EEG graphs by employing positive and negative sub-graphs. We train our method through
minimizing contrastive and generative losses. The employ
of local EEG sub-graphs makes the algorithm an appropriate choice when accessing to all EEG channels is impossible due to complications such as skull fractures. We conduct
an extensive set of experiments on the largest seizure dataset
and demonstrate that our proposed framework outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods in the EEG-based seizure study.
The proposed method is the only study that requires no access to the seizure data in its training phase, yet establishes
a new state-of-the-art to the field, and outperforms all related
supervised methods.

Introduction
Epilepsy is one of the most prevalent neurological disorders affecting 65 million people (Johnson 2019). Patients
with epilepsy suffer from sudden and unforeseen seizures,
during which they are vulnerable to injury, suffocation and
death (Surges et al. 2021). Epileptic seizure detection makes
it possible to identify more accurately the epileptogenic
zone (EZ), which is the brain area responsible for initiating seizures (Sharma, Rai, and Tewari 2018), and the surgical resection of EZ renders epilepsy patients seizure-free. As
epilepsy can start at any age, early detection is crucial to prevent further damage during physiological development and
to increase life expectancy (Beghi and Giussani 2018).
Scalp electroencephalogram (EEG) has been considered
as the most common tool to detect seizures (Kuhlmann et al.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7866

