The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Deep Equilibrium Models for Snapshot Compressive Imaging
Yaping Zhao1,2 , Siming Zheng3,4 , Xin Yuan1, *
1
Westlake University, Hangzhou, China
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China
3
Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
zhaoyp@connect.hku.hk, zhengsiming@cnic.cn, xyuan@westlake.edu.cn
2

Abstract
The ability of snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) systems
to efficiently capture high-dimensional (HD) data has led to
an inverse problem, which consists of recovering the HD
signal from the compressed and noisy measurement. While
reconstruction algorithms grow fast to solve it with the recent advances of deep learning, the fundamental issue of accurate and stable recovery remains. To this end, we propose deep equilibrium models (DEQ) for video SCI, fusing
data-driven regularization and stable convergence in a theoretically sound manner. Each equilibrium model implicitly
learns a nonexpansive operator and analytically computes
the fixed point, thus enabling unlimited iterative steps and
infinite network depth with only a constant memory requirement in training and testing. Specifically, we demonstrate how DEQ can be applied to two existing models for
video SCI reconstruction: recurrent neural networks (RNN)
and Plug-and-Play (PnP) algorithms. On a variety of datasets
and real data, both quantitative and qualitative evaluations
of our results demonstrate the effectiveness and stability of
our proposed method. The code and models are available at:
https://github.com/IndigoPurple/DEQSCI

Introduction
Aiming at the efficient and effective acquisition of highdimensional (HD) visual signal, snapshot compressive
imaging (SCI) systems have benefited from the advent
of novel optical designs to sample the HD data as twodimensional (2D) measurements. Considering the video
SCI system, the 2D measurement of a video, i.e., a threedimensional (3D) data-cube leads to an inverse problem.
The goal of such an inverse problem is to recover a video
from a collection of noisy snapshots, which could be modeled as (Yuan, Brady, and Katsaggelos 2021):
y = Φx + e,

Figure 1: Our proposed deep equilibrium models (DEQ) for
SCI can lead to stable recovery as K increases, where K
denotes the iteration number during the corresponding optimization progress. We test our model under two different frameworks, i.e., RNN (Cheng et al. 2020) and PnPGAP (Yuan et al. 2020), the fidelity and stability of our
model can be obviously observed.

(1)

n

where y ∈ R is the 2D measurement with n equaling the
number of each video frame’s pixels, Φ ∈ Rn×nB is the
sensing matrix, x ∈ RnB is the 3D data (by vectorizing
each frame and stacking them), and e is the measurement
noise; here B denotes that every B video frames are collapsed into a single 2D measurement. Though algorithms

have been fully developed to reconstruct the video from its
snapshot measurement in recent years, the fundamental issue remains: this inverse problem is inherently ill-posed,
which makes the recovery of the signal x inaccurate and unstable for noise-affected data y (Jalali and Yuan 2019).
The rapid advancement of deep learning and artificial in-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3642

