The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

An Extreme-Adaptive Time Series Prediction Model Based on
Probability-Enhanced LSTM Neural Networks
Yanhong Li1 , Jack Xu2 , David C. Anastasiu1
1

Santa Clara University, Santa Clara, CA, USA
Santa Clara Valley Water District, San Jose, CA, USA
yli20@scu.edu, JXu@valleywater.org, danastasiu@scu.edu
2

Abstract

For a long time, water level prediction was mainly based
on traditional machine learning and statistics-based models. However, methods such as Autoregressive Integrated
Moving Average (ARIMA) (Box and Jenkins 1976) seem
to adjust poorly to extreme changes in the water level values and cannot easily find the nonlinear relationships among
the data. Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have
shown their great advantages in various areas (Yang et al.
2019; Anastasiu et al. 2020; Pei et al. 2021). Both conventional Neural Network (NN) and Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) models have been used to overcome the disadvantages of traditional methods for time series forecasting (Qi
et al. 2019), since they can map time series data into latent
representations by capturing the non-linear relationships of
data in sequences. In particular, Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) models generally outperform other models in longterm predictions. However, imbalanced data or severe events
might hurt deep learning models when it comes to long-term
predictions. In the context of reservoir water level forecasting, most of the works mentioned above falter when predicting extreme events. They also usually focus on predicting only one or two sensors, putting in question the generalizability of these models. To solve these two challenges,
we provide an extreme-adaptive solution for reservoir water
level prediction which we evaluate extensively on data from
9 different reservoirs across more than 30 years.
The fundamental contribution of this research is the proposal of NEC+1 , a probability-enhanced neural network
framework. We use clustering in NEC+ to dynamically produce distribution indicators, which improves the model’s
robustness to the occurrence of severe events. To improve
training performance, we present a selected backpropagation approach and a two-level sampling algorithm to accommodate imbalanced extreme data, along with a customizable
weighted loss function for implementing a binary classifier,
which is a crucial component of NEC+.

Forecasting time series with extreme events has been a challenging and prevalent research topic, especially when the
time series data are affected by complicated uncertain factors, such as is the case in hydrologic prediction. Diverse traditional and deep learning models have been applied to discover the nonlinear relationships and recognize the complex
patterns in these types of data. However, existing methods
usually ignore the negative influence of imbalanced data, or
severe events, on model training. Moreover, methods are usually evaluated on a small number of generally well-behaved
time series, which does not show their ability to generalize. To tackle these issues, we propose a novel probabilityenhanced neural network model, called NEC+, which concurrently learns extreme and normal prediction functions and
a way to choose among them via selective back propagation.
We evaluate the proposed model on the difficult 3-day ahead
hourly water level prediction task applied to 9 reservoirs in
California. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed model significantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines and exhibits superior generalization ability on data with
diverse distributions.

Introduction
Time series forecasting is an important technique for many
domains in which most types of data are stored as time
sequences, including traffic (Hua, Kapoor, and Anastasiu
2018), weather forecasting (Hewage et al. 2021), biology (Bose et al. 2022), stock price forecasting (Mohan et al.
2019), and water resource management (Zhang et al. 2021).
These data usually contain seasonality, long term trends, and
non-stationary characteristics which usually are taken into
account by traditional models during prediction. However,
in hydrologic prediction, the water level of dams and reservoirs are also affected by complicated uncertain factors like
weather, geography, and human activities, which makes the
task of precisely predicting them challenging. Most reservoirs are large hydraulic constructions that serve multiple
purposes, including power generation, flood control, irrigation, and navigation, making them critical components in the
safety and quality of life of the general population. Therefore, a large number of studies and architectures have explored the problem of reservoir water level prediction.

Related Work
Time series prediction has been studied extensively. Traditionally, there were several techniques used to effectively forecast future values in the time series, including
univariate Autoregressive (AR), Moving Average (MA),

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8684

https://github.com/davidanastasiu/NECPlus

