The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Stability-Based Generalization Analysis of the Asynchronous Decentralized SGD
Xiaoge Deng, Tao Sun* , Shengwei Li, Dongsheng Li*
National Lab for Parallel and Distributed Processing (PDL), College of Computer,
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China.
dengxg@nudt.edu.cn, nudtsuntao@163.com, lucasleesw9@gmail.com, dsli@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract

Currently, distributed training becomes ubiquitous as the
scale and complexity of ML models and datasets increase
significantly (Dean et al. 2012; Li et al. 2014). In distributed
SGD (Zinkevich et al. 2010; Li et al. 2014), multiple workers
process data in parallel and communicate with the parameter server, which then updates the model accordingly. This
implement often suffers from 1) full synchronization overhead from all workers and 2) communication bottleneck of
the central server. To deal with these issues, asynchronous
decentralized stochastic gradient descent (AD-SGD) was
proposed in (Lian et al. 2018) to improve the training efficiency of the distributed systems. In AD-SGD, workers do
not wait for all others and only communicate in a decentralized manner, thus enabling wait-free computation and communication. The asynchronous decentralized algorithm has
been widely studied due to its superior performance (Jiang
et al. 2021; Cui et al. 2021; Nadiradze et al. 2021; Lan and
Zhou 2021; Xu, Zhang, and Wang 2021).
From the theoretical perspective, although there exists
plenty of convergence analysis of AD-SGD (Lian et al.
2018; Nadiradze et al. 2021; Jiang et al. 2021; Xu, Zhang,
and Wang 2021), whether the converged solution generalizes
well on unseen testing data under the asynchronous decentralized setting has not been explored. This study aims to
close the theoretical gap in the generalizability of the ADSGD algorithm with a stability-based analytical framework.

The generalization ability often determines the success of machine learning algorithms in practice. Therefore, it is of great
theoretical and practical importance to understand and bound
the generalization error of machine learning algorithms. In
this paper, we provide the first generalization results of the
popular stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm in the
distributed asynchronous decentralized setting. Our analysis
is based on the uniform stability tool, where stable means that
the learned model does not change much in small variations
of the training set. Under some mild assumptions, we perform a comprehensive generalizability analysis of the asynchronous decentralized SGD, including generalization error
and excess generalization error bounds for the strongly convex, convex, and non-convex cases. Our theoretical results reveal the effects of the learning rate, training data size, training iterations, decentralized communication topology, and
asynchronous delay on the generalization performance of the
asynchronous decentralized SGD. We also study the optimization error regarding the objective function values and
investigate how the initial point affects the excess generalization error. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on
MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and Tiny-ImageNet datasets
to validate the theoretical findings.

Introduction
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins and Monro
1951) has become the mainstay for training modern machine
learning (ML) models. In practice, the solution founded by
SGD has not only very small training error but also generalizes surprisingly well to the test data (Zhang et al. 2021).
Recently, a series of theoretical researches have been dedicated to establishing the generalization error bounds for
SGD, i.e., the expected difference between empirical risk on
finite training data and population risk on unseen test examples. The seminal work (Hardt, Recht, and Singer 2016)
tackled this problem with the algorithmic stability of SGD,
which measures sensitivity to perturbations in the training
dataset. Stability-based generalization analysis is an important learning theory topic that has been further improved and
extended in (Kuzborskij and Lampert 2018; Lei and Ying
2020; Bassily et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2022).

Our Contributions
This paper studies the generalization behavior of AD-SGD
for the first time, including the generalization error and excess generalization error. We give comprehensive theoretical
results covering strongly convex, convex, and non-convex
problems and further provide a detailed analysis of two commonly used learning rates. The main results are listed in Table 1, and our contributions can be summarized as follows.
• We study the algorithmic stability of AD-SGD and derive
its generalization error bounds accordingly. Theoretical
results show that the impact of the learning rate, training
data size, and training iterations on AD-SGD is identical
to the SGD algorithm (Hardt, Recht, and Singer 2016).
More importantly, we reveal the joint effects of decentralized communication topology and asynchronous delay on the stability and generalizability of AD-SGD.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7340

