The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Simulating Network Paths with Recurrent Buffering Units
Divyam Anshumaan1 * , Sriram Balasubramanian1, 2 * † , Shubham Tiwari1
Nagarajan Natarajan1 , Sundararajan Sellamanickam1 , Venkata N. Padmanabhan1
1
Microsoft Research India
University of Maryland, College Park
t-danshumaan@microsoft.com, sriramb@cs.umd.edu, t-shutiwari@microsoft.com, nagarajn@microsoft.com,
ssrajan@microsoft.com, padmanab@microsoft.com
2

Abstract

manual approach. State-of-the-art (SOTA) data-driven configuration techniques (Yan et al. 2018; Ashok et al. 2020) try to
mitigate this challenge, but (a) they do not accommodate realworld network behaviors like packet reordering, and (b) scale
poorly as they rely on black-box optimization (Section 2).
In this work, we formulate and study a novel ML problem
of simulating a target network path. The goal is to respond to
the sending protocol’s actions with realistic delay values for
every packet, just like the target network would. Note that
the sending protocol is provided as input and it could be very
different at test vs train. Formally:

Simulating physical network paths (e.g., Internet) is a cornerstone research problem in the emerging sub-field of AI-fornetworking. We seek a model that generates end-to-end packet
delay values in response to the time-varying load offered by
a sender, which is typically a function of the previously output delays. The problem setting is unique, and renders the
state-of-the-art text and time-series generative models inapplicable or ineffective. We formulate an ML problem at the
intersection of dynamical systems, sequential decision making, and time-series modeling. We propose a novel grey-box
approach to network simulation that embeds the semantics of
physical network path in a new RNN-style model called Recurrent Buffering Unit, providing the interpretability of standard
network simulator tools, the power of neural models, the efficiency of SGD-based techniques for learning, and yielding
promising results on synthetic and real-world network traces.

1

Definition 1 (End-to-end network path simulation). Let
(Π, N ) denote the traces collected using a sending protocol Π, over a target network path N between a sender S and
N
a receiver R, i.e., S ⇝ R (e.g., the path between a cloud
server and a cellular client in certain locations, during the
b that simulates
peak hours of a day). We seek a model N
N
S ⇝ R s.t. for a new and previously unseen protocol Π′ , the
b ) “closely match” the ground-truth
simulated traces (Π′ , N
(Π′ , N ), that would be obtained if we took the trouble of actu-

Introduction

Network simulation provides a cost-effective way of developing and evaluating networking applications (e.g. videoconferencing) and protocols. It is a cornerstone research problem, recognized as such by the networking community, with
applications in AI-for-networking (Wei, Gu, and Li 2021).
Network simulation entails delaying or dropping the data
packets traversing a sender-receiver network path appropriately. The sender S typically adapts its sending rate continuously based on the feedback in terms of delays or drops
gleaned from the packets sent previously. For the simulation to be realistic, the packet delays and drops produced by
the simulation mechanism should reflect the target network
conditions faithfully, both at the microscopic and the macroscopic levels, so as to recreate application-level metrics such
as throughput distribution.
Widely-used network simulation tools such as ns3 (NSNAM 2011) require configuring with a certain network topology,link bandwidth, cross-traffic, etc., typically
performed manually by networking domain experts. However, it is extremely challenging to ensure realism in such a

N

ally running Π′ too on the same path S ⇝ R under identical
network conditions. The match is in terms of the metrics that
networking applications care about; e.g., the joint delay and
throughput distribution.
This problem poses the following key challenges:
(A1) Reactive inputs at test time: At test time, the decisions made by the protocol (e.g., new sending rate), formb , are a response to the delays
ing the input to the model N
output by the model. So, we cannot expect the entire input
sequence to be available ahead of time, unlike in standard
predictive (Rangapuram et al. 2018; Salinas et al. 2020) or
generative modeling settings (Esteban, Hyland, and Rätsch
2017; Fu et al. 2019; Smith and Smith 2020).
(A2) Unseen test protocols: At test time, the behaviour of
inputs to the model (governed by Π′ ) can change drastically
from that of the training time (governed by Π), as it depends
on how the protocol Π′ reacts to the (simulated) delays.
(A3) Non-trivial success metric: The stochastic nature of
the network setting means that the metrics of interest are
distributional, e.g., joint delay and throughput distribution.
Unlike in sequential decision making, we cannot attach a

* These authors contributed equally.
†
Work partially done as a Research Fellow at Microsoft Research
India
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6684

