The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

GraphPrompt: Graph-Based Prompt Templates for Biomedical Synonym
Prediction
Hanwen Xu* 1 , Jiayou Zhang* 2 , Zhirui Wang* 3 , Shizhuo Zhang4 , Megh Bhalerao1 , Yucong Liu5 ,
Dawei Zhu5 , Sheng Wang†1,6
2

1
University of Washington,
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3
Carnegie Mellon University,
4
Nanyang Technological University,
5
Peking University
swang@cs.washington.edu
Test synonym: CD115 (human)

Abstract

CD185 (human)

In the expansion of biomedical dataset, the same category
may be labeled with different terms, thus being tedious
and onerous to curate these terms. Therefore, automatically
mapping synonymous terms onto the ontologies is desirable, which we name as biomedical synonym prediction
task. Unlike biomedical concept normalization (BCN), no
clues from context can be used to enhance synonym prediction, making it essential to extract graph features from
ontology. We introduce an expert-curated dataset OBO-syn
encompassing 70 different types of concepts and 2 million curated concept-term pairs for evaluating synonym prediction methods. We find BCN methods perform weakly
on this task for not making full use of graph information.
Therefore, we propose GraphPrompt, a prompt-based learning approach that creates prompt templates according to the
graphs. GraphPrompt obtained 37.2% and 28.5% improvement on zero-shot and few-shot settings respectively, indicating the effectiveness of these graph-based prompt templates. We envision that our method GraphPrompt and OBOsyn dataset can be broadly applied to graph-based NLP tasks,
and serve as the basis for analyzing diverse and accumulating biomedical data. All the data and codes are avalible at:
https://github.com/HanwenXuTHU/GraphPrompt

human protein

macrophage colony-stimulating
factor 1 receptor (human)

eukaryotic protein

CD115

[MASK] is identical with CD115 (human)
[MASK] is identical with macrophage ... receptor (human)
[MASK] is a kind of CD115
[MASK] is a kind of human protein
[MASK] is a kind of human protein, which is a kind of [MASK]

Figure 1: Illustration of GraphPrompt. GraphPrompt classifies a test synonym (CD115 (human)) to an entity in the
graph by converting the graph into prompt templates based
on the zeroth-order neighbor (T 0 ), first-order neighbors
(T 1 ), and second-order neighbors (T 2 ).

diseases (Doğan, Leaman, and Lu 2014; Li et al. 2016),
drugs (Kuhn et al. 2007; Pradhan et al. 2013), genes (Szklarczyk et al. 2016) and adverse drug reactions (Roberts,
Demner-Fushman, and Tonning 2017). Despite their encouraging performance, these approaches have not yet been applied to the more ambiguous entities, such as processes,
pathways, cellular components, and functions (Smith et al.
2007), which lie at the center of life sciences. As scientists
rely on these entities to describe disease and drug mechanisms (Yu et al. 2016), the inconsistent terminology used
across different labs inevitably hampers the scientific communication and collaboration, necessitating the synonym
prediction of these entities.
The first immediate bottleneck to achieve the normalization of these under-explored entities is the lack of a highquality and large-scale dataset, which is the prerequisite
for existing entity normalization approaches (Wright 2019;
Ji, Wei, and Xu 2020; Sung et al. 2020). To tackle this
problem, we collected 70 types of biomedical entities from
OBO Foundry (Smith et al. 2007), spanning a wide variety of biomedical areas and containing more than 2 mil-

Introduction
Mining biomedical text data, such as scientific literature and
clinical notes, to generate hypotheses and validate discovery has led to many impactful clinical applications (Zhao
et al. 2021; Lever et al. 2019). One fundamental problem in
biomedical text mining is entity synonym prediction, which
aims to map a phrase to a concept in the controlled vocabulary (Sung et al. 2020). Accurate entity synonym prediction enables us to summarize and compare biomedical insights across studies and obtain a holistic view of biomedical knowledge. Current approaches (Wright 2019; Ji, Wei,
and Xu 2020; Sung et al. 2020) to biomedical synonym prediction often focus on more standardized entities such as
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10576

