The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CL3D: Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Cross-LiDAR 3D Detection
Xidong Peng1 , Xinge Zhu3 , Yuexin Ma1,2 *
2

1
ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{pengxd, mayuexin}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain adaptation for Cross-LiDAR 3D detection is challenging due to the large gap on the raw data representation
with disparate point densities and point arrangements. By
exploring domain-invariant 3D geometric characteristics and
motion patterns, we present an unsupervised domain adaptation method that overcomes above difficulties. First, we propose the Spatial Geometry Alignment module to extract similar 3D shape geometric features of the same object class
to align two domains, while eliminating the effect of distinct point distributions. Second, we present Temporal Motion Alignment module to utilize motion features in sequential frames of data to match two domains. Prototypes generated from two modules are incorporated into the pseudolabel reweighting procedure and contribute to our effective
self-training framework for the target domain. Extensive experiments show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on cross-device datasets, especially for the datasets
with large gaps captured by mechanical scanning LiDARs
and solid-state LiDARs in various scenes. Project homepage
is at https://github.com/4DVLab/CL3D.git.

Introduction

Figure 1: We show several key domain gaps between mechanical scanning LiDAR (from nuScenes) and solid-state
LiDAR (from PandaSet). (a) shows the comparison of statistics of point numbers and point densities. (b) describes domain gaps of perception range and instance-level point distribution. Two adjacent frames are shown in green and red.
The geometric structure represented by the black sampling
points in the side-view and the motion pattern in the birdeye-view are domain-invariant for cars.

Due to the advantages of accurately capturing depth information of large-scale scenes, LiDARs become crucial
sensors for the 3D perception of autonomous driving and
robotics. Boosted by deep learning techniques, LiDARbased 3D detection (Yan, Mao, and Li 2018; Zhu et al.
2021; Qi et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020;
Shi and Rajkumar 2020; Zhang, Hu, and Xu 2022; Cong
et al. 2022; Hou et al. 2022) has made great progress and becomes the main solution for many autonomous driving companies. However, deep learning-based methods rely heavily
on massive annotated data, which is time-consuming and
expensive, especially for labeling 3D point clouds of large
scenes. Moreover, the domain adaptation for point clouds
gets more challenging compared to image-based adaptation
tasks (Chen et al. 2018; Saito et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2018;
Cui et al. 2020; Li, Ji, and Qu 2022) where the image-based
domain gap is more about the explicit appearance including lighting and weather while the domain gap existing in

LiDAR is mainly reflected in the raw point representation,
which causes image-based domain adaptation strategies inapplicable.
Different types of LiDAR have obvious difference on
the point representation. For the widely-used mechanical
scanning LiDARs, they have various beams with different
point densities. Compared with them, solid-state LiDARs
are based on another principle of physics, having disparate
perception ranges, point densities, and point arrangements.
We show the statistics and visualization to describe the domain gaps in Figure. 1. Actually, solid-state LiDARs become
more and more popular because it is cheaper and has longer

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2047

