The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multi-Unit Auctions for Allocating Chance-Constrained Resources
Anna Gautier, Bruno Lacerda, Nick Hawes, Michael Wooldridge
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
anna.gautier@eng.ox.ac.uk, bruno@robots.ox.ac.uk, nickh@robots.ox.ac.uk, mjw@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

plans for the worst-case (i.e., assuming that uncertainty is
resolved with maximum resource usage), resources may be
underutilised in practice. This occurs because agents must
avoid any possibility (however unlikely) of using too many
resources. On the other hand, planning only for expected resource usage could result in agents counting on resources
without any assurance that they are actually available.
For example, suppose the robots receive power from a
shared solar panel each day; our aim would be to design
a system that preallocates the available power among the
different robots. It is essential that, in most cases, the total
power use of the robots does not exceed the amount of energy generated. Say a robot started the day with 100% of
their onboard battery power, and was preallocated enough
solar power to use and recharge 50% of their onboard battery. While they may plan to only use 50% of their battery during daily tasks, stochasticity in the environment may
cause them to use 60% of their battery instead. But this need
not result in a system failure – it only means that the robot
would need to draw an extra 10% out of the solar power.
If no extra power is available, they would start their day
with only 90% battery. Never taking this opportunity would
be excessively risk averse, but doing so repeatedly would
risk flat batteries. Because of this single-agent uncertainty
over resource consumption, we consider a global system that
plans for chance constraints: that is, we seek to limit the
probability of resource violations. This problem is known as
a Chance Constrained Multi-Agent MDP, and was originally
introduced in de Nijs et al. (2017) .
In this paper, we present the Auction for ChanceConstrained Resources (ACCR), an auction mechanism
which handles uncertainty over resource usage. In ACCR,
agents are asked to bid on resources, reporting both how
much they value each resource and how likely they are to
exceed a given resource bound. A Mixed Integer Linear Program (MILP) allocates resources to agents while ensuring a
chance constraint over the probability of exceeding the resource limit is met over all agents. We then consider how
multi-objective reasoning can be used to generate singleagent bids. We also present a pricing structure that can be
used to apply the mechanism to non-cooperative settings.
Finally, we empirically evaluate ACCR against state-of-theart approaches using Maze (Wu and Durfee 2010), a classic
multi-agent constrained resource domain, and an advertising

Sharing scarce resources is a key challenge in multi-agent
interaction, especially when individual agents are uncertain about their future consumption. We present a new auction mechanism for preallocating multi-unit resources among
agents, while limiting the chance of resource violations. By
planning for a chance constraint, we strike a balance between worst-case approaches, which under-utilise resources,
and expected-case approaches, which lack formal guarantees.
We also present an algorithm that allows agents to generate
bids via multi-objective reasoning, which are then submitted
to the auction. We then discuss how the auction can be extended to non-cooperative scenarios. Finally, we demonstrate
empirically that our auction outperforms state-of-the-art techniques for chance-constrained multi-agent resource allocation in complex settings with up to hundreds of agents.

Introduction
When multiple independent agents are operating in the same
environment, it often becomes necessary for them to share
limited resources. For example, consider a research station
on Mars, which comprises multiple robots operated by researchers. The robots might have to share access to electricity to power operation, or network bandwidth to send
data back to Earth. In our work, we focus on multi-unit resources like battery power and bandwidth. Our goal is to
design a system that preallocates the resources among the
agents. It is important for a resource distribution system in
this context to consider that agents are working in an uncertain environment. In this paper, we focus on uncertainty that
can be modelled with a Markov Decision Process (MDP).
This can include uncertainty that arises from the environment that the robot encounters or from the physical execution of the robot’s actions. Because agents cannot fully control their environment, taking the same actions may result
in a different outcome which may, in turn, require different future resource use. This results in agents that are uncertain of the quantity of resources they will consume in a
given day in pursuit of their tasks, even if they follow a fixed
plan. Because resources are preallocated before the uncertainty over resource usage is resolved, the system must decide how to deal with probabilistic information. If the system
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11560

