The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Prompting Neural Machine Translation with Translation Memories
Abudurexiti Reheman1 , Tao Zhou1 , Yingfeng Luo1 , Di Yang2 , Tong Xiao1,2 , Jingbo Zhu1,2 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
2
NiuTrans Research, Shenyang, China
rexiti neu@outlook.com, zhoutao neu@outlook.com, luoyingfengmail@163.com,
yangdi@niutrans.com, {xiaotong, zhujingbo}@mail.neu.edu.cn

Abstract

Force decoding

𝑦1𝑡𝑚 ···𝑦𝑘𝑡𝑚 𝑦1 ··· 𝑦𝑙 <eos>

Improving machine translation (MT) systems with translation
memories (TMs) is of great interest to practitioners in the MT
community. However, previous approaches require either a
significant update of the model architecture and/or additional
training efforts to make the models well-behaved when TMs
are taken as additional input. In this paper, we present a simple but effective method to introduce TMs into neural machine translation (NMT) systems. Specifically, we treat TMs
as prompts to the NMT model at test time, but leave the training process unchanged. The result is a slight update of an existing NMT system, which can be implemented in a few hours
by anyone who is familiar with NMT. Experimental results
on several datasets demonstrate that our system significantly
outperforms strong baselines.

Encoder

Decoder

𝑡𝑚
𝑥1𝑡𝑚 ··· 𝑥𝑚
𝑥1 ··· 𝑥𝑛

𝑡𝑚
𝑡𝑚
<bos> 𝑦1 ···𝑦𝑘 𝑦1 ··· 𝑦𝑙

Figure 1: Structure of the proposed method. The source and
target sentences of TM are concatenated with the input sentence and hypothesis in a specific concatenation template,
respectively. The tokens in the target TM together with the
concatenation template are generated in a forced manner.
The lengths of the source and target TM together with the
concatenation templates are m and k, and the lengths of the
input sentence and hypothesis are n and l, respectively.

Introduction
Integrating TM is one of the commonly used techniques to
improve real-world MT systems. In TM-assisted MT systems, it is often assumed that there is a database in which
high-quality bilingual sentence pairs are stored. When translating an input sentence, the most (or top-K) similar sentence pair, which is retrieved from TM, is used to optimize
the translation. From the perspective of practical application,
this approach is particularly useful for MT, especially when
sentences are highly repetitive, such as in translating technical manuals, legal provisions, etc. Previous works show
that translation quality can be significantly improved when
a well-matched TM sentence pair is provided both in Statistical Machine Translation (SMT) (Ma et al. 2011; Wang,
Zong, and Su 2013; Li, Way, and Liu 2014) and Neural Machine Translation (NMT) (Gu et al. 2018; Khandelwal et al.
2020).
However, there are two major problems with this type of
work in real-world applications. First, it is difficult to find
such a TM dataset in most cases, especially when users can
not share their TM data with the public for some reason.
Second, previous approaches often require model changes,
including training the model with TM (Bulté and Tezcan
2019; Hossain, Ghazvininejad, and Zettlemoyer 2020; Xu,

Crego, and Senellart 2020), changing the NMT model architecture for TM integration (Gu et al. 2018; Bapna and
Firat 2019; Xia et al. 2019; He et al. 2021), and introducing
additional modules (Zhang et al. 2018; He et al. 2019; Khandelwal et al. 2020). In this case, it is difficult to incorporate
TM into the NMT system even if TM data is provided, since
TM incorporation can not be accomplished on a generic decoder, and a deeply customized decoder is needed.
Here, we address this problem by using few-shot learning
(Wang et al. 2021b), which enables the system to quickly
adapt to a small number of samples. The recent prevalence
of prompt-based approaches (Brown et al. 2020), which
transfer the original task into a generation task by designing an appropriate template without modifying the language
model, gives us some inspiration that the retrieved TM can
prompt the translation of the input sentence without modifying the NMT model.
Based on this idea, we propose a simple approach to
quickly adapt the NMT model in the few-shot TM scenario.
Specifically, we treat TMs as prompts to the NMT model
during the decoding process, with very small changes to the
decoder. Our method can cover the advantages of conventional TM augmented methods and bring some new ideas,
such as incorporating users’ local historical translation data
into NMT.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13519

