The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Cogito Ergo Summ: Abstractive Summarization of Biomedical Papers
via Semantic Parsing Graphs and Consistency Rewards
Giacomo Frisoni* , Paolo Italiani* , Stefano Salvatori* , Gianluca Moro*
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Bologna, Cesena Campus
Via dell’Università 50, I-47522 Cesena, Italy
{giacomo.frisoni, paolo.italiani, s.salvatori, gianluca.moro}@unibo.it

substantial challenges and constraints (Karamanis 2007). Indeed, (i) medical jargon and professional language are truly
hard to interpret; (ii) scientific documents convey precise domain information allowing for a narrow interpretation margin and non-tolerating factual mistakes; (iii) clauses are often interdependent and express complex interactions; (iv)
knowledge rapidly evolves over time.
Despite unprecedented progress made possible by pretrained transformer-based language models (Lin and Ng
2019), current summarizers still face issues in terms of
succinctness, non-repetitiveness, fluency, informativeness,
and faithfulness (Maynez et al. 2020). Most prior studies
only depend on superficial text organization and ignore the
deeper underlying semantic content (Bender et al. 2021),
lacking structured representations to encapsulate the convoluted long-range associations between the mentioned entities (e.g., proteins, diseases, drugs). By contra, we argue that
these connections are vital to document understanding and
beneficial to knowledge selection.
Biomedical documents are usually composed of a series
of events and factual evidence; understanding how to leverage such information in generative models is crucial. Notably, semantic parsing graphs normalize many lexical and
syntactic variations by providing formal meaning representations capable of decoupling concept units (what to say)
from language competencies (how to say it). Since these representations can be defined with a panoply of formalisms
having different objectives and properties, we underline the
importance of bridging the complementary strengths of two
influential semantic parsing tasks: closed-domain Event Extraction (EE) and Abstract Meaning Representation (AMR).
EE is task-driven and aims to derive n-ary and potentially
nested interactions between participants having a specific
semantic role, where event schemas (i.e., target event, entity, and role types) are pre-established conforming to a reference ontology; its history is very intertwined with health
informatics (Frisoni, Moro, and Carbonaro 2021). AMR is
linguistically-grounded and is conceived to graphically capture the general meaning of any sentence as high-level semantic relations between abstract concepts (Banarescu et al.
2013). Fig. 1 depicts and compares their expressive power.
A growing body of research in natural language generation (NLG) calls attention to incorporating explicit semantic
structures into the summarization process (Yu et al. 2020),

Abstract
The automatic synthesis of biomedical publications catalyzes
a profound research interest elicited by literature congestion.
Current sequence-to-sequence models mainly rely on the lexical surface and seldom consider the deep semantic interconnections between the entities mentioned in the source document. Such superficiality translates into fabricated, poorly
informative, redundant, and near-extractive summaries that
severely restrict their real-world application in biomedicine,
where the specialized jargon and the convoluted facts further emphasize task complexity. To fill this gap, we argue
that the summarizer should acquire semantic interpretation
over input, exploiting structured and unambiguous representations to capture and conserve the most relevant parts of
the text content. This paper presents C OGITO E RGO S UMM,
the first framework for biomedical abstractive summarization
equipping large pre-trained language models with rich semantic graphs. Precisely, we infuse graphs from two complementary semantic parsing techniques with different goals and
granularities—Event Extraction and Abstract Meaning Representation, also designing a reward signal to maximize information content preservation through reinforcement learning. Extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations on the
CDSR dataset show that our solution achieves competitive
performance according to multiple metrics, despite using
2.5× fewer parameters. Results and ablation studies indicate that our joint text-graph model generates more enlightening, readable, and consistent summaries. Code available at:
https://github.com/disi-unibo-nlp/cogito-ergo-summ.

Introduction
Given the sheer number of biomedical publications, clinicians, patients, and researchers need advanced tools to skim
the literature efficiently and grasp salient contents. Hence,
automatically organizing everyday scientific discoveries or
insights into natural, concise, and informative syntheses is
essential to promote knowledge acquisition (Moradi and
Ghadiri 2019). To this end, abstractive document summarization demands rephrasing and condensing long and often labyrinthine portions of text in a creative way, discarding redundant and unnecessary attributes. Compared with
the open domain, performing this task in biomedicine raises
* All the authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12781

