The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Few-Shot Defect Image Generation via Defect-Aware Feature Manipulation
Yuxuan Duan, Yan Hong, Li Niu∗ , Liqing Zhang*
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
sjtudyx2016@sjtu.edu.cn, yanhong.sjtu@gmail.com, ustcnewly@sjtu.edu.cn, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

𝑧

The performances of defect inspection have been severely
hindered by insufficient defect images in industries, which
can be alleviated by generating more samples as data augmentation. We propose the first defect image generation
method in the challenging few-shot cases. Given just a handful of defect images and relatively more defect-free ones, our
goal is to augment the dataset with new defect images. Our
method consists of two training stages. First, we train a dataefficient StyleGAN2 on defect-free images as the backbone.
Second, we attach defect-aware residual blocks to the backbone, which learn to produce reasonable defect masks and accordingly manipulate the features within the masked regions
by training the added modules on limited defect images. Extensive experiments on MVTec AD dataset not only validate
the effectiveness of our method in generating realistic and diverse defect images, but also manifest the benefits it brings
to downstream defect inspection tasks. Codes are available at
https://github.com/Ldhlwh/DFMGAN.

1

𝑐

Mapping

𝑧object
Mapping

Synthesis
StyleGAN2

𝑧defect

𝑐
Synthesis

DFMGAN

Defect-aware
Res Block

Defect
Mapping

Figure 1: An overview of our DFMGAN and its two-stage
training strategy. Left: First, a StyleGAN2 is pretrained on
defect-free data. Right: Then, defect-aware residual blocks
are attached to the backbone to produce defect masks and
manipulate the features within defect regions.

et al. 2021), or copying the defect region from one image
to another (Lin et al. 2021). Nevertheless, defect images
generated by these methods are far from being realistic and
diverse. On the other hand, though Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) and its variants
are widely used in many image generation tasks, they are
scarcely used for defect image generation because GANs
are susceptible to data shortage. Previously, quite few GANbased defect image generation works (Niu et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2021) are designed. They either rely on hundreds or
thousands of defect images and even more defect-free ones,
or merely focus on a single category of texture (e.g., marble,
metal, concrete). However, in real industrial manufacture,
usually only a few defect images are available because of
the rarity of real defect images in production lines and the
difficulty in collection. Moreover, comparing with textures,
objects (e.g., nut, medicine, gadget) have richer structural
information and fewer regular patterns, which further escalates the difficulty in defect image generation for objects.
To deal with such cases, we propose a novel Defect-aware
Feature Manipulation GAN (DFMGAN) to generate realistic and diverse defect images using limited defect images.
DFMGAN is inspired by few-shot image generation methods (Wang et al. 2020; Zhao, Cong, and Carin 2020; Robb
et al. 2020) which adapt pretrained models learned on large
domains to smaller domains. However, these methods focus
on transferring whole images without particular design on

Introduction

Defect inspection, whose typical tasks include defect detection, classification, and localization, plays an important
role in industrial manufacture. So far, many research efforts
have been paid to design automated defect inspection systems to ensure the qualification rate without manual participation (Pang et al. 2021). However, it is challenging to adequately obtain diverse defect images due to the scarcity of
real defect images in production lines and the high collection cost, also known as the data insufficiency issue. Therefore, nowadays deep learning-based defect inspection methods (Schlegl et al. 2017; Bergmann et al. 2020; Li et al.
2021) usually adopt an unsupervised paradigm, that is, training one-class classifiers with defect-free data only. Without
the supervision of defect images, those models cannot distinguish different defect categories and thus inapplicable to
certain tasks such as defect classification.
Aiming to solve the data insufficiency problem, an intuitive idea is to generate more defect images. Previous methods try to render simple yet fake defect images by manually adding artifacts (DeVries and Taylor 2017), cutting/pasting patches of defect-free images (seen as defects) (Li
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

571

