The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Rephrasing the Reference for Non-autoregressive Machine Translation
Chenze Shao1,2 , Jinchao Zhang3 , Jie Zhou3 , Yang Feng1,2∗
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc, China
{shaochenze18z,fengyang}@ict.ac.cn, {dayerzhang,withtomzhou}@tencent.com

Abstract
Non-autoregressive neural machine translation (NAT) models suffer from the multi-modality problem that there may
exist multiple possible translations of a source sentence, so
the reference sentence may be inappropriate for the training
when the NAT output is closer to other translations. In response to this problem, we introduce a rephraser to provide
a better training target for NAT by rephrasing the reference
sentence according to the NAT output. As we train NAT based
on the rephraser output rather than the reference sentence, the
rephraser output should fit well with the NAT output and not
deviate too far from the reference, which can be quantified as
reward functions and optimized by reinforcement learning.
Experiments on major WMT benchmarks and NAT baselines
show that our approach consistently improves the translation
quality of NAT. Specifically, our best variant achieves comparable performance to the autoregressive Transformer, while
being 14.7 times more efficient in inference.

Figure 1: An example of the reference and the desired
rephraser output. The reference is inappropriate for the training, and the rephraser output should keep the same semantics and correctly evaluate the model output.

“modes” (alternative translations for an input) in the training data. Besides, one thread of research explores the use
of latent variables or word alignments to reduce the nondeterminism in the translation process (Gu, Cho, and Li
2017; Ma et al. 2019; Shu et al. 2020; Song, Kim, and Yoon
2021), and another thread of research focuses on designing
robust training objectives for NAT to mitigate the effect of
multi-modality (Libovický and Helcl 2018; Shao et al. 2020;
Ghazvininejad et al. 2020; Du, Tu, and Jiang 2021).
Our work handles the multi-modality problem in an unexplored way. Since the reference sentence may be inappropriate for the training, we introduce a rephraser to provide
a better training target for NAT by rephrasing the reference
sentence according to the NAT output. As Figure 1 shows,
when the reference is “I ate pizza this morning” and the NAT
output is “this morning I ate apple”, although the only prediction error is ‘apple’, predictions of all positions will be
highly penalized by the inappropriate reference. If the reference can be rephrased to “this morning I ate pizza”, then all
predictions will be correctly evaluated, while the target-side
semantics can still be preserved.
How to obtain a good rephraser is the central focus of
our approach. We use a shallow Transformer decoder as
the rephraser. Since there is no direct supervision for the
rephraser, we quantify our requirements for the rephraser
as reward functions and optimize them with reinforcement
learning. First, the rephraser output should fit well with the
NAT output, otherwise an inappropriate reference will result
in a large and inaccurate training loss. Therefore, the first
reward is related to the training loss on the rephraser out-

Introduction
Non-autoregressive neural machine translation (NAT, Gu
et al. 2018) models significantly speed up the decoding but
suffer from performance degradation compared to autoregressive models. The performance degradation is mainly attributed to the multi-modality problem that there may exist multiple possible translations of a source sentence, so
the reference sentence will be inappropriate for the training when the NAT output is closer to other translations. The
multi-modality problem manifests itself as the large crossentropy loss during the training, which cannot evaluate the
NAT output properly. To minimize the training loss, NAT
tends to generate a mixture of multiple translations rather
than a consistent translation, which typically contains many
repetitive tokens in the generated results.
A number of efforts have explored ways to help NAT
handle the multi-modality problem. A basic solution is
sequence-level knowledge distillation (Kim and Rush 2016;
Zhou, Gu, and Neubig 2020), which replaces the reference
by the output of an autoregressive teacher to reduce the
∗

Joint work with Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc. Yang Feng is the corresponding author. Reproducible
code: https://github.com/ictnlp/Rephraser-NAT.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13538

