The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning to Select Prototypical Parts for Interpretable Sequential Data Modeling
Yifei Zhang, Neng Gao* , Cunqing Ma
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{zhangyifei, gaoneng, macunqing}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract

et al. 2019) introduce additional parameters and specific
model structure to weigh the importance of sequence elements, namely attention mechanism, for giving insight into
models. Prototype-based methods (Li et al. 2018), derived
from case-based reasoning (Kim, Rudin, and Shah 2014),
design machine learning models that select or create a set
of representative instances as prototypes (also named as
concepts). The model tries to find several prototypes that
closely resemble an input for prediction. By inspecting the
selected prototypes, the explanations are more intuitively
understandable for laypersons.
However, recent efforts are often faced with the following challenges. Post-hoc explanations are shown to be incorrect or incomplete, since the approximation may not always reflects the real model structure (Laugel et al. 2019;
Lakkaraju and Bastani 2020). The interpretability of attention mechanism remains controversial (Jain and Wallace
2019; Wiegreffe and Pinter 2019). Although attention mechanism has been widely applied and helps models attend
to more significant elements or features, some have questioned that attention-based explanations are unreliable or
unfaithful (Serrano and Smith 2019; Bai et al. 2021). Existing prototype-based methods mostly learn a fixed set of
representative vectors as prototypes, and an input is represented by one or more prototypes as explanation in practice. For modeling sequences with rich information, stateof-the-art methods (Ming et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2019; Arik
and Pfister 2020) need to maintain a rather large number
of prototypes to achieve reliable performance (Hong, Baek,
and Wang 2020). Moreover, the similarity-based measurements for finding prototypes are applied on hidden representations generated by encoders with highly recursive functions, thus the direct relation between prototypes and the input sequence might still be hard to understand for human.
Overall analysis of the provided prototypes as well as the
input sequence is required, which deviates from the interpretability assumption to some extent.
In this work, we suggest enhancing the prototype-based
interpretability for sequential data with self-selective prototypical parts, and design a Self-Explaining Selective Model
(SESM). Rather than maintaining a relatively large amount
of instances and find the nearest neighbor for explanation, SESM explains by selecting sub-sequences that represent disentangled concepts of the input sequence as pro-

Prototype-based interpretability methods provide intuitive
explanations of model prediction by comparing samples to a
reference set of memorized exemplars or typical representatives in terms of similarity. In the field of sequential data modeling, similarity calculations of prototypes are usually based
on encoded representation vectors. However, due to highly
recursive functions, there is usually a non-negligible disparity between the prototype-based explanations and the original
input. In this work, we propose a Self-Explaining Selective
Model (SESM) that uses a linear combination of prototypical
concepts to explain its own predictions. The model employs
the idea of case-based reasoning by selecting sub-sequences
of the input that mostly activate different concepts as prototypical parts, which users can compare to sub-sequences
selected from different example inputs to understand model
decisions. For better interpretability, we design multiple constraints including diversity, stability, and locality as training objectives. Extensive experiments in different domains
demonstrate that our method exhibits promising interpretability and competitive accuracy.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have been widely employed for analyzing sequential data in real world, such as electrocardiogram (ECG), event streams, and natural language text. Stateof-the-art methods generally leverage CNN, RNN, or other
hybrid networks for sequence modeling. To meet the growing demand on explaining model predictions from black-box
deep neural networks, more and more researchers resort to
interpretable machine learning (IML) methods.
IML methods for sequential data can be roughly divided
into three categories, including post-hoc methods, attentionbased methods, and prototype-based methods (Samek et al.
2021). Post-hoc methods (Jacovi, Shalom, and Goldberg
2018) are the only options to provide a posteriori explanations for trained models by assessing the impact of different
input features and approximating the decision-making process. Attention-based methods and prototype-based methods explicitly reveal some significant information for model
prediction in different ways, resulting in model-intrinsic interpretability. Specifically, attention-based methods (Wang
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6612

