The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Differentially Private Fair Division
Pasin Manurangsi1 , Warut Suksompong2
1

2

Google Research
National University of Singapore

Abstract

also be PROP1) is guaranteed to exist (Lipton et al. 2004).
In addition to fairness, another consideration that has become increasingly important nowadays—as large amounts
of data are constantly collected, processed, and analyzed—
is privacy. Indeed, an agent participating in a resource allocation procedure may not want other participants to know
her preferences if she considers these as sensitive information, for example, if these preferences correspond to the
times when she is available to use a facility, or if they represent her valuations for potential team members when distributing employees in an organization. Consequently, a desirable procedure should ensure that an individual participant’s preferences cannot be inferred based on the output
of the procedure. Achieving privacy alone is trivial, as the
procedure can simply ignore the agents’ preferences and always output a fixed allocation that it announces publicly in
advance. However, it is clear that such a procedure can be
highly unfair for certain preferences of the agents. Despite
its significance, the issue of privacy has been largely unaddressed in the fair division literature as far as we are aware.3
In this paper, we investigate the fundamental question of
whether fairness and privacy can be attained simultaneously
in the allocation of indivisible resources. We use the wellestablished framework of differential privacy (DP), which
has been widely adopted not only in academia but also in
industry (Erlingsson, Pihur, and Korolova 2014; Shankland
2014; Greenberg 2016; Apple Differential Privacy Team
2017; Ding, Kulkarni, and Yekhanin 2017) as well as government sectors (Abowd 2018). Intuitively, the output distribution of a (randomized) DP4 algorithm should not change
by much when a single “entry” of the input is modified. DP
provides a privacy protection for individual entries by ensuring that an adversary with access to the output can only
gain limited information about each individual entry. At the
same time, DP algorithms often still provide useful outputs
based on the aggregated information. We outline the tools
and concepts from DP used in this work in Section 2.2.5

Fairness and privacy are two important concerns in social
decision-making processes such as resource allocation. We
study privacy in the fair allocation of indivisible resources using the well-established framework of differential privacy. We
present algorithms for approximate envy-freeness and proportionality when two instances are considered to be adjacent
if they differ only on the utility of a single agent for a single
item. On the other hand, we provide strong negative results
for both fairness criteria when the adjacency notion allows
the entire utility function of a single agent to change.

1

Introduction

Fairness is a principal concern in numerous social decisionmaking processes, not least when it comes to allocating
scarce resources among interested parties. Whether we divide equipment between healthcare personnel, assign facility time slots to potential users, or distribute office space
among working groups in an organization, it is desirable
that all parties involved feel fairly treated. While fair division has been studied in economics for several decades
(Brams and Taylor 1996; Moulin 2003, 2019), the subject
has received substantial interest from computer scientists in
recent years, much of which has concentrated on the fair allocation of indivisible resources (Bouveret, Chevaleyre, and
Maudet 2016; Markakis 2017; Walsh 2020; Suksompong
2021; Amanatidis et al. 2022; Aziz et al. 2022).
The fair division literature typically focuses on satisfying
concrete fairness criteria. Two of the most prominent criteria are envy-freeness and proportionality. In an envy-free
allocation, no agent prefers to have another agent’s bundle
instead of her own. In a proportional allocation, every agent
receives value at least 1/n of her value for the entire resource, where n denotes the number of agents. As neither
of these criteria is always satisfiable,1 researchers have proposed the relaxations envy-freeness up to c items (EFc) and
proportionality up to c items (PROPc); here, c is a nonnegative integer parameter. Under additive utilities, EFc implies PROPc for every c,2 and an EF1 allocation (which must

3
Sun and Yang (2009) studied a setting in which agents have
“reservation values” over items, and considered a mechanism to be
private if it does not require agents to reveal these values.
4
We use the abbreviation DP for both “differential privacy” and
“differentially private”.
5
For in-depth treatments of the subject, we refer to the surveys
by Dwork (2008) and Dwork and Roth (2014).

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
For example, imagine two siblings fighting for one toy.
2
See the proof of Proposition 2.2(b) in our prior work (Manurangsi and Suksompong 2022a).

5814

