The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Rethinking Alignment and Uniformity in Unsupervised Image Semantic
Segmentation
Daoan Zhang1,3 , Chenming Li1 , Haoquan Li1 , Wenjian Huang1 , Lingyun Huang3 , Jianguo
Zhang1, 2 *
1

Southern University of Science and Technology
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Ping An Technology (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd.
{12032503, 12132339, 12032492}@mail.sustech.edu.cn, lingyun.huanguw@foxmail.com, {huangwj,
zhangjg}@sustech.edu.cn
Abstract

Accordingly, for UISS, The following two requirements
should be satisfied:
(1) The proposed method should build the relationship between pixels and semantics.
(2) We should design specific supervision for UISS to
learn good semantics.
To build the relations of pixels and semantics, traditional
unsupervised segmentation Methods(Caron et al. 2018)
(Van Gansbeke et al. 2021) generate high-level semantic information across pixels to classify pixels into clusters (Fig.
1. left). These methods group pixels with low-level feature
representations into a few semantic groups, often with some
manually designed priors such as different augmentations.
The supervision for these models usually comes from the
pseudo-labels generated by the clustering. Essentially, it assumes pixels in the same semantic object share similar lowlevel embedding (features) in the latent space. However,
there is often no guarantee that the low-level features in the
latent space could represent the high-level semantic information. Thus far, clustering-based methods lack a mechanism to reinforce the low-level features to represent semantic information without considering high-level semantic information. In a nutshell, these methods do not meet the conditions in the requirement (2).
To address this problem, recent methods(Hjelm et al.
2018)(Cho et al. 2021)(Ji, Henriques, and Vedaldi 2019)
utilize mutual information(MI) as a supervision to generate high-level semantic information. The most well-known
methods are based on contrastive learning, as shown in the
middle of Fig. 1, where models are trained by increasing
the distance between representations from different images
while reinforcing the similarity between the representations
of different augmented images from the same image. However, such a design draws the attention of these models to
focus on image-level features or classification-friendly features, which may not be suitable for segmentation tasks,
i.e., these models can miss fine-grained information between
pixels alone with structured semantic layouts. This preference also tends to cause the collapse of representations
of unsupervised models in practice which appears to fail
to classify pixels. That might be because contrastive methods only extract image-level representations from the whole
dataset, which has little power in differentiating pixels.

Unsupervised image semantic segmentation (UISS) aims to
match low-level visual features with semantic-level representations without outer supervision. In this paper, we address
the critical properties from the view of feature alignments and
feature uniformity for UISS models. We also make a comparison between UISS and image-wise representation learning. Based on the analysis, we argue that the existing MIbased methods in UISS suffer from representation collapse.
By this, we proposed a robust network called Semantic Attention Network (SAN), in which a new module Semantic Attention (SEAT) is proposed to generate pixel-wise and semantic features dynamically. Experimental results on multiple semantic segmentation benchmarks show that our unsupervised segmentation framework specializes in catching
semantic representations, which outperforms all the unpretrained and even several pretrained methods.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation of images is to group pixels into
regions with different semantic categories. Most deeplearning-based semantic segmentation approaches(Chen
et al. 2018)(Zhao et al. 2017)require myriad manual efforts to delineate images, especially for fine-grained segmentation tasks. To alleviate the demand for manual annotation, there is increasing attention to developing approaches(Huang et al. 2022b) to segment images in the absence of image annotations, i.e., unsupervised image semantic segmentation. Compared to fully supervised segmentation or image-wise self-supervised learning, UISS is a much
more complex problem. It aims to make dense prediction
between images without any annotations or heuristic information. Thus, the model can neither build the pixel-wise relations between images and annotations like fully supervised
segmentation nor build image-wise relations like imagewise self-supervised learning. For UISS, we have to build
relations between pixel-wise features and the generated semantic features.
Besides, as the model has no supervision, we must find
specific constraints to enable the model to learn good semantic representations.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11192

