The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Invariant Representations with Stochastically Quantized Neural Networks
Mattia Cerrato 1 * , Marius Köppel 2 * , Roberto Esposito 3 , Stefan Kramer 1
1

Institute of Computer Science, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, Germany
Institute for Nuclear Physics, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, Germany
3
Computer Science Department, Università degli Studi di Torino, Italy
{mcerrato, mkoeppel}@uni-mainz.de, roberto.esposito@unito.it, kramer@informatik.uni-mainz.de
2

Abstract

a set of techniques which learns new representations of the
original data where information about protected characteristics such as gender or ethnicity has been removed. Numerous
authors have employed neural networks as the base learning
algorithm in this task (Zemel et al. 2013; Xie et al. 2017;
Madras et al. 2018). The core concept in fair representation
learning is to remove sensitive information from a neural
network’s representations. If one is able to guarantee that the
network has no information about, for instance, an individual’s gender identity, it follows that the decisions undertaken
by the model are independent of it. One possible formalization for the above desideratum relies on computing the
mutual information between the `-th neural layer T ` and a
sensitive attribute S representing the protected information.
If the mutual information I(T ` ; S) equals 0, for instance,
one would obtain group-invariant representations and therefore unbiased decisions which do not rely on S. Estimating
mutual information over high-dimensional distributions is
however highly challenging in general. In practice, an upper
bound on I(T ` ; S) is sufficient for minimization purposes.
Previous research has employed post-training quantization
(Tishby and Zaslavsky 2015), variational approximations of
the encoding distribution (Moyer et al. 2018; Belghazi et al.
2018) and adversarial learning (Madras et al. 2018; Xie et al.
2017). Also, the mutual information I(T ` ; S) is ill-defined
in neural networks as they are deterministic functions of the
input data. Implying that I(X; T ` ) is vacuous, it does not
depend on the network parameters (Goldfeld et al. 2019).

Representation learning algorithms offer the opportunity to
learn invariant representations of the input data with regard to
nuisance factors. Many authors have leveraged such strategies
to learn fair representations, i.e., vectors where information
about sensitive attributes is removed. These methods are attractive as they may be interpreted as minimizing the mutual
information between a neural layer’s activations and a sensitive attribute. However, the theoretical grounding of such
methods relies either on the computation of infinitely accurate adversaries or on minimizing a variational upper bound
of a mutual information estimate. In this paper, we propose
a methodology for direct computation of the mutual information between neurons in a layer and a sensitive attribute.
We employ stochastically-activated binary neural networks,
which lets us treat neurons as random variables. Our method
is therefore able to minimize an upper bound on the mutual
information between the neural representations and a sensitive attribute. We show that this method compares favorably
with the state of the art in fair representation learning and
that the learned representations display a higher level of invariance compared to full-precision neural networks.

1

Introduction

Representation learning algorithms based on neural networks are being employed extensively in information retrieval and data mining applications. The social impact of
what the general public refers to as “AI” is now a topic of
much discussion, with regulators in the EU even putting forward legal proposals which would require practitioners to
“[...] minimize the risk of unfair biases embedded in the
model [...]” (Commission 2021). Such proposals refer to biases with regard to individual characteristics which are protected by the law, such as gender and ethnicity. The concern
is that models trained on biased data might then learn those
biases (Barocas, Hardt, and Narayanan 2019), therefore perpetuating historical discrimination against certain groups of
individuals. Machine learning methodologies designed to
avoid these situations are often said to be “group-fair”.
One possible approach to the group fairness problem is
fair representation learning. Fair representation learning is

In this work, we provide an alternative approach to
fair representation learning by employing stochasticallyquantized neural networks. These networks have a lowprecision activation (1 bit) which may be interpreted as a
random variable following the Bernoulli distribution. We
show a sketch of these networks in Figure 1. Thus, we are
able to obtain a finite, exact value for the mutual information I(Ti` ; S) between a neuron i in any layer ` and the
sensitive attribute, without relying on variational approximation (Moyer et al. 2018), adversarial learning (Madras et al.
2018) or adding noise to the representations (Goldfeld et al.
2019). We then employ this exact value to upper bound the
overall mutual information in layer `, I(T ` ; S), obtaining
an optimization objective which leads to invariant representations. Furthermore, we discuss how to compute I(T ` ; S)
in stochastically activated binary neural networks via den-

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6962

