The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ACE: Cooperative Multi-Agent Q-learning with Bidirectional Action-Dependency
Chuming Li1, 2 * , Jie Liu2 * , Yinmin Zhang1, 2 * , Yuhong Wei3 , Yazhe Niu2, 3 , Yaodong Yang4† ,
Yu Liu2, 3† , Wanli Ouyang1, 2
1

The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Group, Australia,
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
3
SenseTime Group LTD,
4
Institute for AI, Peking University
chli3951@uni.sydney.edu.au, liujie@pjlab.org.cn, {yinmin.zhang, wanli.ouyang}@sydney.edu.au, {weiyuhong,
niuyazhe}@sensetime.com, yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn, liuyuisanai@gmail.com,
Abstract

action for every single agent. In MARL algorithms, the reward signal is affected by other agents’ behavior. However,
the environment of multi-agent task is non-stationary 2019;
2021 to every single agent, where the policies of agents keep
changing during the learning process. This non-stationary
problem breaks the Markov assumption in single-agent RL
algorithms and causes endless adaptation of multiple agents
according to each other’s change of policy. In value-based
methods, the non-stationary problem shows up as that the
value of the individual action can not be estimated accurately.

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) suffers from the
non-stationarity problem, which is the ever-changing targets
at every iteration when multiple agents update their policies at
the same time. Starting from first principle, in this paper, we
manage to solve the non-stationarity problem by proposing
bidirectional action-dependent Q-learning (ACE). Central to
the development of ACE is the sequential decision making
process wherein only one agent is allowed to take action at
one time. Within this process, each agent maximizes its value
function given the actions taken by the preceding agents at
the inference stage. In the learning phase, each agent minimizes the TD error that is dependent on how the subsequent
agents have reacted to their chosen action. Given the design
of bidirectional dependency, ACE effectively turns a multiagent MDP into a single-agent MDP. We implement the ACE
framework by identifying the proper network representation
to formulate the action dependency, so that the sequential decision process is computed implicitly in one forward pass. To
validate ACE, we compare it with strong baselines on two
MARL benchmarks. Empirical experiments demonstrate that
ACE outperforms the state-of-the-art algorithms on Google
Research Football and StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge by
a large margin. In particular, on SMAC tasks, ACE achieves
100% success rate on almost all the hard and super hard maps.
We further study extensive research problems regarding ACE,
including extension, generalization and practicability.

To solve the non-stationary problem, we introduce bidirectional action-dependency to estimate the action value of every
single agent accurately. We cast multi-agent decision-making
process as a sequential decision-making process, where only
one agent makes a decision at a time. In this sequential process, the bidirectional action-dependency is embodied in two
aspects. In the forward direction, the evaluation of an agent’s
action value is dependent on the preceding agents’ actions in
the decision-making sequence. While in the backward direction, the target to update an agent’s action value is dependent
on how subsequent agents react to the preceding actions. We
formulate this bidirectional dependence by transforming a
multi-agent Markov Decision Process (MMDP) 1994 into a
single-agent Markov Decision Process (MDP), called sequentially expanded MDP (SE-MDP). In SE-MDP, a decision at
t
based
states
 t on at state
 s is expanded to multiple intermediate
sa1 , ..., sa1:n , named SE-state. The SE-state sta1:i is defined
as the state st in the original MMDP along with the decisions
a1:i made by the preceding agents. Only one agent makes a
decision at each SE-state. After each agent makes the decision, the state transits to the next one. This transformation
validates that the proposed bidirectional action-dependency
does circumvent the non-stationary problem.

Introduction
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
aims to learn a good policy that controls multiple agents
and maximizes the cumulative return in a given task. It has
great potential in various real-world tasks, such as robot
swarm control 2017, autonomous driving 2020; 2016 and
multi-player games 2019; 2021. A major challenge of MARL
is the complex joint action space. In multi-agent tasks, the
joint action space increases exponentially with the number
of agents. Hence, for the sake of scalability, existing MARL
algorithms usually learn an individual policy to select the

With the introduced bidirectional dependency, we propose
a simple but powerful method, called bidirectional ACtiondEpendent deep Q-learning (ACE). ACE is compatible with
the abundant Q-learning methods for single-agent tasks, and
naturally inherits their theoretical guarantee of convergence
and performance. For practical implementation, we identify
an efficient and effective network representation of the SEstate. We first generate the embeddings for all units in the
task as well as the embeddings for their available actions.

* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8536

