The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Score-Based Learning of Graphical Event Models with Background Knowledge
Augmentation
Debarun Bhattacharjya1 , Tian Gao1 , Dharmashankar Subramanian1 , Xiao Shou2,3
1

2

Research AI, IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA
{debarunb, tgao, dharmash}@us.ibm.com, shoux@rpi.edu
Abstract

ical event models (PGEMs) are simple yet effective at fitting many real world datasets (Bhattacharjya, Subramanian,
and Gao 2018). Piece-wise constant GEMs have been shown
to be a universal approximator for TPPs (Gunawardana and
Meek 2016). There is also a burgeoning stream of recent
work on neural architectures for learning TPP models when
one has access to substantial event data (Du et al. 2016; Xiao
et al. 2017; Mei and Eisner 2017; Omi, Ueda, and Aihara
2019; Shchur, Biloš, and Günnemann 2019; Gao et al. 2020;
Zuo et al. 2020). This line of work has primarily focused on
predicting the next type of event and its occurrence time.
We consider a separate but practically important research
thread: how to learn GEMs in the low-data regime. This
direction is currently understudied; a notable exception is
some recent work on a new parametric family for TPPs
based on expert-provided temporal logical rules (Li et al.
2020). In contrast, we propose a framework for learning a
specified parametric GEM (such as PGEM) through scorebased approaches while augmenting data with knowledge.
Furthermore, we enable incorporation of various forms of
knowledge, including simple qualitative statements that are
easy to assess or readily available, such as ‘event X depends
(or does not depend) on event Y’ or ‘event Y makes event
X more (or less) likely’. Note that the former statement cannot be represented by first order temporal logic as in Li
et al. (2020). Other prior work considers knowledge as a
data-dependent measure and hence may be unsuitable for
low-data problems (Zhang, Sharma, and Liu 2021).
In this work, we are particularly interested in recovering
the underlying model from limited data, i.e. parameter estimation and structure discovery. The latter task is notoriously
challenging in dynamical models due to time dependent confounding (Keiding 1999), and learning an underlying GEM
structure can require much more event data than i.i.d data requirements for Bayesian networks. It is therefore important
in practical applications to enable current GEM learning approaches to effectively exploit any background knowledge
as an inductive bias whenever it is available. However, a
practical learner should ideally be able to override any initial
knowledge given enough data; this is particularly important
when the knowledge is inconsistent with the ground truth.
There is a long line of prior research on incorporating
qualitative knowledge in graphical models such as Bayesian
networks (Lucas 2005; Feelders 2007), mostly around pa-

Graphical event models (GEMs) are representations of temporal point process dynamics between different event types.
Many real-world applications however involve limited event
stream data, making it challenging to learn GEMs from data
alone. In this paper, we introduce approaches that can work
together in a score-based learning paradigm, to augment data
with potentially different types of background knowledge.
We propose novel scores for learning an important parametric class of GEMs; in particular, we propose a Bayesian score
for leveraging prior information as well as a more practical
simplification that involves fewer parameters, analogous to
Bayesian networks. We also introduce a framework for incorporating easily assessed qualitative background knowledge
from domain experts, in the form of statements such as ‘event
X depends on event Y’ or ‘event Y makes event X more
likely’. The proposed framework has Bayesian interpretations
and can be deployed by any score-based learner. Through an
extensive empirical investigation, we demonstrate the practical benefits of background knowledge augmentation while
learning GEMs for applications in the low-data regime.

1

Introduction & Related Work

Graphical event models (GEMs), also known as local independence graphs, are probabilistic graphical models for temporal point processes (TPPs) (Didelez 2008; Meek 2014).
Unlike graphical representations for discrete-time dynamical models such as dynamic Bayesian networks and time series graphs (Dean and Kanazawa 1989; Murphy 2002; Eichler 1999), GEMs represent continuous-time dynamics where
different types of events can occur irregularly over time.
Various types of GEMs have been proposed in prior work,
differing in the parametric assumptions of how conditional
intensity rates for each type of event vary as a function
of historical occurrences. The most popular categories are
those similar to Hawkes processes where intensities jump
and decay over time (Zhou, Zha, and Song 2013b; Luo
et al. 2015; Etesami et al. 2016; Xu, Luo, and Zha 2017),
and those where intensities are piece-wise constant over
time (Gunawardana, Meek, and Xu 2011; Bhattacharjya,
Subramanian, and Gao 2018; Bhattacharjya, Gao, and Subramanian 2020). Among the latter family, proximal graphCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12189

