The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DE-net: Dynamic Text-Guided Image Editing Adversarial Networks
Ming Tao,1 Bing-Kun Bao,1 * Hao Tang,2 Fei Wu,1 Longhui Wei,3 Qi Tian3
1

Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
CVL, ETH Zürich
3
Huawei Inc.
bingkunbao@njupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Text-guided image editing models have shown remarkable
results. However, there remain two problems. First, they
employ fixed manipulation modules for various editing requirements (e.g., color changing, texture changing, content
adding and removing), which results in over-editing or insufficient editing. Second, they do not clearly distinguish
between text-required and text-irrelevant parts, which leads
to inaccurate editing. To solve these limitations, we propose: (i) a Dynamic Editing Block (DEBlock) that composes different editing modules dynamically for various editing requirements. (ii) a Composition Predictor (Comp-Pred),
which predicts the composition weights for DEBlock according to the inference on target texts and source images.
(iii) a Dynamic text-adaptive Convolution Block (DCBlock)
that queries source image features to distinguish text-required
parts and text-irrelevant parts. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our DE-Net achieves excellent performance and
manipulates source images more correctly and accurately.

Figure 1: Benefiting from dynamic editing design, our DENet can deal with various editing tasks (e.g., color changing,
and content editing). Furthermore, the text-adaptive convolution in DCBlock enables more accurate manipulations.

from other image-to-image tasks (e.g., image colorization,
style transfer, and image inpainting), which design effective
models for specific tasks, text-guided image editing is an
open-target task. It contains various editing tasks (e.g., color
changing, texture changing, content adding, and removing)
prompted by various text guidance. But current models ignore the difference between varying editing requirements
and employ fixed manipulation modules for all editing tasks.
It leads the whole network tends to make a trade-off for different editing tasks. These compromises limit the manipulation ability and result in over-editing or insufficient editing.
As the result shown in Figure 1, previous models (Li et al.
2020a,b) fail to deal with different editing requirements.
Second, the editing preciseness is deficient, as current manipulation modules cannot clearly distinguish between textrequired and text-irrelevant parts. Text-visual feature concatenations (Dong et al. 2017; Nam, Kim, and Kim 2018)
and ACM module (Li et al. 2020a,b) are widely used to manipulate image features. However, naive concatenation treats
text-required and text-irrelevant parts equally, resulting in
text information overwriting the source image features. And
the ACM module predicts editing parameters from the encoded source images directly without introducing text information, which makes it unable to accurately edit textrequired parts and preserve text-irrelevant parts. As the result shown in Figure 1, the previous model (Li et al. 2020a,b)
diffuses the text information to the whole image.

Introduction
The last few years have witnessed the great success of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.
2014) for a variety of applications (Tang et al. 2019; Zhang
et al. 2019; Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019; Karras et al. 2020;
Tang et al. 2020). Among them, image editing is one of the
important applications of GANs. Recently, some works tried
to bridge the gap between natural language and image editing (Dong et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2020b,a; Jiang et al. 2021;
Li et al. 2020a,b; Nam, Kim, and Kim 2018; Xu et al. 2022).
Different from other image editing tasks, text-guided image
editing aims to translate source images to target images according to given text descriptions. Due to the advantages of
natural language, the text guidance makes the image editing process more controllable and direct. Moreover, owing
to its promising applications, this task has attracted many
researchers and achieved many significant progresses (Dong
et al. 2017; Nam, Kim, and Kim 2018; Li et al. 2020a,b).
However, current text-guided image editing models have
two problems. First, they tackle various editing requirements equally with fixed manipulation modules. Different
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9971

