The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Steganography of Steganographic Networks
Guobiao Li, Sheng Li* , Meiling Li, Xinpeng Zhang* , Zhenxing Qian
Fudan University
{gbli20, lisheng, mlli20, zhangxinpeng, zxqian}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Stego Image

Steganography is a technique for covert communication between two parties. With the rapid development of deep neural
networks (DNN), more and more steganographic networks
are proposed recently, which are shown to be promising to
achieve good performance. Unlike the traditional handcrafted
steganographic tools, a steganographic network is relatively
large in size. It raises concerns on how to covertly transmit the
steganographic network in public channels, which is a crucial
stage in the pipeline of steganography in real world applications. To address such an issue, we propose a novel scheme
for steganography of steganographic networks in this paper.
Unlike the existing steganographic schemes which focus on
the subtle modification of the cover data to accommodate
the secrets. We propose to disguise a steganographic network
(termed as the secret DNN model) into a stego DNN model
which performs an ordinary machine learning task (termed as
the stego task). During the model disguising, we select and
tune a subset of filters in the secret DNN model to preserve
its function on the secret task, where the remaining filters are
reactivated according to a partial optimization strategy to disguise the whole secret DNN model into a stego DNN model.
The secret DNN model can be recovered from the stego DNN
model when needed. Various experiments have been conducted to demonstrate the advantage of our proposed method
for covert communication of steganographic networks as well
as general DNN models.

Sender

Stego Image

Public Channel

Secret Decoder

Receiver

Secret Decoder

0101···010101
Secrets

🔑

Model
Recover

Model
Disguising

🔑

Upload

GitHub, Model
GooglePool
Drive… Download

Stego DNN

⋮

Stego DNN
0.55
0.18
⋮
0.23

Download

0.55
0.18
⋮
0.23

Ordinary Model
User

Figure 1: The application scenario of the proposed method
for steganography of steganographic networks.

neural network (DNN)-based steganographic schemes have
been proposed (Baluja 2019; Lu et al. 2021a; Jing et al.
2021), which achieve superior performance to handcrafted
ones.
A DNN-based steganographic scheme usually takes advantage of the encoder-decoder structure of DNN for secret
data embedding and extraction, which contains two steganographic networks: a DNN-based secret encoder and a DNNbased secret decoder (termed as the secret encoder and secret
decoder for short). The secret encoder hides the secret into a
cover media to obtain a stego media (i.e., media with hidden
data), while the secret decoder recovers the secret from the
stego media. Despite the advantage, we find that it is not convenient to deploy the DNN-based steganographic schemes
in real world applications. Let’s take image steganography
as an example, when the receiver receives the stego image,
he could only conduct the secret recovery with the possession of the secret decoder, as shown in the upper part of
Fig. 1. Unlike the handcrafted steganographic tools, a DNNbased secret decoder is relatively large in size. It would not
be secure for the sender and receiver to conduct another
transmission for the delivery of the secret decoder.
One possible solution is to treat the secret decoder as or-

Introduction
Steganography is a technique which takes advantage of the
redundancy in cover media to conceal secret information. It
is one of the main strategies for covert communication. Various types of cover media have been considered in literature
for steganography, including image (Lu et al. 2021b; Liao
et al. 2022), text (Liu et al. 2016), audio (Yi et al. 2019),
video (Zhang, Cao, and Zhao 2016) or 3D Mesh (Zhou et al.
2019). Traditional steganographic schemes focus on designing handcrafted algorithms to modify the cover media subtly for data embedding, which are difficult to achieve a good
balance between the undetectability and embedding capacity (termed as the capacity for short). Recently, some deep
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5178

