The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Intensity-Aware Loss for Dynamic Facial Expression Recognition in the Wild
Hanting Li, Hongjing Niu, Zhaoqing Zhu, Feng Zhao*
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
{ab828658, sasori, zhaoqingzhu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn

Intra-class Difference
Happiness

Abstract
Compared with the image-based static facial expression
recognition (SFER) task, the dynamic facial expression
recognition (DFER) task based on video sequences is closer
to the natural expression recognition scene. However, DFER
is often more challenging. One of the main reasons is that
video sequences often contain frames with different expression intensities, especially for the facial expressions in
the real-world scenarios, while the images in SFER frequently present uniform and high expression intensities.
Nevertheless, if the expressions with different intensities
are treated equally, the features learned by the networks
will have large intra-class and small inter-class differences,
which are harmful to DFER. To tackle this problem, we
propose the global convolution-attention block (GCA) to
rescale the channels of the feature maps. In addition, we introduce the intensity-aware loss (IAL) in the training process to help the network distinguish the samples with relatively low expression intensities. Experiments on two inthe-wild dynamic facial expression datasets (i.e., DFEW
and FERV39k) indicate that our method outperforms the
state-of-the-art DFER approaches. The source code will
be available at https://github.com/muse1998/IAL-for-FacialExpression-Recognition.

Inter-class Difference

Neutral

Intensity
Anger

Disgust

Figure 1: In-the-wild expression video sequences with different intensities. In both rows, the facial expression images
in the middle have lower intensities, and the facial images
on both sides have higher expression intensities.

more and more attentions. Unlike SFER, the DFER aims to
classify a video into several discrete expressions (e.g., happiness, sadness, neutral, anger, surprise, disgust, and fear).
According to different data scenarios, the DFER datasets
can be mainly divided into two categories: lab-controlled
and in-the-wild. The lab-controlled datasets are collected in
the laboratory settings, e.g., MMI (Pantic et al. 2005) and
CK+ (Lucey et al. 2010), so most sequences follow a relatively fixed pattern and have similar intensities (i.e., shifting from a neutral facial expression to a peak expression).
Researchers have proposed various techniques to effectively
improve the performance of DFER methods in the laboratory scenarios (Yu et al. 2018; Jeong, Kim, and Dong 2020).
Compared with lab-controlled DFER datasets, the in-thewild ones are closer to the natural facial events and can provide more diverse data by collecting video sequences from
the internet, such as Aff-Wild (Zafeiriou et al. 2017), DFEW
(Jiang et al. 2020), and FERV39k (Wang et al. 2022). As
shown in Figure 1, the video sequences in the real world
with different expression intensities could result in the problem that the inter-class distance becomes smaller than the
intra-class distance. However, the supervised information of
discrete-label datasets does not contain intensity-related priors, e.g., DFEW and FERV39k, which leads to the fact that
low-intensity expression sequences are often more likely to
be misclassified. To address this issue, some datasets annotate video sequences with continuous labels along the

Introduction
Facial expressions are one of the most common human behaviors and play an important role in interpersonal communications (Darwin and Prodger 1998). Facial expression
recognition is the fundamental task of the intervention of
mental diseases (Bisogni et al. 2022), human-computer interaction (Liu et al. 2017b), and driver safety monitoring
(Wilhelm 2019). In recent years, static facial expression
recognition (SFER) has become a popular topic among affective computing tasks. Many SFER methods have gradually improved the accuracy of expression recognition based
on a single image (Li and Deng 2020; Li et al. 2021; She
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2020a; Xue, Wang, and Guo 2021;
Zhao, Liu, and Zhou 2021; Liu et al. 2017a). However, the
facial expression is dynamic, and video-based data can provide richer facial information. Therefore, dynamic facial
expression recognition (DFER) has increasingly attracted
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

67

