The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Neural Span-Based Continual Named Entity Recognition Model
Yunan Zhang1 , Qingcai Chen1, 2 *
1

Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
yunanzhang0@outlook.com, qingcai.chen@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Named Entity Recognition (NER) models capable of Continual Learning (CL) are realistically valuable in areas where
entity types continuously increase (e.g., personal assistants).
Meanwhile the learning paradigm of NER advances to new
patterns such as the span-based methods. However, its potential to CL has not been fully explored. In this paper, we
propose SpanKL, a simple yet effective Span-based model
with Knowledge distillation (KD) to preserve memories and
multi-Label prediction to prevent conflicts in CL-NER. Unlike prior sequence labeling approaches, the inherently independent modeling in span and entity level with the designed
coherent optimization on SpanKL promotes its learning at
each incremental step and mitigates the forgetting. Experiments on synthetic CL datasets derived from OntoNotes and
Few-NERD show that SpanKL significantly outperforms previous SoTA in many aspects, and obtains the smallest gap
from CL to the upper bound revealing its high practiced value.
The code is available at https://github.com/Qznan/SpanKL.

Figure 1: The incoherent optimization across CL tasks of
sequence labeling methods (red dash arrow) compared with
SpanKL (green solid arrow) at the learning targets.

conflicting one. To address this backward incompatibility,
they leverage knowledge distillation to predict the distilled
(pseudo) labels using the previously learned model (teacher)
on current samples, and then learn a current model (student)
jointly by these labels and the current golden labels.
However, an opposite but easily neglected case is that the
non-entity mentions learning currently may belong to a certain entity type to be learned in future tasks, and we find it
forward incompatible for the traditional sequence labeling
methods to successively handle them in CL. Specifically, for
mentions whose entity types will be learned in future tasks
but not in current, sequence labeling methods will assign a
global O tag indicating non-(any)-entity in the current task.
But then they need to frequently change the learning target
of these mentions when the future relevant tasks arrive. As
shown in Fig. 1a, the model’s output logit vector should be
altered, e.g., from predicting O to predicting B-PER for the
first token of mention Chris Lawrence when PER task comes
after the ORG task. This incoherent optimization will force
the model to frequently update the previously learned parameters, thus we consider aggravates the catastrophic forgetting or interference.
A natural solution for this is regarding any non-entity
mentions in the current task only as non-(certain)-entity, and
if possible, in a more efficient span-level, i.e., the span of
mention Chris Lawrence is O-ORG rather than O in the ORG

Introduction
Deep neural models have demonstrated impressive performances on standard tasks, but their abilities to continually
learn a sequence of tasks still remain a real challenge as the
requirement to learn to adapt to new information and meanwhile to retain prior acquired knowledge. It suffers from the
well-known catastrophic forgetting or interference issue particularly with the advent of new tasks from changing distribution. This also troubles the studies on Continual Learning Named Entity Recognition (CL-NER) task (Biesialska,
Biesialska, and Costa-jussà 2020).
Recent explorations on CL-NER with promising results
(Monaikul et al. 2021; Xia et al. 2022) formulate the problem in a class-incremental setting, of which the most prominent feature is that each task only contains the annotations
of entity types defined to be learned in that task. In this context, CL-NER in NLP is more akin to continual object detection than image classification in Computer Vision. Because previously learned entity type’s mentions may appear
in the samples trained in the current task but without the relevant annotations. These false negative labels will unavoidably compel models to forget old knowledge to fit the new
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13993

