The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Quality-Aware Self-Training on Differentiable Synthesis of Rare Relational Data
Chongsheng Zhang1 , Yaxin Hou1 , Ke Chen2,3,* , Shuang Cao1 , Gaojuan Fan1 , Ji Liu4
1
Henan University
South China University of Technology
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
Baidu Research
cszhang@ieee.org, {houyx, cscao, fangaojuan}@henu.edu.cn, chenk@scut.edu.cn, jiliuwork@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Data scarcity is a very common real-world problem that poses
a major challenge to data-driven analytics. Although a lot
of data-balancing approaches have been proposed to mitigate this problem, they may drop some useful information
or fall into the overfitting problem. Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) based data synthesis methods can alleviate
such a problem but lack of quality control over the generated samples. Moreover, the latent associations between the
attribute set and the class labels in a relational data cannot
be easily captured by a vanilla GAN. In light of this, we introduce an end-to-end self-training scheme (namely, QualityAware Self-Training) for rare relational data synthesis, which
generates labeled synthetic data via pseudo labeling on GANbased synthesis. We design a semantic pseudo labeling module to first control the quality of the generated features/samples, then calibrate their semantic labels via a classifier committee consisting of multiple pre-trained shallow classifiers.
The high-confident generated samples with calibrated pseudo
labels are then fed into a semantic classification network as
augmented samples for self-training. We conduct extensive
experiments on 20 benchmark datasets of different domains,
including 14 industrial datasets. The results show that our
method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods,
including two recent GAN-based data synthesis schemes.
Codes are available at https://github.com/yaxinhou/QAST.

(a) Original

(b) CTGAN

(c) GLGAN

(d) QAST

Figure 1: Comparison of the projected feature distributions
of the proposed QAST method with two comparative baselines CTGAN (Xu et al. 2019) and GLGAN (Wang et al.
2020), as well as the original data distribution, via T-SNE
on the CWRU fault diagnosis dataset with an imbalance ratio of 1:20.

Introduction
Data scarcity poses a great challenge to the analysis and
learning of data in many different domains and applications.
It is often associated with class-imbalanced distributions, in
which the rare classes have significantly inadequate sample
size, while the majority classes have an overly large amount
of samples that may dominate the machine learning process.
Compared to unstructured (image) data (Li, Kamnitsas, and
Glocker 2020; Yang et al. 2022c; Liu, Chen, and Jia 2022),
relational data often consists of multiple continuous and discrete attributes (feature dimensions) with diverse modes (Xu
et al. 2019). Moreover, dependencies between a subset of attributes and the class labels as well as correlations between
the attributes commonly exist in relational data, making the
synthesis of relational data very challenging.

Existing approaches to the imbalance learning of relational data can be divided into two categories, which are
cost-sensitive learning and data-balancing. The former attempts to improve the robustness of classifiers via introducing different penalties on the mis-classified samples in the
cost functions, while the latter balances the number of samples across different classes to reduce the negative impact of
imbalanced distributions, where data synthesis for the rare
classes is an important and powerful option.
In the context of deep learning, data augmentation algorithms such as Mixup (Zhang et al. 2018) and its extensions
can remarkably alleviate the suffer from data scarcity in the
rare classes, but cannot ensure stable performance in view of
the random operations in these augmentation methods. More
importantly, these data augmentation methods rely on sim-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6602

