The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Safe AI: Sandboxing DNNs-Based Controllers in Stochastic Games
Bingzhuo Zhong* 1 , Hongpeng Cao* 1 , Majid Zamani2 , Marco Caccamo1
1

Technical University of Munich, Germany
2
University of Colorado Boulder, USA
{bingzhuo.zhong,cao.hongpeng,mcaccamo}@tum.de, majid.zamani@colorado.edu

Abstract

the desired safety specifications are encoded in the reward
functions for training DNNs in reinforcement learning settings. However, these results are only applicable when reward functions are easy to be designed, while reward functions for some control tasks are difficult to be obtained
(e.g., (Bıyık et al. 2022)). Additionally, various progresses
has been made for the verification of DNNs. Nevertheless, verifying DNNs is very challenging and it is an NPcomplete problem (Katz et al. 2017). Concretely, the challenges are due to the non-linear activation functions which
makes DNNs non-linear and non-convex (Ehlers 2017; Katz
et al. 2017). Recent satisfiability modulo theory (SMT)based approaches (Ehlers 2017; Katz et al. 2017, 2019) and
mixed-integer linear program (MILP) optimizers-based approaches (Dutta et al. 2018) can be applied to check if adversarial perturbations over the inputs of the DNNs can change
the decisions of the DNNs (Katz et al. 2017). However, these
approaches are typically applied on linearized input sets for
simple DNNs with a few layers and a few hundred neurons
per layer (Ivanov et al. 2019). To reduce the complexities
in verifying larger DNNs, (Elboher, Gottschlich, and Katz
2020; Prabhakar and Rahimi Afzal 2019) propose DNNs
abstraction approaches, with which one can obtain formal
guarantees for the original complex DNNs by verifying the
simplified DNNs using existing verification tools (Katz et al.
2019; Tran et al. 2020). Unfortunately, it is still difficult to
deploy these methods to verify complex DNNs with millions
of parameters and complicated architectures.

Nowadays, AI-based techniques, such as deep neural networks (DNNs), are widely deployed in autonomous systems for complex mission requirements (e.g., motion planning in robotics). However, DNNs-based controllers are typically very complex, and it is very hard to formally verify their
correctness, potentially causing severe risks for safety-critical
autonomous systems. In this paper, we propose a construction scheme for a so-called Safe-visor architecture to sandbox DNNs-based controllers. Particularly, we consider the
construction under a stochastic game framework to provide
a system-level safety guarantee which is robust to noises and
disturbances. A supervisor is built to check the control inputs
provided by a DNNs-based controller and decide whether to
accept them. Meanwhile, a safety advisor is running in parallel to provide fallback control inputs in case the DNNsbased controller is rejected. We demonstrate the proposed
approaches on a quadrotor employing an unverified DNNsbased controller.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, deep neural networks (DNNs) are widely employed as one of the main components in autonomous
systems for complex tasks, such as autonomous driving
(Bojarski et al. 2016) and human-robot collaboration (ElShamouty et al. 2020). In these systems, DNNs can serve
as perception modules for sensing environments (Liu et al.
2020), as motion planers that provide setpoints for low-level
controllers (Aradi 2020), or as low-level controllers that directly map raw sensor readings to control commands for actuators (Haarnoja et al. 2019). However, the behaviors of
DNNs are sometimes unpredictable if the deployment settings differ from the training settings (Garcıa and Fernández
2015; Huang et al. 2017), which potentially leads to disastrous consequences in safety-critical scenarios (Brunke et al.
2022; Kwiatkowska 2019). This issue motivated researchers
to enter the realm of safe DNNs-enabled systems.
Recent results in (Li and Belta 2019; Lavaei et al. 2020;
Kazemi and Soudjani 2020) consider exploiting safety specifications in the training procedure to provide probabilistic
safety guarantee for DNNs-based controllers. Concretely,

Instead of verifying the correctness of DNNs, systemlevel correct-by-construction schemes (Clavière et al. 2021;
Xiang et al. 2018) can be deployed to provide safety guarantees for DNNs-enabled systems regardless of the concrete
design of the DNNs. In other words, verification of DNNs
is not required under these schemes. For systems with discrete state and input sets, shields are proposed in (Humphrey
et al. 2016; Alshiekh et al. 2018) to correct erroneous control
inputs and enforce safety properties at runtime. As for enforcing safety invariance properties over systems with continuous state sets (i.e. systems are expected to stay within
a fixed safety set), Simplex architecture (Sha 2001; Wang,
Hovakimyan, and Sha 2013; Jagtap et al. 2020) allows the
deployment of unverified controllers for linear control systems. Model predictive control (MPC)-based approaches are
proposed in (Hewing et al. 2020; Wabersich and Zeilinger

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15340

