The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Two Heads Are Better than One: Image-Point Cloud Network for Depth-Based 3D
Hand Pose Estimation
Pengfei Ren, Yuchen Chen, Jiachang Hao, Haifeng Sun, Qi Qi* , Jingyu Wang* , Jianxin Liao
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{rpf, cyc99, haojc, hfsun, qiqi8266, wangjingyu, liaojx}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

structures and inherent inductive biases, 2D CNNs has advantages in extracting local visual features. Thank to the regular structure of image and highly parallelized data processing mechanism (sliding window), 2D CNN is computationally efficient on modern hardware. 3D data based-methods
convert depth data into 3D point cloud (Ge et al. 2018a; Ge,
Ren, and Yuan 2018a; Chen et al. 2018, 2019; Huang et al.
2020a) or volumetric representation (Ge et al. 2018b; Moon,
Chang, and Lee 2018; Malik et al. 2021), and use the point
cloud network or 3D CNN for pose estimation. These methods can avoid information loss due to projection and better
perceive the 3D geometric structure of depth data.
Although both types of methods have made remarkable
progress in 3D hand pose estimation, they both have their
shortcomings. For 2D image-based methods, the learning
process of visual representations ignores the 3D characteristics of depth data, and is limited by the local receptive
field mechanism of convolution operation, which makes it
challenging to capture long-range dependency. For pointbased methods, due to the disordered, unstructured and nonuniform nature of point clouds, the popular point cloud network requires densely and dynamically building local neighborhoods and employing sophisticated feature extractors (Qi
et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2019; Thomas et al. 2019; Li et al.
2018). Due to irregular memory access and dynamic kernel
overhead, point cloud networks are computationally expensive. In addition, these methods often require additional preor post-processing to assist the learning of point cloud features. For 3D voxel-based methods, the 3D convolution operator is more inefficient and the 3D voxelization requires
a large amount of memory to represent the input data and
the intermediate features, making it memory-prohibitive to
scale up the input resolution and network structure.
In previous methods, depth data is independently regarded
as the 2D image or 3D point cloud, which either ignore
the 3D geometric structure of depth data or consumes huge
computation to extract point-wise features. In this paper, we
propose an Image-Point cloud Network (IPNet) that combines the two data representations to take advantage of their
unique properties. First, our method represents the depth
data as a 2D image and adopts the 2D CNN for visual representation learning and initial pose estimation. Then, we
project the 2D image features into the point cloud space and
perform iterative feature enhancement and pose correction

Depth images and point clouds are the two most commonly
used data representations for depth-based 3D hand pose estimation. Benefiting from the structuring of image data and
the inherent inductive biases of the 2D Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN), image-based methods are highly efficient
and effective. However, treating the depth data as a 2D image
inevitably ignores the 3D nature of depth data. Point cloudbased methods can better mine the 3D geometric structure
of depth data. However, these methods suffer from the disorder and non-structure of point cloud data, which is computationally inefficient. In this paper, we propose an Image-Point
cloud Network (IPNet) for accurate and robust 3D hand pose
estimation. IPNet utilizes 2D CNN to extract visual representations in 2D image space and performs iterative correction
in 3D point cloud space to exploit the 3D geometry information of depth data. In particular, we propose a sparse anchorbased “aggregation-interaction-propagation” paradigm to enhance point cloud features and refine the hand pose, which
reduces irregular data access. Furthermore, we introduce a
3D hand model to the iterative correction process, which significantly improves the robustness of IPNet to occlusion and
depth holes. Experiments show that IPNet outperforms stateof-the-art methods on three challenging hand datasets.

Introduction
Hands are essential for humans to interact with the world
and convey intent. 3D hand pose estimation is the core technology of human-computer interaction, virtual reality and
augmented reality. Although great progress has been made
in depth-based 3D hand pose estimation, there are still some
challenging scenarios that are difficult to solve, mainly due
to severe occlusions, including self-occlusion and objectocclusion, and self-similarity between fingers.
Depth-based 3D hand pose estimation can be broadly categorized into two classes according to the input data: 2D
image-based methods and 3D data based-methods. The 2D
image-based method (Oberweger and Lepetit 2017; Wan
et al. 2018; Xiong et al. 2019; Ren et al. 2019; Huang et al.
2020b) treats the depth data as a single-channel depth image,
and then uses a 2D Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
for 3D hand pose estimation. With well-explored network
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2163

