The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Emphasizing Network for Continuous Sign Language Recognition
Lianyu Hu, Liqing Gao, Zekang Liu, Wei Feng*
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China
hly2021,lqgao,lzk100953@tju.edu.cn,wfeng@ieee.org

Abstract
Hand and face play an important role in expressing sign
language. Their features are usually especially leveraged to
improve system performance. However, to effectively extract visual representations and capture trajectories for hands
and face, previous methods always come at high computations with increased training complexity. They usually employ extra heavy pose-estimation networks to locate human
body keypoints or rely on additional pre-extracted heatmaps
for supervision. To relieve this problem, we propose a selfemphasizing network (SEN) to emphasize informative spatial regions in a self-motivated way, with few extra computations and without additional expensive supervision. Specifically, SEN first employs a lightweight subnetwork to incorporate local spatial-temporal features to identify informative
regions, and then dynamically augment original features via
attention maps. It’s also observed that not all frames contribute equally to recognition. We present a temporal selfemphasizing module to adaptively emphasize those discriminative frames and suppress redundant ones. A comprehensive comparison with previous methods equipped with hand
and face features demonstrates the superiority of our method,
even though they always require huge computations and rely
on expensive extra supervision. Remarkably, with few extra computations, SEN achieves new state-of-the-art accuracy
on four large-scale datasets, PHOENIX14, PHOENIX14T, CSL-Daily, and CSL. Visualizations verify the effects
of SEN on emphasizing informative spatial and temporal
features. Code is available at https://github.com/hulianyuyy/
SEN CSLR

Figure 1: Visualization of class activation maps with GradCAM (Selvaraju et al. 2017) for VAC (Min et al. 2021)
(baseline). Top: Original frames. Bottom: activation maps.
It’s observed that without extra supervision, it fails to locate
discriminative face and hand regions precisely.
an independent gloss1 . Continuous sign language recognition (CSLR) progresses by sequentially translating image
streams into a series of glosses to express a complete sentence, more prospective towards bridging the communication gap.
In sign language, the left hand, right hand, and face play
the most important role in expressing glosses. Mostly, they
convey the information through horizontal/vertical hand
movements, finger activities, and static gestures, assisted
with facial expressions and mouth shapes to holistically
deliver messages (Dreuw et al. 2007; Ong and Ranganath
2005). As a result, hand and face, are always especially
leveraged and incorporated in sign language systems. In isolated sign language recognition, early methods (Freeman
and Roth 1995; Sun et al. 2013) leveraged hand-crafted features to describe the gestures and motion of both hands. Recent methods either choose to build a pure pose-based system (Tunga, Nuthalapati, and Wachs 2021; Hu et al. 2021)
based on detected keypoints for both hands and face, or construct appearance-based systems (Hu, Zhou, and Li 2021;
Boukhayma, Bem, and Torr 2019) with cropped patches
for hands and face as collaborative inputs. In CSLR, CNNLSTM-HMM (Koller et al. 2019) builds a multi-stream
(hands and face) Hidden-Markov-Model (HMM) to integrate multiple visual inputs to boost recognition accuracy.
STMC (Zhou et al. 2020) explicitly inserts a pose-estimation

Introduction
Sign language is one of the most commonly-used communication tools for the deaf community in their daily life. It
mainly conveys information by both manual components
(hand/arm gestures), and non-manual components (facial
expressions, head movements, and body postures) (Dreuw
et al. 2007; Ong and Ranganath 2005). However, mastering this language is rather difficult and time-consuming for
the hearing people, thus hindering direct communications
between two groups. To relieve this problem, isolated sign
language recognition tries to classify a video segment into
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

854

Gloss is the atomic lexical unit to annotate sign languages.

