The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Understanding the Generalization Performance of Spectral Clustering Algorithms
Shaojie Li, Sheng Ouyang, Yong Liu*
1

2

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
{lishaojie95, ouyangsheng, liuyonggsai}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract

dan, and Weiss 2001; Shi and Malik 2000), dynamic programming (Alpert and Kahng 1995), or orthonormal transform (Stella and Shi 2003) can be employed to get the discrete solution on the matrix and therefore the final group
partitions.
However, compared with the prosperous development of
the design and application, the generalization performance
analysis of spectral clustering algorithms is scarce. Hitherto, the theoretical analysis of spectral clustering almost
focuses on consistency (Von Luxburg, Belkin, and Bousquet 2008; Von Luxburg, Bousquet, and Belkin 2004; Cao
and Chen 2011; Trillos and Slepčev 2018; Trillos et al.
2016; Schiebinger et al. 2015; Terada and Yamamoto 2019).
Consistency means that if it is true that as the sample size
collected goes to infinity, the partitioning of the data constructed by spectral clustering converges to a certain meaningful partitioning on the population level (Von Luxburg,
Belkin, and Bousquet 2008), but consistency alone does not
reveal the sample complexity (Vapnik 1999). To our best
knowledge, there is only one research that investigates the
generalization performance of kernel NCut (Terada and Yamamoto 2019). They adopt the relationship between NCut
and the weighted kernel k-means (Dhillon, Guan, and Kulis
2007), based on which they establish the excess risk bounds
for kernel NCut. However, Terada and Yamamoto (2019)
study the graph-cut solution, not the solution of spectral
clustering that we used in practice.
In this paper, we are interested in the generalization performance of the practical solution. We investigate the excess
risk bound of two popular spectral clustering algorithms: relaxed RatioCut and relaxed NCut. Notably, to compare with
the RatioCut and NCut without relaxation, we refer to spectral clustering as relaxed RatioCut and relaxed NCut in this
paper. It is known that spectral clustering typically consists
of two steps (Von Luxburg 2007): (1) to obtain the optimal continuous solution by the eigendecomposition on the
graph Laplacian; (2) to obtain the optimal discrete solution,
also referred to as discretization, from the continuous solution by some heuristic algorithms, such as k-means and
orthonormal transform. Consistent with the two steps, we
first investigate the excess risk bound between the empirical
continuous optimal solution and the population-level continuous optimal solution. In deriving this bound, an immediate
emerging difficulty is that the empirical continuous solution

The theoretical analysis of spectral clustering is mainly devoted to consistency, while there is little research on its generalization performance. In this paper, we study the excess
risk bounds of the popular spectral clustering algorithms: relaxed RatioCut and relaxed NCut. Our analysis follows the
two practical steps of spectral clustering algorithms: continuous solution and discrete solution. Firstly, we provide the
convergence rate of the excess risk bounds between the empirical continuous optimal solution and the population-level
continuous optimal solution. Secondly, we show the fundamental quantity influencing the excess risk between the empirical discrete optimal solution and the population-level discrete optimal solution. At the empirical level, algorithms can
be designed to reduce this quantity. Based on our theoretical
analysis, we propose two novel algorithms that can penalize
this quantity and, additionally, can cluster the out-of-sample
data without re-eigendecomposition on the overall samples.
Numerical experiments on toy and real datasets confirm the
effectiveness of our proposed algorithms.

Introduction
Spectral clustering is one of the most popular algorithms in
unsupervised learning and has been widely used for many
machine learning applications (Von Luxburg 2007; Dhillon
2001; Kannan, Vempala, and Vetta 2004; Shaham et al.
2018; Liu et al. 2018). Given a set of data points independently sampled from an unknown underlying probability distribution, also referred to as population distribution,
spectral clustering algorithms aim to divide all data points
into several disjoint sets based on some notion of similarity.
Spectral clustering originates from the spectral graph partitioning (Fiedler 1973). One way to understand spectral clustering is to view it as a relaxation of searching for the best
graph-cut since the latter is known as an NP-hard problem
(Von Luxburg 2007). The core method of spectral clustering is the eigendecomposition on the graph Laplacian, and
the matrix composed of eigenvectors can be interpreted as a
lower-dimensional representation that preserves the grouping relationships among data points as much as possible.
Subsequently, various methods such as k-means (Ng, Jor* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8614

