The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Denoising Pre-training for Machine Translation Quality Estimation with
Curriculum Learning
1

Xiang Geng1 , Yu Zhang1 , Jiahuan Li1 , Shujian Huang1 * , Hao Yang2 ,
Shimin Tao2 , Yimeng Chen2 , Ning Xie2 , Jiajun Chen1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Huawei Translation Services Center, Beijing, China
{gx, zhangy, lijh}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {huangsj, chenjj}@nju.edu.cn,
{yanghao30, taoshimin, chenyimeng, nicolas.xie}@huawei.com
Abstract

Source

Quality estimation (QE) aims to assess the quality of machine translations when reference translations are unavailable. QE plays a crucial role in many real-world applications of machine translation. Because labeled QE data are
usually limited in scale, recent research, such as DirectQE,
pre-trains QE models with pseudo QE data and obtains remarkable performance. However, there tends to be inevitable
noise in the pseudo data, hindering models from learning
QE accurately. Our study shows that the noise mainly comes
from the differences between pseudo and real translation outputs. To handle this problem, we propose CLQE, a denoising
pre-training framework for QE based on curriculum learning. More specifically, we propose to measure the degree
of noise in the pseudo QE data with some metrics based
on statistical or distributional features. With the guidance of
these metrics, CLQE gradually pre-trains the QE model using
data from cleaner to noisier. Experiments on various benchmarks reveal that CLQE outperforms DirectQE and other
strong baselines. We also show that with our framework,
pre-training converges faster than directly using the pseudo
data. We make our CLQE code available (https://github.com/
NJUNLP/njuqe).

MT

the exhibit provided new homes for the zoo ’s
siamangs and pygmy marmosets .
这个 (this) 展览 (exhibit) 为 (for) 动物园 (zoo)
的 (’s) 壁炉 (ﬁreplace) 和 (and) 俾格米 (pygmy)
马 (horse) 赛车 (car racing) 提供了 (provided)
新的 (new) 家园 (homes) . ∥ HTER = 0.4667

Table 1: An example from the WMT20 English-Chinese
(EN-ZH) QE dataset. For word-level tags, each token is labeled as ‘OK’ or ‘BAD’ (we show the ‘BAD’ tokens in bold
font with an underline), representing whether it needs to be
corrected. Sentence level score HTER (Snover et al. 2006)
measures the whole effort to correct the MT manually.

the QE task. The predictor-estimator framework (Kim et al.
2017; Fan et al. 2019) pre-trains a feature extractor called
predictor, which predicts each word in the reference given
the source sentence and the target context.
Cui et al. (2021) argued that the differences between the
predictor task and the QE task might cause problems for
bilingual knowledge transfer. As a solution, they proposed
the DirectQE framework, which generates pseudo QE data
(pseudo MT outputs and their QE labels) and uses these data
to pre-train whole QE models directly. To generate pseudo
MT outputs with controllable errors, DirectQE randomly replaces target tokens of parallel sentences. These replaced
tokens are assigned with QE label ‘BAD’ and others with
‘OK’.
While DirectQE achieves remarkable performance, we
notice that the generated pseudo data still have some noises.
Although the pseudo labels are accurate, these pseudo MT
outputs sometimes are quite different from real ones. To be
specific, there could be more meaningless pseudo translation errors that a well-trained MT model may hardly generate. Besides, the characteristics, such as length distribution or domain, of pseudo MT outputs are different from real
MTs. From the transfer learning perspective, the difference
between the pre-trained distribution and the target distribution could result in performance degradation (negative transfer) (Tan et al. 2017).
To handle this problem, we propose CLQE, a denoising
pre-training framework for QE based on curriculum learning

Introduction
Machine translation (MT) quality estimation (QE) is the task
of estimating the quality of machine translations when reference translations are unavailable (Specia, Scarton, and Paetzold 2018). As shown in Table 1, QE focuses on predicting
sentence-level scores and word-level tags given the sources
and MT outputs. QE is of great practical use in real-world
scenarios including reducing post-editing effort by filtering out low-quality translation results or pointing out possibly low-quality tokens (Specia 2011), improving the performance of MT systems by guiding the decoding process
(Wang et al. 2020a), etc.
Despite the usefulness of QE, the collection and annotation of QE data are expensive, which hinders the performance of neural QE models (Kepler et al. 2019). Thus,
the pre-training and fine-tuning strategy have been widely
used to transfer bilingual knowledge from parallel corpora to
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12827

