The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Skating-Mixer: Long-Term Sport Audio-Visual Modeling with MLPs
Jingfei Xia* 1,2 , Mingchen Zhuge* 1,3 ,
Tiantian Geng , Shun Fan1 , Yuantai Wei1 , Zhenyu He4 , Feng Zheng†1
1

1

Southern University of Science and Technology
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
AI Initiative, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
4
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
xj022@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, mingchen.zhuge@kaust.edu.sa, zhenyuhe@hit.edu.cn,
{gengtiantian97, 27957322s, santyelegy, zfeng02}@gmail.com
Abstract

representation learning on the long videos with large fps
(frame per second) which results in large size of inputs.
(2) Both audio and video should be considered when calculating the scores in figure skating.
• Missing high-quality dataset. Unlike common videos,
figure skating videos are sourced from live sporting tournaments that require extensive manual process effort.
This could be the reason that existing datasets (Xu et al.
2019; Liu et al. 2020) are not comprehensive enough (in
scale or diversity) to cover figure skating.

Figure skating scoring is challenging because it requires judging the technical moves of the players as well as their coordination with the background music. Most learning-based
methods cannot solve it well for two reasons: 1) each move
in figure skating changes quickly, hence simply applying traditional frame sampling will lose a lot of valuable information, especially in 3 to 5 minutes long videos; 2) prior methods rarely considered the critical audio-visual relationship in
their models. Due to these reasons, we introduce a novel architecture, named Skating-Mixer. It extends the MLP framework in a multimodal fashion and effectively learns longterm representations through our designed memory recurrent
unit (MRU). Aside from the model, we collected a highquality audio-visual FS1000 dataset, which contains over
1000 videos on 8 types of programs with 7 different rating metrics, overtaking other datasets in both quantity and
diversity. Experiments show the proposed method achieves
SOTAs over all major metrics on the public Fis-V and our
FS1000 dataset. In addition, we include an analysis applying
our method to the recent competitions in Beijing 2022 Winter
Olympic Games, proving our method has strong applicability.

Earlier work (Liu et al. 2020) utilized a hierarchical
LSTM model (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) to capture
the local and global information in figure skating videos.
The recent Eagle-eye method (Nekoui, Cruz, and Cheng
2021) considers posing heatmaps and appearance features
jointly. Although these two methods achieve comparably
good results, they remain obvious deficiencies. Firstly, their
methods can hardly generalize to different categories of
competition in the real scene. More importantly, they merely
consider visual modality. While technical action (visual
modality) is important in figure skating, we argue that background music (audio modality) should not be ignored as
well. An effective model which considers both visual and
audio cues is urgently needed in this field.
Convolutional Neural Networks (Fukushima 1979) have
long been used for various computer vision tasks (Zhuge
et al. 2022). Later, Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) have
been introduced into this area and show great power in multimodal learning compared with CNNs (Zhuge et al. 2021).
However, the complexity of Vision Transformer (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) is quadratic in the number of input patches
and it usually requires a large amount of data to train (Liu
et al. 2021b), which is hardly satisfied in our task. Recently, a pure MLP-based structure MLP-Mixer has been
proposed and shows promising results on the image classification task (Tolstikhin et al. 2021) with linear complexity.
Yet, this simple structure has not been deeply explored in the
audio-visual area. Therefore, we introduce Skating-Mixer,
which is the pioneer of MLP-based multimodal architecture
and also the first to score figure skating with auditory and
visual features. Skating-Mixer has the following properties:
(1) It simultaneously models audio and visual features and

Introduction
Due to the importance of fair competition, many worldwide
sports committees devote themselves to regularizing the behaviors of both athletes and referees. As a supplementary
tool, crowd workers seek to employ objective machine intelligence to judge performances in competitions. Therefore,
many learning-based assessment models (Pirsiavash, Vondrick, and Torralba 2014; Parmar and Tran Morris 2017;
Pan, Gao, and Zheng 2019; Jain, Harit, and Sharma 2020;
Xiang et al. 2018; Li, Chai, and Chen 2018) have been introduced in recent years. However, few works proposed to
score figure skating videos due to several key challenges:
• Requiring strong video representation learning. (1)
Figure skating videos are 3−5 minutes long and contain manifold technical movements, requiring effective
* The first two authors contributed equally: work is done when

they worked as visiting scholars in SUSTech.
†
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2901

