The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Unsupervised Deep Learning for Phase Retrieval via Teacher-Student Distillation
Yuhui Quan1,2,* , Zhile Chen1,2,* , Tongyao Pang3 , Hui Ji3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
2
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 510320, China
3
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, 119076, Singapore
csyhquan@scut.edu.cn, cszhilechen@mail.scut.edu.cn, matpt@nus.edu.sg, matjh@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

Ahmed 2020; Hyder et al. 2019; Liu, Ghosh, and Scarlett
2021; Liu et al. 2021) to regularize the prediction.
These DL-based PR methods require the acquisition of a
large number of GT images or images with high signal-tonoise ratio (SNR). In many domains, capturing such latent
images is expensive or even infeasible. Although PnP methods can use GT images from other domains, their generality is often limited by domain shifts, e.g., statistical priors
learned from digital photographs of natural scenes are not
suitable for the images of biology or material science. Another approach to avoid collecting GT images is using an untrained convolutional NN (CNN) for regularizing the prediction, which is based on the deep image prior (DIP) (Ulyanov,
Vedaldi, and Lempitsky 2018). These DIP-based unsupervised DL methods (Jagatap and Hegde 2019; Bostan et al.
2020; Chen et al. 2022a) have high computational cost, as
different NN models need to be learned for different test
samples. In addition, their performance is not as good as the
supervised DL methods in the existing literature, probably
due to their lack of knowledge from external data.
Motivated by the challenge of collecting GT images and
the limitations of existing dataset-free unsupervised methods, this paper developed a fully-unsupervised end-to-end
DL approach for PR with the following three features:

Phase retrieval (PR) is a challenging nonlinear inverse problem in scientific imaging that involves reconstructing the
phase of a signal from its intensity measurements. Recently,
there has been an increasing interest in deep learning-based
PR. Motivated by the challenge of collecting ground-truth
(GT) images in many domains, this paper proposes a fullyunsupervised learning approach for PR, which trains an endto-end deep model via a GT-free teacher-student online distillation framework. Specifically, a teacher model is trained
using a self-expressive loss with noise resistance, while a student model is trained with a consistency loss on augmented
data to exploit the teacher’s dark knowledge. Additionally, we
develop an enhanced unfolding network for both the teacher
and student models. Extensive experiments show that our proposed approach outperforms existing unsupervised PR methods with higher computational efficiency and performs competitively against supervised methods.

Introduction
Phase retrieval (PR) refers to reconstructing the phase of a
signal from its intensity measurements, which finds a wide
range of applications in scientific imaging. Formally, PR requires solving a nonlinear ill-posed problem as follows:
y = |Axgt | + n,

(1)

• No prerequisite on GT images or pre-trained NN models.
• Training a universal end-to-end NN from external data.
• Providing competitive performance against existing supervised DL-based methods.

N

where xgt ∈ C denotes the signal (image) to reconstruct,
y ∈ RM the intensity measurements, n ∈ RM the measurement noise, | · | the element-wise modulus operator, and
A ∈ CM ×N some complex-valued linear transform, e.g.,
discrete Fourier transform (DFT).
In recent years, deep learning (DL) has emerged as one
promising tool for PR. Most existing studies leverage supervised DL and train an end-to-end neural network (NN) over
a paired set of ground-truth (GT) images and their intensity
measurements. Recent works (Cha et al. 2021; Zhang et al.
2021b) can train an NN using an unpaired set. Plug-andPlay (PnP) approaches use a pre-trained denoising NN (Metzler et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2019; Shi, Lian, and Chang 2020;
Wei et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2022b) or a pre-trained generative NN (Hand, Leong, and Voroninski 2018; Shamshad and

Main Idea and Contributions
Unsupervised DL of PR can be interpreted as a weakly semisupervised learning problem. Consider the image acquisition process in (1). A GT image xgt is composed by a part
xlgt which is completely captured by the intensity measurements |Axgt | and the other part xugt which is completely lost
during image acquisition. These two parts are sufficient for
reconstructing xgt . Since y is a noisy version of |Axgt |, it is
used as a noisy label of xlgt for weakly supervised learning.
However, there is no label regarding xugt . Then, the training data for unsupervised PR can be viewed as having partial weak (noisy) labels encoded by y, where weakly semisupervised learning applies.

* Corresponding authors: Zhile Chen and Yuhui Quan.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2128

