The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

EMEF: Ensemble Multi-Exposure Image Fusion
Renshuai Liu, Chengyang Li, Haitao Cao, Yinglin Zheng, Ming Zeng, Xuan Cheng*
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China
{medalwill, chengyanglee, chtao, zhengyinglin}@stu.xmu.edu.cn,
{zengming, chengxuan}@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Although remarkable progress has been made in recent years,
current multi-exposure image fusion (MEF) research is still
bounded by the lack of real ground truth, objective evaluation function, and robust fusion strategy. In this paper, we
study the MEF problem from a new perspective. We don’t
utilize any synthesized ground truth, design any loss function, or develop any fusion strategy. Our proposed method
EMEF takes advantage of the wisdom of multiple imperfect MEF contributors including both conventional and deep
learning-based methods. Specifically, EMEF consists of two
main stages: pre-train an imitator network and tune the imitator in the runtime. In the first stage, we make a unified network imitate different MEF targets in a style modulation way.
In the second stage, we tune the imitator network by optimizing the style code, in order to find an optimal fusion result
for each input pair. In the experiment, we construct EMEF
from four state-of-the-art MEF methods and then make comparisons with the individuals and several other competitive
methods on the latest released MEF benchmark dataset. The
promising experimental results demonstrate that our ensemble framework can “get the best of all worlds”. The code is
available at https://github.com/medalwill/EMEF.

1

(a) over-exposure

(b) under-exposure

(c) FMMEF
SS

IF

HP

2/4

2/6

1/3

FusionDN 0/4

3/6

0/3

MGFF

1/6

1/3

FMMEF

(d) FusionDN

(e) MGFF

0/4

(f) statistics in
MEF benchmark

Figure 1: The over-exposure (a) and under-exposure (b) images are the input. The fusion results of FMMEF (c), FusionDN (d), and MGFF (e) respectively exhibit more meaningful structures in the stone arch, roof, and ground regions.
According to the evaluation (f) in MEFB (Zhang 2021), FMMEF, FusionDN, and MGFF have advantages respectively
in the metrics of structural similarity (SS), image feature (IF)
and human perception (HP). “2/4” means that the method
gets 2 best values among the 4 metrics.

Introduction

Real-world scenes usually exhibit a high dynamic range
(HDR) that may be in excess of 100,000: 1 between the
brightest and darkest regions. The pictures captured by digital image sensors, however, usually have a low dynamic
range (LDR), suffering from over-exposure and underexposure in some situations. An effective yet economical solution is MEF, which fuses several LDR images in different
exposures into a single HDR image. Nowadays, MEF has
already been widely used in smartphones like Xiaomi, vivo
and OPPO.
Many MEF methods have been proposed over the last
decade. The traditional MEF methods use specific handcrafted fusion strategies, while the deep learning-based MEF
methods directly feed multi-exposure images into a network
to produce a fused image in a supervised or unsupervised
way. Although deep learning-based methods have gradually

become mainstream in the MEF field, traditional methods
still show very competitive performance in a recently published MEF benchmark (MEFB) (Zhang 2021). Meanwhile,
it’s really hard to find a perfect MEF method at present, as no
single method can always perform well in all situations. This
is mainly due to three factors. 1) The existing MEF ground
truth data is mostly artificially made by selecting visually
appealing results from a set of MEF methods. The lack of
real ground truth hinders the ability of learning-based methods. 2) As HDR is a very subjective visual effect of human
beings, there is no uniform objective metric that can well
evaluate the fusion quality. Hence, the loss functions used
in existing MEF methods are usually biased. 3) Most traditional methods make assumptions about the scenes, which
are valid in some situations but invalid in others. It’s really
hard to design a one-size-fits-all image fusion strategy.

* corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1710

