The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multiplex Graph Representation Learning via Common and Private
Information Mining
Yujie Mo1 * , Zongqian Wu4 * , Yuhuan Chen1 , Xiaoshuang Shi1 , Heng Tao Shen1, 3 , Xiaofeng Zhu1, 2†
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China
2
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen 518000, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518000, China
4
Guangxi Key Lab of Multi-Source Information Mining and Security,
Guangxi Normal University, Guilin 541004, China
moyujie2017@gmail.com
Abstract

without the help of labeled nodes. Existing SMGRL methods
can be broadly classified into two categories, i.e., the contrastive learning within the same graph and the contrastive
learning across graphs. The contrastive learning within the
same graph aims to improve the quality of node representations by capturing the global properties (Park et al. 2020; Ren
et al. 2020; Jing, Park, and Tong 2021). However, it treats every graph independently and ignores the intrinsic correlation
(i.e., common information) among different graphs. To alleviate this, the contrastive learning across graphs is designed
to extract the common information among different graphs
by contrasting their representations (Zhu et al. 2022; Li, Jing,
and Tong 2022; Zhou et al. 2022). For instance, to extract the
common information, STENCIL (Zhu et al. 2022) conducts
multi-view contrastive learning between each graph and the
aggregation graph, while CKD (Zhou et al. 2022) conducts
the contrastive learning between different graphs.
Despite its effectiveness, the contrastive learning across
graphs still has limitations to be addressed. On the one hand,
these methods only focus on the common information and ignore the private information in each graph structure. However,
it has been demonstrated that private information contains
discriminative characteristics, which is important for downstream tasks in real applications such as cross-modal retrieval
and image recognition (Xie et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022).
Similarly, private information in graph structures may convey
significant connection characteristics between nodes in the
multiplex graph. Therefore, ignoring the private information
in graph structures may lead to decreased effectiveness in
downstream tasks. On the other hand, these methods ignore
the redundant information in node representations of each
graph. That is, different dimensionalities of node representations may share the same content. As a result, the redundancy
may weaken the discriminative information of representations and even lead to collapse (Zbontar et al. 2021).
Based on the above observations, jointly capturing the
common information and the private information while minimizing the redundant information in node representations is
a possible solution to achieve an effective SMGRL. However,
few methods address these issues in a unified framework due

Self-supervised multiplex graph representation learning (SMGRL) has attracted increasing interest, but previous SMGRL
methods still suffer from the following issues: (i) they focus on
the common information only (but ignore the private information in graph structures) to lose some essential characteristics
related to downstream tasks, and (ii) they ignore the redundant
information in node representations of each graph. To solve
these issues, this paper proposes a new SMGRL method by
jointly mining the common information and the private information in the multiplex graph while minimizing the redundant
information within node representations. Specifically, the proposed method investigates the decorrelation losses to extract
the common information and minimize the redundant information, while investigating the reconstruction losses to maintain
the private information. Comprehensive experimental results
verify the superiority of the proposed method, on four public
benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Multiplex graph representation learning (MGRL) is a powerful approach to extracting multiple relationships among
nodes in the graph data, and has recently attracted much attention in real applications (Chu et al. 2019; Zhang and Kou
2022; Peng et al. 2022). The multiplex graph can be regarded
as a combination of multiple graphs. Different graphs consist of shared node features and different graph structures,
and each graph structure focuses on one type of relationship.
Therefore, MGRL is available to explore more relationships
than traditional graph representation learning (GRL) (Kipf
and Welling 2017; Fan et al. 2019).
Since node labels are usually difficult to be obtained,
self-supervised multiplex graph representation learning (SMGRL) has emerged as a hot research topic with great success
(Hwang et al. 2020; Pan and Kang 2021; Lin et al. 2021).
SMGRL aims at extracting the hidden information of the multiplex graph and generating discriminative representations
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9217

