The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MC O M E T: Multimodal Fusion Transformer for Physical Audiovisual
Commonsense Reasoning
Daoming Zong and Shiliang Sun*
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
ecnuzdm@gmail.com, slsun@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

TE

AC

Physical commonsense reasoning is essential for building reliable and interpretable AI systems, which involves a general
understanding of the physical properties and affordances of
everyday objects, how these objects can be manipulated, and
how they interact with others. It is fundamentally a multisensory task, as physical properties are manifested through
multiple modalities, including vision and acoustics. In this
work, we present a unified framework, named Multimodal
Commonsense Transformer (MC O M E T ), for physical audiovisual commonsense reasoning. MC O M E T has two intriguing properties: i) it fully mines higher-ordered temporal relationships across modalities (e.g., pairs, triplets, and
quadruplets); and ii) it restricts the cross-modal flow through
the feature collection and propagation mechanism with tight
fusion bottlenecks, forcing the model to attend the most relevant parts in each modality and suppressing the dissemination
of noisy information. We evaluate our model on a very recent
public benchmark, PACS. Results show that MC O M E T significantly outperforms a variety of strong baselines, revealing
powerful multi-modal commonsense reasoning capabilities.

D

Abstract

ET
R

Figure 1: Illustration of two datapoints from PACS, with
each datapoint containing a question and a pair of objects.
Here object1 is a ceramic tile and object2 is foam.

Introduction

Humans use physical commonsense reasoning in all aspects
of everyday life, whether to infer properties of previously
unseen objects or to solve unique problems (e.g., should I
use salt or chocolate to clean my teeth when there is no
toothpaste?). To interact with everyday objects in the real
world, AI needs to acquire physical commonsense knowledge about everyday objects (Yu et al. 2022), such as their
physical properties, affordances, how they are manipulated,
and how they interact with other physical objects (Bisk et al.
2020; Forbes, Holtzman, and Choi 2019). The common understanding of object interactions plays an essential role in
the cognitive abilities of robots (Zhao, Papalexakis, and Ma
2020a) (e.g., when I apply eyeshadow without a brush, a
robot should give me a cotton swab rather than a toothpick).
Previous works have pioneered the exploration of vision and text to understand fundamental physical properties (Hessel, Mimno, and Lee 2018; Krishna et al. 2017;
Storks et al. 2021; Yatskar et al. 2017; Zhao, Papalexakis,

R

and Ma 2020b). However, physical commonsense reasoning
is naturally a multi-modal task because physical properties
are manifested through multiple modalities, including vision
and acoustics. If an object is visually ambiguous or rarely
seen, audio can provide key information to identify its physical properties. As shown in Fig. 1, if only video without an
audio track, object1 could be mistaken for plastic or even
paper, and object2 could be mistaken for rubber or wax.
For Q1 in Fig. 1, the absence of the necessary audio may easily lead to a wrong answer, e.g., object2 is more likely to
break into pieces than object1 if dropped from a height.
Therefore, to empower AI with commonsense physical reasoning capabilities, models must learn to reason across both
audio and visual modalities.
In this work, we focus on physical commonsense reasoning under multimodal (audiovisual) settings. The additional acoustic information poses a great challenge to physical commonsense reasoning compared to tasks that focus
solely on the visual or textual modality. On the one hand,
we conjecture that the time-locked correlation allows audio to enrich the complementary visual information. On

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6621

