The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Imperceptible Adversarial Attack via Invertible Neural Networks
Zihan Chen* , Ziyue Wang* , Jun-Jie Huang† , Wentao Zhao, Xiao Liu, Dejian Guan
College of Computer Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China
{chenzihan21, wangzy13, jjhuang, wtzhao, liuxiao13a, guandejian20}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Adding perturbations via utilizing auxiliary gradient information or discarding existing details of the benign images are
two common approaches for generating adversarial examples. Though visual imperceptibility is the desired property
of adversarial examples, conventional adversarial attacks still
generate traceable adversarial perturbations. In this paper,
we introduce a novel Adversarial Attack via Invertible Neural Networks (AdvINN) method to produce robust and imperceptible adversarial examples. Specifically, AdvINN fully
takes advantage of the information preservation property of
Invertible Neural Networks and thereby generates adversarial examples by simultaneously adding class-specific semantic information of the target class and dropping discriminant
information of the original class. Extensive experiments on
CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet-1K demonstrate that
the proposed AdvINN method can produce less imperceptible
adversarial images than the state-of-the-art methods and AdvINN yields more robust adversarial examples with high confidence compared to other adversarial attacks. Code is available at https://github.com/jjhuangcs/AdvINN.

Introduction

Figure 1: Adversarial examples generated by (a) PerCAL (Zhao, Liu, and Larson 2020), (b) SSAH (Luo et al.
2022), and (c) the proposed AdvINN, respectively. All perturbations are enlarged for better visualization.

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved outstanding
performance in a wide range of applications, however, have
shown to be vulnerable to adversarial examples (Szegedy
et al. 2014; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Akhtar
and Mian 2018; Hendrycks et al. 2021). By adding mild adversarial noise to a benign image, classification DNNs can
be easily deceived and misclassify this adversarial example
to an erroneous class label. Though the existence of adversarial examples may hinder the applications of DNNs to risk
sensitive domains, it further promotes investigation on robustness of DNNs.
Adversarial examples can be generated by either adding
or dropping certain information with respect to the input
benign images. Adding adversarial perturbations (Szegedy
et al. 2014; Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard 2016;
Carlini and Wagner 2017) to clean images is the most common approach to craft adversarial examples. Fast Gradient

Sign Method (FGSM) (Szegedy et al. 2014) and its variations (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016; Dong et al.
2018; Lin et al. 2019) add adversarial noise to the benign
image according to the sign of the gradients of the loss function with respect to the input image. An alternative is to
mix a sequence of images to make the classifier output erroneous predictions and improve the transferability of generated adversarial examples (Wang et al. 2021), since information from images of other classes could disturb the prediction of DNNs. Recently, dropping existing information
from the original images has also shown to be an effective
way to generate adversaries (Duan et al. 2021). Compared
to methods of adding adversarial perturbations to the benign
images, AdvDrop (Duan et al. 2021) shows stronger robustness against denoising-based defence methods and will not
lead to suspicious increase of image storage size.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

414

