The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Inferring Patient Zero on Temporal Networks via Graph Neural Networks
Xiaolei Ru1 , Jack Murdoch Moore1 , Xin-Ya Zhang1 , Yeting Zeng2 , Gang Yan1 *
1

School of Physical Science and Engineering, and National Key Laboratory of Autonomous Intelligent Unmanned Systems,
Tongji University, Shanghai, China
2
Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
{ruxl,jackmoore,xinyazhang,gyan}@tongji.edu.cn, ytceng21@m.fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

a virus comes from and guide governments to develop targeted procedures for epidemic prevention.
The backtracking problem’s practical significance means
it has received sustained attention across several communities, including epidemiology, network science and computer
science. However, many algorithms require detailed information about the spreading process, such as the exact moment when each individual was infected or the person by
whom each individual was infected, and the sudden and unexpected onset of epidemics make this data difficult to obtain in practice. Our algorithm is designed for the more common scenario in which the available information is limited
to three aspects (see Fig. 1). First, a snapshot of the distribution of the disease throughout the population at the final
moment. This final state is usually obtained by carrying out
a full screening, in COVID-19, for example, by nucleic acid
testing. Second, the contact relation of the local population
during the contagion processes, which can be modelled as a
temporal network in which nodes represent individuals and
links represent physical proximity within a distance which
risks transmission. These contact networks can be reconstructed from survey or modern location technologies, such
as mobile signaling data. Third, an estimated time interval –
not necessarily a precise time – when the outbreak starts.
In many epidemic models, individuals are infected with a
certain probability when they come into contact with a patient, with the infection rate depending on the type of disease. Thus, the spreading process is strongly random. Even
with the same patient zero, restarting the spreading process
many times can result in very different snapshots. For example, when patient zero encounters an individual who is a
hub node in the contact network, whether this encounter becomes an effective transmission has a great influence on the
final size of infected population. On the other hand, similar
final snapshots can emerge from distinct patient zeros, especially when their topological distance on the temporal network is small. Soft Margin Monte Carlo estimator (AntulovFantulin et al. 2015) runs extensive simulations of spreading
taking each infected individual as a potential patient zero
in turn, and quantifies the similarity between the simulated
and real snapshots. The individual with maximum similarity
is identified as patient zero. However, this method provides
limited insights into how the behavior of the spreading dynamics system depends on the initial state (Strogatz 2018),

The world is currently seeing frequent local outbreaks of epidemics, such as COVID-19 and Monkeypox. Preventing further propagation of the outbreak requires prompt implementation of control measures, and a critical step is to quickly
infer patient zero. This backtracking task is challenging for
two reasons. First, due to the sudden emergence of local epidemics, information recording the spreading process is limited. Second, the spreading process has strong randomness.
To address these challenges, we tailor a gnn-based model to
establish the inverse statistical association between the current and initial state implicitly. This model uses contact topology and the current state of the local population to determine
the possibility that each individual could be patient zero. We
benchmark our model on data from important epidemiological models on five real temporal networks, showing performance significantly superior to previous methods. We also
demonstrate that our method is robust to missing information
about contact structure or current state. Further, we find the
individuals assigned higher inferred possibility by model are
closer to patient zero in terms of core number and the activity sequence recording the times at which the individual had
contact with other nodes.

Introduction
Artificial intelligence is providing increasingly valuable support to a diverse range of applications in medicine (Buch,
Ahmed, and Maruthappu 2018) by assisting humans to sift
through massive amounts of medical data and uncover the
relevant underlying patterns (Jittprasong 2022). Here, we
propose an AI-based solution for source detection in contagion processes, i.e., inferring patient zero, the individual who initially introduces the virus into the local population. At present, countries around the world are plagued
by highly contagious diseases, e.g., COVID-19 and Monkeypox. During an incubation period, the initially infected
population can be contagious without exhibiting detectable
symptoms, which can lead to the unforeseeable outbreak of
an epidemic. After an outbreak, source detection is a necessary measure to investigate pathogenesis, cut off the route
of transmission and block further propagation. An efficient
detection algorithm can use limited data to determine where
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9632

