The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Faster Practical Approximation Scheme for the Permanent
Juha Harviainen, Mikko Koivisto
University of Helsinki
juha.harviainen@helsinki.fi, mikko.koivisto@helsinki.fi

Abstract

et al. 2008), and there is also empirical evidence of infeasibility (Newman and Vardi 2020).
The practical intractability of the problem calls for approaches developed mainly in the fields of AI and operations
research. Instead of requiring tractability in the worst case
(or average case over some simplistic baseline distribution),
the goal is to design methods that make use of heuristics so
as to perform well on various real-world and benchmark instances. While this paradigm has generally been successful
for (weighted) model counting (see, e.g., Gomes, Sabharwal,
and Selman 2006, Soos and Meel 2019, Kuck et al. 2019b),
the available generic methods appear to be inefficient for approximating the permanent. Thus, estimating the permanent
of nonnegative matrices—in addition to being a fundamentally important problem on its own—serves as a concrete
hard benchmark for heuristic-driven methods.
In this paper, we advance a rejection sampling approach
for estimating the permanent, put recently forward by Kuck
et al. (2019a) and Harviainen, Röyskö, and Koivisto (2021).
The approach stems from Huber’s (2006) scheme for binary
matrices. The idea is to sample a uniform random value between 0 and some upper bound U (A) of the
Qnpermanent; if
the value falls in a range of size w(σ) := i=1 ai,σ(i) reserved by some permutation σ, then the sample is accepted,
otherwise rejected. The acceptance rate is per A/U (A), and
after sufficiently many accepts, we obtain a high-confidence
estimate of per A. This approach relies on two key conditions: (i) we can efficiently decide whether to accept or reject a sample; (ii) we have a good bound U (A). To fullfill
the first condition, Huber utilized self-reducibility: a partial permutation is incrementally extended until it gets accepted or rejected—crucially, this only works if the bound
U (A) is nesting, a kind of monotonicity property. This requirement prevented using the well-known Minc–Brègman
bound (Minc 1963; Brègman 1973). As a remedy, Huber
crafted an approximate variant of that bound. Huber and
Law (2008) extended the idea to matrices with arbitrary nonnegative real entries.
Kuck et al. (2019a) circumvented the need for a nesting bound. Their AdaPart scheme uses the tighter Minc–
Brègman bound, or its extension to nonbinary entries (Schrijver 1978; Soules 2005), and adaptively refines the partition
of the sampling space until the required monotonicity condition is satisfied. A drawback is the larger computational

The permanent of a matrix has numerous applications but
is notoriously hard to compute. While nonnegative matrices
admit polynomial approximation schemes based on rapidly
mixing Markov chains, the known practical estimators of the
permanent rely on importance or rejection sampling. We advance the rejection sampling approach, which provides probabilistic accuracy guarantees, unlike importance sampling.
Specifically, we give a novel class of nesting upper bounds
and a simple preprocessing method that, in comparison to
previous works, enable faster sampling with better acceptance
rate; we demonstrate order-of-magnitude improvements with
both theoretical and empirical analyses. In addition, we display instances on which our approximation scheme is competitive against state-of-the-art importance sampling based
estimators.

Introduction
The permanent of an n × n matrix A = (ai,j ) is the sum
per A :=

n
XY

ai,σ(i)

σ i=1

over all permutations σ of {1, 2, . . . , n}. Permanents appear in numerous and diverse applications, such as counting perfect matchings in a bipartite graph, helping to verify a quantum-mechanical formula (Aaronson and Arkhipov
2011), heuristic counting under global cardinality constraints (Bianco et al. 2019), and multi-target tracking
(Uhlmann 2004), to name just a few.
For computing the permanent, the fastest known exact algorithms run in time O(2n n) (Ryser 1963; Nijenhuis and
Wilf 1978), and no polynomial-time algorithm presumably
exists, for the problem is #P-hard (Valiant 1979). As even
deciding the sign of the permanent is #P-hard (Jerrum, Sinclair, and Vigoda 2004), research on approximation algorithms has focused on nonnegative matrices, which suffice
for many applications. Nonnegative matrices admit fully
polynomial randomized approximation schemes based on
rapidly mixing Markov chains (Jerrum, Sinclair, and Vigoda
2004). However, the best known time complexity bounds are
impractical, within polylogarithmic factors of n7 (Bezáková
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12216

