The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Optimal Features via Partial Invariance
Moulik Choraria1, * , Ibtihal Ferwana1 , Ankur Mani2 , Lav R. Varshney1
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
2
University of Minnesota Twin Cities
{moulikc2, iferwna2, varshney}@illinois.edu, amani@umn.edu

Abstract

the causal features from domain-specific spurious features,
which it can then discard for better generalization.
A standard assumption in such invariance-based objectives
is that of sufficiency (Ahuja et al. 2020b): there exists a predictor, relying solely on the invariant features, which can
achieve Bayes optimal risk in all environments. While fairly
general, this assumption may not be satisfied for certain
classes of distribution shifts. For instance, consider a prediction task with concept drift, wherein the relationship of
the ‘causal’ features (features that are causally responsible
to the label) with the label changes across training environments. Here, a predictor relying solely on invariant features
ends up being over-constrained, since it is incentivized to
discard non-invariant but informative causal features that are
needed for Bayes optimality. Such situations are ubiquitous
in practice, for instance in language tasks in which linguistic features can have different connotations within different
communities (Gallacher 2021; Mani, Varshney, and Pentland 2021) or in tasks with distribution shifts across time
(Luu et al. 2021). Additionally, even when a sufficient representation exists theoretically, it may not be accessible due
to shortcomings in the optimization of the learning objective. However, these factors are seldom accounted for when
considering the application of IRM (or other invariant learning objectives) for a given use-case (Peyrard et al. 2021;
Adragna et al. 2020). Thus, it is important to develop a characterization for the same.
To address this gap in literature, we present a first study to
characterize the behaviour of IRM under explicit concept
drifts. Then, we take a step further and propose a relaxation
for IRM via the Partial Invariance (P-IRM) framework. We
find that our framework increases the flexibility of invariant models by allowing learning of features that are locally
invariant within a partition of the training environments.
This flexibility is accompanied with an inherent trade-off;
the cost of finding the right partition, in an informationagnostic setting, grows exponentially in the number of environments. However, for certain classes of problems, including the language tasks alluded to previously, readily available meta-information often allows us to easily infer the ‘optimal’ training partition for a given use-case. Notice that in
doing so, we move away from the OoD minimax regime,
and instead focus on improving generalization conditioned
on availabity of this meta-information. In this work, we be-

Learning models that are robust to distribution shifts is a key
concern in the context of their real-life applicability. Invariant
Risk Minimization (IRM) is a popular framework that aims
to learn robust models from multiple environments. The success of IRM requires an important assumption: the underlying causal mechanisms/features remain invariant across environments. When not satisfied, we show that IRM can overconstrain the predictor and to remedy this, we propose a relaxation via partial invariance. In this work, we theoretically
highlight the sub-optimality of IRM and then demonstrate
how learning from a partition of training domains can help
improve invariant models. Several experiments, conducted
both in linear settings as well as with deep neural networks
on tasks over both language and image data, allow us to verify our conclusions.

1

Introduction

Standard machine learning models trained using classical
Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) can be expected to
generalize well to unseen data drawn from the same distribution as the training data (Vapnik 2013). However, distribution shifts during test time (when data is from different
sources or under different conditions) can severely degrade
model performance (Beery, V. Horn, and Perona 2018; Lake
et al. 2017; Marcus 2018). The errors can often be attributed
to the model picking up statistically informative but spurious
correlations, which in turn limits their real-life applications
since in practice, the use-case almost always differs from
the training data. Thus, several lines of research explore alternate learning objectives for training robust models.
One particular line of research stems from the Invariant
Causal Prediction framework (Peters, Bühlmann, and Meinshausen 2015), where the goal is to learn causal mechanisms that work well under interventions; our work focuses
on the similarly inspired Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM)
framework, which aims to learn a predictor that relies only
on features that are invariant across all training environments. The underlying motivation for invariance is rooted
in its strong links with causality (Pearl 2009), with the intuition being that by invariance can help the model distinguish
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7175

