The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Scene-Level Sketch-Based Image Retrieval with Minimal Pairwise Supervision
Ce Ge* , Jingyu Wang* , Qi Qi† , Haifeng Sun, Tong Xu, Jianxin Liao
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing 100876, China
{nwlgc, wangjingyu, qiqi8266, hfsun}@bupt.edu.cn, xutong@ebupt.com, jxlbupt@gmail.com

Abstract
The sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR) task has long been
researched at the instance level, where both query sketches
and candidate images are assumed to contain only one dominant object. This strong assumption constrains its application,
especially with the increasingly popular intelligent terminals
and human-computer interaction technology. In this work,
a more general scene-level SBIR task is explored, where
sketches and images can both contain multiple object instances. The new general task is extremely challenging due to
several factors: (i) scene-level SBIR inherently shares sketchspecific difficulties with instance-level SBIR (e.g., sparsity,
abstractness, and diversity), (ii) the cross-modal similarity is
measured between two partially aligned domains (i.e., not all
objects in images are drawn in scene sketches), and (iii) besides instance-level visual similarity, a more complex multidimensional scene-level feature matching problem is imposed
(including appearance, semantics, layout, etc.). Addressing
these challenges, a novel Conditional Graph Autoencoder
model is proposed to deal with scene-level sketch-images retrieval. More importantly, the model can be trained with only
pairwise supervision, which distinguishes our study from others in that elaborate instance-level annotations (for example,
bounding boxes) are no longer required. Extensive experiments confirm the ability of our model to robustly retrieve
multiple related objects at the scene level and exhibit superior performance beyond strong competitors.

(a) Scene sketch

(b) Instance sketches

Figure 1: Comparative illustration of scene sketch vs. instance sketches to represent a retrieval of “a soccer player
is playing soccer”.

color pixels (Yu et al. 2016).
Existing solutions mostly formalize SBIR as an embedding learning problem (Lei et al. 2019). The usual routine is
to embed the query sketch and photos into a common vector space to compare similarities, and return the retrieval
results through nearest neighbor search. Although recent
approaches have achieved excellent performance, there is
still a critical issue that they focused only on instance-level
sketches (i.e., the query sketch is restricted to single object,
such as a handbag, a bird, or a person), whereas scene-level
SBIR (Zou et al. 2018) has been rarely investigated.
Instance-level SBIR is limited in application and is often ambiguous since it ignores contextual information and
correlation between objects. Moreover, instance-level SBIR
can only meet a small part of the demand considering the
fact that scene-level images are more common in daily life.
Fig. 1 shows an illustrative example of retrieving “a soccer
player is playing soccer”. Instance-level SBIR requires that
the objects involved must be drawn one by one. Without seeing the ball, a retrieval system cannot infer much information from the stick figure alone. The figure may be a soccer
player, a basketball player, or a dancer, and it may be kicking, running, dancing, etc. Similarly, it is difficult to extract
useful information from just a sketchy circle. The ambiguity of instance SBIR makes it hard to accurately understand
users’ intentions.
Scene-level SBIR remedies these shortcomings and enables more powerful applications. On the one hand, it allows
for joint retrieval of multiple objects where fine-grained pos-

Introduction
Machine understanding of sketches has been widely studied in the fields of computer vision, computer graphics, and
human-computer interaction (Herot 1976; Yu et al. 2017;
Huang, Canny, and Nichols 2019). With the flourishing of
touch screens (e.g., smartphones and tablets), sketching, as
an efficient human-computer interaction, is becoming practical and ubiquitous. In particular, sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR) is a promising application that allows users to
intuitively draw on screens and search for desired pictures
without using clumsy text descriptions. SBIR is challenging
because of the need to establish a correspondence between
two distinct modalities of sparse line drawings and dense
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

650

