The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Domain Adaptation with Adversarial Training on Penultimate Activations
Tao Sun 1 , Cheng Lu 2 , Haibin Ling 1
1

Stony Brook University, USA
2
XPeng Motors, USA
{tao,hling}@cs.stonybrook.edu, luc@xiaopeng.com

Abstract

Adversarial Training (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2015; Jeddi et al. 2020; Shu et al. 2021) aims to improve
model’s robustness by injecting adversarial examples. Originally, adversarial training is proposed for supervised learning and requires the ground-truth class labels. Miyato et al.
(2018) generalize it to semi-supervised learning and propose
Virtual Adversarial Training (VAT). VAT can be viewed as
a consistency regularization, whose main idea is to force
the model to make similar predictions on clean and perturbed images. VAT is later introduced into domain adaptation to improve local smoothness (Shu et al. 2018). Despite its popularity (Cicek and Soatto 2019; Kumar et al.
2018; Lee et al. 2019b), VAT is commonly used as an auxiliary loss. In contrast, training with VAT alone often leads to
poor performance on domain adaptation benchmarks (Liu,
Wang, and Long 2021; Lee et al. 2019b; Zhang et al. 2021).
Another drawback is that VAT requires an additional backpropagation through the entire network to obtain gradients,
which increases the computation cost.
The above observations motivate us to seek more effective ways of adversarial training for UDA problems. A common practice in UDA is to split the training process into a
source-training stage and a target adaptation stage. Due to
the relevance between the two domains, we find that weights
of the linear classification layer change quite slowly in the
second stage. In fact, some source-data free works (Liang,
Hu, and Feng 2020) freeze the classifier during adaptation
and focus on improving feature extractor. Since our goal is
to enhance prediction confidence on unlabeled target samples, adversarial training on penultimate activations, i.e., the
input features of the final linear classification layer, is more
correlated with this goal than adversarial training on input
images or intermediate features. Our analysis shows that adversarial perturbations on other layer representations can be
mapped into perturbations on penultimate activations. The
mapping maintains the value of adversarial loss but leads to
much higher accuracies. This indicates that it is more effective to manipulate the penultimate activations. Moreover, approximating the optimal adversarial perturbation for penultimate activations is also much easier as it only involves the
linear classifier in the optimization problem.
We propose a framework of domain adaptation with adversarial training on penultimate activations. The method is
applicable to both standard and source-data free setting. As

Enhancing model prediction confidence on target data is
an important objective in Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
(UDA). In this paper, we explore adversarial training on
penultimate activations, i.e., input features of the final linear classification layer. We show that this strategy is more
efficient and better correlated with the objective of boosting prediction confidence than adversarial training on input
images or intermediate features, as used in previous works.
Furthermore, with activation normalization commonly used
in domain adaptation to reduce domain gap, we derive two
variants and systematically analyze the effects of normalization on our adversarial training. This is illustrated both
in theory and through empirical analysis on real adaptation
tasks. Extensive experiments are conducted on popular UDA
benchmarks under both standard setting and source-data free
setting. The results validate that our method achieves the
best scores against previous arts. Code is available at https:
//github.com/tsun/APA.

Introduction
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) aims to transfer
knowledge from a label rich source domain to an unlabeled
target domain (Pan and Yang 2009; Wang and Deng 2018;
Wilson and Cook 2020). The two domains are relevant, yet
there is often a distribution shift between them. Due to the
domain gap, models from the source domain often predict
incorrectly or less confidently on the target domain. Thus,
how to enhance model prediction confidence on target data
becomes critical in UDA.
The mainstream paradigm for UDA is feature adaptation (Sun and Saenko 2016; Tzeng et al. 2014; Ganin and
Lempitsky 2015; Tzeng et al. 2017), which learns domaininvariant features. Despite its popularity, this paradigm has
some intrinsic limitations in the situation with label distribution shift (Li et al. 2020a; Prabhu et al. 2021). Recently, selftraining (Zhu 2005) has drawn increasing attention in UDA,
which applies consistency regularization or pseudo-labeling
loss on the unlabeled target data. Self-training effectively enhances prediction confidence on target data, showing superior results (Liang, Hu, and Feng 2020; Prabhu et al. 2021;
Liu, Wang, and Long 2021; Sun, Lu, and Ling 2022).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9935

