The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robust Image Denoising of No-Flash Images Guided by Consistent Flash Images
Geunwoo Oh1 , Jonghee Back1 , Jae-Pil Heo2 , Bochang Moon1 *
1

Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, South Korea
2
Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
{gnuo8325, jongheeback}@gm.gist.ac.kr, jaepilheo@skku.edu, bmoon@gist.ac.kr

Abstract

typically introduces additional image structures (e.g., hard
shadows or highlights on specular objects) that do not exist
in the ground truth image. It makes flash images less helpful
in guiding a denoiser to preserve fine details in no-flash images. As a result, suppressing noise in a no-flash image by
robustly exploiting an inconsistent flash image, which has
image structures different from the ground truth, is a vital
technical challenge for image denoisers that take a flash/noflash image pair as input.
Training a deep neural network that denoises a no-flash
image while exploiting an additional flash image has recently received attention. As a recent example, Deng and
Dragotti (2021) demonstrated that a sophistically designed
neural network, which fuses a flash/no-flash image pair, can
drastically outperform existing methods (Kostadin Dabov
and Egiazarian 2007; Zhang, Zuo, and Zhang 2018) that take
only a no-flash image as input. Nonetheless, when structural
information (e.g., image edges) in flash images is inconsistent with that in the corresponding ground truth (e.g., image
areas greatly affected by the flashlight), the state-of-the-art
techniques (Li et al. 2016; Deng and Dragotti 2021) often
fail to generate a high-quality denoising output, as shown in
Fig. 1.
We propose a learning-based framework that takes a
flash/no-flash pair as input and generates a denoised no-flash
image while robustly handling the inconsistency between
the input image pair. Our framework is built upon deep combiner (DC) (Back et al. 2020), initially designed for fusing
a synthetic image pair (i.e., two rendered images) via a localized combination model. A straightforward adaptation to
the original DC is substituting their virtual input pair with
flash/no-flash images. However, this direct application can
produce less effective results since their combination model
assumes the image pair is generated using an identical light
condition. We relax their assumption (i.e., a consistent image
pair) and reformulate a new combination model that merges
a flash/no-flash image pair while taking inconsistency between the input pair into account. Our main contributions
are as follows.
• We infer a consistent image patch, which is structurally
similar to the ground truth, by applying per-pixel convolutional kernels to an input flash image locally. We
train a deep neural network to produce the convolutional
kernels so that estimated image patches can adequately

Images taken in low light conditions typically contain distracting noise, and eliminating such noise is a crucial computer vision problem. Additional photos captured with a camera flash can guide an image denoiser to preserve edges since
the flash images often contain fine details with reduced noise.
Nonetheless, a denoiser can be misled by inconsistent flash
images, which have image structures (e.g., edges) that do
not exist in no-flash images. Unfortunately, this disparity frequently occurs as the flash/no-flash pairs are taken in different light conditions. We propose a learning-based technique that robustly fuses the image pairs while considering
their inconsistency. Our framework infers consistent flash image patches locally, which have similar image structures with
the ground truth, and denoises no-flash images using the inferred ones via a combination model. We demonstrate that
our technique can produce more robust results than state-ofthe-art methods, given various flash/no-flash pairs with inconsistent image structures. The source code is available at
https://github.com/CGLab-GIST/RIDFnF.

1

Introduction

Image denoising is a long-standing problem, and its ultimate
goal is to recover ground truth images (clean images) from
noisy input images. In practice, an image frequently contains visually distracting noise when taken in a low light condition. Image denoisers, e.g., (Tomasi and Manduchi 1998;
Buades, Coll, and Morel 2005), often reduce such noise by
blending adjacent pixel colors while preserving fine details.
Additional photos taken with a camera flash can
effectively guide image denoisers since those typically contain high-frequency details with much-reduced
noise (Petschnigg et al. 2004; Eisemann and Durand 2004).
Technically, the flash images can serve as edge-stopping
functions that prevent image denoisers from blending neighboring pixel colors across edges.
Nevertheless, it is unrealistic to assume that highfrequency information in flash images is perfectly matched
to those in ground truth images, i.e., no-flash images without
noise, since they are taken in different light conditions (i.e.,
with and without a camera flash). For example, the flashlight
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1993

