The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Vector Quantized Approach for Text to Speech Synthesis on Real-World
Spontaneous Speech
Li-Wei Chen, Shinji Watanabe, Alexander Rudnicky
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
liweiche@cs.cmu.edu, swatanab@cs.cmu.edu, air@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

trained on real-world speech are able to make use of the
unlimited utterances in the wild. Therefore, we believe it
should be possible to replicate the success similar to that
of large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-3 (Brown
et al. 2020). These systems can be fine-tuned to specific
speaker characteristics or recording environments with few
resources available. In this work, we address emerging challenges when training TTS systems on real-world speech:
higher variation of prosody and background noise compared
to reading speech recorded in controlled environments.
With real-world speech, we first provide evidence that
mel-spectrogram based autoregressive systems failed to generate proper text-audio alignment during inference, resulting
in unintelligible speech. We further show that clear alignments can still be learned in training, and thus the failure of
inference alignment can be reasonably attributed to error accumulation in the decoding procedure. We find that replacing mel-spectrogram with learned discrete codebooks effectively addressed this issue. We attribute this to the higher
resiliency to input noise of discrete representations. Our results, however, indicate that a single codebook leads to distorted reconstruction for real-world speech, even with larger
codebook sizes. We conjecture that a single codebook is insufficient to cover the diverse prosody patterns presented
in spontaneous speech. Therefore, we adopt multiple codebooks and design specific architectures for multi-code sampling and monotonic alignment. Finally, we use a clean silence audio prompt during inference to encourage the model
on generating clean speech despite training on a noisy corpus. We designate this system MQTTS (multi-codebook
vector quantized TTS) and introduce it in Section 3.
We perform ablation analysis in Section 5, as well as
comparing mel-spectrogram based systems to identify the
properties needed for real-world speech synthesis. We further compare MQTTS with non-autoregressive approach.
We show that our autoregressive MQTTS performs better in
intelligibility and speaker transferability. MQTTS achieves
slightly higher naturalness, and with a much higher prosody
diversity. On the other hand, non-autoregressive model excels in robustness and computation speed. Additionally, with
clean silence prompt, MQTTS can achieve a much lower
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). We make our code public1 .

Recent Text-to-Speech (TTS) systems trained on reading or
acted corpora have achieved near human-level naturalness.
The diversity of human speech, however, often goes beyond
the coverage of these corpora. We believe the ability to handle
such diversity is crucial for AI systems to achieve humanlevel communication. Our work explores the use of more
abundant real-world data for building speech synthesizers.
We train TTS systems using real-world speech from YouTube
and podcasts. We observe the mismatch between training and
inference alignments in mel-spectrogram based autoregressive models, leading to unintelligible synthesis, and demonstrate that learned discrete codes within multiple code groups
effectively resolves this issue. We introduce our MQTTS system whose architecture is designed for multiple code generation and monotonic alignment, along with the use of a clean
silence prompt to improve synthesis quality. We conduct ablation analyses to identify the efficacy of our methods. We
show that MQTTS outperforms existing TTS systems in several objective and subjective measures.

1

Introduction

A crucial component of Artificial Intelligence (AI), especially conversational agents, is the ability to synthesize
human-level speech. With recent advances in deep learning,
neural-based Text-to-Speech (TTS) systems (Li et al. 2019;
Kim et al. 2020; Ren et al. 2019) have led to significant improvements in the quality of synthesized speech. However,
standard corpora (Ito and Johnson 2017; Yamagishi, Veaux,
and MacDonald 2019) used for training TTS systems for
the most part include reading or acted speech recorded in
a controlled environment. On the other hand, humans spontaneously produce speech with diverse prosody that conveys
paralinguistic information including subtle emotions. This
ability comes from exposure to thousands of hours of realworld speech. It suggests that TTS systems trained on realworld speech enable human-level AI.
In this work, we explore the use of real-world speech collected from YouTube and podcasts on TTS. While the ultimate goal is to use an ASR system to transcribe real-world
speech, here we simplify the setting by using an already
transcribed corpus and focus on TTS. Systems successfully
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

12644

https://github.com/b04901014/MQTTS

