The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Cross-Modal Contrastive Learning for Domain Adaptation
in 3D Semantic Segmentation
Bowei Xing, Xianghua Ying* , Ruibin Wang, Jinfa Yang, Taiyan Chen
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE)
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
{xingbowei, xhying, robin wang, jinfayang}@pku.edu.cn, chenty@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Specifically, Jaritz et al. (2020; 2022) propose a framework
that utilizes multi-modality data to address Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation (UDA) problem for 3D segmentation.
They design a cross-modal learning method where 2D images and 3D point clouds learn from each other through mutually mimicking the prediction scores between modalities,
thus achieving adaptation effects in target domain.
In order to further boost the adaptation effects through
cross-modal learning, we introduce a contrastive learning
scheme to the UDA training process to facilitate information
exchange between modalities. For the cross-modal 3D segmentation task, in each sample, the given 2D image and 3D
point cloud represent the same semantic content and could
provide complementary information for dense label prediction. Therefore, the domain gap in one modality can be narrowed with the guidance from the other modality. For example, 3D LiDAR point clouds obtained from different sensors
usually have a large domain gap, in this case, the information
of more consistent 2D images is able to help the prediction.
In contrast, when camera images suffer from drastic performance degradation in low light conditions, the learning
can get benefits from 3D LiDAR data because of its robustness to light. To this end, we utilize cross-modal contrastive
learning to maximize mutual information between modalities by enforcing correspondence between 2D pixels and 3D
points. Since contrastive learning is self-supervised with no
ground truth labels needed, it can be applied on both labeled
source domain and unlabeled target domain, which provides
a suitable learning scheme for UDA task. Compared with
xMUDA that adopts KL divergence to mimicking the prediction scores, our method is directly implemented in feature space to align corresponding pixel and point features.
By this means, the 2D and 3D modalities can not only learn
from each other through contrastive learning, but also obtain
more discriminative feature representations.
In addition to the cross-modal contrastive learning
scheme, we propose a neighborhood feature aggregation
module to enable more image information can be taken into
consideration for cross-modal learning. In xMUDA, there is
a projection from 3D point cloud to 2D image, after which
only the matched image pixels are retained. However, because the number of 2D pixels is much larger than the number of 3D points, the projection leads to the loss of massive image context features. To relieve this mismatching be-

Domain adaptation for 3D point cloud has attracted a lot of interest since it can avoid the time-consuming labeling process
of 3D data to some extent. A recent work named xMUDA
leveraged multi-modal data to domain adaptation task of 3D
semantic segmentation by mimicking the predictions between
2D and 3D modalities, and outperformed the previous single
modality methods only using point clouds. Based on it, in this
paper, we propose a novel cross-modal contrastive learning
scheme to further improve the adaptation effects. By employing constraints from the correspondences between 2D pixel
features and 3D point features, our method not only facilitates interaction between the two different modalities, but
also boosts feature representations in both labeled source domain and unlabeled target domain. Meanwhile, to sufficiently
utilize 2D context information for domain adaptation through
cross-modal learning, we introduce a neighborhood feature
aggregation module to enhance pixel features. The module
employs neighborhood attention to aggregate nearby pixels
in the 2D image, which relieves the mismatching between
the two different modalities, arising from projecting relative sparse point cloud to dense image pixels. We evaluate
our method on three unsupervised domain adaptation scenarios, including country-to-country, day-to-night, and datasetto-dataset. Experimental results show that our approach outperforms existing methods, which demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction
3D semantic segmentation is an important task for scene understanding, aiming to predict the class label for each point
in the LiDAR point cloud. Like many other tasks, 3D semantic segmentation also faces the problem of domain shift
when the model is trained and evaluated in datasets from
different domains. Several domain adaptation methods (Wu
et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2021; Jiang and Saripalli 2021; Liu
et al. 2021a; Achituve, Maron, and Chechik 2021) have
been proposed to narrow the domain gap for 3D segmentation, including discrepancy-based methods, adversarialbased methods and so on.
With the development of multi-modal learning, 2D image
information is proved helpful for 3D scene understanding.
* Xianghua Ying is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2974

