The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CasFusionNet: A Cascaded Network for Point Cloud Semantic Scene Completion
by Dense Feature Fusion
Jinfeng Xu, Xianzhi Li* , Yuan Tang, Qiao Yu, Yixue Hao, Long Hu, Min Chen
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
jinfengxu.edu@gmail.com,{xzli, yuan tang, qiaoyu epic, yixuehao, hulong, minchen2012}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Semantic scene completion (SSC) aims to complete a partial 3D scene and predict its semantics simultaneously. Most
existing works adopt the voxel representations, thus suffering from the growth of memory and computation cost as
the voxel resolution increases. Though a few works attempt
to solve SSC from the perspective of 3D point clouds, they
have not fully exploited the correlation and complementarity between the two tasks of scene completion and semantic segmentation. In our work, we present CasFusionNet, a
novel cascaded network for point cloud semantic scene completion by dense feature fusion. Specifically, we design (i) a
global completion module (GCM) to produce an upsampled
and completed but coarse point set, (ii) a semantic segmentation module (SSM) to predict the per-point semantic labels
of the completed points generated by GCM, and (iii) a local
refinement module (LRM) to further refine the coarse completed points and the associated labels from a local perspective. We organize the above three modules via dense feature
fusion in each level, and cascade a total of four levels, where
we also employ feature fusion between each level for sufficient information usage. Both quantitative and qualitative results on our compiled two point-based datasets validate the
effectiveness and superiority of our CasFusionNet compared
to state-of-the-art methods in terms of both scene completion
and semantic segmentation. The codes and datasets are available at: https://github.com/JinfengX/CasFusionNet.

Figure 1: Given a partial point-based scene (left), our CasFusionNet completes and segments the scene (right) by cascaded levels. Each level is composed of GCM, SSM and
LRM, which are connected by dense feature fusion.

et al. 2020b, 2021; Cai et al. 2021) utilize 3D CNN to
predict the volumetric occupancy and semantics based on
voxel representation. Yet, these voxel-based networks suffer
from tremendous computation and memory cost when the
voxel resolution is high. In contrast, point clouds, or scattered collections of points in 3D, are arguably the simplest
shape representation, especially for large-scale 3D scenes
with complex structures and fine details. Thus, recent few
works (Zhang et al. 2021a; Wang et al. 2022) attempt to consume only points as network input to handle SSC, where two
branches are commonly designed, one for point-based scene
completion and the other for point-based semantic segmentation. Despite notable achievements, existing works tend
to ignore the high correlation and complementarity between
scene completion and semantic segmentation, so there is still
a lot of room for performance improvement.
In our work, we present CasFusionNet, a novel cascaded
network for point-based SSC that associates scene completion with semantic segmentation by dense feature fusion.
Figure 1 shows the key idea. Specifically, we design (i) a
global completion module (GCM) to produce an upsampled
and completed but maybe coarse point set from a partial 3D
scene represented by points, (ii) a semantic segmentation
module (SSM) to predict per-point semantic labels of the
completed points generated by GCM, and (iii) a local refinement module (LRM) to further refine the coarse completed

Introduction
Humans can infer the complete shapes and semantics from
only a partial observation of a 3D scene based on experience.
To enable an intelligent agent to behave like humans in 3D
physical world, semantic scene completion (SSC) is gaining
more attention with the goal of simultaneously reconstructing complete 3D scenes and predicting associate semantics
from RGB-D images of a given viewpoint. As SSC supplies
complete 3D information of scenes, it benefits diverse applications, e.g., robot navigation and grasping (Gupta et al.
2017; Varley et al. 2017; Liang, Chen, and Song 2021), automatic driving, high-quality visualization, etc.
Followed by the pioneer work SSCNet (Song et al.
2017), most of existing methods (Guo and Tong 2018; Li
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3018

