The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Logic Programs by Discovering Where Not to Search
Andrew Cropper and Céline Hocquette
University of Oxford
andrew.cropper@cs.ox.ac.uk, celine.hocquette@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

told that some relations are irreflexive. Furthermore, existing bias approaches, such as mode declarations (Muggleton 1995), cannot describe many useful properties, such as
antitransitivity and functional dependencies (Mannila and
Räihä 1994). In general, developing automatic bias discovery
approaches is a grand challenge in the field (Cropper and
Dumancic 2022).
To overcome this limitation, we introduce an automated
bias discovery approach. The key idea is to use given BK to
discover how to restrict the hypothesis space before searching for a solution2 . For instance, consider the previous list
transformation example. Assume we have BK with only the
facts:
head(ijcai,i) tail(ijcai,jcai) even(2)
head(ecai,e) tail(ecai,cai)
even(4)
head(cai,c)
tail(jcai,cai)
odd(1)
tail(ai,i)
tail(cai,ai)
odd(3)

The goal of inductive logic programming (ILP) is to search
for a hypothesis that generalises training examples and background knowledge (BK). To improve performance, we introduce an approach that, before searching for a hypothesis,
first discovers where not to search. We use given BK to discover constraints on hypotheses, such as that a number cannot
be both even and odd. We use the constraints to bootstrap a
constraint-driven ILP system. Our experiments on multiple domains (including program synthesis and game playing) show
that our approach can (i) substantially reduce learning times
by up to 97%, and (ii) scale to domains with millions of facts.

1

Introduction

The goal of inductive logic programming (ILP) (Muggleton
1991) is to search for a hypothesis (a set of rules) that generalises training examples and background knowledge (BK),
where hypotheses, examples, and BK are all logic programs.
To illustrate ILP, consider learning list transformation rules
with an arbitrary head literal h. Assume we can build rules
using the unary relations odd and even and the binary relations head and tail. Then the rule space (the set of all possible
rules) contains rules such as:

Given this BK, if we adopt a closed world assumption (Reiter
1977) we can deduce that some rules will be unsatisfiable
regardless of the concept we want to learn, i.e. regardless of
specific training examples. For instance, as there is no fact
of the form tail(A,A), we can deduce that tail is irreflexive,
and thus remove r1 and r4 from the rule space as their bodies
are unsatisfiable3 . Similarly, we can deduce that tail is asymmetric and antitransitive and that odd and even are mutually
exclusive and thus remove rules r2 , r3 , and r5 . With this
bias discovery approach, we have substantially reduced the
hypothesis space before searching for a solution, i.e. we have
discovered where not to search.
Our bias discovery approach works in two stages. First,
we use the given BK to discover functional dependencies and
relational properties, such as irreflexivity, asymmetry, and antitransitivity. To do so, we use a bottom-up approach (Savnik
and Flach 1993) implemented in answer set programming
(ASP) (Gebser et al. 2012). Second, we use the properties to
build constraints to restrict the hypothesis space. For instance,
if we discover that even and odd are mutually exclusive, we
build constraints to prohibit rules with both the body literals

r1 = h ← tail(A,A)
r2 = h ← tail(A,B), tail(B,A)
r3 = h ← tail(A,B), tail(B,C), tail(A,C)
r4 = h ← tail(A,A), head(A,B), odd(B)
r5 = h ← head(A,B), odd(B), even(B)
The hypothesis space (the set of all hypotheses) is the powerset of the rule space, so can be enormous.
To improve performance, users can impose an inductive
bias (Mitchell 1997) to restrict the hypothesis space1 . For
instance, if told that tail is irreflexive, some systems (Law,
Russo, and Broda 2014) will remove rules with the literal
tail(A,A) from the rule space, such as r1 and r4 . As removing
a rule removes all hypotheses that contain it, a strong bias
can greatly reduce the hypothesis space.
The main limitation with existing approaches is that they
need a human to provide a strong bias, e.g. they need to be

2
A solution is a hypothesis that generalises the examples. An
optimal solution is the smallest solution in terms of its size in literals.
3
These properties may only hold with the given BK. However,
as the ILP problem is defined in terms of the given BK, our approach
is optimally sound (Proposition 1).

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
All machine learning approaches need an inductive bias, i.e.
bias-free learning is futile (Mitchell 1997).

6289

