The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Correspondence-Free Domain Alignment for Unsupervised Cross-Domain Image
Retrieval
Xu Wang1 , Dezhong Peng1,3,4 , Ming Yan2 , Peng Hu1 *
1

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
2
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore
3
Sichuan Zhiqian Technology Co., Ltd, Chengdu, China
4
Chengdu Ruibei Yingte Information Technology Ltd. Company, Chengdu, China
wangxu.scu@gmail.com, pengdz@scu.edu.cn, yanmingtop@gmail.com, penghu.ml@gmail.com
Abstract
Cross-domain image retrieval aims at retrieving images
across different domains to excavate cross-domain classificatory or correspondence relationships. This paper studies a
less-touched problem of cross-domain image retrieval, i.e.,
unsupervised cross-domain image retrieval, considering the
following practical assumptions: (i) no correspondence relationship, and (ii) no category annotations. It is challenging
to align and bridge distinct domains without cross-domain
correspondence. To tackle the challenge, we present a novel
Correspondence-free Domain Alignment (CoDA) method
to effectively eliminate the cross-domain gap through Indomain Self-matching Supervision (ISS) and Cross-domain
Classifier Alignment (CCA). To be specific, ISS is presented
to encapsulate discriminative information into the latent common space by elaborating a novel self-matching supervision mechanism. To alleviate the cross-domain discrepancy,
CCA is proposed to align distinct domain-specific classifiers.
Thanks to the ISS and CCA, our method could encode the
discrimination into the domain-invariant embedding space for
unsupervised cross-domain image retrieval. To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, extensive experiments
are conducted on four benchmark datasets compared with six
state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Comparison of cross-domain image retrieval (CIR)
and unsupervised cross-domain image retrieval (UCIR).
Compared with CIR, there is no category annotation or correspondence relationship in UCIR.

images across diverse domains due to the inconsistent image
distributions, namely the so-called “domain gap” or “crossdomain gap” (Nam et al. 2021).
To bridge the domain gap, extensive efforts have been devoted to learning common representations from different domains (Sangkloy et al. 2016; Yu et al. 2016; Sain et al. 2021;
Fuentes and Saavedra 2021). Although the existing crossdomain image retrieval methods have achieved promising
performance, they implicitly assume that the multi-domain
training data are annotated and aligned well. In practice,
however, it is extremely expensive and even impossible to
label multiple large-scale domains. To alleviate the high labeling cost, one advisable solution is to design an unsupervised cross-domain learning paradigm to learn from a large
number of low-cost and highly accessible unlabeled data.
Obviously, compared with CIR, unsupervised cross-domain
image retrieval (UCIR) is more challenging due to unavailable category and correspondence information as shown in
Figure 1. Such a UCIR problem is barely touched so far, to
the best of our knowledge.
To overcome the challenges, this paper proposes
a novel approach dubbed Correspondence-free Domain
Alignment (CoDA), which unifies the In-domain Selfmatching Supervision (ISS) and Cross-domain Classifier
Alignment (CCA) to achieve unsupervised cross-domain
image retrieval. Specifically, ISS employs a novel selfmatching supervision mechanism to encapsulate the discriminative information into the shared embedding space.

Introduction
With the rapid growth of images collected from many diverse sources (e.g., viewpoints, lightning, artistic styles, and
photograph) on the Internet, there are growing demands
to develop various applications on different domains, such
as domain adaptation (Li et al. 2021b; Singh 2021; Zhu,
Zhuang, and Wang 2019), cross-domain clustering (Li et al.
2021a), and cross-domain image retrieval (CIR) (Huang
et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2019; Paul, Dutta, and Biswas 2021;
Wang et al. 2022; Hu and Lee 2022). In these applications,
CIR has attracted more and more attention in recent years
for its flexible retrieval ways and achieved great success in
numerous application scenarios, e.g., surveillance, mobile
product image search (Shen et al. 2012). Given a query image, CIR aims to correctly retrieve relevant images across
distinct domains, which are with similar visual information
or the same semantics. However, it is challenging to retrieve
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10200

