The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Semantic-Enhanced Image Clustering
Shaotian Cai* , Liping Qiu* , Xiaojun Chen† , Qin Zhang, Longteng Chen
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
cai.st@foxmail.com, qiuliping2021@email.szu.edu.cn, {xjchen, qinzhang}@szu.edu.cn, chenlt2021@163.com

Abstract
Image clustering is an important and open-challenging task
in computer vision. Although many methods have been proposed to solve the image clustering task, they only explore
images and uncover clusters according to the image features,
thus being unable to distinguish visually similar but semantically different images. In this paper, we propose to investigate
the task of image clustering with the help of a visual-language
pre-training model. Different from the zero-shot setting, in
which the class names are known, we only know the number of clusters in this setting. Therefore, how to map images
to a proper semantic space and how to cluster images from
both image and semantic spaces are two key problems. To
solve the above problems, we propose a novel image clustering method guided by the visual-language pre-training model
CLIP, named Semantic-Enhanced Image Clustering (SIC).
In this new method, we propose a method to map the given
images to a proper semantic space first and efficient methods to generate pseudo-labels according to the relationships
between images and semantics. Finally, we propose performing clustering with consistency learning in both image space
and semantic space, in a self-supervised learning fashion. The
theoretical result of convergence analysis shows that our proposed method can converge at a sublinear speed. Theoretical
analysis of expectation risk also shows that we can reduce
the expected risk by improving neighborhood consistency,
increasing prediction confidence, or reducing neighborhood
imbalance. Experimental results on five benchmark datasets
clearly show the superiority of our new method.

Figure 1: Visually similar but semantically different images
on STL10 dataset, where every two images in a column are
similar with the image embedding obtained by the CLIP pretraining model and the text in an image is its true label.

(CNN) based representation learning with traditional shallow clustering methods (Xie, Girshick, and Farhadi 2016;
Yang, Parikh, and Batra 2016; Yang et al. 2017; Tian, Zhou,
and Guan 2017; Shaham and Stanton 2018). In recent years,
with the rapid development of pre-training models, such as
VGG-16 (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014), Resnet (He et al.
2016), ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020), Swin Transformer (Liu
et al. 2021), image clustering methods leave the images representation task for pre-training model, and directly map image representations into labels by training a classification
model like Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), by maximizing
the mutual information between the image and its augmentations (Ji, Vedaldi, and Henriques 2019b; Li et al. 2021;
Zhong et al. 2021) or the likelihood of the cluster assignments between the image and its neighbors (Wu et al. 2019;
Van Gansbeke et al. 2020; Zhong et al. 2021; Dang et al.
2021). However, since we want to obtain semantically meaningful clusters, it is difficult to solve this problem by only
exploring images. Figure 1 shows some examples that are
semantically different but visually similar. For example, an
image with an airplane may be visually similar to an image
with a bird, and an image with a deer may be visually similar
to an image with a horse.
Intuitively, we need to access the language model to improve image clustering with semantic information. Some
works (Jin et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2020; Yang, Huang, and

Introduction
Image classification, which assigns an image to a predefined
set of classes, is an important task in computer vision. However, it is costly to obtain labeled data in the age of big data.
To liberate us from laborious and trivial data labeling work,
image clustering that aims to group images into different
clusters without ground-truth semantic labels has become a
more and more important task.
The early works in deep image clustering usually combine auto-encoders (AE) or Convolutional Neural Network
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6869

