The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Online Noisy Continual Relation Learning
Guozheng Li1 , Peng Wang1 * , Qiqing Luo1 , Yanhe Liu1 , Wenjun Ke1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
2
Beijing Institute of Computer Technology and Application
{gzli, pwang, qqluo, liuyanhe}@seu.edu.cn, kewenjun2191@163.com

Task 1

Abstract
Recent work for continual relation learning has achieved remarkable progress. However, most existing methods only focus on tackling catastrophic forgetting to improve performance in the existing setup, while continually learning relations in the real-world must overcome many other challenges.
One is that the data possibly comes in an online streaming
fashion with data distributions gradually changing and without distinct task boundaries. Another is that noisy labels are
inevitable in real-world, as relation samples may be contaminated by label inconsistencies or labeled with distant supervision. In this work, therefore, we propose a novel continual relation learning framework that simultaneously addresses both
online and noisy relation learning challenges. Our framework
contains three key modules: (i) a sample separated online purifying module that divides the online data stream into clean
and noisy samples, (ii) a self-supervised online learning module that circumvents inferior training signals caused by noisy
data, and (iii) a semi-supervised offline finetuning module
that ensures the participation of both clean and noisy samples. Experimental results on FewRel, TACRED and NYT-H
with real-world noise demonstrate that our framework greatly
outperforms the combinations of the state-of-the-art online
continual learning and noisy label learning methods.

Task 2

Task 3

CRE

...

ON-CRE

...
Episode

Figure 1: Differences between CRE and ON-CRE. CRE is
offline and task-based with whole clean data, whereas ONCRE is online and task-free with falsely labeled data (black
samples). An episode holds the samples only allowed to use
once for parameter update during a specific time period.
setup. However, the existing setup still lacks practicality in
certain aspects.
On the one hand, it is an offline task-based sequential
learning setup, which means that a sequence of tasks are
learned, one at a time, with all data of current task available but not of previous or future tasks. In other words, the
model knows the task boundaries at the training time and the
CRE process is divided perfectly with separate tasks. This
setup, however, is rarely encountered in practical applications. Therefore, we propose an online task-free CRE setup
that keeps on learning relations over time in a streaming
fashion, using each streamed sample only once, with data
distributions gradually changing and without the notion of
separate tasks. Figure 1 shows the differences between CRE
and our proposed setup. The samples in an episode could
come from different tasks. Unfortunately, existing methods
(Wang et al. 2019a; Han et al. 2020; Cui et al. 2021; Zhao
et al. 2022) cannot be applied in online task-free CRE scenarios as they are all trained in the offline paradigm.
On the other hand, previous works assume that all the
samples are labeled correctly. However, learning from data
riddled with noisy labels is an inevitable scenario in realworld especially in the context of RE. Supervised RE models
suffer from the lack of large-scale high-quality training data,
since manually labeling data is time-consuming and humanintensive. To alleviate this issue, distant supervision (Mintz
et al. 2009) has been used to automatically label data by

Introduction
Relation extraction (RE), aiming to identify the relationships
between entities in texts, is an essential task in information
extraction (IE), which can apply to many downstream natural language processing (NLP) tasks, such as information
retrieval and question answering. However, traditional RE
methods (Zeng et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2017; Baldini Soares
et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2020; Li et al. 2022) always assume the
relations are predefined and fixed, which cannot handle the
new relations emerging in the real-world scenarios. Hence,
the ability to continually learn relations from sequential data
has gained much attention in recent RE research (Wang et al.
2019a; Han et al. 2020; Cui et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2022),
which is often coined as continual relation extraction (CRE).
Despite rapid advances in CRE, most of recent researches
are devoted to improving performance in the existing CRE
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13059

