The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SpatialFormer: Semantic and Target Aware Attentions for Few-Shot Learning
Jinxiang Lai 1 , Siqian Yang 1 , Wenlong Wu 1 , Tao Wu 1 , Guannan Jiang 2 , Xi Wang 2 , Jun Liu 1 ,
Bin-Bin Gao 1 , Wei Zhang 2 , Yuan Xie* 3 , Chengjie Wang* 1, 4
1

Tencent Youtu Lab, China
2
CATL, China
3
East China Normal University, China
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{jinxianglai, seasonsyang, ezrealwu, tobinwu}@tencent.com, {jianggn, wangx30, zhangwei}@catl.com
{junsenselee, csgaobb}@gmail.com, yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, jasoncjwang@tencent.com
Abstract

SFTA

STA

Target-Aware

Similarity Scores

Support

Recent Few-Shot Learning (FSL) methods put emphasis on
generating a discriminative embedding features to precisely
measure the similarity between support and query sets. Current CNN-based cross-attention approaches generate discriminative representations via enhancing the mutually semantic
similar regions of support and query pairs. However, it suffers from two problems: CNN structure produces inaccurate
attention map based on local features, and mutually similar
backgrounds cause distraction. To alleviate these problems,
we design a novel SpatialFormer structure to generate more
accurate attention regions based on global features. Different
from the traditional Transformer modeling intrinsic instancelevel similarity which causes accuracy degradation in FSL,
our SpatialFormer explores the semantic-level similarity between pair inputs to boost the performance. Then we derive two specific attention modules, named SpatialFormer Semantic Attention (SFSA) and SpatialFormer Target Attention
(SFTA), to enhance the target object regions while reduce the
background distraction. Particularly, SFSA highlights the regions with same semantic information between pair features,
and SFTA finds potential foreground object regions of novel
feature that are similar to base categories. Extensive experiments show that our methods are effective and achieve new
state-of-the-art results on few-shot classification benchmarks.

SFSA

Mutual Similar
Dog

Cat

Dog

Cat

Dog

Dog

Dog

Dog

Dog

Dog

Cat

√

×

Query

Dog

Target

Background

Class Weights √High × Low similarity

Figure 1: As shown in 1st column, the limitation of crossattention based approaches is that they only recognize the
mutual similar object, but can not solve the distraction problem causing by similar backgrounds. In this paper, we propose two effective modules called SFSA and SFTA, which
are utilized to find the mutual similar object and obtain
target-aware information, respectively. With their combination, the derived STA module is able to enhance target object
while alleviate background distraction.
which assume these similar regions are the target objects.
However, these methods suffer from two problems:
• Problem ①: The CNN-based cross-attention produces inaccurate attention map due to modeling correlation relation based on local features.
• Problem ②: The mutually similar backgrounds cause distraction. For example, in Fig. 1, the query contains dog
and grass, while the support image belonging to cat category also has grass. So the meta classifier may regard
that this query (dog + grass) is more similar to the support image of cat with grass.
To deal with Problem ①, we manage to employ Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; Wang
et al. 2021), which is able to obtain global information, and
has the potential ability to generate a more accurate attention region than CNN-based cross-attention module. However, it raises Problem ③: The traditional Transformer recommends the inputs are instance-level similar, it against
the requirement of FSL which inputs semantic-level similar query and support pairs. In detailed, SuperGlue (Sarlin
et al. 2020) used Transformer to implement cross-attention

Introduction
Few-Shot Learning (FSL) problem becomes one of the research hotspots due to its special ability that could classify
novel (unseen) classes samples relying on few labeled images. In this field, recent works (Hou et al. 2019; Tian et al.
2020; Rizve et al. 2021; Zhengyu et al. 2021; Zhiqiang et al.
2021; Liu et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2021) focus on designing a
fine-grained embedding network and improving its robustness to recognize the novel instances.
The criterion of a fine-grained embedding is the ability of
distinguish background and the target object. As presented
in 1st column of Fig. 1, to generate discriminative features,
current Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based crossattention methods (Hou et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2021) highlight the mutually similar regions of support and query pairs,
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8430

