The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Understanding and Enhancing Robustness of Concept-Based Models
Sanchit Sinha1 , Mengdi Huai1,2 , Jianhui Sun1 , Aidong Zhang1
1

University of Virginia
Iowa State University
{sanchit, js9gu, aidong}@virginia.edu, mdhuai@iastate.edu
2

Abstract

from being local in nature where they assign importance
scores to the features present in an input sample to being
global in nature where the model identifies certain “concepts” present in the input sample. A concept can be thought
of as an abstraction of features which are usually shared
across multiple similar sample points. For example, in Figure 1, a concept can be entirely clinical “osteophyptes- femur”, “sclerosis-tibia”, etc. Usually DNNs are trained endto-end, which makes it difficult to isolate concepts and even
harder to make them human understandable. To alleviate
this, concept-based approaches have been proposed (Koh
et al. 2020; Alvarez Melis and Jaakkola 2018) which map
a sample from input space to a concept space and subsequently map the concept space to the prediction space.
The concept space usually consists of high-level human understandable concepts. A model trained incorporating either manually curated or automatically learned concepts increases both interpretability and reliability of its predictions.
One such example, as proposed in (Koh et al. 2020), Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs), can help domain experts
quickly identify any discrepancy and intervene when and
where needed. CBMs also offer generalizability in the sense
that any DNN can be easily converted into a CBM by resizing an intermediate layer to correspond to the size of
any closed concept set pre-selected by domain experts. The
training of such models uses standard training procedure
with a loss function augmented with an extra term from the
bottleneck layer.
Although incredibly simple in formulation and training, many recent works have demonstrated certain flaws
in CBMs which warrant an increased caution in their
widespread applications. For exmaple, Margeloiu et
al. (Margeloiu et al. 2021) demonstrated that computing the
saliency maps with respect to a single concept does not capture the position of that concept in the image itself. Similarly, Mahinpei et al. (Mahinpei et al. 2021) demonstrate
that CBMs suffer from “information leakage” where more
than necessary information is encoded in a concept - making
them adulterated with non-relevant noise resulting in unreliable downward predictions.
In this paper, we aim to study the security vulnerability and robustness of concept-based models to carefully
crafted malicious attacks, where an adversary with a malevolent intent aims to introduce perturbations to clean sam-

Rising usage of deep neural networks to perform decision
making in critical applications like medical diagnosis and
financial analysis have raised concerns regarding their reliability and trustworthiness. As automated systems become
more mainstream, it is important their decisions be transparent, reliable and understandable by humans for better trust
and confidence. To this effect, concept-based models such
as Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) and Self-Explaining
Neural Networks (SENN) have been proposed which constrain the latent space of a model to represent high level concepts easily understood by domain experts in the field. Although concept-based models promise a good approach to
both increasing explainability and reliability, it is yet to be
shown if they demonstrate robustness and output consistent
concepts under systematic perturbations to their inputs. To
better understand performance of concept-based models on
curated malicious samples, in this paper, we aim to study
their robustness to adversarial perturbations, which are also
known as the imperceptible changes to the input data that
are crafted by an attacker to fool a well-learned conceptbased model. Specifically, we first propose and analyze different malicious attacks to evaluate the security vulnerability of
concept based models. Subsequently, we propose a potential
general adversarial training-based defense mechanism to increase robustness of these systems to the proposed malicious
attacks. Extensive experiments on one synthetic and two realworld datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
attacks and the defense approach. An appendix of the paper with more comprehensive results can also be viewed at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.16080.

Introduction
With growth of highly specialized architectures for a variety of use-cases and their superior performance, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are increasingly being used in sensitive and critical applications such as medical diagnosis,
employment/recruiting, financial credit analysis, etc. However, widespread adoption of such models faces several
challenges - primarily the black-box nature of their predictions. Many recent research works have proposed explanation methods which provide deep understanding of model
predictions by providing “explanations”. Explanations range
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15127

