The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Contrastive Learning with the Feature Reconstruction Amplifier
Wentao Cui1 , Liang Bai1,2*
1

Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of Ministry of Education, School of
Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China
2
Institute of Intelligent Information Processing, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, 030006, Shanxi, China
cuiwentao.sxu@qq.com, bailiang@sxu.edu.cn

Abstract
Contrastive learning has emerged as one of the most promising self-supervised methods. It can efficiently learn the transferable representations of samples through the instance-level
discrimination task. In general, the performance of the contrastive learning method can be further improved by projecting the transferable high-dimensional representations into the
low-dimensional feature space. This is because the model
can learn more abstract discriminative information. However,
when low-dimensional features cannot provide sufficient discriminative information to the model (e.g., the samples are
very similar to each other), the existing contrastive learning method will be limited to a great extent. Therefore, in
this paper, we propose a general module called the Feature Reconstruction Amplifier (FRA) for adding additional
high-dimensional feature information to the model. Specifically, FRA reconstructs the low-dimensional feature embeddings with Gaussian noise vectors and projects them to a
high-dimensional reconstruction space. In this reconstruction
space, we can add additional feature information through the
designed loss. We have verified the effectiveness of the module itself through exhaustive ablation experiments. In addition, we perform linear evaluation and transfer learning on
five common visual datasets, the experimental results demonstrate that our method is superior to recent advanced contrastive learning methods.

Figure 1: Contrastive learning models learn discriminative
information of samples in a low-dimensional feature space.
This process is similar to identifying the original content
from a compressed image. When it is hard to discern, there
is no doubt that adding additional information is a good
method.

the performance of contrastive learning methods is greatly
improved. However, are that representation information, i.e.,
more essential feature information, really useless?
Here, we give an example as shown in Figure 1. Let’s
compress one photo and then identify its original content
in the compressed photo. If we can discern the original content, the information in this compressed photo is sufficient.
But what if the content in the compressed photo is simply illegible? We believe it is necessary to add some additional information at this point. Therefore, we design the Feature Reconstruction Amplifier (FRA) supplemented with additional
information. Specifically, the FRA module reconstructs lowdimensional feature embeddings and projects them into a
high-dimensional space, called the reconstruction space. In
this reconstruction space, we train the entire framework by
an additional loss, using (high-dimensional) reconstruction
embeddings. In this way, the model can learn richer feature
information that satisfies more conditions through FRA. In
other words, we want these reconstruction embeddings to
contain more correct discriminative information. Then, lowdimensional feature embeddings will be also more discriminative, because the reconstruction embeddings are generated
through these feature embeddings. As in the previous example, we continuously adjust the compressed photo until it is

Introduction
Today, contrastive learning (CL) has achieved great success
as a kind of self-supervised learning in the fields of computer
vision (He et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020a), natural language
processing (Gao, Yao, and Chen 2021; Yan et al. 2021),
graph neural network (You et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2021), etc.
The core idea of contrastive learning is pulling positive feature embeddings close to the anchor but pushing negative
feature embeddings far away. Note that to make the model
learn more abstract feature information, contrastive learning methods usually use low-dimensional feature embeddings rather than high-dimensional representations. That is,
we tend to use a nonlinear multi-layer perceptron (i.e., a projection head) to project representations to a low-dimensional
space. By discriminating these abstract feature embeddings,
* Liang Bai is the corresponding author: bailiang@sxu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7279

