The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FinalMLP: An Enhanced Two-Stream MLP Model for CTR Prediction
Kelong Mao1* , Jieming Zhu2 * , Liangcai Su3 , Guohao Cai2 , Yuru Li2 , Zhenhua Dong2
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Tsinghua University
kyriemkl@gmail.com, jiemingzhu@ieee.org, sulc21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

widely recognized that in practice applying a vanilla MLP
network is inefficient to learn multiplicative feature interactions (e.g., dot) (Wang et al. 2017, 2021; Rendle et al. 2020).
To enhance the capability of learning explicit feature interactions (2nd- or 3rd-order features), a variety of feature
interaction networks have been proposed. Typical examples
include factorization machines (FM) (Rendle 2010), cross
network (Wang et al. 2017), compressed interaction network (CIN) (Lian et al. 2018), self-attention based interaction (Song et al. 2019), adaptive factorization network
(AFN) (Cheng, Shen, and Huang 2020), and so on. These
networks introduce inductive bias for learning feature interactions efficiently but lose the expressiveness of MLP
as our experiments shown in Table 3. As such, two-stream
CTR prediction models have been widely employed, such
as DeepFM (Guo et al. 2017), DCN (Wang et al. 2017),
xDeepFM (Lian et al. 2018), and AutoInt+ (Song et al.
2019), which integrate both an MLP network and a dedicated feature interaction network together for enhanced CTR
prediction. Concretely, the MLP stream learns feature interactions implicitly, while the other stream enhances explicit feature interactions in a complementary way. Due to
their effectiveness, two-stream models have become a popular choice for industrial deployment (Zhang et al. 2021).
Although many existing studies have validated the effectiveness of two-stream models against a single MLP
model, none of them reports a performance comparison
to a two-stream MLP model that simply combines two
MLP networks in parallel (denoted as DualMLP). Therefore, our work makes the first effort to characterize the performance of DualMLP. Our empirical study on open benchmark datasets shows that DualMLP, despite its simplicity,
can achieve surprisingly good performance, which is comparable to or even better than many well-designed two-stream
models (see our experiments). This observation motivates us
to study the potential of such a two-stream MLP model and
further extend it to build a simple yet strong model for CTR
prediction.
Two-stream models in fact can be viewed as an ensemble of two parallel networks. One advantage of these twostream models is that each stream can learn feature interactions from a different perspective and thus complements each other to achieve better performance. For instance, Wide&Deep (Cheng et al. 2016) and DeepFM (Guo

Click-through rate (CTR) prediction is one of the fundamental tasks for online advertising and recommendation. While
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) serves as a core component in
many deep CTR prediction models, it has been widely recognized that applying a vanilla MLP network alone is inefficient
in learning multiplicative feature interactions. As such, many
two-stream interaction models (e.g., DeepFM and DCN) have
been proposed by integrating an MLP network with another
dedicated network for enhanced CTR prediction. As the MLP
stream learns feature interactions implicitly, existing research
focuses mainly on enhancing explicit feature interactions in
the complementary stream. In contrast, our empirical study
shows that a well-tuned two-stream MLP model that simply combines two MLPs can even achieve surprisingly good
performance, which has never been reported before by existing work. Based on this observation, we further propose
feature selection and interaction aggregation layers that can
be easily plugged to make an enhanced two-stream MLP
model, FinalMLP. In this way, it not only enables differentiated feature inputs but also effectively fuses stream-level interactions across two streams. Our evaluation results on four
open benchmark datasets as well as an online A/B test in our
industrial system show that FinalMLP achieves better performance than many sophisticated two-stream CTR models. Our
source code will be available at MindSpore/models and FuxiCTR/model zoo.

Introduction
Click-through rate (CTR) prediction is a fundamental task in
online advertising and recommender systems (Cheng et al.
2016; He et al. 2014). The accuracy of CTR prediction not
only has a direct effect on user engagement but also significantly influences the revenue of business providers. One of
the key challenges in CTR prediction is to learn complex
relationships among features such that a model can still generalize well in case of rare feature interactions. Multi-layer
perceptron (MLP), as a powerful and versatile component in
deep learning, has become a core building block of various
CTR prediction models (Zhu et al. 2021). Although MLP is
known to be a universal approximator in theory, it has been
* Both authors contributed equally. Jieming Zhu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4552

