The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Spatio-Temporal Meta-Graph Learning for Traffic Forecasting
Renhe Jiang*1,2 , Zhaonan Wang*2 , Jiawei Yong3 , Puneet Jeph2 , Quanjun Chen2 ,
Yasumasa Kobayashi3 , Xuan Song2 , Shintaro Fukushima3 , Toyotaro Suzumura1
1

Information Technology Center, The University of Tokyo
Center for Spatial Information Science, The University of Tokyo
3
Toyota Motor Corporation
{jiangrh, znwang, songxuan}@csis.u-tokyo.ac.jp; {jiawei yong, s fukushima}@mail.toyota.co.jp
2

Abstract
Traffic forecasting as a canonical task of multivariate time
series forecasting has been a significant research topic in
AI community. To address the spatio-temporal heterogeneity and non-stationarity implied in the traffic stream, in this
study, we propose Spatio-Temporal Meta-Graph Learning
as a novel Graph Structure Learning mechanism on spatiotemporal data. Specifically, we implement this idea into
Meta-Graph Convolutional Recurrent Network (MegaCRN)
by plugging the Meta-Graph Learner powered by a MetaNode Bank into GCRN encoder-decoder. We conduct a
comprehensive evaluation on two benchmark datasets (i.e.,
METR-LA and PEMS-BAY) and a new large-scale traffic
speed dataset called EXPY-TKY that covers 1843 expressway road links in Tokyo. Our model outperformed the stateof-the-arts on all three datasets. Besides, through a series of
qualitative evaluations, we demonstrate that our model can
explicitly disentangle the road links and time slots with different patterns and be robustly adaptive to any anomalous
traffic situations. Codes and datasets are available at https:
//github.com/deepkashiwa20/MegaCRN.

Figure 1: Progression of Graph Structure Learning for
Spatio-Temporal Modeling
makes the task even more challenging when X factors, including accident and congestion, present.
For more effective traffic forecasting, the existing works
have made tremendous progress by modeling latent spatial correlation among sensors and temporal autocorrelation
within time series. Since these two relationships can be naturally represented by graph and sequence respectively, the
mainstream models handle them by leveraging GCN-based
modules (Diao et al. 2019; Guo et al. 2019; Geng et al. 2019;
Zhang et al. 2021) and sequence models, such as Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs) (Li et al. 2018; Bai et al. 2020; Ye
et al. 2021), WaveNet (Wu et al. 2019), Transformer (Zheng
et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2020). Particularly,
to perform convolution-like operations on graphs, GCNs require an auxiliary input that characterizes the topology of the
underlying spatial dependency. This essential part is defined
based on certain metrics in early works, such as inversedistance Gaussian kernel (Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2018; Li et al.
2018), cosine similarity (Geng et al. 2019).
However, this pre-defined graph not only relies on empirical laws (e.g. Tobler’s first law of geography) which does
not necessarily indicate an optimal solution, but ignores the
dynamic nature of traffic networks. This twofold limitation
has stimulated explorations in two lines of research. The
first one aims to find the optimal graph structure that facilitates the forecasting task. GW-Net (Wu et al. 2019) pioneers along this direction by treating the adjacency matrix
as free variables (i.e. parameterized node embedding E) to
train, which generates a so-called adaptive graph (in Figure
1). Models including MTGNN (Wu et al. 2020), AGCRN
(Bai et al. 2020), GTS (Shang, Chen, and Bi 2021) fall into
this category, integrating MTS and traffic forecasting with
Graph Structure Learning (GSL) (Zhu et al. 2021). In the
other line of research, attempts have been made to tackle net-

Introduction
Spatio-temporal data, streamed by sensor networks, are
widely studied in both academia and industry given various real-world applications. Traffic forecasting (Yu, Yin, and
Zhu 2018; Li et al. 2018; Zheng et al. 2020; Bai et al. 2020;
Lee et al. 2022), as one canonical task, has been receiving
increasing attention with rapid developing Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Kipf and Welling 2016; Veličković et al.
2017). This spatio-temporal modeling task can be formulated similarly to multivariate time series (MTS) forecasting
(Wu et al. 2020; Cao et al. 2020; Shang, Chen, and Bi 2021),
but with extra prior knowledge from the geographic space
(e.g. sensor locations, road networks) to imply the dependency among sensor signals. Compared with ordinary MTS,
traffic data (e.g. traffic speed and flow) potentially contain
spatio-temporal heterogeneity, as traffic condition differs
over roads (e.g. local road, highway, interchange) and time
(e.g. off-peak and rush hours). Moreover, non-stationarity
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Corresponding authors who contributed equally.

8078

