The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Avocodo: Generative Adversarial Network for Artifact-Free Vocoder
Taejun Bak1 * , Junmo Lee2 * † , Hanbin Bae3† , Jinhyeok Yang4† , Jae-Sung Bae3† , Young-Sun Joo1
1

AI Center, NCSOFT, Seongnam, Korea
2
SK Telecom, Seoul, Korea
3
Samsung Research, Seoul, Korea
4
Supertone Inc., Seoul, Korea
happyjun@ncsoft.com, ljun4121@sk.com
Abstract

Song, and Kim 2020; Kumar et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2020;
Kong, Kim, and Bae 2020; Yang et al. 2021; Mustafa, Pia,
and Fuchs 2021; Kim et al. 2021). Compared to other neural vocoders (van den Oord et al. 2016; Prenger, Valle, and
Catanzaro 2019; Kim et al. 2019; van den Oord et al. 2018),
GAN-based vocoders are faster and lighter while still maintaining a high level of synthesized speech quality. Specifically, a generator converts input features such as random
noise or a mel-spectrogram into speech waveforms. A discriminator then evaluates the generated speech waveforms.
Because the speech spectrum in the low-frequency bands
is much more crucial to perceptual quality, most GANbased vocoders perform multi-scale analysis that evaluates
the downsampled speech waveforms. Multi-scale analysis
allows a generator to focus on the speech spectrum in lowfrequency bands; downsampling limits the frequency range
of speech by decreasing the sampling rate (Shannon 1949).
In MelGAN (Kumar et al. 2019), a multi-scale discriminator (MSD) evaluates the downsampled waveforms that used
an average pooling technique. In HiFi-GAN (Kong, Kim,
and Bae 2020), a multi-period discriminator (MPD) specializing in periodic components was proposed. It discriminates downsampled waveforms obtained by using an equally
spaced sampling technique with various periods. Consequently, these GAN-based vocoders have successfully increased the quality of synthesized speech (Yang et al. 2020;
Kim et al. 2021; Jang et al. 2021).
In preliminary experiments, however, we discovered that,
GAN-based vocoders suffer from two major issues. The first
issue is the artifacts caused by the upsampling layer (Pons
et al. 2021). For example, artifacts in high-frequency bands
degrade the quality of speech by introducing noise. The second issue is the degraded reproducibility of the harmonic
components. The fundamental frequency (F 0 ) of synthesized speech is often inaccurate (Morrison et al. 2022) with
the aliasing during simple downsampling, such as an average pooling or an equally spaced sampling, being one of the
reasons behind this problem. These artifacts significantly reduce the perceptual quality, when synthesizing speech with
large pitch variation (Lorenzo-Trueba et al. 2019; Zaı̈di et al.
2022). The preceding issues are analyzed further in the following section.
To address these issues, we propose Avocodo, a GANbased vocoder that synthesizes high-quality speech wave-

Neural vocoders based on the generative adversarial neural network (GAN) have been widely used due to their fast
inference speed and lightweight networks while generating
high-quality speech waveforms. Since the perceptually important speech components are primarily concentrated in
the low-frequency bands, most GAN-based vocoders perform multi-scale analysis that evaluates downsampled speech
waveforms. This multi-scale analysis helps the generator improve speech intelligibility. However, in preliminary experiments, we discovered that the multi-scale analysis which focuses on the low-frequency bands causes unintended artifacts,
e.g., aliasing and imaging artifacts, which degrade the synthesized speech waveform quality. Therefore, in this paper, we
investigate the relationship between these artifacts and GANbased vocoders and propose a GAN-based vocoder, called
Avocodo, that allows the synthesis of high-fidelity speech
with reduced artifacts. We introduce two kinds of discriminators to evaluate speech waveforms in various perspectives:
a collaborative multi-band discriminator and a sub-band discriminator. We also utilize a pseudo quadrature mirror filter
bank to obtain downsampled multi-band speech waveforms
while avoiding aliasing. According to experimental results,
Avocodo outperforms baseline GAN-based vocoders, both
objectively and subjectively, while reproducing speech with
fewer artifacts.

Introduction
Speech synthesis generates speech waveforms that correspond to the input text. An acoustic model initially generates acoustic features corresponding to the input text (Wang
et al. 2017; Li et al. 2019; Ren et al. 2019, 2021). A vocoder
then converts the acoustic features into a speech waveform
(Masanori, Yokomori, and Ozawa 2016; van den Oord et al.
2016). With the emergence of deep learning, neural vocoders
can generate high-fidelity speech waveforms that are indistinguishable from human recordings (Prenger, Valle, and
Catanzaro 2019; Kim et al. 2019; van den Oord et al. 2018).
Recently, vocoders based on generative adversarial network
(GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) with non-autoregressive
convolutional architectures have been proposed (Yamamoto,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work performed at NCSOFT.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12562

