The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Scalable Decision-Focused Learning in Restless Multi-Armed Bandits with
Application to Maternal and Child Health
Kai Wang* †1 , Shresth Verma* 2 , Aditya Mate†1 , Sanket Shah1 , Aparna Taneja2 ,
Neha Madhiwalla3 , Aparna Hegde3 , Milind Tambe1,2
1

Harvard University
2
Google Research
3
ARMMAN
{kaiwang, aditya mate, sanketshah}@g.harvard.edu, {aparnataneja, milindtambe}@google.com,
{neha, aparnahegde}@armman.org

Abstract

from all arms. RMABs are commonly used to model sequential scheduling problems where limited resources must
be strategically assigned to different tasks sequentially to
maximize performance. Examples include machine maintenance (Glazebrook, Ruiz-Hernandez, and Kirkbride 2006),
cognitive radio sensing problem (Bagheri and Scaglione
2015), and healthcare (Mate et al. 2022).
In this paper, we study offline RMAB problems with unknown transition dynamics but with given arm features. The
goal is to learn a mapping from arm features to transition dynamics, which can be used to infer the dynamics of unseen
RMAB problems to plan accordingly. Prior works (Mate
et al. 2022; Sun et al. 2018) often learn the transition dynamics from the historical pulling data by maximizing the predictive accuracy. However, RMAB performance is evaluated by
its solution quality derived from the predicted transition dynamics, which leads to a mismatch in the training objective
and the evaluation objective. Previously, decision-focused
learning (Wilder, Dilkina, and Tambe 2019) has been proposed to directly optimize the solution quality rather than
predictive accuracy, by integrating the one-shot optimization problem (Donti, Amos, and Kolter 2017; Perrault et al.
2020) or sequential problems (Wang et al. 2021; Futoma,
Hughes, and Doshi-Velez 2020) as a differentiable layer in
the training pipeline. Unfortunately, while decision-focused
learning can successfully optimize the evaluation objective,
it is computationally extremely expensive due to the presence of the optimization problems in the training process.
Specifically, for RMAB problems, the computation cost of
decision-focused learning arises from the complexity of the
sequential problems formulated as Markov decision processes (MDPs), which limits the applicability to RMAB
problems due to the PSPACE hardness of finding the optimal solution (Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis 1994).
Our main contribution is a novel and scalable approach for
decision-focused learning in RMAB problems using Whittle index policy, a commonly used approximate solution
in RMABs. Our three key contributions are (i) we establish the differentiability of Whittle index policy to support
decision-focused learning to directly optimize the RMAB
solution quality; (ii) we show that our approach of differen-

This paper studies restless multi-armed bandit (RMAB) problems with unknown arm transition dynamics but with known
correlated arm features. The goal is to learn a model to predict transition dynamics given features, where the Whittle index policy solves the RMAB problems using predicted transitions. However, prior works often learn the model by maximizing the predictive accuracy instead of final RMAB solution quality, causing a mismatch between training and evaluation objectives. To address this shortcoming, we propose a
novel approach for decision-focused learning in RMAB that
directly trains the predictive model to maximize the Whittle
index solution quality. We present three key contributions: (i)
we establish differentiability of the Whittle index policy to
support decision-focused learning; (ii) we significantly improve the scalability of decision-focused learning approaches
in sequential problems, specifically RMAB problems; (iii) we
apply our algorithm to a previously collected dataset of maternal and child health to demonstrate its performance. Indeed, our algorithm is the first for decision-focused learning
in RMAB that scales to real-world problem sizes.

Introduction
Restless multi-armed bandits (RMABs) (Weber and Weiss
1990; Tekin and Liu 2012) are composed of a set of heterogeneous arms and a planner who can pull multiple arms
under budget constraint at each time step to collect rewards. Different from the classic stochastic multi-armed
bandits (Gittins, Glazebrook, and Weber 2011; Bubeck and
Cesa-Bianchi 2012), the state of each arm in an RMAB can
change even when the arm is not pulled, where each arm
follows a Markovian process to transition between different states with transition probabilities dependent on arms
and the pulling decision. Rewards are associated with different arm states, where the planner’s goal is to plan a sequential pulling policy to maximize the total reward received
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work done during an internship at Google Research.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12138

