The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Probabilities of Potential Outcome Types in Experimental Studies: Identification
and Estimation Based on Proxy Covariate Information
Ryusei Shingaki, Manabu Kuroki
Graduate School of Engineering Science, Yokohama National University
79-5 Tokiwadai, Hodogaya-ku, Yokohama 240-8501 Japan
shingaki-ryusei-kw@ynu.jp, manabu-kuroki-zm@ynu.ac.jp

Abstract

from it, it is useful to (i) classify the situations of the subjects into four outcome types, which are labeled, “doomed”,
“causative”, “preventive” and “immune”, and (ii) evaluate
the probabilities of these four outcome types. In the phase
III randomized clinical trial described above, the “doomed”
situation represents a case where treatment is irrelevant because the disease occurs whether the vaccine or the placebo
are received. The “causative” situation represents a case
where the disease occurs if and only if subjects receive the
placebo. The “preventive” situation represents a case where
the disease occurs if and only if subjects receive the vaccine.
The “immune” situation occurs when the treatment is irrelevant because the disease does not occur where the vaccine
or the placebo are received. Because each subject belongs to
one of four outcome types, these outcomes are referred to as
“potential outcome types”. However, we do not know from
the observed data to which type a subject belongs. Here, as
an effective vaccination policy, it would be better to target
subjects in the “causative” outcome type because the severity in this type of subjects is reduced when they are vaccinated, but not when they are not vaccinated. In contrast, the
probability of the “preventive” outcome type would be useful to evaluate the severity of receiving the vaccination because the severity in this type of subjects is decreased when
they do not receive the vaccination but not when they receive
the vaccination.

The concept of potential outcome types is one of the fundamental components of causal inference. However, even in
randomized experiments, assumptions on the data generating process, such as monotonicity, are required to evaluate
the probabilities of the potential outcome types. To solve the
problem without such assumptions in experimental studies, a
novel identification condition based on proxy covariate information is proposed in this paper. In addition, the estimation
problem of the probabilities of the potential outcome types
reduces to that of singular models when they are identifiable
through the proposed condition. Thus, they cannot be evaluated by standard statistical estimation methods. To overcome
this difficulty, new plug-in estimators of these probabilities
are presented, and the asymptotic normality of the proposed
estimators is shown.

Introduction
Motivation
Simultaneously deriving the results of the same subjects receiving the experimental treatment and the controlled treatment is an essential part of causal inference. However, even
in randomized experiments (Pearl 2009, pp.284–285), this
cannot be achieved. Thus, it is difficult to evaluate the likelihood that one event would cause another event.
To understand the importance of the above situation, consider the following statement regarding the phase III randomized clinical trial comparing the COVID-19 vaccine
with the placebo, as reported by Goodman, Grabenstein, and
Braun (2020)
“The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) guidance set as an expectation for licensure that a COVID19 vaccine would prevent disease or decrease its
severity in at least 50% of people who are vaccinated.
. . . It will also be important to understand whether a
vaccine reduces not only mild but also more severe
disease, as well as hospitalizations and deaths.”
This statement implies that it was uncertain whether the
severity would be decreased if unvaccinated healthy subjects
would be vaccinated (counterfactually) at that time. To administer the vaccine to the subjects most likely to benefit

Theoretical Background and Contribution
One representative example of “the probabilities of the potential outcome types” is “the probabilities of causation”,
which probabilistically evaluate the “necessity cause”, “sufficiency cause”, and “necessity and sufficiency cause” (Cai
and Kuroki 2005; Dawid, Musio, and Fienberg 2016; Dawid,
Musio, and Murtas 2017; Dawid and Musio 2022; Pearl
2015; VanderWeele 2012). Pearl (2009) and Tian and Pearl
(2000) developed formal semantics for the probabilities of
causation based on structural causal models. These probabilities are formulated based on the probabilities of the potential outcome types, and thus are not identifiable even in
randomized experiments (Pearl 2009, pp.284–285). To solve
the problem, Kuroki and Cai (2011) and Tian and Pearl
(2000) showed how to bound these quantities from data obtained in experimental and observational studies. Although
these bounds provide the range within which the probabili-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12287

