The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Model-Agnostic Heuristics for Selective Classification
Andrea Pugnana1 , Salvatore Ruggieri2
1

Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, Italy
2
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy
andrea.pugnana@sns.it, salvatore.ruggieri@unipi.it

Abstract

ject option) (Chow 1970; Pietraszek 2005) conservatively
extends a classifier with a selection function (reject option/strategy) to determine whether or not a prediction should be
accepted. The selection function assesses the classifier prediction’s confidence, robustness, and trustworthiness. If a
sufficiently high level is not reached, the selective classifier
abstains from producing a prediction – e.g. a risk score in
a credit evaluation application. Levels can also inform the
user about the degree of confidence in the classifier prediction, e.g., by associating a rating label to the prediction (e.g.,
high confident, average confident, low confident). Selective
classification has been extensively studied from a theoretical side (El-Yaniv and Wiener 2010; Franc and Průša 2019).
State-of-the-art practical approaches and tools, however, are
model-specific, e.g., they are tailored to DNNs, as e.g., in the
case of SelectiveNet (Geifman and El-Yaniv 2019) and SelfAdapting Training (SAT) (Huang, Zhang, and Zhang 2020),
and focused/experimented mainly on image datasets.
Our contribution consists of a model-agnostic heuristics
that lifts any base probabilistic binary classifier to a selective (probabilistic binary) classifier. The proposed algorithm,
called SC ROSS, adopts a cross-fitting approach. Training
data is split into K folds. For each fold, we train a classifier
on the remaining K −1 folds and test it on the fold. The confidence of predictions over all the folds is used to estimate
the bounds on prediction confidence for which the base classifier should abstain. Estimating the bounds relies on theoretical results on quantile estimation (Knight and Bassett
2003) that guarantee a second-order improvement over sample quantile estimation. We present extensive experimentation on eight real-world datasets, comparing SC ROSS with
the standard P LUG I N baseline, which is model-agnostic but
requires a validation set, and with the state-of-the-art approaches SelectiveNet and SAT.

Selective classification (also known as classification with reject option) conservatively extends a classifier with a selection function to determine whether or not a prediction should
be accepted (i.e., trusted, used, deployed). This is a highly relevant issue in socially sensitive tasks, such as credit scoring.
State-of-the-art approaches rely on Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) that train at the same time both the classifier and the
selection function. These approaches are model-specific and
computationally expensive. We propose a model-agnostic approach, as it can work with any base probabilistic binary classification algorithm, and it can be scalable to large tabular
datasets if the base classifier is so. The proposed algorithm,
called SC ROSS, exploits a cross-fitting strategy and theoretical results for quantile estimation to build the selection function. Experiments on real-world data show that SC ROSS improves over existing methods.

Introduction
There is a pressing demand for a trustworthy AI (Wing
2021). For instance, the EU Regulatory framework proposal
on AI (European Parliament and the Council 2021) rules
that high-risk AI systems will be subject to strict obligations before deployment. One such obligation is to ensure
“a high level of robustness, security and accuracy”. Highrisk AI systems refer to socially sensitive domains, including: healthcare, where predictions might be used to predict
treatments; justice, where predictions can assess the risk of
recidivism; hiring, where predictions can determine rankings of candidates; credit scoring, where predictions are routinely used to estimate the probability of repaying a debt. In
all these cases, AI is typically framed as a probabilistic binary classifier (see e.g., (Dastile, Çelik, and Potsane 2020)
for credit scoring), and the predictions are used to score or
rank people. However, the predictive performance of classifiers is typically not homogeneous over the data distribution.
Identifying sub-populations with low performance could be
helpful for debugging and monitoring purposes, especially
in high-risk scenarios. A direction toward improving robustness and accuracy is to lift from the canonical framework of
binary classification to the selective classification one. Selective classification (also known as classification with re-

Related Work
Selective classification trades off the error rate with the rejection rate. Two main models are considered.
In the cost model (Chow 1970), the goal is to minimize
the expected loss defined in terms of misclassification and
rejection costs. The Bayes optimal classifier requires posterior probabilities, which can be estimated on a validation
set by the plug-in rule (Herbei and Wegkamp 2006). Other
methods are based on estimates of the ROC curve (Tortorella

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9461

