The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FanoutNet: A Neuralized PCB Fanout Automation Method Using Deep
Reinforcement Learning
Haiyun Li1 , Jixin Zhang2 * , Ning Xu1 * , Mingyu Liu3
1

School of Information Engineering, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China
2
School of Computer Science, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan, China
3
Wuhan Research Institute, Huawei Device Co., Ltd., Wuhan, China
zhangjx@hbut.edu.cn, xuning@whut.edu.cn
Abstract

pins to the fanout locations. As a pre-design of PCB routing,
unlike detailed routing from pin to pin, PCB fanout focuses
on connection topology, routing resource assignment, component placement, and layer segmentation. Human engineers pre-allocate routing resources, reduce topology crossings, and improve routability through PCB fanout. In modern high-speed PCB designs, the net connections have many
topology crossings and the routing resources are highly limited, making direct pin-to-pin routing without PCB fanout
difficult. Hence, PCB fanout is often a necessary stage in the
modern PCB routing.
However, current PCB fanout design heavily relies on the
experience of human engineers, and there is no existing solution for PCB fanout automation in the industry, which limits the quality of PCB routing automation. Although some
related approaches to Ball Grid Array (BGA) package escape routing have been proposed (Liao and Dong 2020; Lin
et al. 2021a), these approaches are only designed for BGA
escape routing. The pin array in BGA is quite regular, while
the pins in PCB are various, so that the BGA escape routing approaches cannot be used for solving PCB fanout problems. Although PCB fanout is very important for reducing
the routing complexity and improving routability, which is
especially effective in modern high-speed PCB, little consideration has been given to this field. In this paper, we aim
to propose an intelligent fanout method to fill the vacancies
of prior studies.
The main idea of our solution is to use Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) to learn and simulate the fanout designs of human engineers. We formulate the PCB fanout
problem as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) and build a
policy model to make optimal decisions on fanout actions
and a value model to make accurate evaluations of fanout results. One of the biggest challenges is to transform the fanout
optimization into gradient optimization so that we can efficiently optimize fanout results. To address the challenge, we
propose to use deep neural networks to encode the representations of PCB layout and netlist so that the gradient information can be used to train the policy and value model. We
also design a PPO algorithm to optimize the fanout results.
In this paper, we propose a neuralized PCB fanout method
based on Reinforcement Learning (RL), named FanoutNet,
to generate high-quality fanout results automatically. First,
we extract the information of the netlist and partially gener-

In modern electronic manufacturing processes, multi-layer
Printed Circuit Board (PCB) routing requires connecting
more than hundreds of nets with perplexing topology under
complex routing constraints and highly limited resources, so
that takes intense effort and time of human engineers. PCB
fanout as a pre-design of PCB routing has been proved to be
an ideal technique to reduce the complexity of PCB routing
by pre-allocating resources and pre-routing. However, current
PCB fanout design heavily relies on the experience of human
engineers, and there is no existing solution for PCB fanout
automation in industry, which limits the quality of PCB routing automation. To address the problem, we propose a neuralized PCB fanout method by deep reinforcement learning.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first in the literature
to propose the automation method for PCB fanout. We combine with Convolution Neural Network (CNN) and attentionbased network to train our fanout policy model and value
model. The models learn representations of PCB layout and
netlist to make decisions and evaluations in place of human
engineers. We employ Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)
to update the parameters of the models. In addition, we apply
our PCB fanout method to a PCB router to improve the quality of PCB routing. Extensive experimental results on realworld industrial PCB benchmarks demonstrate that our approach achieves 100% routability in all industrial cases and
improves wire length by an average of 6.8%, which makes
a significant improvement compared with the state-of-the-art
methods.

Introduction
Modern PCB designs contain more than hundreds of nets,
thousands of pins, and multiple layers (Yan and Wong 2010;
Yan, Ma, and Wong 2012). Due to the complicated functionality and electronic constraints, PCB routing automation
has become an extremely challenging problem. An industrial PCB layout takes about months to route manually, and
PCB routing automation can tremendously improve the efficiency of industrial production.
In industry, the design of fanout is widely used for PCB
routing. Basically, the PCB fanout includes assigning layers, determining the fanout locations, and routing from the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8554

