The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Hypernetworks for Zero-Shot Transfer in Reinforcement Learning
Sahand Rezaei-Shoshtari1,2,3 , Charlotte Morissette1,3 , Francois R. Hogan3
Gregory Dudek1,2,3 , David Meger1,2,3
1

McGill University
Mila - Québec AI Institute
3
Samsung AI Center Montreal
srezaei@cim.mcgill.ca
2

Abstract

Hypernetwork

In this paper, hypernetworks are trained to generate behaviors across a range of unseen task conditions, via a novel TDbased training objective and data from a set of near-optimal
RL solutions for training tasks. This work relates to meta RL,
contextual RL, and transfer learning, with a particular focus
on zero-shot performance at test time, enabled by knowledge
of the task parameters (also known as context). Our technical approach is based upon viewing each RL algorithm as a
mapping from the MDP specifics to the near-optimal value
function and policy and seek to approximate it with a hypernetwork that can generate near-optimal value functions and
policies, given the parameters of the MDP. We show that, under certain conditions, this mapping can be considered as a
supervised learning problem. We empirically evaluate the effectiveness of our method for zero-shot transfer to new reward and transition dynamics on a series of continuous control tasks from DeepMind Control Suite. Our method demonstrates significant improvements over baselines from multitask and meta RL approaches.

1

Near-optimal Solution

Figure 1: Our method uses hypernetworks to approximate
an RL algorithm as a mapping from a family of parameterized MDPs to a family of near-optimal solutions, in order to
achieve zero-shot transfer to new reward and dynamics settings.
related but unseen task, simply by conditioning on provided
task parameters.
The differences between the tasks we consider leads to
large and complicated changes in the optimal policy and
induced optimal trajectory distribution. Learning to predict new policies from this data requires powerful learners
guided by helpful loss functions. We show that the abstraction and modularity properties afforded by hypernetworks
allow them to approximate RL generated solutions by mapping a parameterized MDP family to a set of optimal solutions. We show that this framework enables achieving strong
zero-shot transfer to new reward and dynamics settings by
exploiting commonalities in the MDP structure.
We perform experimental validation using several families of continuous control environments where we have parameterized the physical dynamics, the task reward, or both
to evaluate learners. We carry out contextual zero-shot evaluation, where the learner is provided the parameters of the
test task, but is not given any training time – rather the
very first policy execution at test time is used to measure
performance. Our method outperforms selected well-known
baselines, in many cases recovering nearly full performance
without a single timestep of training data on the target tasks.
Ablations show that hypernetworks are a critical element in
achieving strong generalization and that a structured TD-like
loss is additionally helpful in training these networks.
Our main contributions are:

Introduction

Adult humans possess an astonishing ability to adapt their
behavior to new situations. Well beyond simple tuning, we
can adopt entirely novel ways of moving our bodies, for example walking on crutches with little to no training after
an injury. The learning process that generalizes across all
past experience and modes of behavior to rapidly output the
needed behavior policy for a new situation is a hallmark of
our intelligence.
This paper proposes a strong zero-shot behavior generalization approach based on hypernetworks (Ha, Dai, and
Le 2016), a recently proposed architecture allowing a deep
hyper-learner to output all parameters of a target neural network, as depicted in Figure 1. In our case, we train on the full
solutions of numerous RL problems in a family of MDPs,
where either reward or dynamics (often both) can change
between task instances. The trained policies, value functions
and rolled-out optimal behavior of each source task is the
training information from which we can learn to generalize.
Our hypernetworks output the parameters of a fully-formed
and highly performing policy without any experience in a

1. The use of hypernetworks as a scalable and practical approach for approximating RL algorithms as a mapping
from a family of parameterized MDPs to a family of nearoptimal policies.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9579

