The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

LADA-Trans-NER: Adaptive Efficient Transformer for Chinese Named Entity
Recognition using Lexicon-Attention and Data-Augmentation
Jiguo Liu1∗ , Chao Liu1,2 , Nan Li1,2∗ , Shihao Gao1,2 , Mingqi Liu1 , Dali Zhu1,2
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{liujiguo, liuchao, linan, gaoshihao, liumingqi, zhudali}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract
Recently, word enhancement has become very popular for
Chinese Named Entity Recognition (NER), reducing segmentation errors and increasing the semantic and boundary information of Chinese words. However, these methods tend to
ignore the semantic relationship before and after the sentence
after integrating lexical information. Therefore, the regularity of word length information has not been fully explored in
various word-character fusion methods. In this work, we propose a Lexicon-Attention and Data-Augmentation (LADA)
method for Chinese NER. We discuss the challenges of using
existing methods in incorporating word information for NER
and show how our proposed methods could be leveraged to
overcome those challenges. LADA is based on a Transformer
Encoder that utilizes lexicon to construct a directed graph and
fuses word information through updating the optimal edge
of the graph. Specially, we introduce the advanced data augmentation method to obtain the optimal representation for the
NER task. Experimental results show that the augmentation
done using LADA can considerably boost the performance
of our NER system and achieve significantly better results
than previous state-of-the-art methods and variant models in
the literature on four publicly available NER datasets, namely
Resume, MSRA, Weibo, and OntoNotes v4. We also observe
better generalization and application to a real-world setting
from LADA on multi-source complex entities.

1

Figure 1: (a) An example to show entity nesting for Chinese
NER. (b) An example to show the complex combination and
entity indefinite length for Chinese NER.
are vaguely grasped. Besides, the task also has many other challenges, such as complex combinations, entity nesting,
and indefinite length. As shown in Figure 1(a), there is a scenario where a shorter entity is completely contained within
another longer entity. For example, “(Mail)” and “
(Email Phishing Attack)” are two entities: mail
and attack event. In Figure 1(b), “ 360(360 Security Brain)” is easily misidentified as “ (Brain)”, and
“2020(2020 Global Advanced Persistent Threat Research Report)” is a longer entity
that is easily misidentified as “(Research Report)”.
Traditionally, the task of Chinese NER is decoupled into
a pipeline of two separated subtasks, namely word segmentation and word sequence labeling (Yang et al. 2016; Zhao
et al. 2021). The major disadvantage of this method is error propagation: word segmentation errors negatively impact
the identification of named entities (Peng and Dredze 2015;
Sun and He 2017). With the development of deep learning,
neural networks have been introduced to the NER task and
achieved impressive results (Huang et al. 2015; Lample et al.
2016; Habibi et al. 2017; Gregoric et al. 2018; Lin and Lu
2018). To avoid the segmentation errors, most of neural Chinese NER models are character-based. Although characterbased model has achieved good performance than wordbased model, it does not exploit word information in character sequence. To explicitly inform each character about its
related word information, previous works (Zhang and Yang
2018; Liu et al. 2019; Yan et al. 2019) have proposed to integrate word information into character sequences via wordcharacter lattice structure.

Introduction

Named Entity Recognition (NER) plays an essential role in
structuring of unstructured text. It is a sequence tagging task
that extracts named entities from unstructured text. The main
task of NER is to automatically identify named entities such
as Person (PER), Location (LOC), Organization (ORG), etc.
in given text (Zhao et al. 2020). NER is a basic task of many
NLP systems including relation extraction (Takanobu et al.
2019; Wei et al. 2020; Cheng et al. 2021), entity linking (Le
and Titov 2018; Hou et al. 2020; Gu et al. 2021), knowledge
graph (Ji et al. 2020; Chawla et al. 2021), etc.
Due to the additional word segmentation process of Chinese (Zhao et al. 2019), Chinese NER is more difficult compared to English NER. In particular, Chinese NER has some
ambiguity in many cases, and the boundaries of new words
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13236

