The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Behavioral Learning in Security Games:
Threat of Multi-Step Manipulative Attacks
Thanh H. Nguyen1 , Arunesh Sinha2
1

University of Oregon
2
Rutgers University
thanhhng@cs.uoregon.edu, arunesh.sinha@rutgers.edu

Abstract

These behavior models, after being trained, are used to determine an optimal strategy of the defender.
However, as pointed out in previous work, since the defender relies on some attack data to make prediction, the
attacker can intentionally change its attack behavior to mislead the defender’s learning (Nguyen et al. 2020; Nguyen,
Sinha, and He 2020). Consequently, the learned adversary
behavior model deviates from the true behavior model, and
causes the defender to generate ineffective patrolling strategies, which benefits the attacker in the end. Intuitively, the
attacker is perfectly rational, but pretends to act in a boundedly rational manner. The attacker may suffer an immediate
loss for deviating from a myopic optimal response, but it
will gain significantly more long-term benefit as a result of
the defender’s deteriorated strategies. In this work, we focus
on analyzing such manipulative attacks of the attacker.
The existing works in SSGs mainly study one-shot game
scenarios in which the defender only learns the attacker behavior once and then commits to a single defense strategy afterward (Nguyen et al. 2020; Nguyen, Sinha, and He 2020).
However, in many real-world domains such as wildlife protection, the defender and attacker often interact in a repeated
manner (Fang et al. 2016). That is, at each time step, given
historical attack and patrol data, the defender updates his
model of the attacker’s behavior and re-generates a new defense strategy while the attacker responds accordingly by
launching a certain number of attacks. These new defense
and attack actions are then collected for the future use. This
learning-patrolling-attack loop continues until the end of the
time horizon. In this multi-step interaction scenario, it is
clear that the existing one-shot SSG studies fail to capture
the long-term impact of the attacker’s manipulation.
In this work, we study the problem of sequential manipulative attacks in multi-step SSGs. We aim at investigating
the long-term manipulative decisions of the attacker and the
accumulative impact of such manipulation on both the defender and attacker’s utility. We provide the following three
key contributions. First, we introduce a new multi-step manipulative attack game model. In our game model, the defender follows a learning-patrolling process at each time step
to play. On the other hand, at each time step, the attacker attempts to find an optimal attack strategy given the current
defense strategy, taking into account the tradeoff between
the immediate utility loss for playing boundedly rational at

This paper studies the problem of multi-step manipulative
attacks in Stackelberg security games, in which a clever attacker attempts to orchestrate its attacks over multiple time
steps to mislead the defender’s learning of the attacker’s behavior. This attack manipulation eventually influences the defender’s patrol strategy towards the attacker’s benefit. Previous work along this line of research only focuses on oneshot games in which the defender learns the attacker’s behavior and then designs a corresponding strategy only once.
Our work, on the other hand, investigates the long-term impact of the attacker’s manipulation in which current attack
and defense choices of players determine the future learning
and patrol planning of the defender. This paper has three key
contributions. First, we introduce a new multi-step manipulative attack game model that captures the impact of sequential manipulative attacks carried out by the attacker over the
entire time horizon. Second, we propose a new algorithm to
compute an optimal manipulative attack plan for the attacker,
which tackles the challenge of multiple connected optimization components involved in the computation across multiple
time steps. Finally, we present extensive experimental results
on the impact of such misleading attacks, showing a significant benefit for the attacker and loss for the defender.

1

Introduction

Stackelberg security games (SSGs) have been widely applied for solving many real-world problems in public safety
and security, cybersecurity, and conversations (Pita et al.
2008; Tambe 2011; Shieh et al. 2012; Fang et al. 2016).
In recent work in SSGs, machine learning-based techniques
have been used for modeling and predicting the attacker’s
behavior based on collected attack data (Yang et al. 2011;
Kar et al. 2017; Sinha et al. 2018; Gholami et al. 2019). For
example, in PROTECT, Quantal Response was used to predict decision making of the attacker in the domain of ferry
protection (Shieh et al. 2012). In addition, in the PAWSrelated work, different models such as Quantal Response,
SUQR, and SHARP, etc were used to capture the behavior of
poachers (i.e., predicting where the poachers are likely to set
trapping tools to catch wild animals) (Fang et al. 2016; Kar
et al. 2017, 2015; Sinha et al. 2018; Gholami et al. 2019).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9302

