The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AutoStegaFont: Synthesizing Vector Fonts for Hiding Information in Documents
Xi Yang1 , Jie Zhang1,2 , Han Fang* 3 , Chang Liu1 , Zehua Ma1 ,
Weiming Zhang* 1 , Nenghai Yu1
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
University of Waterloo
3
National University of Singapore
yx9726@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jiezhangsp@gmail.com, fanghan@nus.edu.sg
{hichangliu@mail., mzh045@mail., zhangwm@, ynh@}ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

achieve massive practical commercial applications. For example, embedding unique hyperlinks in documents can push
abundant information to readers through cellphone scanning; embedding invisible watermarks can help protect the
copyright of documents; embedding identification information such as employee IDs can help government agencies,
the military, or companies trace the source of confidential
documents after being leaked. All these applications have
attracted increasing interest in both industry and academic
fields (Xiao, Zhang, and Zheng 2018; Qi et al. 2019).
Due to the redundancy characteristics, information hiding
in natural images has been well-studied (Baluja 2017; Zhu
et al. 2018; Wengrowski and Dana 2019; Tancik, Mildenhall,
and Ng 2020) and is mainly based on pixel-wise modifications. However, compared with natural images, document
images only consist of simple text structures and smooth
backgrounds, lacking complex textures and colors, which
makes it more challenging to invisibly embed information.
Considering this, a few recently-reported studies exploit
the characteristics of document files rather than document
images to hide information, by modifying glyphs (i.e., the
particular shape designs) of the font used. Specifically, Xiao
et al. (Xiao, Zhang, and Zheng 2018) propose FontCode.
They gather human volunteers to initialize the candidates of
slightly perturbed glyphs from a font manifold (Campbell
and Kautz 2014), which are further filtered to construct a
font codebook. The information can be embedded by replacing the original glyphs with similar glyphs from the codebook. To extract the information, they train one classifier
for each glyph, which means 52 classifiers are needed for
the English alphabet. However, the process of constructing
a codebook is labor-intensive and time-consuming. Meanwhile, the extraction strategy is only suitable for alphabetic
languages such as English and cannot be extended to ideographic languages with a wide range of glyphs like Chinese.
Besides, this method can only correctly extract information
from high-resolution documents without much distortion.
Similarly, Qi et al. (Qi et al. 2019) propose to manually
modify the strokes of Chinese glyphs to obtain deformations
of glyphs to construct the font codebook. On the extraction
side, a template-matching method (Yoo and Han 2009) is
used to match the deformations. They share the same limitations with FontCode, namely, the expensive cost to manually
construct the font codebook, weak generalizability to fonts

Hiding information in text documents has been a hot topic
recently, with the most typical schemes of utilizing fonts. By
constructing several fonts with similar appearances, information can be effectively represented and embedded in documents. However, due to the unstructured characteristic, font
vectors are more difficult to synthesize than font images. Existing methods mainly use handcrafted features to design the
fonts manually, which is time-consuming and labor-intensive.
Moreover, due to the diversity of fonts, handcrafted features
are not generalizable to different fonts. Besides, in practice,
since documents might be distorted through transmission, ensuring extractability under distortions is also an important
requirement. Therefore, three requirements are imposed on
vector font generation in this domain: automaticity, generalizability, and robustness. However, none of the existing methods can satisfy these requirements well and simultaneously.
To satisfy the above requirements, we propose AutoStegaFont, an automatic vector font synthesis scheme for hiding
information in documents. Specifically, we design a twostage and dual-modality learning framework. In the first
stage, we jointly train an encoder and a decoder to invisibly
encode the font images with different information. To ensure
robustness, we target designing a noise layer to work with
the encoder and decoder during training. In the second stage,
we employ a differentiable rasterizer to establish a connection between the image and the vector modality. Then, we
design an optimization algorithm to convey the information
from the encoded image to the corresponding vector. Thus
the encoded font vectors can be automatically generated. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior performance of
our scheme in automatically synthesizing vector fonts for hiding information in documents, with robustness to distortions
caused by low-resolution screenshots, printing, and photography. Besides, the proposed framework has better generalizability to fonts with diverse styles and languages.

Introduction
Text documents are one of the most widely-used media in
our daily lives, and we can access useful information effectively by reading them. Meanwhile, it is still interesting to hide more information in text documents, which can
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3198

