The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Class Fairness in Online Matching
Hadi Hosseini1 , Zhiyi Huang2 , Ayumi Igarashi3 , Nisarg Shah4
1

Pennsylvania State University
2
University of Hong Kong
3
University of Tokyo
4
University of Toronto
hadi@psu.edu,zhiyi@cs.hku.hk,igarashi@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp,nisarg@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract

Over the past few decades, a large body of literature—
within the field of online algorithm design—is devoted to
the study of online bipartite matching problems. Their primary goal is to satisfy some notion of economic efficiency—
e.g. maximizing the size of the final matching—with no
knowledge of which items will arrive in the future and in
what order. Algorithms designed for this problem are judged
by their competitive ratio, which is the worst-case approximation ratio of the size of the matching produced to the
maximum possible size in hindsight. It is well known that
the best deterministic algorithm can only achieve a 1/2approximation of this efficiency goal, e.g., by using a greedy
algorithm to get a maximal matching. Notably, the seminal
work of Karp, Vazirani, and Vazirani (1990) provides a randomized algorithm called R ANKING with the best possible
(1 − 1/e)-approximation.
While the literature offers online algorithms with optimal
efficiency guarantees, little work has been done in ensuring
that these algorithms treat agents, or rather, classes of agents
fairly. Consider the example of a food bank that wishes to
distribute the donated items among nonprofit organizations
and homeless shelters. The perishable food items donated
to the food bank must be assigned upon their arrival. How
should an online matching algorithm distribute these donations to the nonprofits and shelters in such a manner that the
communities they serve are treated equitably?
Class fairness. We initiate the study of class fairness in online matching, where a set of items arriving online must be
assigned to agents who are partitioned into known classes,
with the goal of achieving fairness among classes. Agents
either like an item (value 1) or don’t like it (value 0). We
adopt classical notions from the fair division literature that
typically apply to individual agents—such as envy-freeness
(EF), proportionality (Prop), and maximin share guarantee
(MMS)—to classes of agents. Our extensions ensure that
different classes are treated fairly, regardless of their sizes
(e.g., in the food bank example above, different communities are treated equally, even if some have many more organizations serving them).
In the standard fair division model, the impossibility of
achieving envy-freeness has motivated relaxations such as
envy-freeness up to one item (EF1), which can be guaranteed (Lipton et al. 2004). When applied to classes, our class
envy-freeness up to one item (CEF1) requires that envy of

We initiate the study of fairness among classes of agents in
online bipartite matching where there is a given set of offline
vertices (aka agents) and another set of vertices (aka items)
that arrive online and must be matched irrevocably upon arrival. In this setting, agents are partitioned into classes and
the matching is required to be fair with respect to the classes.
We adopt popular fairness notions (e.g. envy-freeness, proportionality, and maximin share) and their relaxations to this
setting and study deterministic algorithms for matching indivisible items (leading to integral matchings) and for matching
divisible items (leading to fractional matchings). For matching indivisible items, we propose an adaptive-priority-based
algorithm, M ATCH - AND -S HIFT, prove that it achieves 1/2approximation of both class envy-freeness up to one item and
class maximin share fairness, and show that each guarantee is
tight. For matching divisible items, we design a water-fillingbased algorithm, E QUAL -F ILLING, that achieves (1 − 1/e)approximation of class envy-freeness and class proportionality; we prove 1 − 1/e to be tight for class proportionality and
establish a 3/4 upper bound on class envy-freeness.

1

Introduction

The one-sided matching problem is a fundamental subject within economics and computation that deals with the
matching of a set of items to a set of agents. Its primary
objective is to ensure desirable normative properties such
as economic efficiency and fairness. The advent of Internet economics along with the introduction of novel marketplaces has posed new challenges in designing desirable
solutions for which, as noted by Moulin (2019), “we need
division rules that are both transparent and agreeable, in
other words, fair.” A wide array of these applications are inherently online, that is, items (or goods) arrive in an online
fashion, and need to be matched immediately and irrevocably to the participating agents: consider the examples of allocating advertisement slots to Internet advertisers (Mehta
et al. 2007), assigning packets to output ports in switch
routing (Azar and Richter 2005), distributing food donations among nonprofit charitable organizations (Lee et al.
2019), and matching riders to drivers in ridesharing platforms (Banerjee and Johari 2019).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5673

