The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Scalable Optimal Multiway-Split Decision Trees with Constraints
Shivaram Subramanian* , Wei Sun*
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, New York, USA
{subshiva, sunw}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
There has been a surge of interest in learning optimal decision
trees using mixed-integer programs (MIP) in recent years, as
heuristic-based methods do not guarantee optimality and find
it challenging to incorporate constraints that are critical for
many practical applications. However, existing MIP methods
that build on an arc-based formulation do not scale well as
the number of binary variables is in the order of O(2d N ),
where d and N refer to the depth of the tree and the size of
the dataset. Moreover, they can only handle sample-level constraints and linear metrics. In this paper, we propose a novel
path-based MIP formulation where the number of decision
variables is independent of N . We present a scalable column
generation algorithm to solve the MIP. Our framework produces a multiway-split tree which is more interpretable than
the standard binary-split trees due to its shorter rules. Our
method can incorporate nonlinear metrics such as F1-score
and a broader class of constraints. We demonstrate its efficacy
with extensive experiments. We present results on datasets
containing up to 1,008,372 samples while existing MIP-based
decision tree models do not scale well on data beyond a few
thousand points. We report superior or competitive results
compared to the state-of-art MIP-based methods with up to
a 24X reduction in runtime.

1

Figure 1: An example of OMT trained on car-evaluation.

Vayanos 2019; Verwer and Zhang 2019; Aghaei, Gómez,
and Vayanos 2021) - this is the methodology we are focusing
on in this paper.
Prior MIP-based methods rely on an arc-based formulation that require a large number of binary decision variables
to identify splitting conditions at branch nodes as well as
label and sample assignments to leaf nodes. This approach
has several drawbacks: (1) the optimization problem becomes easily intractable as the number of binary variables
and constraints increases linearly with training data. Hence,
experiments are typically restricted to datasets with no more
than a few thousand samples. (2) Prior MIP frameworks can
only handle linear metrics. In many applications, it is desirable to consider nonlinear metrics, e.g., F1-score is preferred over accuracy to evaluate machine learning models
trained on imbalanced datasets. (3) With the arc-based formulation, it is challenging to impose constraints on individual decision rules and feature combinations. One such example occurs in the medical field, where doctors have to arrive at an appropriate diagnosis while taking into account
the costs of medical tests (Lomax and Vadera 2013). (4)
The vast majority of the decision tree literature focuses on
binary-split trees, where each node can have at most two
child nodes. Multiway-split trees (see Figure 1 for an example) whose branching condition may contain several values
are often more intuitive and comprehensible (Fulton, Kasif,
and Salzberg 1995).
In this paper, we attempt to address these prior limitations
by proposing a scalable MIP-based framework to train constrained optimal multiway-split trees (OMT). Our contributions are five-fold.

Introduction

Decision trees are among the most popular machine learning models as the tree structure is visually easy to understand. As learning an optimal decision tree is NP-hard (Laurent and Rivest 1976), popular algorithms such as CART
(Breiman et al. 1984), ID3 (Quinlan 1986) and C4.5 (Quinlan 2014) rely on greedy heuristics to construct trees. Motivated by the heuristic nature of the traditional methods,
there have been many efforts across different fields to learn
optimal decision trees (ODT), e.g., dynamic programming
(Lin et al. 2020), constraint programming (Verhaeghe et al.
2020), Boolean satisfiability (Narodytska et al. 2018), itemset mining (Aglin, Nijssen, and Schaus 2020). In particular, recent advances in modern optimization has facilitated
a nascent stream of research that leverages mixed-integer
programming (MIP) to train globally optimal trees with
constraints (Bertsimas and Dunn 2017; Aghaei, Azizi, and
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9891

