The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learn from Yesterday: A Semi-supervised Continual Learning Method for
Supervision-Limited Text-to-SQL Task Streams
Yongrui Chen1 , Xinnan Guo1 , Tongtong Wu1,2 , Guilin Qi1 , Yang Li3 , Yang Dong4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
2
Department of Data Science & AI, Monash University
3
Alibaba Group
4
Ant Group
yrchen@seu.edu.cn, guoxinnan0727@163.com, wutong8023@seu.edu.cn, tongtong.wu@monash.edu
gqi@seu.edu.cn, ly200170@alibaba-inc.com, dongyang1231@gmail.com
Abstract

tasks for the parser. Although machine learning-based textto-SQL methods have achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance, they suffer from the following two challenges in
the face of rapidly growing tasks.
1) Limited supervised data. For a new text-to-SQL task
against unseen databases, it is often impractical to annotate
sufficient SQL labels for training in a short period of time,
resulting in parsers that are prone to overfitting. 2) Costly
full volume retraining. Considering a new task, an intuitive
idea is to train the model from scratch on all seen tasks. Unfortunately, the computational cost of such retraining is unaffordable due to the increasing size of pre-trained models,
even with limited training data (Wu et al. 2022). Assuming
that there are K tasks and the average training time of one
task is Tavg , the total time of full volume retraining on these
K tasks is T = K(K + 1)Tavg /2. When K is large, the
squared relationship makes T intolerable.
Existing works provide ideas to address the challenges
separately. First, semi-supervised learning (SSL) (Guo et al.
2022) can compensate for the lack of supervised data
by mining the potential value of NLQs without SQL labels. Second, continuous learning (CL) (Li, Qu, and Haffari 2021) provides an alternative cost-effective training
paradigm without using all instances of previous tasks.
However, both of them focuses on one of the challenges but
ignores the impact of the other. It remains a pressing issue
to address both challenges simultaneously.
In this paper, we propose to integrate SSL and CL to
solve the supervision-limited text-to-SQL task stream. We
first give a VANILLA solution in which the parser applies
self-training to predict pseudo-labeled instances to improve
generalization to the current task (SSL) while replaying
small portions of past instances stored in memory to alleviate forgetting of previous tasks (CL). Despite its simplicity, VANILLA has experimentally proven to be sufficient to
outperform most SSL-only and CL-only methods in text-toSQL task streams. Thereafter, we further hypothesize that
SSL and CL can boost each other. On the one hand, some
instances in previous tasks can supply valuable information
to SSL for predicting pseudo-labels of unlabeled instances.
As shown in Figure 1(a), although instances A and B are
associated with different databases, Perpetrator and
Race track, respectively, the target SQL of A is similar

Conventional text-to-SQL studies are limited to a single task
with a fixed-size training and test set. When confronted with
a stream of tasks common in real-world applications, existing
methods struggle with the problems of insufficient supervised
data and high retraining costs. The former tends to cause overfitting on unseen databases for the new task, while the latter
makes a full review of instances from past tasks impractical
for the model, resulting in forgetting of learned SQL structures and database schemas. To address the problems, this
paper proposes integrating semi-supervised learning (SSL)
and continual learning (CL) in a stream of text-to-SQL tasks
and offers two promising solutions in turn. The first solution
VANILLA is to perform self-training, augmenting the supervised training data with predicted pseudo-labeled instances
of the current task, while replacing the full volume retraining with episodic memory replay to balance the training efficiency with the performance of previous tasks. The improved
solution SFN ET takes advantage of the intrinsic connection
between CL and SSL. It uses in-memory past information
to help current SSL, while adding high-quality pseudo instances in memory to improve future replay. The experiments
on two datasets shows that SFN ET outperforms the widelyused SSL-only and CL-only baselines on multiple metrics.

Introduction
Relational databases (RDs) store a vast amount of today’s
information and provide the foundation for applications
such as customer relationship management (Anshari et al.
2019), financial markets (Lewis et al. 2017), and medical
records (Wang, Shi, and Reddy 2020). Text-to-SQL technology trains a parser to translate natural language problems
into machine-readable SQL programs, providing an ideal
way for non-technical users to easily interact with their data
stored in RDs. Current research on text-to-SQL has covered single-table (Zhong, Xiong, and Socher 2017), multitable (Yu et al. 2018), and conversation (Yu et al. 2019a) scenarios, with a common assumption that the size of training
and testing data does not change over time. Unfortunately, in
real-world applications, new databases are always emerging
to adapt to changing circumstances (e.g., new diseases, adjusted financial policies), thus continuously generating new
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12682

