The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Dual Memory Aggregation Network for Event-Based Object Detection with
Learnable Representation
Dongsheng Wang1 , Xu Jia1∗ , Yang Zhang1 , Xinyu Zhang1 ,
Yaoyuan Wang2 , Ziyang Zhang2 , Dong Wang1 , Huchuan Lu1 *
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology, China
Advanced Computing and Storage Lab, Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd, China
{32009141, cain, zhangxy71102}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {wangyaoyuan1, zhangziyang11}@huawei.com,
{xjia, wdice, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Dual Memory Aggregation
Event-based Detector

Event-based cameras are bio-inspired sensors that capture
brightness change of every pixel in an asynchronous manner. Compared with frame-based sensors, event cameras have
microsecond-level latency and high dynamic range, hence
showing great potential for object detection under high-speed
motion and poor illumination conditions. Due to sparsity and
asynchronism nature with event streams, most of existing approaches resort to hand-crafted methods to convert event data
into 2D grid representation. However, they are sub-optimal in
aggregating information from event stream for object detection. In this work, we propose to learn an event representation optimized for event-based object detection. Specifically,
event streams are divided into grids in the x-y-t coordinates
for both positive and negative polarity, producing a set of pillars as 3D tensor representation. To fully exploit information
with event streams to detect objects, a dual-memory aggregation network (DMANet) is proposed to leverage both long
and short memory along event streams to aggregate effective
information for object detection. Long memory is encoded in
the hidden state of adaptive convLSTMs while short memory is modeled by computing spatial-temporal correlation between event pillars at neighboring time intervals. Extensive
experiments on the recently released event-based automotive
detection dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

… …

EventPillars Representation

Event
Stream
k-i k-i+1
Long Memory

… …

k-2 k-1 k Timestamp
Short Memory

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed method. At each time
step, EventPillars is applied to convert event streams into a
3D grid representation as the input of DMANet. Then our
network leverages both long and short spatial-temporal information with events to obtain the detection results of the
k-th time step.

sensors (DVS) (Posch et al. 2014), are novel bio-inspired
vision sensors that encode visual information in pixel-level
event streams. In contrast to conventional frame-based cameras, which capture intensity images at a constant frame
rate (e.g., 30fps), event cameras emit sequences of sparse
and asynchronous events only at positions where brightness
changes. Therefore, the event cameras have several advantages such as high dynamic range (HDR, exceeding 140 dB)
(Posch et al. 2014), high temporal resolution, microsecondlevel latency and are almost absent of motion blur. These
properties make event cameras alone attractive in performing tasks such as object detection (Mitrokhin et al. 2018;
Perot et al. 2020), tracking (Gehrig et al. 2018; Chen et al.
2019; Maqueda et al. 2018) and optical flow estimation
(Zhu et al. 2018; Ye et al. 2018; Ding et al. 2022), even
in challenging scenarios (e.g., low lighting conditions and
high-speed moving scenes) (Gallego et al. 2022).
Output signal of an event camera is a stream of events,
with each one recording an event’s pixel location, time
stamp and polarity, which are very different from conventional cameras. Therefore, it would be difficult to directly
apply image-based object detection approaches to event

Introduction
Object detection is regarded as the core basis of autonomous
driving system. Generally, most of detection algorithms are
designed based on frame-based sensors, which enable the
system to better understand the real driving scenarios. These
sensors are inexpensive and can provide rich information of
scenes. However, due to the low frame rate, conventional
cameras is not ideal for object detection under poor illumination conditions and fast motion. In addition, these cameras only capture static images, making it difficult for framebased detectors to leverage motion information of scenes.
With the advance of neuromorphic vision sensing (NVS)
sensors, these limitations of frame-based cameras have been
addressed. Event-based cameras, such as dynamic vision
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2492

