The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Program Synthesis for Integer Sequences from Scratch
Thibault Gauthier, Josef Urban
Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic
email@thibaultgauthier.fr, josef.urban@gmail.com

Abstract
We present a self-learning approach for synthesizing programs
from integer sequences. Our method relies on a tree search
guided by a learned policy. Our system is tested on the OnLine Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences. There, it discovers,
on its own, solutions for 27987 sequences starting from basic
operators and without human-written training examples.

1

tnn = random_initialization ();
while(true)
{
programs = generate (tnn, sequences);
solutions = test (programs, oeis);
tnn = train (solutions)
}

Introduction

Figure 1: Pseudo-code of the self-learning procedure.

The search for abstract patterns is one of the principal occupations of mathematicians. The discovery of similar patterns across different mathematical fields often leads to surprising connections. Probably the most famous example
of such an unexpected connection in mathematics is the
Taniyama–Shimura conjecture proved in 2001 (Breuil et al.
2001). It relates elliptic curves over the field of rational numbers with a special kind of complex analytical functions
known as modular forms. This conjecture became especially
famous because a restricted version of it implies Fermat’s last
theorem (Wiles 1995). The connections found by the system
described in this paper are more modest. For instance, it has
created formulas for testing prime numbers based both on
Fermat’s little theorem1 (stated in 1640) and Wilson’s theorem2 (stated in 1770). When a symbolic representation (e.g.
formula) describing a pattern is conjectured and preferably
proven, a mathematician can start reasoning and deriving
additional facts about the theory in which the pattern occurs.
Integer sequences are a very common kind of mathematical
patterns. A compilation of such sequences is available in the
On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences (OEIS) (Sloane
2007). Our objective in this project is to create a system that
can discover, on its own, programs for the OEIS sequences.
Such programs will be chosen to be small since usually the
best explanations for a particular phenomenon are the simplest ones. This principle is known as Occam’s razor or the
law of parsimony. It has been one of the most important
heuristics guiding scientific research in general. In a machine
learning setting, this can be seen as a form of regularization.
A mathematical proof of this principle relying on Bayesian

reasoning and assumptions about the computability of our
universe is provided in Solomonoff’s theory of inductive
inference (Solomonoff 1964).
The programs produced by our system are readable, making it possible for mathematicians to gain insight into the
nature of the patterns by analyzing the programs.1 We believe
that in the future, such systems will assist mathematicians
during their conjecture-making process when investigating
open problems.

1.1

Overview

Our approach is to synthesize programs for the OEIS sequences (Section 2) in a simple domain-specific language
(Section 3) in many iterations of the following self-learning
loop (Figure 1). Each iteration (generation) of the loop consists of three phases: a generating phase (Section 4), a testing
phase (Section 5) and a training phase (Section 6). Initially,
multiple searches are randomly building programs that generate integer sequences and checking if they are in the OEIS.
Then, for each generated OEIS sequence we select the smallest program that generates it. From those solutions, a tree
neural network is trained to predict what the right building action is, given a target sequence and a partially built program.
The next searches are then guided by the statistical correlations learned by the network, typically producing further
solutions. We describe the experiments in Section 7 and analyze some of the solutions in Section 8. Section 9 discusses
related work.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fermat_primality_test
2
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wilson’s_theorem

1

7670

See our web interface (Gauthier and Urban 2022b).

