The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Future Aware Pricing and Matching for Sustainable On-Demand Ride Pooling
Xianjie Zhang1,2 , Pradeep Varakantham2 , Hao Jiang2
1

Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province, School of Software, Dalian University
of Technology, China
2
Singapore Management University, Singapore
zhangxianjie@mail.dlut.edu.cn, pradeepv@smu.edu.sg, haojiang.2021@phdcs.smu.edu.sg

Abstract

matching of taxis to groups of customer requests (referred
to as the matching problem).
There are multiple difficult challenges in solving the
matching and pricing problems for ride-pooling systems.
First, finding taxis to serve requests (matching) determines
the price to be set for requests (pricing) and price set for
a request (pricing) determines which requests still remain
(as customers can drop the request if the price is too high)
for the taxis to serve. In summary, there is a cyclic dependency between pricing and matching, where pricing impacts
matching and matching impacts pricing. Second, both pricing and matching decisions can have an impact on future requests and recent work (Shah, Lowalekar, and Varakantham
2020) has shown that developing future aware approaches
can have a significant impact. Finally, unlike in on-demand
ride sharing, on-demand ride pooling requires matching vehicles to trips (combinations of requests), which is no longer
a bi-partite matching problem. It is matching on a tripartite graph (Alonso-Mora et al. 2017) between requests, trips
(combinations of requests) and vehicles, which is a significantly harder problem.
Due to the cyclic dependency between matching and
pricing, recent work has acknowledged the importance
of simultaneously optimizing pricing and matching (Shah,
Lowalekar, and Varakantham 2022; Özkan 2020) in improving the overall effectiveness and efficiency of on-demand
ride sharing systems. However, most existing works have
focused on optimizing either pricing or matching individually (Banerjee, Johari, and Riquelme 2015; Bimpikis, Candogan, and Saban 2019; Lowalekar, Varakantham, and Jaillet 2018; Shah, Lowalekar, and Varakantham 2020, 2022)
and usually in a myopic manner (without considering the
impact on serving future requests), but recently there has
been emphasis on future aware methods (Shah, Lowalekar,
and Varakantham 2020; Lowalekar, Varakantham, and Jaillet 2019) that have shown to provide significant benefits.
There have been few recent studies on joint optimal pricing and matching decisions, however, they are either not
scalable (Chen et al. 2019b) or rely on unrealistic assumptions about knowing all (current and future) customer requests in advance (Chen et al. 2019a). Moreover, the above
works (Chen et al. 2019b,a) are not for the case of ride pooling.
To that end, in this paper, we make multiple contribu-

The popularity of on-demand ride pooling is owing to the
benefits offered to customers (lower prices), taxi drivers
(higher revenue), environment (lower carbon footprint due to
fewer vehicles) and aggregation companies like Uber (higher
revenue). To achieve these benefits, two key interlinked challenges have to be solved effectively: (a) pricing – setting
prices to customer requests for taxis; and (b) matching – assignment of customers (that accepted the prices) to taxis/cars. Traditionally, both these challenges have been studied
individually and using myopic approaches (considering only
current requests), without considering the impact of current
matching on addressing future requests. In this paper, we develop a novel framework that handles the pricing and matching problems together, while also considering the future impact of the pricing and matching decisions. In our experimental results on a real-world taxi dataset, we demonstrate that
our framework can significantly improve revenue (up to 17%
and on average 6.4%) in a sustainable manner by reducing
the number of vehicles (up to 14% and on average 10.6%) required to obtain a given fixed revenue and the overall distance
travelled by vehicles (up to 11.1% and on average 3.7%). That
is to say, we are able to provide an ideal win-win scenario
for all stakeholders (customers, drivers, aggregator, environment) involved by obtaining higher revenue for customers,
drivers, aggregator (ride pooling company) while being good
for the environment (due to fewer number of vehicles on the
road and lesser fuel consumed).

Introduction
The emergence of Uber, LYFT, DiDi and other taxi aggregation companies have improved the utilization rate of taxis
and reduced customers’ waiting time. One of the most popular services offered by taxi aggregation companies is the
on-demand ride pooling service. Apart from being one of
the most economical transport methods that allows multiple
passengers to share a taxi, on-demand ride pooling also provides higher revenue for drivers and taxi aggregation companies, while having fewer taxis on the roads (lower carbon footprint). Effectiveness and efficiency of ride pooling
service is determined by the methods used for pricing of
customer requests (referred to as the pricing problem) and
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14628

