The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning by Applying: A General Framework for Mathematical Reasoning
via Enhancing Explicit Knowledge Learning
Jiayu Liu1, 2 , Zhenya Huang1, 2 * , Chengxiang Zhai3 , Qi Liu1, 2
1

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application, School of Data Science &
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
3
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
jy251198@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {huangzhy, qiliuql}@ustc.edu.cn, czhai@illinois.edu
Abstract

.QRZOHGJH

ĀWLPHV´LVUHODWHGWRĀā
ൈ澔
ĀDSSOHV´EHORQJVWRĀIUXLWVā

Mathematical reasoning is one of the crucial abilities of general artificial intelligence, which requires machines to master
mathematical logic and knowledge from solving problems.
However, existing approaches are not transparent (thus not
interpretable) in terms of what knowledge has been learned
and applied in the reasoning process. In this paper, we propose a general Learning by Applying (LeAp) framework to
enhance existing models (backbones) in a principled way by
explicit knowledge learning. In LeAp, we perform knowledge
learning in a novel problem-knowledge-expression paradigm,
with a Knowledge Encoder to acquire knowledge from problem data and a Knowledge Decoder to apply knowledge for
expression reasoning. The learned mathematical knowledge,
including word-word relations and word-operator relations,
forms an explicit knowledge graph, which bridges the knowledge “learning” and “applying” organically. Moreover, for
problem solving, we design a semantics-enhanced module
and a reasoning-enhanced module that apply knowledge to
improve the problem comprehension and symbol reasoning
abilities of any backbone, respectively. We theoretically prove
the superiority of LeAp’s autonomous learning mechanism.
Experiments on three real-world datasets show that LeAp improves all backbones’ performances, learns accurate knowledge, and achieves a more interpretable reasoning process.

1

0DWK:RUG3UREOHP

/HDUQLQJ

$P\KDVDSSOHV6KHKDVWLPHVDV
PDQ\EDQDQDVDVDSSOHV+RZPDQ\
IUXLWVGRHVVKHKDYH"

([SUHVVLRQ

$SSO\LQJ

$QVZHU

൅澔
ൈ澔




Figure 1: Learning and applying knowledge for MWP.
.QRZOHGJH

0DWK:RUG3UREOHP

&RG\LV\HDUVROG+LVJUDQGPRWKHU
LVWLPHVDVROGDVKHLV+RZROGLV
and then reason a mathematical expression
(i.e.,“3 × 2 + 2”),
/HDUQLQJ &RG\¶VJUDQGPRWKHU"

ൈ澔
ĀWLPHV´LVUHODWHGWRĀā

based on which finally get the answer (i.e.,“8”).
ൈ澔
([SUHVVLRQ

In the literature, traditional MWP
solvers include
rulebased, statistic-based, $SSO\LQJ
and semantics $QVZHU
parsing-based
(Zhang,
Wang et al. 2020). In recent years, sequence to sequence
(Seq2Seq) framework has thrived in MWP task (Wang,
Liu, and Shi 2017; Lan et al. 2022), following a problemexpression paradigm to translate problems into expressions,
where the existing work has focused on improving MWP in
two ways, including promoting problem understanding (Lin
et al. 2021; Kim et al. 2022) and improving expression reasoning (Zhang et al. 2020a; Cao et al. 2021). However, such
a problem-expression paradigm is still far from encompassing human-like mathematical reasoning capacity, because it
lacks the processes of learning and applying explicit knowledge. On one hand, according to the educational theory of
cognitivism (Mowrer 1960; Muhajirah 2020), humans acquire explicit mathematical knowledge from solving problems (Liu et al. 2019), e.g., the word “times” is related to
the operator “×” and “apples” belongs to “fruits” from the
problem in Figure 1. On the other hand, humans produce ൈ澳
solutions for MWP by applying this knowledge in logical
thinking (Liang et al. 2018). It is necessary to integrate these
two processes organically into machines to build a stronger
AI (Tsatsou et al. 2021; de Penning et al. 2011).
From this perspective, existing MWP solvers have some
room for improvement. First, they ignore the learning process of explicit knowledge. To be specific, the learned
knowledge of existing solvers is implicitly contained in the
parameters and network architectures, which is not transparent to humans. Second, the lack of applying explicit knowledge (e.g., “times” is related to “×” in Figure 1) hinders
their reasoning ability and interpretability of how they rea-

Introduction

Mathematical reasoning is one of the core abilities and
signs of the intelligence level of general artificial intelligence (Zhang, Wang et al. 2020). It requires machines to
grasp mathematical knowledge and logical thinking from
solving several mathematical problems (Lewkowycz et al.
2022; Seo et al. 2015). Among them, we specifically study
math word problems (MWP) in this paper, which is a fundamental reasoning task that has attracted much attention since
the 1960s (Feigenbaum, Feldman et al. 1963). Figure 1 illustrates a toy example. Generally, a math word problem is
represented as a problem sentence (“Amy has ... have?”) that
poses a question requesting an unknown quantity. To solve
it, the machine needs to understand the verbal description
that contains words (e.g.,“Amy”) and quantities (e.g.,“2”),
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4497

