The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Trafformer: Unify Time and Space in Traffic Prediction
Di Jin1,2 , Jiayi Shi1 , Rui Wang1 , Yawen Li3,* , Yuxiao Huang4 , Yu-Bin Yang2
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, P.R. China
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, P.R. China
3
School of Economics and Management, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, P.R. China
4
Columbian College of Arts Sciences, George Washington University, Washington, D.C., USA
{jindi,shijiayi,wr1895}@tju.edu.cn, warmly0716@bupt.edu.cn, yuxiaohuang@gwu.edu, yangyubin@nju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

works (RNNs) (Huang et al. 2014; Fu, Zhang, and Li
2016), one-dimensional convolutional neural networks (1DCNNs) (Stoller et al. 2019), and Transformer varients (Kitaev, Kaiser, and Levskaya 2020; Zhou et al. 2021; Wu et al.
2021). Although these models account for temporal dependencies in traffic data and have gained success in some traffic prediction tasks, they neglect spatial correlations, compromising the model performance in accuracy and other aspects. The traffic flow on a road is not only influenced by
its historical traffic conditions but also the conditions of
upstream and downstream roads, making traffic prediction
more challenging than other time series forecasting problems.
To better utilize the space information hidden in traffic
data, some efforts have been dedicated to combine time series models with 2D-CNNs or GNNs. Some models, like
(Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017) and (Cao et al. 2017), convert traffic data into spatial-temporal grids and then treat
these grid-style spatial dependencies as images and impose
two-dimentional convolutional neural network (2D-CNN)
on the converted grid traffic data. A more natural way to
utilize space information in traffic data is to treat it as a
series of spatial-temporal graphs. These works use RNN,
1D-CNN or Transformer for encoding temporal information and GNNs, like GCN, GAT (Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2019;
Guo et al. 2020), for encoding spatial information. For example, DCRNN (Li et al. 2017) constructs traffic graph by
nodes proximity (measures road network distance of sensor nodes) and then replaces 2D-CNNs with GCNs in order
to extract graph-style spatial dependencies, in which spatial
dependencies are modeled as a diffusion process. PVCGN
(Liu et al. 2020) constructs a physical graph, a similarity
graph and a correlation graph based on the physical topology
of a metro system and human domain knowledge, and then
incorporates these extracted graphs into a Graph Convolutional Gated Recurrent Unit (GC-GRU) for local spatialtemporal representation learning.
However, existing methods have a common limitation
preventing them from getting better performance, that is,
all of them encode time and space information separately.
To be specific, as shown in Fig.1, for an input traffic flow
graph with multiple timestamps, these methods either encode time-series first, encode space first, or iteratively deal
with time and space. These strategies can use both time and

Traffic prediction is an important component of the intelligent transportation system. Existing deep learning methods
encode temporal information and spatial information separately or iteratively. However, the spatial and temporal information is highly correlated in a traffic network, so existing
methods may not learn the complex spatial-temporal dependencies hidden in the traffic network due to the decomposed
model design. To overcome this limitation, we propose a new
model named Trafformer, which unifies spatial and temporal
information in one transformer-style model. Trafformer enables every node at every timestamp interact with every other
node in every other timestamp in just one step in the spatialtemporal correlation matrix. This design enables Trafformer
to catch complex spatial-temporal dependencies. Following
the same design principle, we use the generative style decoder
to predict multiple timestamps in only one forward operation
instead of the iterative style decoder in Transformer. Furthermore, to reduce the complexity brought about by the huge
spatial-temporal self-attention matrix, we also propose two
variants of Trafformer to further improve the training and inference speed without losing much effectivity. Extensive experiments on two traffic datasets demonstrate that Trafformer
outperforms existing methods and provides a promising future direction for the spatial-temporal traffic prediction problem.

Introduction
With the trend of global urbanization and population growth,
transportation systems are growing bigger and more complex, making Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) (Jabbarpour et al. 2018) become increasingly important. Traffic
prediction is one of the most challenging tasks in ITS. By
learning historical traffic conditions and patterns, accurate
traffic prediction helps with a wide range of traffic management problems, such as traffic congestion, travel duration,
and controlling flow, etc.
Some traffic forecasting works treat traffic prediction
as a general time series forecasting problem, including
classic time series models, e.g. auto-regressive and integrated moving average (ARIMA) models; machine learning and deep learning models, e.g. recurrent neural net* Corresponding author

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8114

