The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DeAR: A Deep-Learning-Based Audio Re-recording Resilient Watermarking
Chang Liu1 , Jie Zhang1,2 , Han Fang∗3 , Zehua Ma1 ,
Weiming Zhang∗1 , Nenghai Yu1
1

University of Science and Technology of China,
2
University of Waterloo,
3
National University of Singapore
hichangliu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jiezhangsp@gmail.com, fanghan@nus.edu.sg,
mzh045@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhangwm@ustc.edu.cn, ynh@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract
Audio watermarking is widely used for leaking source tracing. The robustness of the watermark determines the traceability of the algorithm. With the development of digital technology, audio re-recording (AR) has become an efficient and
covert means to steal secrets. AR process could drastically
destroy the watermark signal while preserving the original
information. This puts forward a new requirement for audio
watermarking at this stage, that is, to be robust to AR distortions. Unfortunately, none of the existing algorithms can
effectively resist AR attacks due to the complexity of the
AR process. To address this limitation, this paper proposes DeAR, a deep-learning-based audio re-recording resistant watermarking. Inspired by DNN-based image watermarking, we pioneer a deep learning framework for audio carriers,
based on which the watermark signal can be effectively embedded and extracted. Meanwhile, in order to resist the AR
attack, we delicately analyze the distortions that occurred in
the AR process and design the corresponding distortion layer to cooperate with the proposed watermarking framework.
Extensive experiments show that the proposed algorithm can
resist not only common electronic channel distortions but also AR distortions. Under the premise of high-quality embedding (SNR=25.86 dB), in the case of a common re-recording
distance (20 cm), the algorithm can effectively achieve an average bit recovery accuracy of 98.55%.

Figure 1: The re-recording operation preserves the content
information while destroying the watermark information in
the audio to hide the source of the leakage.

ital channel. However, with the miniaturization of recording
devices, audio re-recording (AR) has become a more convenient and converted way to copy audios. Meanwhile, AR
could effectively preserve the audio content and significantly
damage the embedded watermark signal; attackers can easily and stealthily steal the audio content without any watermark evidence, as shown in Fig. 1. Therefore, ensuring
robustness to AR becomes the urgent property of audio watermarking at this stage.
Currently, the research field of audio watermarking is still dominated by traditional mathematical algorithms, which
try to search for an invariant feature before and after distortion to conduct watermark embedding. Most used features
are in the transform domain, such as discrete cosine transform (DCT), discrete wavelet transform (DWT), and fast
Fourier transform (FFT) (Su et al. 2018; Xiang et al. 2017;
Natgunanathan et al. 2012; Liu, Huang, and Huang 2018).
However, due to the complexity of the AR process itself,
quantitatively and delicately analyzing the distortions and
finding the robust feature in this process is a nontrivial task.
Therefore, none of the existing algorithms can resist AR distortion very well. This drives the demand to seek a learnable
feature that is adapted to AR distortions.
In recent years, deep-learning-based watermarking has
achieved tremendous success in the field of image and video
watermarking (Zhu et al. 2018; Tancik, Mildenhall, and Ng
2020; Zhang et al. 2019; Luo et al. 2021). The main backbone of such a framework is an end-to-end auto-encoder-like
architecture that contains an encoder, a distortion layer, and
a decoder. The central part to ensure robustness is the distortion layer which tries to generate the distorted image for

Introduction
As an efficient method to trace the source of leakage, digital watermarking technology has been widely studied. There
have been many excellent works in image (Fang et al.
2018), audio (Erfani, Pichevar, and Rouat 2016), and video
(Asikuzzaman and Pickering 2017) watermarking. The two
most important properties that audio watermarking should
satisfy are fidelity and robustness. Fidelity ensures the normal use of the watermarked audio. Robustness guarantees
that even if the audio is distorted (MPEG encoding, noise
addition, audio re-recording, etc.), the embedded watermark
can still be extracted losslessly(Wu, Su, and Kuo 1999).
Most traditional audio watermarking methods are concerned with the robustness of digital distortions in the electronic channel because most audio copying occurs in the dig∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13201

