The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Structured BFGS Method for Optimal Doubly Stochastic
Matrix Approximation
Dejun Chu1 , Changshui Zhang2 , Shiliang Sun3 , Qing Tao4
1

School of Software, Hefei University of Technology
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
4
Army Academy of Artillery and Air Defense
djun.chu@gmail.com, zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, slsun@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, taoqing@gmail.com
Abstract

Shashua 2006; Yan, Shen, and Wang 2014; Wang, Nie,
and Huang 2016; Linderman et al. 2018; Birdal and Simsekli 2019; Dallakyan and Pourahmadi 2021) and references
therein. Since stochastic matrix are often used to describe
the transitions of a Markov chain, the connection between
doubly stochastic matrix and the transition probability has
been discussed in (Seneta 2006; Boyd, Diaconis, and Xiao
2004; Boyd et al. 2009). Moreover, data clustering as one of
the most fundamental and important topics in machine learning (Hastie et al. 2009), has been extensively studied for a
long time. Recently, graph-based clustering methods which
reveal the pairwise relationship with an affinity matrix have
attracted great attention. These works (Yang, Corander, and
Oja 2016; Wang, Nie, and Huang 2016; Wang et al. 2022;
Ding et al. 2022) use the doubly stochastic matrix to normalize the affinity matrix and improve the clustering performance. Meanwhile, it is worth noting that in the attentionbased deep neural networks, if the attention matrix is doubly
stochastic, the model accuracy could achieve a significant
improvement in computer vision and natural language processing tasks (Tay et al. 2020; Sander et al. 2022).
Since classical Birkhoff-von Neumann theorem (Birkhoff
1946; Von Neumann 1953) shows that the set Dn coincides
with the convex hull of the n × n permutation matrices, and
furthermore that the vertices of Dn are precisely the permutation matrices, the polytope Dn has been frequently introduced as a convex relaxation to the combinatorial problem
involving permutations (Fogel et al. 2013; Lim and Wright
2014), such as Bayesian networks (Dallakyan and Pourahmadi 2021), graph matching problem (Zaslavskiy, Bach,
and Vert 2009) and quadratic assignment problem (Lawler
1963), etc.
In general, tackling the relaxation problem requires computing the nearest doubly stochastic matrix. Therefore, it is
crucial to develop a fast solver for the problem (1), which
determines whether the problem involving doubly stochastic matrix can be solved efficiently.

Doubly stochastic matrix plays an essential role in several
areas such as statistics and machine learning. In this paper
we consider the optimal approximation of a square matrix
in the set of doubly stochastic matrices. A structured BFGS
method is proposed to solve the dual of the primal problem.
The resulting algorithm builds curvature information into the
diagonal components of the true Hessian, so that it takes only
additional linear cost to obtain the descent direction based
on the gradient information without having to explicitly store
the inverse Hessian approximation. The cost is substantially
fewer than quadratic complexity of the classical BFGS
algorithm. Meanwhile, a Newton-based line search method
is presented for finding a suitable step size, which in practice
uses the existing knowledge and takes only one iteration. The
global convergence of our algorithm is established. We verify
the advantages of our approach on both synthetic data and
real data sets. The experimental results demonstrate that our
algorithm outperforms the state-of-the-art solvers and enjoys
outstanding scalability.

Introduction
A square matrix X is called a doubly stochastic matrix if
it is nonnegative and the sums of entries in each row and
each column are equal to one respectively (Gagniuc 2017).
Denote the set of n × n doubly stochastic matrices by Dn
which is also known as Birkhoff polytope, i.e.,

Dn = X ∈ Rn×n : X ≥ 0, Xe = e, X > e = e
where X ≥ 0 means each entry of X is nonnegative and e
is a column vector of ones. In this paper, we focus on the
matrix optimization problem
1
(1)
min kX − Ak2F , s.t. X ∈ Dn
X 2
which approximate the data matrix A ∈ Rn×n by a doubly stochastic matrix in the Frobenius norm. The problem
(1) belongs to the general class of matrix nearness problem
(Higham 1989), i.e., a problem of projecting a given matrix
onto the set of matrices that satisfy a certain property.
Doubly stochastic matrices have recently received much
attention in several areas such as statistics, machine learning and computer visions; see (Sinkhorn 1964; Zass and

Related Works
It is straightforward to verify that the set of Dn is convex.
This implies that the primal problem (1) is a special case
of convex constrained quadratic optimization, which can be
solved using standard methods such as interior-point solvers
(Nocedal and Wright 2006). However, these methods scale

Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7193

