The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Carburacy: Summarization Models Tuning and Comparison in Eco-Sustainable
Regimes with a Novel Carbon-Aware Accuracy
Gianluca Moro1, 2 , Luca Ragazzi1 , Lorenzo Valgimigli1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Bologna, Cesena Campus
Via dell’Università 50, I-47522 Cesena, Italy
2
CNIT
{gianluca.moro, l.ragazzi, lorenzo.valgimigli}@unibo.it
Abstract

An example of an NLP task affected by this shift is long
document summarization, which aims to compress a lengthy
input text into a shorter version while preserving the salient
details in terms of informativeness and factual consistency
(Koh et al. 2023). This task is dominated by large solutions (Wu et al. 2021; Mao et al. 2022) requiring massive
labeled training data and high-memory GPUs (up to 48 GB)
to obtain state-of-the-art results at the expense of a high
carbon footprint (Dhar 2020; Patterson et al. 2022). Consequently, this untenable tendency narrows the research to
large companies, raising barriers to small and medium organizations distinguished by low-resource regimes (e.g., GPUs
of 12 GB memory and 100 training samples). Besides, in
the face of the climate change problem, it is compulsory
to minimize carbon sources to avoid rising global temperatures (Pörtner et al. 2022). Hence, we argue that the research must move toward environmental-friendly cuttingedge approaches (Tambe et al. 2021; Du et al. 2022; Moro
and Ragazzi 2022; Frisoni et al. 2022b; Moro et al. 2023).
Nevertheless, there is no automatic evaluation measure to
capture the eco-sustainability of models, restricting the rise
of new research directions toward greener solutions.
This paper presents Carburacy,1 the first carbon-aware
accuracy measure to evaluate models by considering the
performance and the CO2 emissions demanded to fulfill
their effectiveness score. The key features of Carburacy
are: (1) Applicability in multiple NLP tasks, namely those
assessed by metrics that produce a score ∈ [0, 1] (e.g.,
text summarization and classification). (2) Two hyperparameters used to tune what should be prioritized and rewarded (i.e., model effectiveness or eco-sustainability). To
test Carburacy, we benchmark multiple state-of-the-art
quadratic and linear transformers on various long document summarization datasets under challenging scenarios of
limited hardware and data. Precisely, we study the impact
of many hyperparameters on model effectiveness and ecosustainability, optimizing the pipelines toward greener training. Moreover, we investigate the inference phase, which is
paramount for model deployment at the business level.

Generative transformer-based models have reached cuttingedge performance in long document summarization. Nevertheless, this task is witnessing a paradigm shift in developing ever-increasingly computationally-hungry solutions, focusing on effectiveness while ignoring the economic, environmental, and social costs of yielding such results. Accordingly, such extensive resources impact climate change
and raise barriers to small and medium organizations distinguished by low-resource regimes of hardware and data. As
a result, this unsustainable trend has lifted many concerns
in the community, which directs the primary efforts on the
proposal of tools to monitor models’ energy costs. Despite
their importance, no evaluation measure considering models’ eco-sustainability exists yet. In this work, we propose
Carburacy, the first carbon-aware accuracy measure that
captures both model effectiveness and eco-sustainability. We
perform a comprehensive benchmark for long document summarization, comparing multiple state-of-the-art quadratic and
linear transformers on several datasets under eco-sustainable
regimes. Finally, thanks to Carburacy, we found optimal
combinations of hyperparameters that let models be competitive in effectiveness with significantly lower costs.

Introduction
In the last few years, we have witnessed remarkable progress
on a broad range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks
(Borgeaud et al. 2022; Moro et al. 2022; Frisoni et al. 2023),
accomplished by increasingly large and computationallyhungry transformer-based models (Floridi and Chiriatti
2020; Smith et al. 2022) backed by high-performance dedicated hardware such as GPUs and TPUs (Wang, Wei, and
Brooks 2019). Such solutions are proposed to obtain new
state-of-the-art results, namely enhancing the score of automatic evaluation measures that focus on effectiveness (e.g.,
ROUGE (Lin 2004) for text summarization and F1 for question answering), completely overlooking the economic, environmental, and social costs of attaining those outcomes
(Strubell, Ganesh, and McCallum 2020). Thus, the AI community started raising concerns for this unsustainable trend
(Bender et al. 2021), proposing tools to monitor energy costs
without concrete solutions (Henderson et al. 2020).

Contributions. Our contributions are the following:
(1) A novel carbon-aware accuracy measure to automatically consider eco-sustainability. In this work, we propose

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

14417

The code is at https://github.com/disi-unibo-nlp/carburacy

