The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Knowledge-Constrained Answer Generation for Open-Ended Video Question
Answering
Yao Jin1 * , Guocheng Niu2 , Xinyan Xiao2 , Jian Zhang3 , Xi Peng4 , Jun Yu1†
1

Hangzhou Dianzi University
2
Baidu Inc.
3
Zhejiang International Studies University
4
College of Computer Science, Sichuan Univerisity
jy.struggling.cu@gmail.com, niuguocheng@baidu.com, xiaoxinyan@baidu.com, jeyzhang@outlook.com,
pengx.gm@gmail.com, yujun@hdu.edu.cn
Abstract
Open-ended Video question answering (open-ended
VideoQA) aims to understand video content and question
semantics to generate the correct answers. Most of the best
performing models define the problem as a discriminative
task of multi-label classification. In real-world scenarios,
however, it is difficult to define a candidate set that includes
all possible answers. In this paper, we propose a Knowledgeconstrained Generative VideoQA Algorithm (KcGA) with
an encoder-decoder pipeline, which enables out-of-domain
answer generation through an adaptive external knowledge
module and a multi-stream information control mechanism. We use ClipBERT to extract the video-question
features, extract framewise object-level external knowledge
from a commonsense knowledge base and compute the
contextual-aware episode memory units via an attention
based GRU to form the external knowledge features, and
exploit multi-stream information control mechanism to fuse
video-question and external knowledge features such that the
semantic complementation and alignment are well achieved.
We evaluate our model on two open-ended benchmark
datasets to demonstrate that we can effectively and robustly
generate high-quality answers without restrictions of training
data.

Figure 1: An illustration of out-of-domain answer generation. Our model generates out-of-domain answers (answers
that do not appear in the training set) by combining video
clips, question features and external knowledge features.
.

Introduction

Li et al. 2019b; Gao et al. 2019), graph networks (Cherian
et al. 2022; Park, Lee, and Sohn 2021; Jiang and Han
2020; Huang et al. 2020) or causal analysis (Li et al. 2022).
This requires to form a candidate set using answers with
the top-k occurrence frequency, and then infer the answer
from the candidate set. Since the candidate set consists of
only answers appearing in the training set, these methods
can only predict in-domain answers, but cannot predict
out-of-domain answers (answers that do not appear in the
training set) at all. Furthermore, due to the structural characteristics of the answers in the training set, the candidate
set basically contains very shot answers with length one or
exceptionally two. Hence, the predicted answers usually
lack rich semantics and details. In contrast, freely generated
out-of-domain answers often contain long and semantically
complete answers with more details. Motivated by this,
some works (Xue, Zhao, and Cai 2017; Zhao et al. 2018b;
Lee et al. 2021) tackle the open-ended VideoQA in a

Open-ended Video Question Answering (open-ended
VideoQA) (Fan et al. 2019) means generating the answer
according to a given video and question from scratch without having to choose from several pre-supplied answers or
fill the missing part of an incomplete answer. To achieve the
freeform answer generation, open-ended VideoQA should
not only understand the video and question well, but also
conduct comprehensive cross-modal reasoning. Therefore,
open-ended VideoQA is more challenging compared with
other types of VideoQA. Many well-performed works treat
the open-ended VideoQA as a multi-label classification task
and solve it using attention mechanisms (Gao et al. 2018;
* Work is done during an internship at Baidu Inc.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8141

