The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Win-Win: A Privacy-Preserving Federated Framework for Dual-Target
Cross-Domain Recommendation
Gaode Chen 1,2,3,4 * , Xinghua Zhang 1,2 , Yijun Su 3,4† , Yantong Lai 1,2 ,
Ji Xiang 1,2 , Junbo Zhang 3,4† , Yu Zheng 3,4
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
JD iCity, JD Technology, Beijing, China
4
JD Intelligent Cities Research, Beijing, China
{chengaode, zhangxinghua, laiyantong, xiangji}@iie.ac.cn, suyijun.ucas@gmail.com,
{msjunbozhang, msyuzheng}@outlook.com

2

Abstract

methods inevitably suffer from the long-standing data sparsity problem to some extent. This problem makes it hard to
model user preference accurately and efficiently, which can
lead to a dramatic decrease in recommendation quality.
Cross Domain Recommendation (CDR) has been popularly studied recently to alleviate the data sparsity problem, which leverages the data in an auxiliary domain to improve the recommendation performance of the target domain. Although existing CDR methods (Liu et al. 2020a;
Li and Tuzhilin 2020) have yielded immense success, they
usually assume that user behavior data can be fully shared
across domains, which undoubtedly poses a significant risk
of privacy leakage since user data are very sensitive. Several works have focused on studying privacy protection for
CDR, but they still suffer from satisfying practical requirements, which are mainly embodied in three aspects:

Cross-domain recommendation (CDR) aims to alleviate the
data sparsity by transferring knowledge from an informative
source domain to the target domain, which inevitably proposes stern challenges to data privacy and transferability during the transfer process. A small amount of recent CDR works
have investigated privacy protection, while they still suffer
from satisfying practical requirements (e.g., limited privacypreserving ability) and preventing the potential risk of negative transfer. To address the above challenging problems,
we propose a novel and unified privacy-preserving federated
framework for dual-target CDR, namely P2FCDR. We design P2FCDR as peer-to-peer federated network architecture
to ensure the local data storage and privacy protection of business partners. Specifically, for the special knowledge transfer
process in CDR under federated settings, we initialize an optimizable orthogonal mapping matrix to learn the embedding
transformation across domains and adopt the local differential
privacy technique on the transformed embedding before exchanging across domains, which provides more reliable privacy protection. Furthermore, we exploit the similarity between in-domain and cross-domain embedding, and develop
a gated selecting vector to refine the information fusion for
more accurate dual transfer. Extensive experiments on three
real-world datasets demonstrate that P2FCDR significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods and effectively protects data privacy.

• Limited Privacy-preserving Ability. Existing privacypreserving CDR approaches (Gao et al. 2019b,a, 2021;
Chen et al. 2022) share either item embedding or differential private interaction matrix with target domain to
protect privacy. The plaintext embedding is still at risk of
being inferred, and sharing original interaction data has
become an unacceptable behavior as new privacy regulations (e.g., GDPR) are being enacted around the world.
So existing privacy-preserving CDR methods are limited
by current privacy-preserving criteria.
• Incomplete Scenario Coverage. The existing privacypreserving CDR models (Liu et al. 2021; Yan et al. 2022)
are mainly proposed to protect the data privacy of individual customers. These methods treat edge devices of
users as clients, and each client locally stores the private data of a single user. As is known to all, a company
tends to seek cooperation with another one in a different field, and then enhances business capability through
these complementary information. Therefore, the privacy
protection of business partners is vital but existing methods are short of exploration for this scenario.
• Unidirectional Benefit Target. The privacy-preserving
CDR methods (Chen et al. 2022; Yan et al. 2022) men-

Introduction
In the era of information explosion, recommender systems
are instrumental to alleviate information overload. Especially, Collaborative filtering (Wang et al. 2019a) (CF) is
a promising and widely used technique for modern recommender systems, which learns the latent embedding of users
and items effectively, and then performs the recommendation based on these embedding vectors. However, these
* The paper was done when Gaode Chen was an intern at JD In-

telligent Cities Research under the supervision of the Junbo Zhang.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4149

