The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Efficient Mirror Detection via Multi-Level Heterogeneous Learning
Ruozhen He, Jiaying Lin* , Rynson W.H. Lau
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
ruozhenhe2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, jiayinlin5-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, rynson.lau@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
We present HetNet (Multi-level Heterogeneous Network), a
highly efficient mirror detection network. Current mirror detection methods focus more on performance than efficiency,
limiting the real-time applications (such as drones). Their
lack of efficiency is aroused by the common design of adopting homogeneous modules at different levels, which ignores
the difference between different levels of features. In contrast, HetNet detects potential mirror regions initially through
low-level understandings (e.g., intensity contrasts) and then
combines with high-level understandings (contextual discontinuity for instance) to finalize the predictions. To perform
accurate yet efficient mirror detection, HetNet follows an effective architecture that obtains specific information at different stages to detect mirrors. We further propose a multiorientation intensity-based contrasted module (MIC) and a
reflection semantic logical module (RSL), equipped on HetNet, to predict potential mirror regions by low-level understandings and analyze semantic logic in scenarios by highlevel understandings, respectively. Compared to the state-ofthe-art method, HetNet runs 664% faster and draws an average performance gain of 8.9% on MAE, 3.1% on IoU,
and 2.0% on F-measure on two mirror detection benchmarks.
The code is available at https://github.com/Catherine-R-He/
HetNet.

Ours
49.23FPS

F-measure

0.90

SANet
8.53FPS
MirrorNet
7.82FPS

VST
6.05FPS

0.85

CPDNet
65.83FPS

0.75

0.70

SETR
2.84FPS

LDF
107.74FPS

0.80

0

20

Mirror
SOD

PMD
7.41FPS

MINet
3.55FPS

R3Net
8.30FPS

40

60

80

100

FLOPs (GMac)

EGNet
10.76FPS

120

140

160

Figure 1: Comparison of our proposed method with Mirror
Detection and SOD models on F-measure, FLOPs (GMac),
and FPS using the MSD dataset. Our method achieves a new
SOTA result with considerable efficiency.

formances on mirror detection, these methods suffer from
huge computation costs since they apply the same modules for both low-level features with large spatial resolutions
and high-level features with small spatial resolutions at every stage. Besides, they heavily rely on post-processing algorithms, e.g., CRF (Krähenbühl and Koltun 2011), which
heavily limit the usage of these existing methods to realworld scenarios with the demand for real-time processing,
as demonstrated in Figure 1. For more comparisons, we also
include some methods from a related task, salient object
detection (SOD). Although some of them (e.g., LDF (Wei
et al. 2020), CPDNet (Wu, Su, and Huang 2019)) contain
few FLOPs with high FPS, they are not able to achieve competitive performances. Thus, it is challenging and significant
to propose a method that meets the trade-off between accuracy and efficiency.
Figure 2 compares different network architectures for mirror detection. As shown in Figure 2(a-c), existing mirror detection network architectures use the same module for both
low-level and high-level features (Yang et al. 2019; Lin,

Introduction
Mirrors are common objects in our daily lives. The reflection of mirrors may cause depth prediction errors and confusion about reality and virtuality. Ignoring them in computer vision tasks may cause severe safety issues in situation such as drone and robotic navigation. In addition, owing
to the limited computation resources, application scenarios
may heavily depend on the model efficiency while efficient
mirror detection is essential for real-time computer vision
applications.
Recently, Yang et al. (Yang et al. 2019) propose MirrorNet based on contextual contrasted features. Lin et al.
(Lin, Wang, and Lau 2020) propose PMD, which considers content similarity. Guan et al. (Guan, Lin, and Lau
2022) propose SANet, which focuses on semantic associations. Though experimental results show their superior per* Corresponding authors: Jiaying Lin and Rynson W.H. Lau
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

790

