The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Dynamic Representation Learning with Temporal Point Processes for
Higher-Order Interaction Forecasting
Tony Gracious, Ambedkar Dukkipati
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore - 560012, INDIA
{tonygracious, ambedkar}@iisc.ac.in

Abstract

have been introduced for modeling edge formation in dynamic networks. TPPs are stochastic processes that model
localized events in time, and the events can be of multiple
types (Hawkes 1971). To model dynamic networks, one represents each edge as an event type, and a probability distribution is defined over the time of its formation. Here, the probability distribution is parameterized using an intensity function based on representations of nodes. These node representations are functions of time and past interaction events.
The parameters of these functions are learned by minimizing
the negative log-likelihood of the interactions in the training
data.
However, most real-world interactions are more complex
than just pairwise interactions. For example, a person can
have multiple items in a single shopping order, a group of
people can co-author an article, mutual funds have stocks
of various companies, and so on. These types of problems
have been studied using hypergraphs, and many theoretical advances have taken place (Ghoshdastidar and Dukkipati
2017a,b).
A common technique employed to deal with this problem
is to approximate these multiway interactions with pairwise
interactions, which amounts to approximating hypergraphs
with graphs. This leads to enormous information loss, as
demonstrated in Figure 1. In this example, two different
kinds of interaction between nodes {v1 , v2 , v3 , v4 , v5 , v5 }
have the same pairwise interaction graph. Further, it is impossible to infer the original interactions once they are projected into a pairwise graph.
This paper addresses the problem of forecasting higherorder interactions as hyperedge events using TPP. We define a conditional intensity function on each hyperedge
that takes node representations as inputs. Since each hyperedge can have a variable number of nodes, we use a selfattention-based architecture for hyperedge encoding. Since
nodes evolve as they interact, it is essential to employ dynamic node representations. In earlier works on dynamic
networks (Trivedi et al. 2019; Dai et al. 2016; Cao et al.
2021), node embeddings are updated based on the node embedding of the other node in the interaction. For example,
consider edge event (va , vb ) occurring at time t. To update
node embeddings of va , we use the node embeddings of
vb and vice versa. However, hyperedge events have a variable number of nodes (Figure 1), so the techniques devel-

The explosion of digital information and the growing involvement of people in social networks led to enormous research
activity to develop methods that can extract meaningful information from interaction data. Commonly, interactions are
represented by edges in a network or a graph, which implicitly assumes that the interactions are pairwise and static.
However, real-world interactions deviate from these assumptions: (i) interactions can be multi-way, involving more than
two nodes or individuals (e.g., family relationships, protein
interactions), and (ii) interactions can change over a period of
time (e.g., change of opinions and friendship status). While
pairwise interactions have been studied in a dynamic network setting and multi-way interactions have been studied
using hypergraphs in static networks, there exists no method,
at present, that can predict multi-way interactions or hyperedges in dynamic settings. Existing related methods cannot
answer temporal queries like what type of interaction will occur next and when it will occur. This paper proposes a temporal point process model for hyperedge prediction to address
these problems. Our proposed model uses dynamic representation learning techniques for nodes in a neural point process
framework to forecast hyperedges. We present several experimental results and set benchmark results. As far as our knowledge, this is the first work that uses the temporal point process
to forecast hyperedges in dynamic networks.

1

Introduction

Learning from temporal interactions between entities to
extract meaningful information and knowledge is of
paramount importance. For example, learning how a person interacts on social media can provide knowledge about
that person’s preferences, and it can help in recommending items to that person. Similarly, an e-commerce website can better understand the users’ needs if it efficiently
extracts knowledge from users’ consumption history. Previously these problems have been studied using representation
or embedding learning in dynamic networks where interactions were modeled as instantaneous links or edges between
two nodes formed at the time of interaction (Nguyen et al.
2018; Kumar, Zhang, and Leskovec 2019). For this, Temporal Point Processes (TPP) (Daley and Vere-Jones 2003)
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7748

