The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Spatio-Temporal Graph Neural Point Process for Traffic Congestion Event
Prediction
Guangyin Jin1 , Lingbo Liu2 , Fuxian Li3 , Jincai Huang1
1

School of System Engineering, National University of Defense Technology
Department of Computer Sciences, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
3
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
jinguangyin18@nudt.edu.cn, liulingbo918@gmail.com, fuxianli2020@163.com, huangjincai@nudt.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Traffic congestion event prediction is an important yet challenging task in intelligent transportation systems. Many existing works about traffic prediction integrate various temporal encoders and graph convolution networks (GCNs), called
spatio-temporal graph-based neural networks, which focus on
predicting dense variables such as flow, speed and demand in
time snapshots, but they can hardly forecast the traffic congestion events that are sparsely distributed on the continuous time axis. In recent years, neural point process (NPP)
has emerged as an appropriate framework for event prediction in continuous time scenarios. However, most conventional works about NPP cannot model the complex spatiotemporal dependencies and congestion evolution patterns. To
address these limitations, we propose a spatio-temporal graph
neural point process framework, named STGNPP for traffic
congestion event prediction. Specifically, we first design the
spatio-temporal graph learning module to fully capture the
long-range spatio-temporal dependencies from the historical
traffic state data along with the road network. The extracted
spatio-temporal hidden representation and congestion event
information are then fed into a continuous gated recurrent
unit to model the congestion evolution patterns. In particular, to fully exploit the periodic information, we also improve
the intensity function calculation of the point process with
a periodic gated mechanism. Finally, our model simultaneously predicts the occurrence time and duration of the next
congestion. Extensive experiments on two real-world datasets
demonstrate that our method achieves superior performance
in comparison to existing state-of-the-art approaches.

Figure 1: Example of the traffic congestion features and link
speed trends from the Beijing dataset we adopted in this paper. In sub-figure (a), we select the traffic congestion statistics of three neighbor links on 12 May 2021 to visualize the
occurrence time and duration in 24 hours. In sub-figure (b),
we select the speed of link 1 from 7.am to 10.am on 12 May
2021 to visualize the change trend.

flow prediction (Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2018; Li et al. 2018; Wu
et al. 2019; Fang et al. 2021; Song et al. 2020; Zheng et al.
2020; Li and Zhu 2021). Most of these works adopt the architecture of spatio-temporal graph-based neural networks
to capture the spatio-temporal correlations, and predict the
states of links in future time slots by the homogeneous features in historical regular sequential time slots. Although this
framework can fully exploit the spatio-temporal information
to improve prediction, it is difficult to handle the traffic congestion event prediction task. There are at least two disadvantages in predicting congestion event: 1) The traditional
traffic prediction framework only model dense variables on
the road such as speed, not sparse ones such as congestion
events. 2) Most traditional traffic prediction framework (Jin
et al. 2022; Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2018; Wu et al. 2019; Jin et al.
2020; Fang et al. 2021; Song et al. 2020; Li and Zhu 2021;
Wang, Zhang, and Tsui 2021; Jin et al. 2021) can only support the prediction in the given future time window (e.g., the
next one hour), which is difficult to flexibly predict congestion occurring in arbitrary time intervals.
Neural point process is an appropriate framework
for sparse event prediction in continuous-time scenar-

Introduction
Traffic congestion is one of the most serious problems in urban management, which is associated with more than 60%
world-wide traffic accidents (Jain, Sharma, and Subramanian 2012). Since traffic congestion is a continuous process
from generation to dissipation, each individual congestion
event can be defined by two core elements: occurrence time
and duration. Therefore, it is meaningful to predict when the
next congestion event will occur and how long it will last for
improving the traffic management and scheduling.
In recent years, many works have made some breakthroughs in intelligent transportation, especially the traffic
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14268

