The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Dual Low-Rank Graph Autoencoder for Semantic and Topological Networks
Zhaoliang Chen1,2 , Zhihao Wu1,2 , Shiping Wang1,2 , Wenzhong Guo1,2 *
2

1
College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China
Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Network Computing and Intelligent Information Processing, Fuzhou University,
Fuzhou, China
chenzl23@outlook.com, zhihaowu1999@gmail.com, shipingwangphd@163.com, guowenzhong@fzu.edu.cn

Abstract
Due to the powerful capability to gather the information of
neighborhood nodes, Graph Convolutional Network (GCN)
has become a widely explored hotspot in recent years. As a
well-established extension, Graph AutoEncoder (GAE) succeeds in mining underlying node representations via evaluating the quality of adjacency matrix reconstruction from
learned features. However, limited works on GAE were devoted to leveraging both semantic and topological graphs,
and they only indirectly extracted the relationships between
graphs via weights shared by features. To better capture the
connections between nodes from these two types of graphs,
this paper proposes a graph neural network dubbed Dual
Low-Rank Graph AutoEncoder (DLR-GAE), which takes
both semantic and topological homophily into consideration.
Differing from prior works that share common weights between GCNs, the presented DLR-GAE conducts sustained
exploration of low-rank information between two distinct
graphs, and reconstructs adjacency matrices from learned latent factors and embeddings. In order to obtain valid adjacency matrices that meet certain conditions, we design some
surrogates and projections to restrict the learned factor matrix. We compare the proposed model with state-of-the-art
methods on several datasets, which demonstrates the superior
accuracy of DLR-GAE in semi-supervised classification.

Topological/semantic graphs
Topological/semantic graphs
Weight sharing

GCN

GCN

GCN

GCN

Factor sharing

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Comparison of GCN exploring semantic and topological graphs. Subfigure (a) depicts prior works that built
parallel GCNs with weight sharing to learn two distinct
node embeddings. Subfigure (b) briefly elaborates on the
proposed model. Instead, it considers the factor sharing of
reconstructed adjacency matrices to explore a common and
direct correlation between two types of graphs.

Introduction
Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling
2017) is a crucial technique of graph learning and has been
universally applied to a multitude of machine learning tasks
(Kang et al. 2020; Bian et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022; Feng
et al. 2021), including node classification, computer vision
and social analysis. Originated from GCN, Graph AutoEncoder (GAE) aims to explore underlying node representations from topological networks. It learns low-dimensional
node embeddings via graph convolutional layers, and supervises the learned latent features via link connections stored
in the adjacency matrix. A multitude of researchers have put
emphases on the study and applications of GAE (SánchezMartı́n, Rateike, and Valera 2022; Jing, Xu, and Li 2022; Liu
et al. 2019).

As a supplement to the natural topological structure of
nodes, extracting semantic node connections from the feature space is beneficial to more dexterous embedding exploration, which has been investigated by some state-of-the-art
works (Wang et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021). The utilization of feature graphs is helpful to capturing additional homophily between vertices and latent semantics in nodes. As
described in Figure 1 (a), most of the prior frameworks built
parallel networks to manipulate topological and semantic
node relationships simultaneously. These models often fed
different adjacency matrices to two networks respectively,
and shared convolutional weights between them. Eventually, the unified node representation is attained via a linear
weighted combination or an attention mechanism.
Nevertheless, these models only explore the latent consistency of learned features through shared convolutional

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4191

