The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Compositional Tasks from Language Instructions
Lajanugen Logeswaran1 , Wilka Carvalho2 , Honglak Lee1,2
1

2

LG AI Research
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
llajan@lgresearch.ai

Abstract
The ability to combine learned knowledge and skills to solve
novel tasks is a key aspect of generalization in humans that
allows us to understand and perform tasks described by novel
language utterances. While progress has been made in supervised learning settings, no work has yet studied compositional generalization of a reinforcement learning agent following natural language instructions in an embodied environment. We develop a set of tasks in a photo-realistic simulated kitchen environment that allow us to study the degree to
which a behavioral policy captures the systematicity in language by studying its zero-shot generalization performance
on held out natural language instructions. We show that our
agent which leverages a novel additive action-value decomposition in tandem with attention-based subgoal prediction is
able to exploit composition in text instructions to generalize
to unseen tasks.

Training

Test

Pick up the knife and use it to chop the bread on
the counter.
Pick up the butter knife near the sink and cut the
yellow apple on the white table.
Move the knife near the table and slice the apple.

Move the knife near the
table and slice the apple.

Move the knife near the
table and slice the apple.

look down

turn left

pickup knife

…

Introduction

slice apple

…

Figure 1: Zero-shot generalization to an unseen task of slicing an apple. The test task is composed of known primitive
subtasks – picking up a knife and slicing the apple – each of
which were encountered in training tasks. Our agent learns
to decompose a natural language task description into subtasks using attention and executes them using low-level actions.

Human language is characterized by systematic compositionality: one can combine known components – such as
words or phrases – to produce novel linguistic combinations (Chomsky 2009). This is a key aspect of generalization
in humans and enables us to understand and perform tasks
specified by novel language utterances over familiar words
or phrases. If you know what a “laptop” and a “fridge” are,
you can easily understand how to perform the task “place the
laptop in the fridge” even if you have never placed a laptop
in a fridge.
Prior work studying the linguistic “systematicity” of neural networks have focused on sequence mapping tasks in
a supervised learning setting (Lake and Baroni 2018; Lake
2019; Andreas 2019). In this work, we are interested in compositional generalization of a reinforcement learning agent
following natural language instructions in an embodied environment. In particular, we explore the hypothesis that a
language-conditioned reinforcement learning agent with a
compositional inductive bias in its behavioral policy will
exhibit systematic generalization to unobserved natural language instructions.
There has been a flurry of recent work on embodied learning tasks such as question answering (Gupta et al. 2017),

vision-language navigation (Anderson et al. 2018) and object interaction (Shridhar et al. 2020; Carvalho et al. 2020;
Singh et al. 2020; Corona et al. 2020; Blukis et al. 2022;
Min et al. 2021) in embodied settings. In particular, the ALFRED task (Shridhar et al. 2020) studies agents that exploit
detailed natural language instructions to generalize to novel
instructions in novel environments at test time. Such existing
benchmarks offer limited flexibility to study systematic generalization since (i) the benchmarks were not built for this
purpose and it is unclear to what extent systematic generalization skills are required to solve the tasks and (ii) the tasks
demand challenging reasoning skills such as visual recognition, planning over large number of time-steps and exploration in unseen layouts which makes it difficult to study
compositional generalization ability in isolation.
In this work we develop a set of tasks in the AI2Thor
virtual home environment (Kolve et al. 2017) which test
the compositionality of embodied agents. In order to make

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13300

