The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Mx2M: Masked Cross-Modality Modeling in Domain Adaptation for 3D Semantic
Segmentation
Boxiang Zhang13 * † , Zunran Wang2†‡ , Yonggen Ling2 , Yuanyuan Guan13 ,
Shenghao Zhang2 , Wenhui Li13‡
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun, China
2
Robotics X, Tencent, Shenzhen, China
3
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineer, Jilin University, Changchun, China
zhangbx2113@mails.jlu.edu.cn, zran.wang@outlook.com, liwh@jlu.edu.cn

Abstract

good. As shown in the left part of Fig.1, if the domain gap is
large and both networks underperform on the target domain,
these methods appear weak.
The problem of lacking supervision once constricted the
visual pre-training task and has been solved by methods with
masked modeling (He et al. 2022; Bao, Dong, and Wei 2022;
Yu et al. 2022), which has been proved to belong to data
augmentation (Xu et al. 2022). Its core solution is simple:
removing a portion of inputs and learning to predict the removed contents. Models are fitted with sufficient data in this
way, so that learn more inner semantic correspondences and
realize self-supervision (He et al. 2022). For this DA task,
this way of data augmentation and then the self-supervision
can enrich the robustness and reduce the gap. Hence the idea
is natural: if we introduce masked modeling into the task, the
lacking supervision on the target domain and then the large
gap are solved. Nevertheless, two problems are the key to introducing masked modeling. a) The core solution ought to be
re-designed to fit for this task, where there are two modalities. b) For the cross-modal feature matching, we should
explore a new way to suit the joining of masked modeling.
Given these observations, we propose a new method
Mx2M utilizing masked cross-modality modeling to solve
the problem of lacking supervision for the DA of 3D segmentation. Our Mx2M can reduce the large domain gap by
adding two new components to the common backbone for
this task, which correspond to the above two problems. For
the first one, we design the core solution in the Mx2M, crossmodal removal and prediction (xMRP). As the name implies, we inherit the ’removal-and-prediction’ proceeding in
the core solution of masked single-modality modeling and
improve it with the cross-modal working manner for this
task. During removal, the xMRP has two changes. i) Our
CNN backbone cannot perform well with highly destroyed
object shapes (Geirhos, Meding, and Wichmann 2020), so
the masked portion is less. ii) To guarantee the existence of
full semantics in this segmentation task, we do not mask all
inputs and ensure at least one modality complete in each input. We can obtain the different xMRP by controlling the removal proceeding, which makes the Mx2M adapt to various
DA scenarios. During prediction, to learn more 2D-3D correspondences beneficial to networks (Jaritz et al. 2020), we

Existing methods of cross-modal domain adaptation for 3D
semantic segmentation predict results only via 2D-3D complementarity that is obtained by cross-modal feature matching. However, as lacking supervision in the target domain,
the complementarity is not always reliable. The results are
not ideal when the domain gap is large. To solve the problem of lacking supervision, we introduce masked modeling
into this task and propose a method Mx2M, which utilizes
masked cross-modality modeling to reduce the large domain gap. Our Mx2M contains two components. One is the
core solution, cross-modal removal and prediction (xMRP),
which makes the Mx2M adapt to various scenarios and provides cross-modal self-supervision. The other is a new way
of cross-modal feature matching, the dynamic cross-modal
filter (DxMF) that ensures the whole method dynamically
uses more suitable 2D-3D complementarity. Evaluation of
the Mx2M on three DA scenarios, including Day/Night, USA/Singapore, and A2D2/SemanticKITTI, brings large improvements over previous methods on many metrics.

1

Introduction

3D semantic segmentation methods (Graham, Engelcke, and
Van Der Maaten 2018; Wang et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2021)
often encounter the problem of shift or gap between different but related domains (e.g. day and night). The task
of cross-modal domain adaptation (DA) for 3D segmentation (Jaritz et al. 2020) is designed to address the problem,
which is inspired by 3D datasets usually containing 2D and
3D modalities. Like most DA tasks, labels here are only
available in the source domain, whereas the target domain
has no segmentation labels. Existing methods, i.e. xMUDA
(Jaritz et al. 2020) and its heirs (Liu et al. 2021a; Peng et al.
2021), extract 2D and 3D features through two networks and
exploit the cross-modal complementarity by feature matching to predict results. However, as lacking supervision in the
target domain, the robustness of this complementarity is not
* Work done during an internship at Tencent.
†

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

3401

