The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Redactor: A Data-Centric and Individualized Defense Against Inference Attacks
Geon Heo, Steven Euijong Whang
KAIST
{geon.heo, swhang}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

Noise

Information leakage is becoming a critical problem as various
information becomes publicly available by mistake, and machine learning models train on that data to provide services.
As a result, one’s private information could easily be memorized by such trained models. Unfortunately, deleting information is out of the question as the data is already exposed to
the Web or third-party platforms. Moreover, we cannot necessarily control the labeling process and the model trainings
by other parties either. In this setting, we study the problem
of targeted disinformation generation where the goal is to dilute the data and thus make a model safer and more robust
against inference attacks on a specific target (e.g., a person’s
profile) by only inserting new data. Our method finds the closest points to the target in the input space that will be labeled as
a different class. Since we cannot control the labeling process,
we instead conservatively estimate the labels probabilistically
by combining decision boundaries of multiple classifiers using data programming techniques. Our experiments show that
a probabilistic decision boundary can be a good proxy for labelers, and that our approach is effective in defending against
inference attacks and can scale to large data.

Victim

Inaccessible by us
Attacker

Labeling

Information

Unlabeled data
(e.g., the Web)

(e.g., membership)

Outputs

Training

Victim Model

Attack Model

(a) Conventional Inference Attack Defense
Inaccessible by us
Disinformation
Victim

Attacker

Labeling
Training

Unlabeled data
(e.g., the Web)

Information
(e.g., membership)

Outputs

Victim Model
(e.g. third-party platforms)

Attack Model

(b) Redactor

Figure 1: (a) Existing inference attack defenses (e.g., add
noise to model’s output) are not feasible when the victim
models are owned by third parties. (b) Instead, we assume
the realistic setting where we can only add disinformation
to the unlabeled training data, which is presumably labeled
and used for model training by unknown model owners.

Introduction
Information leakage is becoming a serious problem as personal data is being used to train machine learning (ML)
models. Personal data can be leaked through AI chatbots (McCurry 2021) and the Web (Hill and Krolik 2019)
among others. Furthermore, there are various privacy threats
on ML models including inference attacks (Shokri et al.
2017; Hayes et al. 2019; Choo et al. 2020) and reconstruction attacks (Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart 2015). Defending against such leakage is critical for safe and robust AI.
In many cases, it is impossible to delete one’s information that is published on the Web or uploaded on a thirdparty platform. Even if the original data is deleted by request, there is no way to prevent someone from extracting
that information elsewhere by attacking the model of the unknown third-party platform. Moreover, there is also no control over the model training process where anyone can train
a model on the publicized data. Therefore, conventional privacy techniques or defenses that require ownership of the
data or model cannot be used here.

The only solution is to take a data-centric approach and
add new data that “dilutes” an individual’s personal information, which we refer to as disinformation. An analogy
is blacking out or redacting text where the reader knows
there is some information, but cannot read it. We thus define
the problem of targeted disinformation generation where
the goal is to generate disinformation that indirectly makes
a victim model less likely to leak personal information to
an attack model without any access to the victim model
(Figure 1). We assume the disinformation will be eventually picked up automatically by crawlers for model training,
which is a common assumption in the AI Security literature (Shafahi et al. 2018; Suciu et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2019).
From an ethical perspective, our disinformation is intended
to protect one’s information from inference attacks.
Our solution is motivated by clean-label targeted poison-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14874

