The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Deep Parametric 3D Filters for Joint Video Denoising and Illumination
Enhancement in Video Super Resolution
Xiaogang Xu1,2 , Ruixing Wang 2 , Chi-Wing Fu 1 , Jiaya Jia 1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SmartMore
{xgxu, cwfu, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, ruixing.wang@smartmore.com

Abstract

18.92,0.60

Despite the quality improvement brought by the recent methods, video super-resolution (SR) is still very challenging, especially for videos that are low-light and noisy. The current
best solution is to subsequently employ best models of video
SR, denoising, and illumination enhancement, but doing so
often lowers the image quality, due to the inconsistency between the models. This paper presents a new parametric representation called the Deep Parametric 3D Filters (DP3DF),
which incorporates local spatiotemporal information to enable simultaneous denoising, illumination enhancement, and
SR efficiently in a single encoder-and-decoder network. Also,
a dynamic residual frame is jointly learned with the DP3DF
via a shared backbone to further boost the SR quality. We
performed extensive experiments, including a large-scale user
study, to show our method’s effectiveness. Our method consistently surpasses the best state-of-the-art methods on all
the challenging real datasets with top PSNR and user ratings, yet having a very fast run time. The code is available
at https://github.com/xiaogang00/DP3DF.

(a) Input

20.67,0.70

(b) SOTA Video SR
21.77,0.71

(c) Combined Strategy

23.66,0.78

(d) Ours

Figure 1: An example frame (a) from a challenging underexposed video enhanced by (b) a SOTA SR method (Xiang
et al. 2020); (c) SOTA methods in video denoising (Tassano, Delon, and Veit 2020) + video illumination enhancement (Zhang et al. 2021) + video SR (Xiang et al. 2020);
and (d) our approach. We can see that (d) is more sharp with
distinct contrast, less noise, and less aliasing vs. (b) & (c).
Please zoom to view the details. Score is PSNR/SSIM.

Introduction
as the three networks are trained separately, we cannot ensure their consistency, e.g., artifacts from a preceding denoising or illumination enhancement network could be amplified by the subsequent SR network; see Fig. 1 (c). Alternatively, one may try to cascade and train all networks endto-end. Yet, existing networks for video SR, denoising, and
illumination enhancement often take multiple frames as input and output only a single frame, so a subsequent network
cannot obtain sufficient inputs from the preceding one. Also,
these networks are rather complex, so it is hard to fine-tune
them together for high performance.
Another approach is to use parallel branches of different
purposes in a framework. However, as the branches are separated from one another, their connections are weak for joint
learning. Also, the input to all branches should be identical, while the sizes of their outputs are inconsistent: the output size of the SR branch is larger than its input size, while
the other branches have same input and output sizes. Hence,
how to achieve various purposes with one common branch
and representation is worth to be considered. Further, we
eventually will need to infer the different branches to produce the final results, which is time costly.

The goal of video super resolution (SR) is to produce highresolution videos from low-resolution video inputs. While
promising results are demonstrated on general videos, existing approaches typically do not work well on videos that are
low-light and noisy. Yet, such a setting is very common in
practice, e.g., applying SR to enhance noisy videos taken in
a dark and high-contrast environment.
Fundamentally, video denoising and video illumination
enhancement are very different tasks from video SR: the
former deals with noise and brightness in videos whereas
the latter deals with the video resolution. Hence, to map a
low-resolution, low-light, and noisy (LLN) video to a highresolution, normal-light, and noise-free (HNN) video, the
current best solution is to collectively use the best network
model of each task by cascading models in a certain order.
However, doing so has several drawbacks. First, the network complexity is threefold, resulting in a slow inference,
as we have to subsequently run three separate network models for denoising, illumination enhancement, and SR. Also,
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3054

