The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Latent Constraints on Unsupervised Text-Graph Alignment
with Information Asymmetry
Jidong Tian1, 2 * , Wenqing Chen3 * , Yitian Li1, 2 , Caoyun Fan1, 2 ,
Hao He1, 2† , Yaohui Jin1, 2†
1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
State Key Lab of Advanced Optical Communication System and Network,
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
frank92@sjtu.edu.cn, chenwq95@mail.sysu.edu.cn, {yitian li, fcy3649, hehao, jinyh}@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

2022b) in NLU. However, most available methods on unsupervised alignment (Schmitt et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2020;
Prabhumoye et al. 2018; Yi et al. 2020; Xiao et al. 2021; Ma
et al. 2021) cannot solve a critical problem that is very common in UTGA: information asymmetry. We first illustrate
information asymmetry in UTGA defined in Definition 1.
Information Asymmetry: Yang et al. (Yang et al. 2019)
summarize three information conditions in text generation tasks: Source ≈ Target, Source > Targe, and Source
< Target. However, there exists a more challenging condition in unsupervised alignment tasks: Source ̸= Target, the phenomenon of which is defined as information asymmetry in Definition 1. For the example in Figure 1, the text includes the information of the story scene
(such as “visit” and “movie”) that is not visible to the
graph, while the graph also contains the logic (such as
Mother(x, y) ∧ Mother(y, z) → Grandmother(x, z)) that
is not necessary to be expressed in the text. It is challenging to eliminate its impacts on UTGA. Due to the lack of labels, models can hardly extract asymmetric information during training, like supervised learning (Yang et al. 2019; Liu,
Wang, and Li 2021). In addition, asymmetric information is
usually entangled in forms and contents so that we cannot
operate on explicit spaces directly (Schmitt et al. 2020).
Definition 1. Information asymmetry in UTGA is the phenomenon that the paired data contain additional information with complex forms invisible to each other.
To address the information asymmetry problem in UTGA,
we assume that all information, including asymmetric information, is encoded in the latent variable. This latent variable
can be divided into three parts: transferable variable (TV)
and non-transferable parts (NTV) with asymmetric information of the text and the graph, respectively. Furthermore,
NTV is classified into the dependent variable (DV) and
the independent variable (IV) according to its correlation
to TV. Aiming at TV, we design a VAE-based transferable
constraint (Kingma and Welling 2014) to preserve shared
information between two generation processes. Considering NTV, we propose two other CVAE-based regularizations (Kingma et al. 2014; Jain, Zhang, and Schwing 2017)
for DV and IV that force their distributions to approximate

Unsupervised text-graph alignment (UTGA) is a fundamental task that bidirectionally generates texts and graphs without
parallel data. Most available models of UTGA suffer from information asymmetry, a common phenomenon that texts and
graphs include additional information invisible to each other.
On the one hand, these models fail to supplement asymmetric
information effectively due to the lack of ground truths. On
the other hand, it is challenging to indicate asymmetric information with explicit indicators because it cannot be decoupled from the data directly. To address the challenge posed
by information asymmetry, we propose the assumption that
asymmetric information is encoded in unobservable latent
variables and only affects the one-way generation processes.
These latent variables corresponding to asymmetric information should obey prior distributions recovered approximately
from original data. Therefore, we first propose a taxonomy
of the latent variable that classifies the latent variable into
transferrable (TV) and non-transferable (NTV) variables and
further distinguish NTV as the dependent variable (DV) and
the independent variable (IV). Next, we propose three latent
VAE-based regularizations on TV, DV, and IV to constrain
their distributions to well-designed prior distributions to introduce asymmetric information into models and enhance the
preservation of shared contents. Finally, we impose the three
proposed constraints on a cycle-consistent learning framework, back-translation (BT), named ConstrainedBT. Experiments on three UTGA tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of
ConstrainedBT on the information-asymmetric challenge.

Introduction
Unsupervised text-graph alignment (UTGA) is the task of
bidirectional text-graph generation without parallel data (Jin
et al. 2020; Schmitt et al. 2020; Ke et al. 2021), which is fundamental to producing readable explanations (Cai and Lam
2020; Saha et al. 2021; Chairatanakul et al. 2021; Gai et al.
2021; Tian et al. 2022) and is used to make reasoning (Sinha
et al. 2019; Tian et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2021; Li et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13655

