The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

IndicSUPERB: A Speech Processing Universal Performance Benchmark for
Indian languages
Tahir Javed1,2 , Kaushal Bhogale1,2 , Abhigyan Raman2
Pratyush Kumar2,3 , Anoop Kunchukuttan2,3 , Mitesh M. Khapra1,2
1

Indian Institute of Technology Madras
2
AI4Bharat
3
Microsoft
{tahir, cs22d006}@cse.iitm.ac.in, ramanabhigyan@gmail.com
pratyush@cse.iitm.ac.in, ankunchu@microsoft.com, miteshk@cse.iitm.ac.in
Abstract
A cornerstone in AI research has been the creation and adoption of standardized training and test datasets to earmark
the progress of state-of-the-art models. A particularly successful example is the GLUE dataset for training and evaluating Natural Language Understanding (NLU) models for
English. The large body of research around self-supervised
BERT-based language models revolved around performance
improvements on NLU tasks in GLUE. The success of large
self-supervised models such as wav2vec2 enable creation of
speech models with relative ease to access unlabelled data.
These models can then be evaluated on SLU tasks, such
as the SUPERB benchmark. In this work, we extend this
to Indic languages by releasing the IndicSUPERB benchmark. Specifically, we make the following three contributions. (i) We collect Kathbath containing 1,684 hours of labelled speech data across 12 Indian languages from 1,218
contributors located in 203 districts in India. (ii) Using Kathbath, we create benchmarks across 6 speech tasks: Automatic
Speech Recognition, Speaker Verification, Speaker Identification (mono/multi), Language Identification, Query By Example, and Keyword Spotting for 12 languages. (iii) On
the released benchmarks, we train and evaluate different
self-supervised models alongside a commonly used baseline
FBANK. We show that language-specific fine-tuned models
are more accurate than baseline on most of the tasks, including a large gap of 76% for Language Identification task.
However, for speaker identification, self-supervised models trained on large datasets demonstrate an advantage. We
hope IndicSUPERB contributes to the progress of developing
speech language understanding models for Indian languages.

Figure 1: Distribution of Speakers across 22 Indian States

representations which can then be specialised for a wide
variety of tasks. To evaluate the effectiveness of SSL, several diverse benchmarks such as GLUE (Wang et al. 2018),
XTREME (Hu et al. 2020), SUPERB (Yang et al. 2021a),
etc. have been created. Creating such benchmarks, while expensive and time consuming, has become very crucial for
driving progress. In particular, languages for which such
benchmarks do not exist often do not receive their fair share
of representation in academic fora (Joshi et al. 2020).
A case in point is that of languages from the Indian
subcontinent. India has 22 constitutionally recognised languages with a collective speaker base of over 1 Billion
speakers. On one hand, there is an acute need for building
speech and language understanding models for Indian languages, while on the other hand, there is an acute shortage of good benchmarks for training and evaluating such
models. Recently released benchmarks such as IndicGLUE
(Kakwani et al. 2020) and FLORES-200 (NLLB Team et al.
2022) have alleviated the situation to a certain extent for natural language understanding and machine translation. However, for Speech Language Understanding (SLU), to the best
of our knowledge, such a diverse benchmark is only available for English (Yang et al. 2021a). In this work, we address this gap and build a SLU benchmark for 12 Indian languages covering 6 speech tasks: Automatic Speech Recognition, Speaker Verification, Speaker Identification, Language
Identification, Query By Example, and Keyword Spotting.
Our first main contribution is to build a large dataset for
automatic speech recognition containing read speech across

Introduction
Over the past few years, several works have shown that
self-supervised learning (SSL) is very effective for natural
language processing, vision and speech tasks (Devlin et al.
2019; Newell and Deng 2020; Yang et al. 2021a). The key
idea is to pre-train a large scale model on easily available
unlabelled data and then adapt the same model for a wide
variety of tasks by fine-tuning on smaller amounts of task
specific data. Given the quantity and diversity of the pretraining data, such models learn to encode general purpose
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12942

