The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Exploring Stochastic Autoregressive Image Modeling
for Visual Representation
Yu Qi1 * † , Fan Yang2 * , Yousong Zhu3 , Yufei Liu1 , Liwei Wu2 , Rui Zhao2,4 , Wei Li2‡
1

Tsinghua University
SenseTime Research
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
qiy20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yousong.zhu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, liuyufei@tsinghua.edu.cn
{yangfan1,wuliwei,zhaorui,liwei1}@sensetime.com
2

Abstract

training data. Motivated by the success of BERT and the
outstanding performance of Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020), recent works (He et al. 2021; Bao, Dong,
and Wei 2021; Wei et al. 2021; Xie et al. 2021) introduce
BERT-style pretraining by reconstructing the masked patches,
which achieve an overall improvement in downstream tasks
and greatly narrow the gap between vision and language. OpenAI made an attempt to propose an influential work called
iGPT (Chen et al. 2020a), it learns representations by predicting pixels in raster order but the performances lag behind
other self-supervised learning methods in both capacity and
efficiency.
We ask: what makes autoregressive modeling different
between vision and language tasks? We try to answer this
question from the following aspects:
• Input signal. Different from language which follows the
fixed natural order, images are not sequential signals. The
lack of a well-defined order is the main challenge of applying autoregressive methods to process images. Previous
methods, such as PixelCNN (Van Oord, Kalchbrenner,
and Kavukcuoglu 2016) and iGPT, just follow the raster
order to generate pixels. Such order is perhaps optimal
for image generation, but it may not be the best order for
visual representation learning. Because when people look
at an image, they first focus on the main object or the object they are interested in, which is randomly distributed
in any position instead of fixed in the top left corner. So
we propose to learn representations by predicting the object in stochastic order, which can take advantage of the
richness and variety of visual signals.
• Architecture. In vision, convolutional networks have
been the mainstream model until recently, but in the field
of NLP, Transformer was dominant. iGPT firstly trains a
sequence Transformer to auto-regressively predict pixels.
But it can only work with low-resolution images because
the computational complexity of self-attention is quadratic
to image size, which prevents the capabilities and scaling
of such approaches. So we introduce Vision Transformer
as the encoder to solve this problem. As for the decoder,
we design the parallel encoder-decoder architecture which
is inspired by XLNET (Yang et al. 2019) but doesn’t share

Autoregressive language modeling (ALM) has been successfully used in self-supervised pre-training in Natural language
processing (NLP). However, this paradigm has not achieved
comparable results with other self-supervised approaches in
computer vision (e.g., contrastive learning, masked image
modeling). In this paper, we try to find the reason why autoregressive modeling does not work well on vision tasks. To
tackle this problem, we fully analyze the limitation of visual
autoregressive methods and proposed a novel stochastic autoregressive image modeling (named SAIM) by the two simple
designs. First, we serialize the image into patches. Second,
we employ the stochastic permutation strategy to generate an
effective and robust image context which is critical for vision
tasks. To realize this task, we create a parallel encoder-decoder
training process in which the encoder serves a similar role to
the standard vision transformer focusing on learning the whole
contextual information, and meanwhile the decoder predicts
the content of the current position so that the encoder and
decoder can reinforce each other. Our method significantly
improves the performance of autoregressive image modeling
and achieves the best accuracy (83.9%) on the vanilla ViTBase model among methods using only ImageNet-1K data.
Transfer performance in downstream tasks also shows that our
model achieves competitive performance. Code is available at
https://github.com/qiy20/SAIM.

Introduction
Un-/Self-supervised representation learning has achieved
great success in natural language processing (NLP) (Yang
et al. 2019; Brown et al. 2020; Devlin et al. 2018; Radford
et al. 2018, 2019). Autoregressive language modeling (ALM)
and masked language modeling (MLM) (e.g., GPT (Radford
et al. 2018, 2019; Brown et al. 2020) BERT (Devlin et al.
2018)), are capable of training large-scale language models
with human-like performances using billions of unlabeled
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Intern at SenseTime Research
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

2074

