The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improving Pareto Front Learning via Multi-Sample Hypernetworks
Long P. Hoang1,2* , Dung D. Le1 , Tran Anh Tuan2 , Tran Ngoc Thang2
1

College of Engineering and Computer Science, VinUniversity
School of Applied Mathematics and Informatics, Hanoi University of Science and Technology
long.hp@vinuni.edu.vn, dung.ld@vinuni.edu.vn, tuan.ta181295@sis.hust.edu.vn, thang.tranngoc@hust.edu.vn
2

Abstract

as selecting between the shortest but congested route and
the farther but more sparse one, or adapting the investment
strategy when the marketplace changes.
For that reason, (Lin et al. 2020; Navon et al. 2021; Ruchte
and Grabocka 2021) recently explore and develop a research
direction called Pareto Front Learning (PFL), which attempts
to approximate the entire Pareto front. However, these works
only update the weights in the optimization algorithms by
a random preference vector at each iteration, bringing with
them restrictions in MOO that render them inappropriate for
the PFL problem (see Section 5 for more details), and ignoring the dynamic relationship between the Pareto optimal
solutions. We argue that this information is crucial in producing a high-quality Pareto front because having a variety
of solutions representing different trade-off preferences between the objective functions offers us a global view of the
current Pareto front. Therefore, we propose to use hypervolume indicator to guide the optimization process. Specifically,
we build upon the work of (Navon et al. 2021) to allow the
derivation of multiple Pareto optimal solutions from multiple
preference vectors, followed by the hypervolume (defined
by the obtained solutions) maximization step to improve the
learnt Pareto front.
Contributions. Our contributions can be summarized in
the following:

Pareto Front Learning (PFL) was recently introduced as an
effective approach to obtain a mapping function from a given
trade-off vector to a solution on the Pareto front, which solves
the multi-objective optimization (MOO) problem. Due to the
inherent trade-off between conflicting objectives, PFL offers a
flexible approach in many scenarios in which the decision makers can not specify the preference of one Pareto solution over
another, and must switch between them depending on the situation. However, existing PFL methods ignore the relationship
between the solutions during the optimization process, which
hinders the quality of the obtained front. To overcome this
issue, we propose a novel PFL framework namely PHN-HVI ,
which employs a hypernetwork to generate multiple solutions
from a set of diverse trade-off preferences and enhance the
quality of the Pareto front by maximizing the Hypervolume
indicator defined by these solutions. The experimental results
on several MOO machine learning tasks show that the proposed framework significantly outperforms the baselines in
producing the trade-off Pareto front.

1

Introduction

Multi-objective optimization has been shown prevalent in
many machine learning applications with conflicting objectives such as in computer vision (Hong et al. 2013; Yuan,
Liu, and Yan 2012; Ánh et al. 2022), speech & natural language processing (Chen et al. 2015; Wu and Huang 2015),
and recommender system (Hadash, Shalom, and Osadchy
2018; Milojković et al. 2019; Le and Lauw 2020, 2021),
etc. (Sener and Koltun 2019) states that multi-task learning
can be formulated as a multi-objective optimization (MOO)
problem, in which the optimal decisions need to be taken in
the presence of trade-offs between two or more conflicting
objectives. Typically in MOO problems, the set of optimal
solutions is called Pareto front, in which each solution on
the front represents different trade-off between the objectives.
However, most of the recent MOO algorithms must know the
trade-off in advance or require a separate model to be trained
for each point on the Pareto front (Navon et al. 2021). This
limits the flexibility as there are many situations in which
the user can only make a trade-off decision on the fly, such

• Firstly, we provide a mathematical formulation of PFL
with Hypernetwork, which originally introduced in
(Navon et al. 2021).
• Secondly, we propose a novel framework, namely PHNHVI that improves PFL problem using multi-sample hypernetworks and hypervolume indicator maximization.
• Thirdly, we conduct comprehensive experiments on several multi-task learning datasets to validate the effectiveness of PHN-HVI compared to baseline methods.
Organization. Section 2 provides the background knowledge for the PFL problem. In Section 3, we describe our
framework PHN-HVI and its efficient variant with the partitioning algorithm. In Section 4, we review related work in the
literature and briefly discuss both of their accomplishments
and shortcomings. In Section 5, we conduct experiments
from comparison and provide a model behavior analysis. We
conclude the paper in Section 6 and discuss possible research
directions as future work.

* The author started this paper as part of the graduation thesis.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7875

