The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Censored Fairness through Awareness
Wenbin Zhang1 , Tina Hernandez-Boussard2 and Jeremy Weiss3
1

Michigan Technological University, Houghton, MI 49931
2
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
3
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892
wenbinzh@mtu.edu, boussard@stanford.edu, jeremy.weiss@nih.gov

Abstract

theme amongst all these prior works is the assumption of
fairness as a supervised learning problem– where the class
label either actual or predicted is given as a precondition
for fairness definitions as well as debiasing algorithms depending on these notions to enforce fairness (Žliobaitė 2017;
Zhang and Ntoutsi 2019; Quy et al. 2022).
This setting, however, is unrealistic to many domains
leaving users with real-world socially sensitive problems
without tooling to mitigate discrimination and prejudice
concerns– echoing existing critiques that current fairnessaware methods do not meet the real-world fair AI use
cases (Hoffmann 2019; Selbst et al. 2019). In this work, we
study such an AI fairness problem that originates from the
gap between the design of a “fair” model in the lab and their
real-world deployment. Specifically, we consider the ubiquitous censorship phenomenon in real-world data analysis
in which the assumption of class label guarantee does not
hold, but still requires that similar individuals are treated
similarly (Dwork et al. 2012). Below exemplifies such a
real-life AI fairness problem that necessitates censorship
management,

There has been increasing concern within the machine learning community and beyond that Artificial Intelligence (AI)
faces a bias and discrimination crisis which needs AI fairness
with urgency. As many have begun to work on this problem,
most existing work depends on the availability of class label
for the given fairness definition and algorithm which may not
align with real-world usage. In this work, we study an AI fairness problem that stems from the gap between the design of a
“fair” model in the lab and its deployment in the real-world.
Specifically, we consider defining and mitigating individual
unfairness amidst censorship, where the availability of class
label is not always guaranteed due to censorship, which is
broadly applicable in a diversity of real-world socially sensitive applications. We show that our method is able to quantify
and mitigate individual unfairness in the presence of censorship across three benchmark tasks, which provides the first
known results on individual fairness guarantee in analysis of
censored data.

Introduction
AI-based decision-making systems, when implemented in
real-life scenarios, have been shown to exhibit bias and
discrimination against marginalized groups or populations.
This is evidenced by instances in various fields, such as
criminal justice (Chouldechova 2017), healthcare (Chen
et al. 2020), predictive policing (Chang 2021), and employment (Miller 2015). As a result, there is a growing body of
research on quantifying and guaranteeing fairness for machine learning (Beutel et al. 2019; Meyer 2018; Skirpan and
Gorelick 2017). The vast majority of them address the problem by taking the statistical group fairness approach that first
identifies a small collection of high-level groups defined by
the sensitive attribute, such as gender or race, then ensures
similar outcome statistics of the predictor (e.g., the prediction accuracy and true positive rate), across these groups,
with the aim of preventing practices that one socially salient
group is collectively allocated a more favorable outcome
(e.g., which patients need extra medical care and the targeted customers to receive promotional deals) compared to
another (Mehrabi et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021; Saxena,
Zhang, and Shahabi 2023a,b). In addition, another common

Example 1. A hospital plans to create precise AI algorithm
to help streamline the clinical work flow and improve
patient outcomes for a particular type of cancer. In
addition to precision when predicting the likelihood of
experiencing relapses, the model is required to correctly
risk stratify the severity of illness for similarly situated
patients to prevent unequal treatments when allocating
critical healthcare resources. As the patients’ main
outcome under assessment, i.e., cancer recurrence which
is the class label, could be unknown for a portion of the
study group (phenomenon known as censorship, cf. a
detailed discussion below), existing fairness notions and
algorithms which assume the availability of class label
become inapplicable.
In this example, we see that the presence of censorship
nullifies any bias quantification and mitigation of the class
label dependent fair training procedure when the model is
deployed. Such censorship can arise in various ways as
shown in Figure (1): the individual has not yet experienced
the event of interest prior to the study ends so this individual’s class label remains unknown, e.g., the individual d4

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14611

