The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Online Semi-supervised Learning with Mix-Typed Streaming Features
Di Wu1 * , Shengda Zhuo2 * , Yu Wang2 , Zhong Chen3 , Yi He4†
1
College of Computer and Information Science, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Blockchain, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, LA 70125, USA
4
Department of Computer Science, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529, USA
wudi.cigit@gmail.com, zhuosd96@gmail.com, yuwang@gzhu.edu.cn, zchen@xula.edu, yihe@cs.odu.edu
2

Abstract

respect to both streaming data and streaming features. This
allows a more flexible learning environment in which new
features can emerge and join the model training process arbitrarily, and pre-existing features may become unobservable
or vanish from model during various time spans.
Invited by this flexibility, various domain applications
start to model their data in a doubly-streaming format.
Consider, for example, a crowd-sensing application, where
the mobile users commit their data collectively to train an
incremental model that detects air pollution in local areas (Meng et al. 2017; Pan et al. 2017; Schreckenberger
et al. 2020). The doubly-streaming property is manifested
from the crowd-sensed data streams – the new users joining
the sensing effort with upgraded or totally new devices (e.g.,
cellphones, sensor kits) will lead to new features, while any
users who leave (or that some devices fail to commit due to
network issues) can incur feature unobservability. To learn
from such data streams, a common practice shared by prior
studies is to establish the correlation among features, such
that the incremental model can: 1) initialize the learning coefficients of any new features using educated guess, expediting convergence with a jump-start when these new features
are not described by sufficient data instances, and 2) enjoy a reconstructed information of the unobserved features,
leveraging their learned coefficients to improve the prediction performance via online ensembling.
Despite their triumphs, most existing studies are limited
by two assumptions. First, the incremental model is trained
under full supervision, which means that every arriving data
instance must be accompanied with a class label. Unfortunately, annotating labels is in general prohibitive, due to the
limited manpower and time stretched by the large volume
and high velocity of data streams. Second, all features flowing into the model are prescribed to share the same data type,
which is often violated in real applications. For example, the
features captured by various types of sensor devices are naturally in different data types including Boolean (e.g., rainy
or not), ordinal (e.g., PM2.5 levels), and continuous (e.g.,
outdoor temperature). Establishing correlation among such
mix-typed features is tangibly challenging and cannot be viable by the prior online parametric models that assume, e.g.,
Gaussian correlation matrices (Agarwal, Chen, and Elango
2010; Balzano, Chi, and Lu 2018; He et al. 2019).
Motivated by this situation, we explore a new learn-

Online learning with feature spaces that are not fixed but
can vary over time renders a seemingly flexible learning
paradigm thus has drawn much attention. Unfortunately, two
restrictions prohibit a ubiquitous application of this learning paradigm in practice. First, whereas prior studies mainly
assume a homogenous feature type, data streams generated from real applications can be heterogeneous in which
Boolean, ordinal, and continuous co-exist. Existing methods that prescribe parametric distributions such as Gaussians
would not suffice to model the correlation among such mixtyped features. Second, while full supervision seems to be a
default setup, providing labels to all arriving data instances
over a long time span is tangibly onerous, laborious, and
economically unsustainable. Alas, a semi-supervised online
learner that can deal with mix-typed, varying feature spaces
is still missing. To fill the gap, this paper explores a novel
problem, named Online Semi-supervised Learning with Mixtyped streaming Features (OSLMF), which strives to relax
the restrictions on the feature type and supervision information. Our key idea to solve the new problem is to leverage copula model to align the data instances with different
feature spaces so as to make their distance measurable. A
geometric structure underlying data instances is then established in an online fashion based on their distances, through
which the limited labeling information is propagated, from
the scarce labeled instances to their close neighbors. Experimental results are documented to evidence the viability and
effectiveness of our proposed approach. Code is released in
https://github.com/wudi1989/OSLMF.

Introduction
Online learning from doubly-streaming inputs is a new
paradigm for data stream analytics that thrives very recently (Zhang et al. 2016; Hou, Zhang, and Zhou 2017;
Beyazit, Alagurajah, and Wu 2019; Zhang et al. 2020; He
et al. 2021a,b; Wu et al. 2021; Lian et al. 2022; Chen et al.
2022; Wu 2023). Unlike traditional online learning that can
deal with data streams residing in a fixed feature space
only (Aggarwal 2007; Shalev-Shwartz et al. 2011), this new
learning paradigm strives to build incremental models with
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Dr. Yi He (yihe@cs.odu.edu)
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4720

