The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Neural Spline Search for Quantile Probabilistic Modeling
Ruoxi Sun1∗ , Chun-Liang Li1∗ , Sercan Ö. Arık1 , Michael W. Dusenberry2 , Chen-Yu Lee1 , Tomas
Pfister1
1

Google Cloud AI
Google Research, Brain Team
{ruoxis, chunliang, soarik, dusenberrymw, chenyulee, tpfister}@google.com
2

P(Y|X)

Abstract
2

Accurate estimation of output quantiles is crucial in many use
cases, where it is desired to model the range of possibility.
Modeling target distribution at arbitrary quantile levels and at
arbitrary input attribute levels are important to offer a comprehensive picture of the data, and requires the quantile function
to be expressive enough. The quantile function describing the
target distribution using quantile levels is critical for quantile
regression. Although various parametric forms for the distributions (that the quantile function specifies) can be adopted,
an everlasting problem is selecting the most appropriate one
that can properly approximate the data distributions. In this
paper, we propose a non-parametric and data-driven approach,
Neural Spline Search (NSS), to represent the observed data
distribution without parametric assumptions. NSS is flexible
and expressive for modeling data distributions by transforming the inputs with a series of monotonic spline regressions
guided by symbolic operators. We demonstrate that NSS outperforms previous methods on synthetic, real-world regression
and time-series forecasting tasks.

X=X0

1
Y

0
True
Quantile 25%
Quantile 75%

1
2
2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0
X

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

Figure 1: Modeling multiple quantiles at different conditionlevels with a universal quantile function. The goal is to model
target data distribution y at any arbitrary quantile level and
attribute level X, using one versatile quantile function. Gray
dots are observed data points, while green and blue lines
indicate 25% and 75% quantile levels. The data distribution
y varies at different levels of X, say variance of y increases
when X is away from zero. Red dots are data points at X =
X0 , p(Y |X0 )).

Introduction
For many machine learning applications, modeling the prediction intervals (e.g. estimating the ranges all individual
predictions observation fall), beyond point estimates, is crucial (Salinas et al. 2020; Wen et al. 2017; Tagasovska and
Lopez-Paz 2019; Gasthaus et al. 2019; Pearce et al. 2018).
The prediction intervals can help with decision making for
retail sales optimization (Simchi-Levi et al. 2008), medical diagnoses (Begoli, Bhattacharya, and Kusnezov 2019;
Mhaskar, Pereverzyev, and van der Walt 2017; Jiang et al.
2012), information safety (Smith, Dinev, and Xu 2011), financial investment management (Engle 1982), robotics and
control (Buckman et al. 2018), autonomous transformation
(Xu et al. 2014) and many others.
To estimate prediction intervals, we would need to estimate
different levels of quantiles for the target distribution using
quantile regression (Koenker and Regression 2005; Waldmann 2018). A real-world challenge is to select the parametric forms of target distributions, which is specified by the
quantile function (also known as the inverse CDF function),

to properly align with observed data distribution. Different
choices for the target distribution (Gaussian, Poisson, Negative Binomial, Student-t etc.) may yield different quantile
predictions, and misalignment of the assumption with the real
distribution may hinder the performance of the model. Therefore, such heuristic or empirical hand-picking based parametric assumptions for the distribution can be sub-optimal. An
approach based on learning from the data in an automated
way, would be highly desirable, from both foundational and
practical perspectives.
For learnable parametric modeling, one challenge is how to
model all quantiles for all input attributes level in a computationally efficient way. First, modeling an any arbitrary
quantile, as opposed to a couple of pre-defined quantile levels,
offers a more comprehensive view on the target distribution,
and provides convenience to use the quantile model (e.g. no
need to re-train the model when quantiles at testing are different from the ones at training). Second, real-world data can
have complex distributions beyond what simple assumptions
can model. Fig. 1 shows different input attribute X levels

∗

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9927

