The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Combating Unknown Bias with
Effective Bias-Conflicting Scoring and Gradient Alignment
Bowen Zhao1 , Chen Chen2 , Qian-Wei Wang1,3 , Anfeng He2 , Shu-Tao Xia1,3 *
1

Tsinghua University
2
Tencent TEG AI
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
zbw18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, chen1634chen@gmail.com, xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Stage I
Stage II

(a)

Models notoriously suffer from dataset biases which are
detrimental to robustness and generalization. The identifyemphasize paradigm shows a promising effect in dealing with
unknown biases. However, we find that it is still plagued
by two challenges: A, the quality of the identified biasconflicting samples is far from satisfactory; B, the emphasizing strategies just yield suboptimal performance. In this work,
for challenge A, we propose an effective bias-conflicting
scoring method to boost the identification accuracy with two
practical strategies — peer-picking and epoch-ensemble. For
challenge B, we point out that the gradient contribution statistics can be a reliable indicator to inspect whether the optimization is dominated by bias-aligned samples. Then, we
propose gradient alignment, which employs gradient statistics to balance the contributions of the mined bias-aligned and
bias-conflicting samples dynamically throughout the learning process, forcing models to leverage intrinsic features to
make fair decisions. Experiments are conducted on multiple datasets in various settings, demonstrating that the proposed solution can alleviate the impact of unknown biases
and achieve state-of-the-art performance.

1

(b)

0

Previous

1

bias-conflicting
likelihood

ECS (Ours)

training
end
process
Vanilla
Previous
bias-conflicting samples bias-aligned samples

start

GA (Ours)
contribution seesaw

Figure 1: (a) Effective bias-Conflicting Scoring helps identify real bias-conflicting samples in stage I. (b) Gradient Alignment balances contributions from the mined biasaligned and bias-conflicting samples throughout training,
enforcing models to focus on intrinsic features in stage II.
backgrounds, and a human-centric set can be biased by gender or racial information. Models blinded by biased datasets
usually perform poorly in mismatched distribution (e.g., a
red ‘8’ may be incorrectly categorized as ‘0’). Worse still,
models with racial or gender bias, etc. can cause severe negative social impacts. Moreover, in most real-world problems,
the bias information (both bias type and precise labels of
bias attribute) is unknown, making debiasing more challenging. Therefore, combating unknown biases is urgently demanded when deploying AI systems in realistic applications.
One major issue that leads to biased models is that
the training objective (e.g., vanilla empirical risk minimization) can be accomplished via only unintended decision rules (Sagawa et al. 2020b). Accordingly, some studies (Nam et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2021) try to identify and emphasize the bias-conflicting samples. Nevertheless, we find
that the low identification accuracy and the suboptimal emphasizing strategies impair the debiasing effect. In this work,
we build an enhanced two-stage debiasing scheme to combat unknown dataset biases. In stage I, we present an Effective bias-Conflicting Scoring (ECS) function to mine biasconflicting samples. On top of the off-the-shelf method, we
propose a peer-picking mechanism to consciously pursue seriously biased auxiliary models and employ epoch-ensemble
to obtain more accurate and stable scores. In stage II, we
propose Gradient Alignment (GA), which balances the gradient contributions across the mined bias-aligned and biasconflicting samples to prevent models from being biased.
The gradient information is served as an indicator to downweight (up-weight) the mined bias-aligned (bias-conflicting)
samples in order to achieve dynamic balance throughout op-

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved significant
progress in various visual tasks. DNNs tend to learn intended decision rules to accomplish target tasks commonly.
However, they may follow unintended decision rules based
on the easy-to-learn shortcuts to “achieve” target goals in
some scenarios (Bahng et al. 2020). For instance, when
training a model to classify digits on Colored MNIST (Kim
et al. 2019), in which the images of each class are mainly
dyed by one pre-defined color respectively (e.g., most ‘0’ are
red, ‘1’ are yellow), the intended decision rules classify images based on the shape of digits, while the unintended decision rules utilize color information instead. Following Nam
et al. (2020), sample x that can be “correctly” classified by
unintended decision rules is denoted as a bias-aligned sample x (e.g., red ‘0’) and vice versa a bias-conflicting sample
x (e.g., green ‘0’).
There are also many similar scenarios in real-world, e.g.,
an animal-centric image set may be biased by the habitats in
* Corresponding authors: Chen Chen and Shu-Tao Xia.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3561

