The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DUET: Cross-Modal Semantic Grounding for Contrastive Zero-Shot Learning
Zhuo Chen1, 2, 6 , Yufeng Huang3, 6 , Jiaoyan Chen4 , Yuxia Geng1, 6 , Wen Zhang3, 6 ,
Yin Fang1, 6 , Jeff Z. Pan5 , Huajun Chen1, 2, 6 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Donghai Laboratory, Zhoushan 316021, China
3
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
4
Department of Computer Science, The University of Manchester
5
School of Informatics, The University of Edinburgh
6
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies
{zhuo.chen, huangyufeng, gengyx, wenzhang2015, fangyin, huajunsir}@zju.edu.cn,
jiaoyan.chen@manchester.ac.uk, j.z.pan@ed.ac.uk
Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to predict unseen classes
whose samples have never appeared during training. As annotations for class-level visual characteristics, attributes are
widely used semantic information for zero-shot image classification. However, the current methods often fail to discriminate those subtle visual distinctions between images due to
not only the lack of fine-grained annotations, but also the
issues of attribute imbalance and co-occurrence. In this paper, we present a transformer-based end-to-end ZSL method
named DUET, which integrates latent semantic knowledge
from the pre-trained language models (PLMs) via a selfsupervised multi-modal learning paradigm. Specifically, we
(1) developed a cross-modal semantic grounding network to
investigate the model’s capability of disentangling semantic
attributes from the images; (2) applied an attribute-level contrastive learning strategy to further enhance the model’s discrimination on fine-grained visual characteristics against the
attribute co-occurrence and imbalance; (3) proposed a multitask learning policy for considering multi-model objectives.
We find that DUET can achieve state-of-the-art performance
on three standard ZSL benchmarks and a knowledge graph
equipped ZSL benchmark, and that its components are effective and its predictions are interpretable.

Figure 1: (a) Attribute imbalance. (b) Attribute cooccurrence. (c) Our attribute-level contrastive learning strategy which chooses those distinctive classes as positive references when they are associated with one common attribute
(e.g., “spotted”) and those similar classes as negative references when they have mutually exclusive attributes (e.g.,
“striped”) toward the same aspect (e.g., “wing pattern”).

Introduction
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to mimic human’s inference
ability to learn novel concepts based on prior experience
without seeing them beforehand. Early embedding-based
ZSL methods project the input into a common vector space
where the unseen class prediction can be implemented by
searching the nearest class. Generative ZSL methods create synthetic data via the side information of unseen classes,
which transforms ZSL into a standard supervised learning
problem with less bias toward seen or unseen classes.
As annotations for image visual characteristics, attributes
are among the most popular semantic information for ZSL.
However, the attributes in real world are typically not annotated to image regions but to a whole class. Recently,

some attention-based ZSL methods (Chen et al. 2022b,a)
emerge to distinguish the discriminative regions in image
classification under the guidance of attentive attribute information. As pointed out by (Wang et al. 2021), these systems suffer from the imbalanced attribute distribution (i.e.,
some attributes are highly frequent while some are rare),
as well as the attribute co-occurrence which impacts attributes’ discrimination capability. For example, in a zeroshot scene classification dataset SUN (Patterson and Hays

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

405

