The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Practical Parallel Algorithms for Submodular Maximization Subject to a
Knapsack Constraint with Nearly Optimal Adaptivity
Shuang Cui1 , Kai Han2 * , Jing Tang3 , He Huang2 ∗ , Xueying Li4 , Aakas Zhiyuli4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology / Suzhou Research Institute, University of Science and Technology of China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Alibaba Group
lakers@mail.ustc.edu.cn, hankai@suda.edu.cn, jingtang@ust.hk, huangh@suda.edu.cn,
xiaoming.lxy@alibaba-inc.com, aakas.lzy@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

Kazemi, Zadimoghaddam, and Karbasi 2018), this situation
is further exacerbated by the proliferation of “big data”, for
which simply reducing query complexity is often insufficient to get efficient algorithms. Thus, parallelization has received increased attention for submodular maximization.
Unfortunately, traditional greedy algorithms for submodular maximization are inherently sequential and adaptive,
which makes them unsuitable for being parallelized. Some
efforts have been devoted to designing distributed submodular maximization algorithms using parallel models such as
MapReduce (Mirzasoleiman et al. 2013; Kumar et al. 2013;
Barbosa et al. 2015; Mirzasoleiman et al. 2016; Epasto, Mirrokni, and Zadimoghaddam 2017; Kazemi et al. 2021), but
these algorithms can still be highly adaptive, as they usually
run sequential greedy algorithms on each machine. Recently,
Balkanski and Singer (2018) proposed submodular maximization algorithms with low adaptive complexity (a.k.a.
“adaptivity”), where only a sub-linear number of adaptive
rounds are incurred and polynomially-many queries can be
executed in parallel in each adaptive round. Subsequently, a
lot of studies have appeared to design low-adaptivity algorithms; many of them concentrate on the submodular maximization with a cardinality constraint (SMC) problem (e.g.,
(Kazemi et al. 2019; Fahrbach, Mirrokni, and Zadimoghaddam 2019b; Balkanski, Rubinstein, and Singer 2019a)).
Besides the SMC problem, one of the most fundamental problems in submodular optimizations is the problem
of submodular maximization subject to a knapsack constraint (SKP), which has applications both for monotone
and non-monotone submodular functions (Kulik, Shachnai,
and Tamir 2009; Lee et al. 2010; Badanidiyuru and Vondrák
2014). Especially the non-monotone SKP problem has many
real-world applications such as revenue maximation (Han
et al. 2021; Amanatidis et al. 2020, 2021), movie recommendation (Amanatidis et al. 2020, 2021) and image
summarization (Han et al. 2021). Surprisingly, although
the SKP problem has been extensively studied since the
1980s (Wolsey 1982), there exist only few studies on designing low-adaptivity algorithms for it. In particular, Chekuri
e
and Quanrud (2019b) provide a ( e−1
+ ϵ)-approximation
in O(log n) adaptive rounds for monotone SKP, while (Ene,

Submodular maximization has wide applications in machine learning and data mining, where massive datasets have
brought the great need for designing efficient and parallelizable algorithms. One measure of the parallelizability of a submodular maximization algorithm is its adaptivity complexity, which indicates the number of sequential rounds where a
polynomial number of queries to the objective function can
be executed in parallel. In this paper, we study the problem of
non-monotone submodular maximization subject to a knapsack constraint, and propose the first combinatorial algorithm
achieving an (8 + ϵ)-approximation under O(log n) adaptive
complexity, which is optimal up to a factor of O(log log n).
Moreover, under slightly larger adaptivity, we also propose
approximation algorithms with nearly optimal query complexity of Õ(n), while achieving better approximation ratios.
We show that our algorithms can also be applied to the special case of submodular maximization subject to a cardinality
constraint, and achieve performance bounds comparable with
those of state-of-the-art algorithms. Finally, the effectiveness
of our approach is demonstrated by extensive experiments on
real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Submodular maximization has extensive applications such
as influence maximization (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos
2003; Chen et al. 2021), exemplar-based clustering (Gomes
and Krause 2010), crowdsourcing (Singla, Tschiatschek,
and Krause 2016) and sensor placement (Iyer and Bilmes
2013; Sallam et al. 2020), so it has been widely studied under various constraints such as cardinality, knapsack, matroid constraint. Many algorithms in this area adopt greedy
search strategies (e.g., continuous greedy algorithms in (Calinescu et al. 2011)), but may have large query complexity to
achieve a good approximation ratio, where query complexity
refers to the number of evaluations to the objective function.
In practice, evaluating the objective function may be timeconsuming (Dueck and Frey 2007; Das and Kempe 2008;
* Corresponding author: Kai Han <hankai@suda.edu.cn> and
He Huang <huangh@suda.edu.cn>.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7261

