The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On the Expressive Flexibility of Self-Attention Matrices
Valerii Likhosherstov1 * , Krzysztof Choromanski2 * , Adrian Weller1,3
1

University of Cambridge
2
Google Brain
3
The Alan Turing Institute
vl304@cam.ac.uk

Abstract

Thus, Transformers appear domain-agnostic and can learn
any priors once a suitable large-scale dataset is provided.
Finally, Transformers were recently shown to be applicable for end-to-end training on large-scale multimodal data of
images with textual annotations extracted from the Internet
(Radford et al. 2021; Jia et al. 2021). The resulting models
are highly generalizable and perform very well in zero-shot
classification from scratch, and when fine-tuned on standard
benchmarks of a smaller scale.
The omnivorous nature of these models suggests that
Transformers and their core component, self-attention, have
an inherent ability to capture useful patterns in data regardless of the domain. A thorough analysis is required to gain
a deeper understanding of this remarkable phenomenon. We
take a step in this direction by analyzing the expressiveness
of the self-attention module.
In self-attention, dependencies between elements of the
input are propagated via a self-attention matrix, which can
be thought of as an input-dependent linear projection applied
to the input. By the definition, this right stochastic matrix
(i.e. having nonnegative elements with rows summing up to
1) encodes input-dependent patterns in the data. Therefore,
we aim to analyze the expressiveness of this matrix, to understand how flexible these input-dependent patterns can be.
Importantly, we consider the setup when the query dimension of self-attention d is much smaller than the sequence
length n aiming to characterize relationships between the
two. We focus on the case when d < n because it is typical
in practice, e.g. d = 64, n = 512 in BERT (Devlin et al.
2019). Also, the case d ≥ n can model any right stochastic matrix as shown in (Bhojanapalli et al. 2020). Finally,
smaller d facilitates computational efficiency of Transformers, which are notorious for their high compute demand and
CO2 footprint (Strubell, Ganesh, and McCallum 2019).
Our first contribution shows that understanding which
right stochastic matrices can be approximated by a selfattention matrix is a challenging task. Namely, we show that
the decision task which accepts the right stochastic matrix
and outputs whether approximation is possible or not for
a given d > 1 is NP-hard. We further show that the case
d = 1 is tractable and give an algorithm for the decision
problem. Our derivations are inspired by the theory of dot
product graphs (Kang and Müller 2012).
Since it is hard to tackle the general setup of approximat-

Transformer networks are able to capture patterns in data
coming from many domains (text, images, videos, proteins,
etc.) with little or no change to architecture components.
We perform a theoretical analysis of the core component responsible for signal propagation between elements, i.e. the
self-attention matrix. We ask the following questions: Can
a self-attention matrix approximate arbitrary patterns?
How small is the query dimension d required for such approximation? Our first result shows that the task of deciding
whether approximation of a given pattern is possible or not
is NP-hard for a fixed d > 1. In practice, the self-attention
matrix typically exhibits two properties: it is sparse, and it
changes dynamically depending on the input to the module.
Motivated by this observation, we show that the self-attention
matrix can provably approximate sparse matrices. While the
parameters of self-attention are fixed, various sparse matrices can be approximated by only modifying the inputs. Our
proof is based on the random projection technique and uses
the seminal Johnson-Lindenstrauss lemma. In particular, we
show that, in order to approximate any sparse matrix up to
a given precision defined in terms of preserving matrix element ratios, d grows only logarithmically with the sequence length n (i.e. d = O(log n)).

Introduction
Transformer networks have demonstrated strong performance in the area of large-scale deep learning, coming close
to or beating the state of the art in a wide range of tasks. Initially proposed in the context of neural machine translation
(Vaswani et al. 2017), Transformers were found to generalize well across a variety of natural language processing tasks
when pretrained on large text corpora (Devlin et al. 2019;
Radford et al. 2019; Brown et al. 2020). These successes facilitated the application of Transformers in other domains.
For instance, in biology, Transformers pretrained on large
corpora of proteins were shown to predict proteins’ structure and function (Elnaggar et al. 2019; Rives et al. 2021),
and to generate protein sequences with specific properties
(Madani et al. 2020). Another exciting advancement was the
emergence of Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021)
and, later, Video Vision Transformers (Arnab et al. 2021).
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8773

