The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Deep Graph Structural Infomax
Wenting Zhao1 , Gongping Xu1 , Zhen Cui1 * , Siqiang Luo2 , Cheng Long2 , Tong Zhang1
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China.
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
{wtingzhao, xugongping, zhen.cui, tong.zhang}@njust.edu.cn, {siqiang.luo, c.long}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

the labeled data usually needs expensive cost to collect while
the unlabeled data is easy to access. Thus, research community has proposed techniques (Veličković et al. 2019; Jing,
Park, and Tong 2021; Kipf and Welling 2016b; Hong et al.
2021; Yang et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022) for learning representation in a self-supervised manner, which designs and
extracts supervision signals from the unlabeled data itself.
Deep InfoMax (DIM) (Hjelm et al. 2019) was first proposed
in computer vision, Deep Graph Infomax(DGI) (Veličković
et al. 2019) then extended it to graph domain and achieved a
promising result by maximizing the mutual information between local node representation and global graph summary.
As a pioneer work, however, DGI has two major limitations on the use of mutual information. First, after obtaining
the encoded node representation and computing the graph
summary by a readout function, DGI maximizes the mutual
information between local node representation and global
graph summary, which indeed ignores more fine-grained
mutual information in different-sized receptive fields. Second, DGI just considers the mutual information in the feature space, and does not explore the structural mutual information that is actually meaningful for graph data. As
a result, only less informative node representation is obtained, leading to a suboptimal performance on the downstream tasks. Peng et al. (Peng et al. 2020) proposed to
learn topology-aware mutual information by reconstructing
the adjacency matrix, which is insufficient to capture the diversity of local neighborhoods.

In the scene of self-supervised graph learning, Mutual Information (MI) was recently introduced for graph encoding
to generate robust node embeddings. A successful representative is Deep Graph Infomax (DGI), which essentially operates on the space of node features but ignores topological structures, and just considers global graph summary. In
this paper, we present an effective model called Deep Graph
Structural Infomax (DGSI) to learn node representation. We
explore to derive the structural mutual information from the
perspective of Information Bottleneck (IB), which defines a
trade-off between the sufficiency and minimality of representation on the condition of the topological structure preservation. Intuitively, the derived constraints formally maximize
the structural mutual information both edge-wise and local
neighborhood-wise. Besides, we develop a general framework that incorporates the global representational mutual
information, local representational mutual information, and
sufficient structural information into the node representation.
Essentially, our DGSI extends DGI and could capture more
fine-grained semantic information as well as beneficial structural information in a self-supervised manner, thereby improving node representation and further boosting the learning performance. Extensive experiments on different types of
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of the
proposed method.

1

Introduction

Graph is a flexible and universal data structure consisting
of a set of nodes and edges, where nodes can represent
any kind of object and edges indicate some relationships
between node pairs. For mining graph data, Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) have achieved remarkable performance
on various tasks in different domains, such as node/graph
classification (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Li et al.
2021; Zhao et al. 2021; Veličković et al. 2018; Jiang et al.
2019; Zhang et al. 2021), computer vision (Han et al. 2022;
Cui et al. 2022), recommendation (Zhang et al. 2020b; Wang
et al. 2021), biomolecules (Morehead, Chen, and Cheng
2022; Somnath, Bunne, and Krause 2021).
However, most of the existing GNNs require sufficient labeled data to obtain satisfactory generalization abilities, and

The Information Bottleneck (IB) principle is appealing,
since it defines what we mean by a good representation, in
terms of the fundamental trade-off between having a concise
representation and one with good predictive power (Tishby
and Zaslavsky 2015). Information Bottleneck theory provides a framework for constraining task-relevant information sufficiently retained in the learned representation, which
encodes representation that is maximally informative about
the target while being minimally informative about input
data (Yang et al. 2021; Alemi et al. 2017). Essentially, the
Information Bottleneck seeks a trade-off between data fit
and model generalization. And based on the IB principle,
the learned representation is naturally more robust. IB has
been applied to learn informative representation in the fields
of computer vision and natural language processing. For irregular data, Yu et al. (Yu et al. 2020, 2021) learned the max-

* The corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4920

