The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

NeAF: Learning Neural Angle Fields for Point Normal Estimation
Shujuan Li1 * , Junsheng Zhou1 * , Baorui Ma1 , Yu-Shen Liu1† , Zhizhong Han2
1

School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA
lisj22, zhoujs21, mbr18 @mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn, h312h@wayne.edu
2

Abstract

to poor generalization ability on unseen scenarios such as
large-scale scenes.
As a remedy, state-of-the-art methods introduce to predict
the normal of a point by fitting a local geometric surface.
They learned point-wise weights for neighboring points to fit
the surface, and then predict the normal vector from the fitted surface. However, the geometric surface settings (e.g. the
constant order of the polynomial surface) are predefined during the training process, which leads to poor fitting results
due to the various complexity of the local point patches. For
example, when the geometric surface is more complex than
the underlying point patches, it results in overfitting problems. Otherwise, the underfitting leads to over-smoothing
details. As a result, the performance of surface fitting methods is dramatically limited in cases with complex topology
and geometry.
To resolve these issues, we propose an implicit method to
learn the Neural Angle Field (NeAF) of local patches in the
spherical coordinate system. Specifically, instead of explicitly predicting the normal from the input point clouds, we
design a neural network to implicitly predict the angle offset
between the ground truth normal and a randomly sampled
query vector. The network observes more diverse samples
by learning to model the relationship between vectors from
various directions and the target normal, leading to an angle field around the target normal. With a well-learned angle
field, the network will have the ability to predict accurate
and robust normal vectors.
At inference time, to predict normals from the learned angle fields, we randomly sample query vectors in a unit spherical space and take the vectors with minimal angle offsets as
the predicted normals. To further leverage the prior learned
by NeAF, we propose a novel learning scheme for refining the predicted normal vectors. Unlike existing learningbased methods that can only predict the normal via one forward pass, our proposed method can further optimize the
predicted normal, which leads to more accurate normal estimation.
Our contributions are summarized as follows.
• We propose Neural Angle Field (NeAF) for point normal
estimation. Unlike previous methods, our implicit function learns an angle field for each point, which implicitly
predicts the angle offset of query vectors.
• Our method can conduct further optimization at infer-

Normal estimation for unstructured point clouds is an
important task in 3D computer vision. Current methods
achieve encouraging results by mapping local patches
to normal vectors or learning local surface fitting using
neural networks. However, these methods are not generalized well to unseen scenarios and are sensitive to
parameter settings. To resolve these issues, we propose
an implicit function to learn an angle field around the
normal of each point in the spherical coordinate system, which is dubbed as Neural Angle Fields (NeAF).
Instead of directly predicting the normal of an input
point, we predict the angle offset between the ground
truth normal and a randomly sampled query normal.
This strategy pushes the network to observe more diverse samples, which leads to higher prediction accuracy in a more robust manner. To predict normals
from the learned angle fields at inference time, we randomly sample query vectors in a unit spherical space
and take the vectors with minimal angle values as the
predicted normals. To further leverage the prior learned
by NeAF, we propose to refine the predicted normal
vectors by minimizing the angle offsets. The experimental results with synthetic data and real scans show
significant improvements over the state-of-the-art under
widely used benchmarks. Project page: https://lisj575.
github.io/NeAF/.

Introduction
Estimating normals for unstructured point clouds is a fundamental task in 3D computer vision. The estimated normal vectors can be leveraged in various downstream applications, such as surface reconstruction (Kazhdan, Bolitho, and
Hoppe 2006), registration (Pomerleau et al. 2015), and semantic segmentation (Grilli, Menna, and Remondino 2017).
Recently, the learning-based methods have achieved promising results by casting the normal estimation task into a regression problem. They resolved this problem by directly
learning a mapping from local patches to normal vectors using neural networks. However, these methods fail to observe
adequate samples for accurate normal estimation. This leads
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Yu-Shen Liu
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1396

