The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Time-Aware Random Walk Diffusion to Improve Dynamic Graph Learning
Jong-whi Lee and Jinhong Jung*
Department of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Jeonbuk National University, South Korea
jong.whi.lee@jbnu.ac.kr, jinhongjung@jbnu.ac.kr

Abstract

With the astonishing progress of GNNs, diverse augmentation techniques (Zhao et al. 2022; Yoo, Shim, and Kang
2022) have been proposed to increase the generalization
power of GNN models, especially on a static graph. Previous approaches mainly transform the topological structure of
the input graph. For example, drop-based methods stochastically remove a certain number of edges (Rong et al. 2020) or
nodes (Feng et al. 2020) at each training epoch in a similar
manner to dropout regularization. On the contrary, diffusion
methods (Klicpera, Weißenberger, and Günnemann 2019)
insert additional edges having weights scored by graph diffusions such as Personalized PageRank (Tong, Faloutsos,
and Pan 2006), thereby augmenting a spatial locality around
each node and improving graph convolution.
However, the aforementioned techniques assume to augment data within a static graph, and dynamic graph augmentation problem has not yet been comprehensively studied. Unlikely static graphs, dynamic graphs change or evolve
over time by their nature; thus, dynamic graph augmentation
needs to simultaneously consider temporal dynamics as well
as spatial structure. More specifically, as verified in previous
work (Rossi et al. 2020; Shin 2017; Lee, Shin, and Faloutsos
2020), real-world dynamic graphs exhibit temporal locality
indicating that graph objects such as nodes and triangles tend
to be more affected by more recent edges than older ones,
i.e., edges closer to a specific object in time are more likely
to provide important information. Naively applying a static
augmentation method to each time step cannot consider such
a temporal locality.
In this work, we propose T IA R A (Time-aware Random
Walk Diffusion), a novel diffusion-based augmentation
method for a discrete-time dynamic graph which is represented by a temporal sequence of graph snapshots. T IA R A
aims to augment both spatial and temporal localities of each
graph snapshot. For this purpose, we design a time-aware
random walk that a surfer randomly moves around nodes
or a time-axis to measure spatially and temporally localized
scores. We then derive time-aware random walk diffusion
from the scores, and interpret it as the combination of spatial
and temporal augmenters. Our diffusion matrices are used as
augmented adjacency matrices for any dynamic GNN models in discrete-time domain. We further adopt approximate
techniques such as power iteration and sparsification to reduce the heavy cost of computing the diffusion matrices.

How can we augment a dynamic graph for improving the
performance of dynamic graph neural networks? Graph augmentation has been widely utilized to boost the learning performance of GNN-based models. However, most existing approaches only enhance spatial structure within an input static
graph by transforming the graph, and do not consider dynamics caused by time such as temporal locality, i.e., recent
edges are more influential than earlier ones, which remains
challenging for dynamic graph augmentation. In this work,
we propose T IA R A (Time-aware Random Walk Diffusion),
a novel diffusion-based method for augmenting a dynamic
graph represented as a discrete-time sequence of graph snapshots. For this purpose, we first design a time-aware random
walk proximity so that a surfer can walk along the time dimension as well as edges, resulting in spatially and temporally localized scores. We then derive our diffusion matrices
based on the time-aware random walk, and show they become
enhanced adjacency matrices that both spatial and temporal
localities are augmented. Throughout extensive experiments,
we demonstrate that T IA R A effectively augments a given dynamic graph, and leads to significant improvements in dynamic GNN models for various graph datasets and tasks.

Introduction
Dynamic graphs represent various real-world relationships
that dynamically occur over time. Learning such dynamic
graphs has recently attracted considerable attention from
machine learning communities (Skarding, Gabrys, and Musial 2021; Han et al. 2021), and plays a crucial role in diverse
applications such as link prediction (Yang et al. 2021; Pareja
et al. 2020), node or edge classification (Xu et al. 2019;
Pareja et al. 2020), time-series traffic forecasting (Wu et al.
2020; Guo et al. 2019), knowledge completion (Jung, Jung,
and Kang 2021), and pandemic forecasting (Panagopoulos,
Nikolentzos, and Vazirgiannis 2021). Over the last years,
many researchers have put tremendous effort into developing interesting methods by sophisticatedly fusing GNNs and
recurrent neural networks (RNN) or attention mechanisms
for continuous-time (Xu et al. 2020; Rossi et al. 2020) and
discrete-time (Seo et al. 2018; Pareja et al. 2020; Yang et al.
2021) dynamic graphs.
* Jinhong Jung is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8473

