The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Boosting Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation with Probabilistic
Representations
Haoyu Xie1 , Changqi Wang1 , Mingkai Zheng2 , Minjing Dong2 , Shan You3 ,
Chong Fu1 , Chang Xu 2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineer, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
3
SenseTime Research, Beijing, China
xiehaoyu@stumail.neu.edu.cn, 2101668@stu.neu.edu.cn, mingkaizheng@outlook.com, mdon0736@uni.sydney.edu.au,
youshan@sensetime.com, fuchong@mail.neu.edu.cn, c.xu@sydney.edu.au
2

Abstract
Recent breakthroughs in semi-supervised semantic segmentation have been developed through contrastive learning. In
prevalent pixel-wise contrastive learning solutions, the model
maps pixels to deterministic representations and regularizes
them in the latent space. However, there exist inaccurate
pseudo-labels which map the ambiguous representations of
pixels to the wrong classes due to the limited cognitive ability of the model. In this paper, we define pixel-wise representations from a new perspective of probability theory and
propose a Probabilistic Representation Contrastive Learning
(PRCL) framework that improves representation quality by
taking its probability into consideration. Through modelling
the mapping from pixels to representations as the probability via multivariate Gaussian distributions, we can tune the
contribution of the ambiguous representations to tolerate the
risk of inaccurate pseudo-labels. Furthermore, we define prototypes in the form of distributions, which indicates the confidence of a class, while the point prototype cannot. Moreover, we propose to regularize the distribution variance to
enhance the reliability of representations. Taking advantage
of these benefits, high-quality feature representations can be
derived in the latent space, thereby the performance of semantic segmentation can be further improved. We conduct
sufficient experiment to evaluate PRCL on Pascal VOC and
CityScapes to demonstrate its superiority. The code is available at https://github.com/Haoyu-Xie/PRCL.

Figure 1: Contradistinction between two types of representations and prototypes. Deterministic representations: left
triangle symbol, Probabilistic representations: right dotted
cross symbol, Point prototypes: left filled circle symbols,
Distribution prototypes: right radial circle symbols.

Recently, powerful methods based on self-training (Liu et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2022) additionally introduce a pixel-wise
contrastive learning as an auxiliary task to further explore
unlabeled data. Contrastive learning benefits from not only
the local context of neighbouring pixels, but also global semantic class relations across the mini-batch even the entire dataset. They map pixels to representations and regularize them in the latent space in a supervised way, i.e.
gather representations belonging to the same class and scatter representations belonging to different classes, where the
semantic class information comes from both ground truths
and pseudo-labels. Most of contrastive learning methods is
guided by pseudo-labels in semi-supervised settings. Therefore, the quality of pseudo-labels is critical since inaccurate pseudo-labels lead to assigning representations to wrong
classes and cause a disorder in latent space. Existing efforts
try to polish pseudo-labels via either confidence (Liu et al.
2021) or entropy (Feng et al. 2022). These techniques can
improve the quality of pseudo-labels and eliminate inaccurate ones to some extent. However, the inherent noise as well
as essential incorrectness in pseudo-labels are rather difficult
to be perfectly tackled by existing work. Thus, we propose to
alleviate this risk in an opposite way. Specifically, instead of
paying more attention to polishing pseudo-labels for inaccuracy elimination, we propose to improve the quality of representations from data via modelling probability, and allow
them to perform better under the inaccurate pseudo labels.
Comparing with existing conventional deterministic representation modelling, we model representations as a ran-

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a pixel-level classification task,
i.e. predicting the class of each pixel. Existing supervised methods rely on large-scale annotated data, which requires high manual-labeling costs. Semi-supervised learning (Ouali, Hudelot, and Tami 2020; Ke et al. 2020b; Zou
et al. 2021; Sohn et al. 2020) takes advantage of unlabeled
data and relieves the labor of human annotation. Some methods use unlabeled data to improve segmentation models via
adversarial learning (Ke et al. 2020b), consistency regularization (Peng et al. 2020), and self-training (Tarvainen and
Valpola 2017). Self-training is a typical solution that uses
the prediction generated by a model trained on labeled data
(called pseudo-label) as ground-truth to train unlabeled data.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2938

