The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FSR: A General Frequency-Oriented Framework to Accelerate
Image Super-resolution Networks
Jinmin Li1,2 , Tao Dai2 * , Mingyan Zhu1,4 , Bin Chen3,4 , Zhi Wang1 , Shu-Tao Xia1,4
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
4
Research Center of Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory
{ljm22,zmy20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, daitao.edu@gmail.com, chenbin2021@hit.edu.cn,
{wangzhi,xiast}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have witnessed remarkable
achievement in image super-resolution (SR), and plenty of
DNN-based SR models with elaborated network designs have
recently been proposed. However, existing methods usually
require substantial computations by operating in spatial domain. To address this issue, we propose a general frequencyoriented framework (FSR) to accelerate SR networks by considering data characteristics in frequency domain. Our FSR
mainly contains dual feature aggregation module (DFAM)
to extract informative features in both spatial and transform
domains, followed by a four-path SR-Module with different
capacities to super-resolve in the frequency domain. Specifically, DFAM further consists of a transform attention block
(TABlock) and a spatial context block (SCBlock) to extract
global spectral information and local spatial information, respectively, while SR-Module is a parallel network container
that contains four to-be-accelerated branches. Furthermore,
we propose an adaptive weight strategy for a trade-off between image details recovery and visual quality. Extensive
experiments show that our FSR can save FLOPs by almost
40% while reducing inference time by 50% for other SR
methods (e.g., FSRCNN, CARN, SRResNet and RCAN).
Code is available at https://github.com/THU-Kingmin/FSR.

Figure 1: Comparison of PSNR results and computations of
ClassSR (Kong et al. 2021) and our FSR over other SR networks on DIV8K dataset in ×4 SR. ClassSR can accelerate other SR networks with fewer FLOPs, while it requires
higher inference time. By contrast, our FSR succeeds in not
only reducing both FLOPs and inference time, but obtaining
better performance.

16 layers is developed based on residual learning. To further improve the performance, Lim et al. (2017) designed
a very deep and wide network EDSR (Lim et al. 2017)
with more than 60 layers. More recently, more advanced
SR networks like RCAN (Zhang et al. 2018) and SAN (Dai
et al. 2019) contain hundreds of layers and obtain impressive performance by considering feature correlation. Despite
the remarkable performance, these methods usually suffer
from heavy computational costs in practice (see Fig. 1),
which hinders the applications of SR models in resourceconstrained devices. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, RCAN
requires high computational costs of 32.6G FLOPs for input
images with 32 × 32 cropped from DIV8K dataset.
To accelerate SR networks, ClassSR (Kong et al. 2021)
has been recently developed based on the observation that
different image regions contain different reconstruction difficulties. In this way, SR networks can be accelerated by
handling image regions with different capacities. Although

Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR), which pursues to reconstruct high-resolution images from their corresponding lowresolution versions, has been widely applied in various
computer vision tasks like medical diagnostic imaging and
object recognition. Recently, deep neural network (DNN)
based SR methods have received much attention, and different advanced deep SR models with elaborated network
designs have been proposed.
Generally, most existing DNN-based SR methods focus
on deeper architecture design to achieve better performance.
For example, Dong et al. (2014) first designed a shallowthree-layer convolutional network (SRCNN) for SR. Later,
deeper VDSR (Kim, Lee, and Lee 2016) with more than
* Corresponding author: Tao Dai
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1343

