The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Graph Ordering Attention Networks
Michail Chatzianastasis1 , Johannes Lutzeyer1 , George Dasoulas1,2 , Michalis Vazirgiannis1
1

Ecole Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
2
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
{michail.chatzianastasis, johannes.lutzeyer}@polytechnique.edu, georgios_dasoulas@hms.harvard.edu,
mvazirg@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract

treat neighboring nodes as a set and process them individually, omitting potential interactions between the large number of subsets that the neighboring nodes can form. Therefore, current MPNNs cannot observe the entire structure of
neighborhoods in a graph (Pei et al. 2020) and cannot capture all synergistic interactions between neighbors (Murphy
et al. 2019; Wagstaff et al. 2022).
The concept of synergy is important in many scientific
fields and is central to our discussion here. It expresses the
fact that some source variables are more informative when
observed together instead of independently. For example in
neuroscience, synergy is observed when the target variable
corresponds to a stimulus and the source variables are the responses of different neurons (Bizzi and Cheung 2013). In the
Statistics literature (Cox 1984), the modelling interaction of
effects, i.e., synergy of independent variables, has also been
shown to be advantageous. Synergistic information is often
presented in biological cells, where extra information is provided by patterns of coincident spikes from several neurons
(Brenner et al. 2000). In gene-gene interactions, synergy is
present when the contribution of two mutations to the phenotype of a double mutant is larger than the expected additive
effects of the individual mutations (Pérez-Pérez, Candela,
and Micol 2009). We believe the consideration of synergistic information to have great potential in the GNN literature.
In this paper, to better understand interactions between
nodes, we introduce the Partial Information Decomposition
(PID) framework (Williams and Beer 2010) to the graph
learning context. We decompose the information that neighborhood nodes have about the central node into three parts:
unique information from each node, redundant information,
and synergistic information due to the combined information from nodes. We furthermore show that typical MPNNs
cannot capture redundant and synergistic information.
To tackle these limitations we propose the Graph Ordering Attention (GOAT) layer, a novel architecture that can
capture all sources of information. We employ self-attention
to construct a permutation-invariant ordering of the nodes in
each neighborhood before we pass these ordered sequences
to a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) aggregator. Using a
permutation-sensitive aggregator, such as the Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM) model, allows us to obtain larger
representational power (Murphy et al. 2019) and to capture
the redundant and synergistic information. We further ar-

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been successfully used
in many problems involving graph-structured data, achieving state-of-the-art performance. GNNs typically employ a
message-passing scheme, in which every node aggregates information from its neighbors using a permutation-invariant
aggregation function. Standard well-examined choices such
as the mean or sum aggregation functions have limited capabilities, as they are not able to capture interactions among
neighbors. In this work, we formalize these interactions
using an information-theoretic framework that notably includes synergistic information. Driven by this definition, we
introduce the Graph Ordering Attention (GOAT) layer, a
novel GNN component that captures interactions between
nodes in a neighborhood. This is achieved by learning local node orderings via an attention mechanism and processing the ordered representations using a recurrent neural network aggregator. This design allows us to make use
of a permutation-sensitive aggregator while maintaining the
permutation-equivariance of the proposed GOAT layer. The
GOAT model demonstrates its increased performance in
modeling graph metrics that capture complex information,
such as the betweenness centrality and the effective size of
a node. In practical use-cases, its superior modeling capability is confirmed through its success in several real-world node
classification benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) achieve remarkable success in machine learning problems on graphs (Scarselli et al.
2009; Kipf and Welling 2017; Bronstein et al. 2021). In these
problems, data arises in the structure of attributed graphs,
where in addition to the node and edge sets defining a graph,
a set of feature vectors containing data on each node is
present. The majority of GNNs learn node representations
using a message-passing scheme (Gilmer et al. 2017). In
such message passing neural networks (MPNN) each node
iteratively aggregates the feature vectors or hidden representations of its neighbors to update its own hidden representation. Since no specific node ordering exists, the aggregator
has to be a permutation-invariant function (Xu et al. 2019).
Although MPNNs have achieved great results, they have
severe limitations. Their permutation-invariant aggregators
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7006

