The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PIXEL: Physics-Informed Cell Representations
for Fast and Accurate PDE Solvers
Namgyu Kang1 , Byeonghyeon Lee1 , Youngjoon Hong2 , Seok-Bae Yun2 , Eunbyung Park1, 3 *
1

Department of Artificial Intelligence, Sungkyunkwan University
2
Department of Mathematics, Sungkyunkwan University
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University

Abstract

entiation (Baydin et al. 2018) to enforce the physical constraints of underlying PDEs. Although promising and successfully utilized in various forward and inverse problems
thanks to its numerous benefits, such as flexibility in handling a wide range of forward and inverse problems and
mesh-free solutions, PINNs suffer from slow convergence
rates, and they often fall short of the desired accuracy (Krishnapriyan et al. 2021; Wang, Sankaran, and Perdikaris 2022;
Wang, Teng, and Perdikaris 2021).
Training PINNs generally involves deep neural networks
and iterative optimization algorithms, e.g., L-BFGS (Liu
and Nocedal 1989) or Adam (Kingma and Ba 2014), which
typically requires a large number of iterations to converge.
While many techniques have been developed over the past
decades to improve the training efficiency of deep neural networks in general (Girshick 2015; Ioffe and Szegedy
2015), high computational complexity is still a primary concern for their broader applicability.
In addition, multi-layer perceptron (MLP) architecture in
low dimensional input domains, where PINNs generally operate, is known to have spectral bias, which prioritizes learning low-frequency components of the target function. Recent
studies have shown that spectral bias (Rahaman et al. 2019)
indeed exists in PINN models (Moseley, Markham, and
Nissen-Meyer 2021; Wang, Wang, and Perdikaris 2021b)
and this tendency towards smooth function approximation
often leads to failure to accurately capture high-frequency
components or singular behaviors in solution functions.
In this paper, we propose physics-informed cell representations (coined as PIXEL), a grid representation that is
jointly trained with neural networks to improve convergence
rates and accuracy. Inspired by classical numerical solvers
that use grid points, we divide solution space into many subspaces and allocate trainable parameters for each cell (or
grid point). Each cell is a representation that is further processed by following small neural networks to approximate
solution functions. The key motivation behind the proposed
method is to disentangle the trainable parameters with respect to the input coordinates. In neural network-only approaches, such as PINNs, all network parameters are affected by the entire input domain space. Therefore, parameter updates for specific input coordinates influence the outputs of other input subspaces. On the other hand, each input coordinate has dedicated trainable parameters updated

With the increases in computational power and advances
in machine learning, data-driven learning-based methods
have gained significant attention in solving PDEs. Physicsinformed neural networks (PINNs) have recently emerged
and succeeded in various forward and inverse PDE problems thanks to their excellent properties, such as flexibility, mesh-free solutions, and unsupervised training. However,
their slower convergence speed and relatively inaccurate solutions often limit their broader applicability in many science and engineering domains. This paper proposes a new
kind of data-driven PDEs solver, physics-informed cell representations (PIXEL), elegantly combining classical numerical methods and learning-based approaches. We adopt a
grid structure from the numerical methods to improve accuracy and convergence speed and overcome the spectral
bias presented in PINNs. Moreover, the proposed method enjoys the same benefits in PINNs, e.g., using the same optimization frameworks to solve both forward and inverse PDE
problems and readily enforcing PDE constraints with modern automatic differentiation techniques. We provide experimental results on various challenging PDEs that the original
PINNs have struggled with and show that PIXEL achieves
fast convergence speed and high accuracy. Project page:
https://namgyukang.github.io/PIXEL/

Introduction
Partial differential equations (PDEs) have been central to
studying various science and engineering domains (Evans
2010). Numerical methods (Smith 1985; Eymard, Gallouët,
and Herbin 2000) have been developed to approximate the
solutions over the centuries. While successful, it requires
significant computational resources and domain expertise.
As an alternative approach, data-driven machine learning
methods have emerged thanks to recent advances in deep
learning (Rudy et al. 2017; Meng et al. 2020).
Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) have recently
received significant attention as new data-driven PDE
solvers for both forward and inverse problems (Raissi,
Perdikaris, and Karniadakis 2019). PINNs employ neural
networks and gradient-based optimization algorithms to represent and obtain the solutions, leveraging automatic differ* Corresponding author (epark@skku.edu)
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8186

