The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

InfoCTM: A Mutual Information Maximization Perspective of
Cross-Lingual Topic Modeling
Xiaobao Wu1 , Xinshuai Dong2 , Thong Nguyen3 ,
Chaoqun Liu1,4 , Liang-Ming Pan3 , Anh Tuan Luu1
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Carnegie Mellon University, USA
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore
4
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Singapore
{xiaobao002,chaoqun001,anhtuan.luu}@ntu.edu.sg xinshuad@andrew.cmu.edu {e0998147,liangmingpan}@u.nus.edu
Abstract
Cross-lingual topic models have been prevalent for crosslingual text analysis by revealing aligned latent topics. However, most existing methods suffer from producing repetitive
topics that hinder further analysis and performance decline
caused by low-coverage dictionaries. In this paper, we propose the Cross-lingual Topic Modeling with Mutual Information (InfoCTM). Instead of the direct alignment in previous work, we propose a topic alignment with mutual information method. This works as a regularization to properly
align topics and prevent degenerate topic representations of
words, which mitigates the repetitive topic issue. To address
the low-coverage dictionary issue, we further propose a crosslingual vocabulary linking method that finds more linked
cross-lingual words for topic alignment beyond the translations of a given dictionary. Extensive experiments on English,
Chinese, and Japanese datasets demonstrate that our method
outperforms state-of-the-art baselines, producing more coherent, diverse, and well-aligned topics and showing better transferability for cross-lingual classification tasks.

Bilingual corpus

English Topic#3:
music song album…

People enjoy
listening to music...

aligned
English Topic#5:
star celebrity singer …

English doc

Doc-topic distribution
Chinese Topic#3:
歌曲 (song), 专辑 (album),
乐队 (band) …

人们喜爱听
音乐...
Chinese doc

Chinese Topic#5:

aligned

名人 (celebrity), 歌手
(singer), 明星 (star)…
Doc-topic distribution

Figure 1: Illustration of cross-lingual topic models, producing aligned topics of different languages. Words in the brackets are the corresponding English translations.
English Topic#1: photos style
Chinese Topic#1: 风格 文字

finds ebay week vintage
西装 模特 西服 每周

English Topic#2: fashion week photos new style beauty
Chinese Topic#2: 时尚 时髦 流行 时装 模特 每周

Introduction
Cross-lingual topic models have been popular for crosslingual text analysis and applications (Vulić, De Smet, and
Moens 2013). As shown in Figure 1, they aim to discover
cross-lingual topics from bilingual corpora. Each topic is
interpreted as the relevant words in the corresponding language. The same cross-lingual topics are required to be
aligned (semantically consistent across languages). For example, the English Topic#3 and Chinese Topic#3 are aligned
as they are both about music, and English Topic#5 and
Chinese Topic#5 are aligned and both about the celebrity.
These aligned topics can reveal commonalities and differences across languages and cultures, which enables crosslingual analysis without supervision (Ni et al. 2009; Shi et al.
2016; Gutiérrez et al. 2016; Lind et al. 2019).
Since parallel corpora are often difficult to access, recent
cross-lingual topic models tend to rely on vocabulary linking information from bilingual dictionaries (Shi et al. 2016;
Yuan, Van Durme, and Ying 2018; Yang, Boyd-Graber, and
Resnik 2019; Wu et al. 2020a). They commonly use translations of a dictionary as linked cross-lingual words and make

English Topic#3: photos fashion new beauty line week
Chinese Topic#3: 时尚 时髦 全新 金山 流行 模特

Table 1: Top related words of of repetitive cross-lingual topics produced by MCTA (Shi et al. 2016). Repetitive words
are underlined.

these words belong to the same cross-lingual topics, i.e.,
align their topic representations (what topics a word belongs
to). For instance in Figure 1, the word “song” and its Chinese translation both belong to Topic#3 of English and Chinese. These methods are more practical because dictionaries
are widely accessible. Recent studies (Bianchi et al. 2020;
Mueller and Dredze 2021) employ multilingual BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) for multilingual corpora, but they are not
traditional cross-lingual topic models since they do not discover aligned cross-lingual topics.
However, despite the practicality, these methods, e.g.,
MCTA (Shi et al. 2016) and NMTM (Wu et al. 2020a), suffer from two issues: (1) They tend to generate low-quality

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13763

