The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Accommodating Audio Modality in CLIP for Multimodal Processing
Ludan Ruan, Anwen Hu, Yuqing Song, Liang Zhang, Sipeng Zheng, Qin Jin*
School of Information, Renmin University of China
{ruanld,anwenhu,syuqing,zhangliang00,zhengsipeng,qjin}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2019; Portillo-Quintero, Ortiz-Bayliss, and TerashimaMarı́n 2021) have shown superior performance for understanding tasks such as text-visual retrieval and flexible scalability for generation tasks such as video captioning. Audio
pre-training models (Gong, Chung, and Glass 2021; Baevski
et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2022) can represent complex audio
information. As learning general correlations of vision, text
and audio via pre-training from scratch is highly computation costly (e.g. 768 TPU days for VATT (Akbari et al.
2021)), one straight-forward idea is to combine the stateof-the-art VL models with the pre-trained audio backbones.
However, it faces two main challenges. First, the text, vision
and audio backbones usually have different model structures, which makes it hard to combine via a unified training strategy. For example, the audio pre-training models for
Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) normally process audio at the phoneme level, whose parameters are too heavy
compared with the VL models. Second, there is currently no
single audio backbone that can fully handle rich and different types of information conveyed in general audios, which
can be roughly categorized as verbal information and nonverbal information. The verbal information refers to the human speech in the video, which delivers linguistic semantics of the video. The nonverbal information refers to ambient sounds which can reflect natural events occurring in
the video, such as raining. Due to the heterogeneity of these
two types of information, the existing audio models usually
focus on handling only one type. However, both types of
information are indispensable for the comprehensive video
understanding. It is naive and cumbersome to apply multiple
audio backbones to encode the two types of audio information respectively.

Multimodal processing has attracted much attention lately especially with the success of pre-training. However, the exploration has mainly focused on vision-language pre-training, as
introducing more modalities can greatly complicate model
design and optimization. In this paper, we extend the stateof-the-art Vision-Language model CLIP to accommodate the
audio modality for Vision-Language-Audio multimodal processing. Specifically, we apply inter-modal and intra-modal
contrastive learning to explore the correlation between audio and other modalities in addition to the inner characteristics of the audio modality. Moreover, we further design an
audio type token to dynamically learn different audio information type for different scenarios, as both verbal and nonverbal heterogeneous information is conveyed in general audios. Our proposed CLIP4VLA model is validated in different downstream tasks including video retrieval and video
captioning, and achieves the state-of-the-art performance on
the benchmark datasets of MSR-VTT, VATEX, and Audiocaps.The corresponding code and checkpoints will be released at https://github.com/ludanruan/CLIP4VLA.

Introduction
Multimodal processing (Portillo-Quintero, Ortiz-Bayliss,
and Terashima-Marı́n 2021; Carion et al. 2020; Sun et al.
2019) aims to learn the general knowledge across multiple
modalities of our daily perception, such as text, vision and
audio. Due to the high complexity and high training cost of
multimodal alignment, most works focus on the processing
of two modalities such as text and vision. However, only
visual and textual information may be insufficient to comprehensively understand a realistic scenario. For example,
in sports program, the sound of the race start gun and the
cheers of the crowd can describe the intensity of the competition even more than the picture, and the narrator’s commentary helps the general audience with less sports knowledge to better understand the progress of the game. Therefore, it is necessary to equip the video pre-training models
with audio modality modeling.
In recent years, pre-training has achieved great success in multimodal processing. For example, VisionLanguage (VL) pre-training models (Carion et al. 2020; Sun

To tackle the above two challenges, in this paper, we
propose CLIP4VLA (CLIP for Vision, Language and
Audio), which extends CLIP to accommodate the audio modality with unified tri-encoder structure for multimodal processing. Specifically, we employ the state-of-theart VL model CLIP (Portillo-Quintero, Ortiz-Bayliss, and
Terashima-Marı́n 2021) as the vision and text encoders,
and propose an audio encoder with the same architecture
as the vision encoder to ensure the training consistency
and efficiency. To simultaneously encode both verbal information and nonverbal information from the audio track of
videos, we design an audio type token to dynamically con-

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9641

