The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Doodle to Object: Practical Zero-Shot Sketch-Based 3D Shape Retrieval
Bingrui Wang, Yuan Zhou*
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{wangbingrui, zhouyuan}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

tasks that rely on large-scale image datasets (Li et al. 2013,
2014b), SBSR tasks are dwarfed in both variety and volume,
wherein the maximum number of classes number just over
100 with no more than 80 samples per class in most cases.
This predicament seems to make the task of SBSR nigh impossible, thus largely motivates the task of zero-shot SBSR
(ZS-SBSR), which effectively identifies unseen but related
classes during training to promote practical SBSR knowledge expansion applications.
ZS-SBSR is extremely challenging based on the field’s
highly abstract sketches and huge cross-domain discrepancies between two-dimensional (2D) drawing sketches and
3D shapes. Nevertheless, for ZS learning, ZS-SBSR requires
the transference of semantic knowledge from seen to unseen
classes. However, this describes a capability area in which
traditional SBSR methods generally cannot be applied.
To handle these challenges, we propose a new prototype
contrastive learning (PCL) method (Fig. 1) whose training
process consists of two stages, intra-domain feature extraction and cross-domain feature alignment, upon which our
novel prototype contrastive loss is framed. After training,
samples from different domains are clustered near their corresponding prototype to effectively distinguished positive
and negative samples, including unseen ones that appear
during retrieval. Accordingly, our PCL method can handle
the ZS-SBSR problem.
Furthermore, to advance the practical adaptation of ZSSBSR, it is necessary to build a suitable dataset. Thus, we
start with the Doodle2Object (D2O) dataset, which can be
augmented to meet the challenges of ZS-SBSR with the help
of ModelNet40 (Wu et al. 2015) and QuickDraw (Ha and
Eck 2017). D2O consists of 8,992 3D shapes and more than
7M sketches spanning 50 categories. The dataset guarantees
a sample size of at least 30 items per 3D shape class and
contains the temporal information of sketches. We believe
that the proposed D2O dataset has the potential to mimic
the real-world semantic gap between sketches and the larger
domain of 3D shapes.
Extensive experiments are conducted in this study using
the two most common SBSR benchmarks (i.e., SHREC’13
(Li et al. 2013) and SHREC’14 (Li et al. 2014b)), showing
that the proposed PCL method applied to ZS-SBSR outperforms contemporary methods on temporal sketch information, demonstrating PCL’s potential for the practical appli-

Zero-shot (ZS) sketch-based three-dimensional (3D) shape
retrieval (SBSR) is challenging due to the abstraction
of sketches, cross-domain discrepancies between twodimensional sketches and 3D shapes, and ZS-driven semantic knowledge transference from seen to unseen categories.
Extant SBSR datasets suffer from lack of data, and no current SBSR methods consider ZS scenarios. In this paper,
we contribute a new Doodle2Object (D2O) dataset consisting of 8,992 3D shapes and over 7M sketches spanning
50 categories. Then, we propose a novel prototype contrastive learning (PCL) method that effectively extracts features from different domains and adapts them to unseen categories. Specifically, our PCL method combines the ideas
of contrastive and cluster-based prototype learning, and several randomly selected prototypes of different classes are assigned to each sample. By comparing these prototypes, a
given sample can be moved closer to the same semantic
class of samples while moving away from negative ones.
Extensive experiments on two common SBSR benchmarks
and our D2O dataset demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed PCL method for ZS-SBSR. Resource is available at
https://github.com/yigohw/doodle2object.

Introduction
Free-hand sketches comprise a universal modality of human
artistic communications across society. Throughout history,
people of all backgrounds have used sketches to tell stories, express needs, and transcend language barriers. In modern times, with the pervasive nature of touchscreen devices
and the rapid development three-dimensional (3D) sensing
and modeling technologies, sketch-based 3D shape retrieval
(SBSR) has attracted widespread attention for these and
other reasons (Wang, Kang, and Li 2015; Dai et al. 2017;
Dai, Xie, and Fang 2018; Qi, Song, and Xiang 2018; He
et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2020; Dai and Liang 2020).
However, hand sketches must be drawn asynchronously
by humans, at the same time, there is a certain threshold
for 3D sensing and modeling. Therefore, data scarcity is
a major bottleneck faced by almost all researches on both
sketches and 3D shapes, when attempting to intuit meaning from adjacent domains. Compared with computer vision
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2474

