The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Imbalanced Label Distribution Learning
Xingyu Zhao1,2 , Yuexuan An1,2 , Ning Xu1,2 , Jing Wang1,2 , Xin Geng1,2∗
2

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Ministry of Education), Southeast University, Nanjing
211189, China
{xyzhao, yx an, xning, wangjing91, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

25
20

Label distribution covers a certain number of labels, representing the degree to which each label describes an instance.
The learning process on the instances labeled by label distributions is called Label Distribution Learning (LDL). Although LDL has been applied successfully to many practical applications, one problem with existing LDL methods is
that they are limited to data with balanced label information.
However, annotation information in real-world data often exhibits imbalanced distributions, which significantly degrades
the performance of existing methods. In this paper, we investigate the Imbalanced Label Distribution Learning (ILDL)
problem. To handle this challenging problem, we delve into
the characteristics of ILDL and empirically find that the representation distribution shift is the underlying reason for the
performance degradation of existing methods. Inspired by
this finding, we present a novel method named Representation Distribution Alignment (RDA). RDA aligns the distributions of feature representations and label representations to
alleviate the impact of the distribution gap between the training set and the test set caused by the imbalance issue. Extensive experiments verify the superior performance of RDA.
Our work fills the gap in benchmarks and techniques for practical ILDL problems.

15
10
5
0

1

2

3

4

(a) Balanced

5

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

1

2

3

4

(b) Imbalanced

5

1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Balanced
Imbalanced

KLD Chebyshev Clark

(c) Results

Figure 1: Performance comparison of a standard LDL model
(i.e., SA-BFGS) respectively trained on the balanced Movie
dataset and imbalanced Movie dataset. In (a) and (b), the xaxes indicate the rating score, the y-axes indicate the sum of
the description degree. In (c), the x-axis indicates the LDL
evaluation criterion, the y-axis indicates the result value (the
smaller the better).

Despite the fact that LDL achieved success in many applications, one limitation with existing LDL methods is that
they are designed for data with balanced supervision information in different labels. That is, the distribution of label
annotation information is balanced, which means the sum of
the label description degree for each label is approximately
equal. However, annotation information in real-world data
often exhibits imbalanced distributions, which significantly
degrades the performance of existing methods (He and Garcia 2009; Wu et al. 2020). For example, when training a
movie rating distribution model for some types of movies,
the description degree distribution corresponding to a certain rating may be much higher than other ratings due to the
possible deviation of the data collection means. Therefore,
the ideal dataset shown in Figure 1(a) may be difficult to
gather, and it is possible to obtain the imbalanced dataset
shown in Figure 1(b). We use a standard LDL method (i.e.,
SA-BFGS) to train two models from these training sets separately and test them on the given balanced test set (Geng
2016). From the results given in Figure 1(c), we can find
that the performance of the model trained on the imbalanced
dataset is significantly worse than that of the model trained
on the balanced dataset on each evaluation criterion. Therefore, how to learn an LDL model resilient to the imbalanced
label distribution is challenging and meaningful for the practicality of LDL.
We refer to this new and challenging scenario as Imbalanced Label Distribution Learning (ILDL) and systemati-

Introduction
Learning with ambiguity is one of the most important machine learning topics since data ambiguity is ubiquitous in
the real world (Geng 2016; Gao et al. 2017). Label distribution learning (LDL) is a novel paradigm for dealing with
data ambiguity. LDL assigns each instance a label distribution and learns the mapping from instances to label distributions. Each element of a label distribution is called the label
description degree that explicitly indicates the relative importance of the corresponding label to an instance. As the
utility of dealing with ambiguity explicitly, LDL has been
successfully applied to many real applications, such as facial landmark detection (Su and Geng 2019), age estimation (Gao et al. 2018), head poses estimation (Geng and Xia
2014), zero-shot learning (Huo and Geng 2017), emotion
analysis (Yang et al. 2021a) and autism spectrum disorder
classification (Wang et al. 2022).
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11336

