The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Human Mobility Modeling during the COVID-19 Pandemic
via Deep Graph Diffusion Infomax
Yang Liu2 , Yu Rong3 , Zhuoning Guo1 , Nuo Chen1 , Tingyang Xu3 , Fugee Tsung1, 2 , Jia Li1, 2 *
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Tencent AI Lab
yliukj@connect.ust.hk, yu.rong@hotmail.com,{zguo772,nchen022}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn,
tingyangxu@tencent.com,{season,jialee}@ust.hk
Abstract

studies (Levin et al. 2021; Hu et al. 2021; Gibbs et al. 2020,
2021) have analyzed the human mobility patterns to support
policy-makers. They usually aggregate mobility data, provided by commercial companies, such as SafeGraph 2 and
Google 3 , and then compute metrics (e.g., daily average fraction of residents staying at home) to model human mobility.
Despite their effectiveness, they only focus on a macro aspect of mobility during COVID-19 and ignore the impact of
NPIs on individuals. Since NPIs slow the virus spread by
limiting human mobility, an in-depth understanding of human behaviours during the COVID-19 pandemic will allow
decision makers judiciously and promptly implement interventions.
In this work, we strictly follow the real-world scenario
that case diffusions (i.e., location visiting histories) can only
be observed when they are tested positive, which abides by
the privacy data protection regulation of most countries/regions. Under these settings, we aim to answer the question:
will a location be visited by the COVID-19 cases (e.g., confirmed cases, close contacts, and asymptomatic infections)
in the near future? Addressing the above problem is challenging due to the data sparsity in two aspects.
Firstly, due to the privacy policy, the available diffusion
data is anonymous, resulting in a limited number of location visiting records of each case. To alleviate such data
sparsity, a common solution is to incorporate side information. Thus, we propose to utilize the geometric information,
i.e., a geometric graph is constructed where two locations
are connected if they are neighbors. To this end, our problem is formulated into computing the relevance score between a diffusion and a location, conditional on a geometric graph. Following the most recent works (Chang et al.
2021b, 2020; Schwabe, Persson, and Feuerriegel 2021), we
employ the representation learning framework. That is, we
use fixed-length embedding vectors to denote locations, diffusions, and graphs respectively. Figure 1 is an example of
the COVID-19 high-risk location prediction, in which a diffusion illustrates a location history of the COVID-19 case,
and the geometric graph reflects the distance between locations.
Secondly, most locations have a small number of appear-

Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs), such as social
gathering restrictions, have shown effectiveness to slow the
transmission of COVID-19 by reducing the contact of people.
To support policy-makers, multiple studies have first modeled human mobility via macro indicators (e.g., average daily
travel distance) and then studied the effectiveness of NPIs. In
this work, we focus on mobility modeling and, from a micro perspective, aim to predict locations that will be visited
by COVID-19 cases. Since NPIs generally cause economic
and societal loss, such a micro perspective prediction benefits
governments when they design and evaluate them. However,
in real-world situations, strict privacy data protection regulations result in severe data sparsity problems (i.e., limited case
and location information). To address these challenges, we
formulate the micro perspective mobility modeling into computing the relevance score between a diffusion and a location,
conditional on a geometric graph. we propose a model named
Deep Graph Diffusion Infomax (DGDI), which jointly models variables including a geometric graph, a set of diffusions
and a set of locations. To facilitate the research of COVID19 prediction, we present two benchmarks that contain geometric graphs and location histories of COVID-19 cases. Extensive experiments on the two benchmarks show that DGDI
significantly outperforms other competing methods.

Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has been the greatest global public health challenge with over 567 million confirmed cases
and over 6.3 million deaths as of 27 July 20221 . The outbreak of the COVID-19 not only threatens the public health
but also has a devastating impact on economic activity, leading to increased food insecurity, poverty, and socioeconomic
inequality (Wang et al. 2020; Laborde et al. 2020; Clouston,
Natale, and Link 2021). To control the spread of COVID19, Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs), such as social gathering restrictions, school and business closures, and
stay-at-home orders, are implemented via changing people’s
mobility behaviours (Haug et al. 2020). Therefore, multiple
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
who.int/publications/m/item/weekly-epidemiological-updateon-covid-19---27-july-2022

2
3

14347

https://www.safegraph.com/academics
https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/

