The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learnable Blur Kernel for Single-Image Defocus Deblurring in the Wild
Jucai Zhai1 , Pengcheng Zeng1 , Chihao Ma1 , Jie Chen1,2 , Yong Zhao1 *
1

Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
2
Peng Cheng Laborator
{jucaizhai, zpceng, machihao}@stu.pku.edu.cn, yongzhao@pkusz.edu.cn, chenj@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract
Recent research showed that the dual-pixel sensor has made
great progress in defocus map estimation and image defocus
deblurring. However, extracting real-time dual-pixel views is
troublesome and complex in algorithm deployment. Moreover, the deblurred image generated by the defocus deblurring network lacks high-frequency details, which is unsatisfactory in human perception. To overcome this issue, we propose a novel defocus deblurring method that uses the guidance of the defocus map to implement image deblurring. The
proposed method consists of a learnable blur kernel to estimate the defocus map, which is an unsupervised method,
and a single-image defocus deblurring generative adversarial network (DefocusGAN) for the first time. The proposed
network can learn the deblurring of different regions and recover realistic details. We propose a defocus adversarial loss
to guide this training process. Competitive experimental results confirm that with a learnable blur kernel, the generated defocus map can achieve results comparable to supervised methods. In the single-image defocus deblurring task,
the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art results, especially significant improvements in perceptual quality, where
PSNR reaches 25.56 dB and LPIPS reaches 0.111.

Figure 1: Qualitative comparison on the DPDD dataset. This
image has obvious depth information. The first and last
columns show defocused input images and their ground truth
(GT). MDPNet is the best single-image defocus deblurring
network. As we can see, compared to MDPNet, our generated images can handle large-scale defocus blur, recovering
good structure and texture.
to monocular depth estimation. Both obtain depth clues from
an image, which is an unreliable estimation. Therefore, it is a
challenge to remove the defocus blur and restore the all-infocus (AiF) image. Recent work in (Abuolaim and Brown
2020a) proposed a method to remove defocus blur using the
left and right views of a dual-pixel (DP) sensor as input.
The idea comes from the way DP sensors work, which is
similar to stereo views to provide defocus clues. However,
extracting real-time DP views is troublesome and complex
in algorithm deployment(Abuolaim et al. 2021a). Existing
single-image deblurring networks generate images of poor
quality and cannot properly handle defocus blur due to the
lack of reliable defocus clues. At the same time, there is also
a lack of high-frequency (HF) information, which is unsatisfactory in human perception. It can be seen from the MDPNet (Abuolaim, Afifi, and Brown 2022a) in Figure 1.
Based on these findings, we propose a new method to alleviate the defocus blur problem. We first generate a defocus
map using DP views to obtain defocus clues. Since the current defocus map has no ground truth, we propose a learnable blur kernel (BK) to estimate the defocus map in an unsupervised way. We then propose DefocusGAN guided by
defocus map. Since the defocus blur area is regular, we design a defocus adversarial loss to focus on the learning of
blurred regions. Due to the use of an annealing strategy, the
defocus map can be removed during inference to achieve

Introduction
Defocus blur occurs when a scene point outside the depthof-field (DoF) of the lens is out-of-focus (OoF) during a
camera capture (Abuolaim and Brown 2020a). As shown in
Figure 1, objects located at different depths have different
degrees of blur. During the shooting process of the camera,
the light from the scene point on the focal plane of the camera’s object side is focused on the image plane, and no blur
occurs. As the distance between the scene point and the focal
plane of the object side of the camera gets farther, the projection of the scene point on the image plane also presents
a larger circle of confusion (CoC), resulting in defocus blur.
The spatial extent of the CoC can be described by a point
spread function (PSF).
Most existing methods (Karaali and Jung 2018; Lee et al.
2021) start with single-image itself to reduce defocus blur.
However, according to the PSF, defocus deblurring is related
* corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3384

