The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Semi-supervised Learning with Support Isolation
by Small-Paced Self-Training
Zheng Xie, Hui Sun, Ming Li
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{xiez,sunh,lim}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

Huang et al. 2006) aims to build models from the data where
the selection of labeled data subjects to some bias or preference. The shift between labeled and unlabeled distributions
is usually assumed to be of certain types, e.g., label shift,
covariate shift, concept shift, etc.
In this paper, we focus on a specific type of problem,
where the labeling process is not executed on random instances, but determined by some preceding filtering mechanism. Such a mechanism can be regarded as a deterministic
classification model for predicting if an instance is qualified
to enter the subsequent process, which includes the observation or production of its ground truth label. If the instance is
rejected by the filtering model, the label remains unrevealed
and will never be known. The filtering mechanism can be a
set of rules, a group of experts, or a machine learning model,
depending on the situation. Such situations can occur in various fields including financial, medical, marketing, etc., here
we take the lung nodule diagnosis as an example:

In this paper, we address a special scenario of semisupervised learning, where the label missing is caused by a
preceding filtering mechanism, i.e., an instance can enter a
subsequent process in which its label is revealed if and only
if it passes the filtering mechanism. The rejected instances
are prohibited to enter the subsequent labeling process due
to economical or ethical reasons, making the support of the
labeled and unlabeled distributions isolated from each other.
In this case, semi-supervised learning approaches which rely
on certain coherence of the labeled and unlabeled distribution
would suffer from the consequent distribution mismatch, and
hence result in poor prediction performance. In this paper, we
propose a Small-Paced Self-Training framework, which iteratively discovers labeled and unlabeled instance subspaces
with bounded Wasserstein distance. We theoretically prove
that such a framework may achieve provably low error on the
pseudo labels during learning. Experiments on both benchmark and pneumonia diagnosis tasks show that our method is
effective.

1

When a lung nodule is detected during a CT lung scan,
the doctors decide if the nodule has to be surgically
removed based on some treatment rules. If the nodule
needs surgical removal, the nodule tissue can be collected
during the surgery and then analyzed by the pathologists
under a microscope. In such a case, the property of the
tumor is observed. If the nodule is decided against surgical removal, the patient will have a conservative treatment, and the nodule property remains unrevealed since
the nodule tissue is not available for biopsy. The doctors
“filter” the data to be “labeled” according to the treatment rules, which makes the data suffer label missing
for building machine learning models for other tasks like
nodule classification.

Introduction

Semi-supervised learning (Chapelle, Schlkopf, and Zien
2006; Zhu et al. 2009), which aims to alleviate the huge
cost of collecting labeled data by exploiting the relatively
large amount of unlabeled data, is raised from real-world
demands. Existing approaches utilize the unlabeled data for
better modeling the data distribution through different ways,
increasing the capability of semi-supervised learning in various scenarios (Bennett and Demiriz 1999; Nigam et al.
2000; Zhu, Ghahramani, and Lafferty 2003; Tarvainen and
Valpola 2017; Berthelot et al. 2019).
Differing from semi-supervised learning, which usually
considers the labeled data is sampled from the population
distribution with no or neglectable shift, in specific situations, labeled data may be sampled from a different distribution other than the test distribution, and unlabeled data
sampled from the test distribution can be used for improving learning. For example, domain adaptation (Ben-David
et al. 2010; Hoffman et al. 2018; Qu et al. 2019) aims to
build models with labeled and unlabeled data from two different but related (source and target) domains. Learning under sample selection bias (Quiñonero-Candela et al. 2008;

Such a filtering mechanism makes the distribution of the
labeled data different from the overall data distribution. A
hard filtering boundary isolates the labeled distribution and
the unlabeled distribution, making it difficult to learn the decision boundary for the target task on the unlabeled side,
as shown in Figure 2. Here we remark that the problem
we face can be regarded as some sort of sample selection
bias, but the mainstream of research in this direction does
not interested in such exceptional case that the labeled and
unlabeled distribution do not overlap in their support. Instead, the condition that the support of biased labeled data

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10510

