The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Geometric Inductive Biases for Identifiable Unsupervised Learning of
Disentangled Representations
Ziqi Pan, Li Niu* , Liqing Zhang*
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{panziqi ai, ustcnewly}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

tional Autoencoders (Kingma and Welling 2013; Rezende,
Mohamed, and Wierstra 2014) (VAEs). Compared to other
methods, VAE-based models dominate unsupervised disentangling, and various VAE variants (Higgins et al. 2017; Kim
and Mnih 2018; Chen et al. 2018) are proposed. However,
the identifiability issue of VAE-based models is pointed out
by (Locatello et al. 2019a), namely unsupervised disentangling is fundamentally impossible without inductive biases
both on the models and datasets. To tackle this issue, recent works turn to employing weak supervision (Shu et al.
2020; Bouchacourt, Tomioka, and Nowozin 2018; Gabbay
and Hoshen 2019; Hosoya 2019; Chen and Batmanghelich 2020; Locatello et al. 2019b; Klys, Snell, and Zemel
2018; Paige et al. 2017), altering the variational family and
prior distribution (Kumar and Poole 2020; Mathieu et al.
2019), and introducing auxiliary variables (Kim, Guerrero,
and Pavlovic 2021; Khemakhem et al. 2020; Mita, Filippone, and Michiardi 2021; Hyvarinen, Sasaki, and Turner
2019; Hälvä et al. 2021). Another line of research focuses
on revealing inner mechanisms and inductive biases (Ridgeway 2016) for VAE-based models, and the PCA inductive
biases are demystified (Rolinek, Zietlow, and Martius 2019;
Zietlow, Rolinek, and Martius 2021; Bao et al. 2020) recently. It has been analyzed that the PCA inductive biases
induce VAEs to improve local alignment of latent dimensions with principal components of the data (Zietlow, Rolinek, and Martius 2021; Rakowski and Lippert 2021). In
this paper, we propose novel geometric inductive biases for
unsupervised disentangling that induce the model to capture
the global geometric properties of the data manifold, and the
model identifiability is proven to be rigorously guaranteed.
We also propose an unsupervised disentangling framework
named Geometric Disentangling Regularized AutoEncoder
(GDRAE), which combines the PCA and the proposed geometric inductive biases in one unified framework.
In the remainder of this paper, we introduce our proposed
geometric inductive biases and GDRAE for unsupervised
disentangling in Sec. 2-3, and discuss their relations to existing works in Sec. 4. We show experimental results in Sec. 5,
and conclude the paper in Sec. 6.

The model identifiability is a considerable issue in the unsupervised learning of disentangled representations. The PCA
inductive biases revealed recently for unsupervised disentangling in VAE-based models are shown to improve local alignment of latent dimensions with principal components of the
data. In this paper, in additional to the PCA inductive biases,
we propose novel geometric inductive biases from the manifold perspective for unsupervised disentangling, which induce the model to capture the global geometric properties of
the data manifold with guaranteed model identifiability. We
also propose a Geometric Disentangling Regularized AutoEncoder (GDRAE) that combines the PCA and the proposed geometric inductive biases in one unified framework. The experimental results show the usefulness of the geometric inductive
biases in unsupervised disentangling and the effectiveness of
our GDRAE in capturing the geometric inductive biases.

1

Introduction

Learning disentangled representation has attracted considerable research interest in the field of representation learning.
Disentangled representation is considered to be interpretable
with each dimension relevant to one generative factor of
the data yet irrelevant to other generative factors (Higgins
et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2021). Disentangled representations are
considered to be more generalizable (Van Steenkiste et al.
2019), semantically meaningful, and thus useful for various
downstream tasks (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013).
The unsupervised learning of disentangled representations is more preferable than a supervised manner since acquiring ground-truth labels of generative factors is expensive. Given an unlabelled dataset, unsupervised disentangling methods aim to learn a generative model that aligns
latent dimensions with ground-truth generative factors (Higgins et al. 2017). Classical methods such as PCA (Wold,
Esbensen, and Geladi 1987) and ICA (Comon 1994; Theis
2006) are based on algebraic and statistical approaches, and
more recent methods are based on neural network architectures and deep learning approaches (Zietlow, Rolinek, and
Martius 2021), such as Generative Adversarial Nets (Goodfellow et al. 2014) (GANs) (Chen et al. 2016) and Varia-

2

* Corresponding author

Geometric Inductive Biases

We first briefly introduce some fundamentals of Riemannian
geometry. For a thorough reference, refer to (Petersen 2006).

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9372

