The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Mitigating Adversarial Norm Training with Moral Axioms
Taylor Olson, Kenneth D. Forbus
Northwestern University
taylorolson@u.northwestern.edu, forbus@northwestern.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses the issue of adversarial attacks on ethical AI systems. We investigate using moral axioms and rules
of deontic logic in a norm learning framework to mitigate adversarial norm training. This model of moral intuition and
construction provides AI systems with moral guard rails yet
still allows for learning conventions. We evaluate our approach by drawing inspiration from a study commonly used
in moral development research. This questionnaire aims to
test an agent's ability to reason to moral conclusions despite
opposed testimony. Our findings suggest that our model can
still correctly evaluate moral situations and learn conventions
in an adversarial training environment. We conclude that
adding axiomatic moral prohibitions and deontic inference
rules to a norm learning model makes it less vulnerable to
adversarial attacks.

Background and Definitions
Here we are interested in learning and reasoning about injunctive norms rather than descriptive norms. A norm is thus
taken to be an evaluative attitude about what should (not)
happen, e.g., “you should not steal.” We build upon our previous framework for representing and performing evidential
reasoning about norms (Olson and Forbus 2021).

Norm Frames
This framework represents norms as logical frame-based
knowledge structures. A norm frame has four slots: 1) the
behavior the norm is about, 2) the contextual preconditions
for the norm, 3) the deontic evaluation of the behavior, and
4) the prevalence of the behavior. We have extended this
representation to be more expressive by allowing for conjunctions of logical statements which can contain open variables (prefixed with ‘?’) in the behavior and context slots.
Unconditional norms are represented with an empty conjunction in the context slot that is taken to be tautologous.
All the concepts within the norm frame slots are grounded
in the NextKB knowledge base (Forbus and Hinrichs 2017).
The concepts for evaluation consist of the modals from the
Traditional Threefold Classification (TTC) of Deontic
Logic (McNamara 1996): Obligatory (OBL), Optional
(OPT), Impermissible (IMP). We ignore the prevalence slot
here as we are only concerned with deontic reasoning. We
provide an example for the norm underlying the claim “it is
impermissible to smoke in a house” below. This norm frame
states that when it can be proven that an agent is in a human
residence, then it should not also be true that the agent is
smoking.

The Bane of Machine Ethics
It has been argued that machine learning is the bane of machine ethics as such models are vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Olson 2022). The normative attitudes of such bottomup approaches ride the wave of common opinion, no matter
its moral status. In this paper we present a grounded norm
learning model that can instead reject common opinion if it
does not align with a priori moral principles. We demonstrate that this approach mitigates adversarial norm training
but, importantly, can still learn societal norms and conventions. We aim to contribute towards moving machine ethics
away from moral imitation and towards moral understanding.
We start by outlining the norm learning framework we
build upon. Then we discuss the moral development and
philosophical theories underlying our approach. Next, we
explain how our model deploys deontic inference rules to
reason from first principles and block adversarial training.
Then we discuss and analyze our model’s performance on a
task used in moral development research. We conclude with
related work and discussion.

(isa norm1 Norm)
(behavior norm1
(and (isa ?smoke Smoking)
(doneBy ?smoke ?agent)))

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11882

