The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Identify Event Causality with Knowledge and Analogy
Sifan Wu1 , Ruihui Zhao2 , Yefeng Zheng2 , Jian Pei3 , Bang Liu1 *
1

RALI & Mila, University of Montreal
2
Tencent Jarvis Lab
3
Duke University
sifan.wu@umontreal.ca, zachary@ruri.waseda.jp, yefengzheng@tencent.com,
j.pei@duke.edu, bang.liu@umontreal.ca
Abstract

Sentence 1: An earthquake measuring at least magnitude-5.9 shook
a sparsely populated area of southern Iran on Sunday, flattening
seven villages and killing 10 people, officials said.

Event causality identification (ECI) aims to identify the
causal relationship between events, which plays a crucial role
in deep text understanding. Due to the diversity of real-world
causality events and difficulty in obtaining sufficient training
data, existing ECI approaches have poor generalizability and
struggle to identify the relation between seldom seen events.
In this paper, we propose to utilize both external knowledge
and internal analogy to improve ECI. On the one hand, we
utilize a commonsense knowledge graph called ConceptNet
to enrich the description of an event sample and reveal the
commonalities or associations between different events. On
the other hand, we retrieve similar events as analogy examples and glean useful experiences from such analogous neighbors to better identify the relationship between a new event
pair. By better understanding different events through external knowledge and making an analogy with similar events, we
can alleviate the data sparsity issue and improve model generalizability. Extensive evaluations on two benchmark datasets
show that our model outperforms other baseline methods by
around 18% on the F1-value on average.

Sentence 2: Tehran's seismologic center said the quake measured
magnitude-5.9, but the U.S. Geological Survey in Golden, Colo., said it
was a magnitude-6.1 temblor.
Intra-sentence causality:
Inter-sentence causality:

Event Causality Identification

Figure 1: An example of ECI. Each double arrow line indicates that there is a causal relationship between the two
noted events.
the intra-sentence causality between two events mentioned
in the same sentence, here we aim to identify both sentencelevel and document-level ECI (DECI) to predict both intrasentence and inter-sentence event causality. It is also worth
noting that although causal relationships are directed, we
omit the causal directions following the same settings as
prior research works (Zuo et al. 2021a; Cao et al. 2021).
Identifying event causality is challenging due to several
reasons. First, existing datasets for ECI are relatively small
and imbalanced. For example, the largest widely used public ECI dataset is the EventStoryLine Corpus (Caselli and
Vossen 2017), which contains 258 documents consisting of
4,316 sentences, and only 1,770 out of 7,805 event pairs are
annotated as causal relations. This situation poses challenges
to existing data-hungry deep learning-based approaches for
ECI tasks (Zuo et al. 2020; Cao et al. 2021; Liu, Chen, and
Zhao 2020), which mainly utilize language models to model
sentence context and treat the ECI task as a binary classification problem. Therefore, how to efficiently utilize limited
data is one essential problem to be solved for ECI. Second,
event mentions in texts are usually short and lack explicit
definitions or descriptions, making it difficult to learn a good
representation for an event. Third, as there are diverse and
enormous amount of events in real-world, how to improve
the generalizability of ECI models on unseen events is a critical problem.
We propose to exploit both external knowledge and internal analogy for improving the representation and generalization abilities of ECI models. On the one hand, by in-

Introduction
Event causality identification (ECI) is an important task in
natural language processing (NLP) which aims to identity
the causal relationships between events in text pieces, i.e.,
predict whether one event causes another one to happen. The
term “event” is used as a cover term to refer to any situations that can happen, occur, or hold, which is a synonym to
“eventuality” introduced by (Bach 1986) for covering both
dynamic and static situations. With a better understanding
of event causality, ECI can help with various NLP applications, such as question answering (Oh et al. 2016), machine
reading comprehension (Berant et al. 2014), and logical reasoning (Ding et al. 2019; Hashimoto 2019).
Figure 1 shows an example to illustrate the task of ECI.
Given two sentences “An earthquake ... killing 10 people, officials said.” and “The U.S. ... a magnitude-6.1 temblor.”, an ECI system needs to identify the causal relationships between mentioned events in the texts, such as
“killing” and “temblor”. Specifically, while most existing researches focus on sentence-level ECI which only predicts
* Corresponding author. Canada CIFAR AI Chair.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13745

