The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Reliable Neural Machine Translation with Consistency-Aware
Meta-Learning
Rongxiang Weng1,2 , Qiang Wang3,4 , Wensen Cheng2 , Changfeng Zhu2 , Min Zhang1
1

Soochow University, Suzhou, China
2
miHoYo AI, Shanghai, China
3
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
4
RoyalFlush AI Research Institute, Hangzhou, China
wengrongxiang@gmail.com, wangqiangneu@gmail.com, vinson7973@gmail.com, bajiuchangfeng@126.com,
minzhang@suda.edu.cn
Abstract
Source:

Neural machine translation (NMT) has achieved remarkable
success in producing high-quality translations. However, current NMT systems suffer from a lack of reliability, as their
outputs that are often affected by lexical or syntactic changes
in inputs, resulting in large variations in quality. This limitation hinders the practicality and trustworthiness of NMT.
A contributing factor to this problem is that NMT models
trained with the one-to-one paradigm struggle to handle the
source diversity phenomenon, where inputs with the same
meaning can be expressed differently. In this work, we treat
this problem as a bilevel optimization problem and present
a consistency-aware meta-learning (CAML) framework derived from the model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) algorithm to address it. Specifically, the NMT model with CAML
(named C O NMT) first learns a consistent meta representation of semantically equivalent sentences in the outer loop.
Subsequently, a mapping from the meta representation to the
output sentence is learned in the inner loop, allowing the NMT
model to translate semantically equivalent sentences to the
same target sentence. We conduct experiments on the NIST
Chinese to English task, three WMT translation tasks, and
the TED M2O task. The results demonstrate that C O NMT
effectively improves overall translation quality and reliably
handles diverse inputs.

在没有新来的驾驶员的情况下，你让我校准了操纵
杆。

Trans: You make me calibrate joystick without a new driver.
在没有新来的驾驶员的情况下，你让我校准了控制
(control)
杆。
Under the case of no new pilot, you ask me to control
Trans:
the control stick.

Source:

Source:

你让我校准了操纵杆，在新来的那个驾驶员还没来
(a new driver)
的情况下。

Trans:

You let me calibration the joystick when you haven’t
come yet.

Figure 1: Translations (Trans) from semantically equivalent
inputs (Source). Compared to the first one, Some semantically irrelevant modifications in the following inputs bring
apparent changes in the outputs.

Introduction
Neural machine translation (NMT) based on the encoderdecoder structure (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014;
Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) and attention mechanism (Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015), has achieved prominent success in the vast majority of translation tasks (Cho
et al. 2014; Vaswani et al. 2017) in recent years. Most NMT
models are trained by parallel data in an end-to-end manner.
In a nutshell, the encoder encodes an input sentence into sequential hidden states as contextual representation. Then, the
decoder fetches the contextual representation through cross
attention and generates the corresponding target sentence.
However, many previous studies have shown that NMT
models are highly susceptible to lexical or syntactic changes
in inputs (Ott et al. 2018; He, Meister, and Su 2020). This
means that altering the structure of the input sentence or even
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13709

just a few words, without changing the semantics, can result
in a significant change in the output, frequently leading to
inaccurate translations (See Figure 1). One reason for this
is that the one-to-one training paradigm conflicts with the
many-to-many characteristic of natural language. We define
the aforementioned phenomenon as the source diversity problem and focus on the many-to-one situation in this work. In
reality, the many-to-one mapping is commonplace in NMT.
For example, individuals may express the same concept in
different ways, and even two descriptions of the same concept from a single individual may vary significantly. When
NMT correctly handles the source diversity, it will become
more reliable in diversified application scenarios.
Some recent works have noticed this problem and sought
to address it. Nguyen et al. (2020) proposed a data augmentation method, which back-translates the original sentence by
several machine translation systems, and then directly adds
them into the model training process. However, it does not
constrain the NMT model, leaving them to deal only with synthetic data. Wei et al. (2020) proposed a variational method to
model uncertainty, so as to map semantically equivalent sen-

