The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Semantic-Aware Superpixel for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Sangtae Kim1 , Daeyoung Park2 , andByonghyo Shim1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
2
Department of Information and Communication, Inha University, Incheon, Korea
stkim@islab.snu.ac.kr, dpark@inha.ac.kr, bshim@islab.snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Weakly-supervised semantic segmentation aims to train a
semantic segmentation network using weak labels. Among
weak labels, image-level label has been the most popular
choice due to its simplicity. However, since image-level labels lack accurate object region information, additional modules such as saliency detector have been exploited in weakly
supervised semantic segmentation, which requires pixel-level
label for training. In this paper, we explore a self-supervised
vision transformer to mitigate the heavy efforts on generation of pixel-level annotations. By exploiting the features
obtained from self-supervised vision transformer, our superpixel discovery method finds out the semantic-aware superpixels based on the feature similarity in an unsupervised manner. Once we obtain the superpixels, we train the semantic segmentation network using superpixel-guided seeded region growing method. Despite its simplicity, our approach
achieves the competitive result with the state-of-the-arts on
PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS-COCO 2014 semantic segmentation datasets for weakly supervised semantic segmentation.
Our code is available at https://github.com/st17kim/semanticaware-superpixel.

1

Figure 1: Superpixels obtained by SLIC (Felzenszwalb and
Huttenlocher 2004) and our method. The colors are only
used to indicate the different superpixels.

level labels as weakly-supervised semantic segmentation
(WSSS).
One major difficulty of WSSS is to discover object locations and shapes from image-level labels. A typical WSSS
approach is to locate the object regions using the class activation mapping (Zhou et al. 2016) and use these region in the
training of semantic segmentation network (Kolesnikov and
Lampert 2016; Li et al. 2018). However, since the pseudolabels generated from this approach are sparse and inaccurate, there exists a considerable performance gap between
fully-supervised and weakly-supervised semantic segmentation. To obtain the object region information, many recent
WSSS approaches exploit the extra supervisions (Yao and
Gong 2020; Li et al. 2021). One well-known approach is to
employ the saliency detectors to obtain the saliency map indicating the class-agnostic object regions. While the saliency
maps are commonly used in many WSSS approaches, the
saliency detectors still requires huge effort for the detailed
pixel-level annotation.
Recently, DINO (Caron et al. 2021), a self-supervised
vision transformer trained by distillation mechanism without labels, has achieved the comparable performance to the
state-of-the-art convolutional neural network models. In particular, the feature obtained by DINO appears to contain explicit information about the semantic segmentation of objects in an image. It has been shown that this DINO-based
features can be exploited in many computer vision tasks
such as unsupervised object detection (Siméoni et al. 2021)
or unsupervised saliency detection (Wang et al. 2022).
An aim of this paper is to relieve the thirst for pixel-level

Introduction

Image semantic segmentation, a task to assign a semantic label to every pixel, has received much attention due
to its wide range of applications such as autonomous driving, medical diagnosis, and aerial imaging (Cordts et al.
2016; Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015). Recently, deep
learning (DL)-based semantic segmentation has received
special attention due to its excellent segmentation performance (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015). One wellknown shortcoming of this approach is that it requires largescale training dataset with dense annotation for the network
training. Since the generation of fully-annotated dataset is
laborious, weakly supervised learning has received much
attention as a surrogate of the fully supervised learning
(Kolesnikov and Lampert 2016; Huang et al. 2018). Among
the various types of weak supervisions, image-level labels,
indicating the existing classes of an image, are popularly
used due to the simplicity (Huang et al. 2018). We henceforth refer to the semantic segmentation using the imageCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1142

