The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Federated Learning on Non-IID Graphs via Structural Knowledge Sharing
Yue Tan1 * , Yixin Liu2 * , Guodong Long1 , Jing Jiang1 , Qinghua Lu3 , Chengqi Zhang1
1

Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
2
Monash University, Australia
3
Data61, CSIRO, Australia
yue.tan@student.uts.edu.au, yixin.liu@monash.edu, {guodong.long, jing.jiang}@uts.edu.au,
qinghua.lu@data61.csiro.au, chengqi.zhang@uts.edu.au

Avg Test Acc (%)

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have shown their superiority
in modeling graph data. Owing to the advantages of federated learning, federated graph learning (FGL) enables clients
to train strong GNN models in a distributed manner without sharing their private data. A core challenge in federated
systems is the non-IID problem, which also widely exists
in real-world graph data. For example, local data of clients
may come from diverse datasets or even domains, e.g., social
networks and molecules, increasing the difficulty for FGL
methods to capture commonly shared knowledge and learn
a generalized encoder. From real-world graph datasets, we
observe that some structural properties are shared by various domains, presenting great potential for sharing structural
knowledge in FGL. Inspired by this, we propose FedStar, an
FGL framework that extracts and shares the common underlying structure information for inter-graph federated learning
tasks. To explicitly extract the structure information rather
than encoding them along with the node features, we define structure embeddings and encode them with an independent structure encoder. Then, the structure encoder is shared
across clients while the feature-based knowledge is learned
in a personalized way, making FedStar capable of capturing more structure-based domain-invariant information and
avoiding feature misalignment issues. We perform extensive
experiments over both cross-dataset and cross-domain nonIID FGL settings, demonstrating the superiority of FedStar.

Local
FedAvg

75.0
72.5

GCFL

70.0

1.2

BZR (SM)

1.0

ENZYMES (BIO)

0.8

PROTEINS (BIO)

67.5

0.6

Letter-low (CV)

65.0

0.4

Letter-med (CV)

62.5
60.0

1.4

MUTAG (SM)

SM

BIO-SM BIO-SN-CV

(a)

0.2

Random
M

B

E

P L-l L-m R

0.0

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Performance comparison of local training and
FL/FGL methods (McMahan et al. 2017; Xie et al. 2021)
in three cross-dataset/domain non-IID settings. (b) The
heatmap of Jensen-Shannon divergence of degree distributions among six real-world graph datasets from different domains and random graphs. The random graphs are generated
with Erdős–Rényi model (Erdős, Rényi et al. 1960).
shared model or personalized models in a decentralized
manner while not sharing the local data of clients (Yang
et al. 2019). Due to the advantages of FL, it is natural to
apply FL to graph data to mitigate the data isolation and protect the security of graph data owned by end users, such as
molecule graphs owned by pharmaceutical companies and
social networks located in the social app of end users. Collaboratively training GNN models with an FL framework,
federated graph learning (FGL) has emerged to be a promising direction to further explore the potential of GNNs on
decentralized graph data.
An important challenge in FL is the non-IID data problem where local datasets of clients can be extremely different due to their diverse behaviors or preferences. This difference may lead to unstable training and performance drop in
some extreme cases, e.g., the data of clients are from different domains (Li et al. 2020c; Kairouz et al. 2021). The nonIID data problem, unfortunately, also naturally exists in FGL
owing to the diversity of graph data. For example, different companies/platforms maintain rich social networks data,
which are of great heterogeneity (i.e., diverse feature spaces
and connection rules) due to different data collection manners and purposes. It is beneficial to overcome the non-IID
issue, enabling these companies to collaboratively provide
better online social network service without sacrificing data
security. Furthermore, it is of great potential to explore the
underlying knowledge commonly shared by heterogeneous
graph domains, e.g., social networks and molecules.

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been widely used to
model graph-structured data in a variety of scenarios and applications, such as recommender systems (Wu et al. 2020a),
drug discovery (Gaudelet et al. 2021), and traffic (Bai et al.
2020). Most existing GNNs follow a centrally training principle where graph data need to be collected together before
training (Kipf and Welling 2017; Xu et al. 2019). However,
nowadays, a large number of graph data are generated from
edge devices and may contain private data of users, hindering the traditional GNNs from training strong models by collective intelligence (Zhang et al. 2021a).
Federated learning (FL), as a new machine learning
paradigm, allows clients to collaboratively train a globally
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9953

