The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SSPAttack: A Simple and Sweet Paradigm for Black-Box Hard-Label Textual
Adversarial Attack
Han Liu1 , Zhi Xu1 , Xiaotong Zhang1 * , Xiaoming Xu1 , Feng Zhang2 , Fenglong Ma3 ,
Hongyang Chen4 , Hong Yu1 , Xianchao Zhang1
1

Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
2
Peking University, Beijing, China
3
The Pennsylvania State University, Pennsylvania, USA
4
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
liu.han.dut@gmail.com, xu.zhi.dut@gmail.com, zxt.dut@hotmail.com, xu.xm.dut@gmail.com,
zfeng.maria@gmail.com, fenglong@psu.edu, dr.h.chen@ieee.org, {hongyu,xczhang}@dlut.edu.cn
Abstract

the one hand, changing words in a sentence slightly may
cause tremendous changes in semantics. On the other hand,
the text space is discrete and non-differentiable. Existing
textual adversarial attack methods are very few and the relevant research is still in the early stage.
Existing textual adversarial attack methods can be divided
into two categories: white-box attacks (Meng and Wattenhofer 2020; Zou et al. 2020) and black-box attacks (Jin
et al. 2020; Ye et al. 2022). The white-box attack assumes
that the attacker can access all the model information, such
as parameters and gradients. Therefore, the white-box attack
usually utilizes gradients and model parameters to generate
adversarial examples. Different from the white-box attack,
the black-box attack methods can only access the output information of the victim model. There are two settings in
black-box based attack: soft-label setting (Jin et al. 2020;
Gao et al. 2018; Zang et al. 2020) and hard-label setting
(Maheshwary, Maheshwary, and Pudi 2021; Ye et al. 2022).
The soft-label setting can obtain the predicted label and corresponding confidence score of victim model. Therefore,
these methods can utilize the confidence score to compute
the importance score of each word, and then leverage it to
determine the replacement order and replace the corresponding words. In the hard-label setting, attackers only have access to the predicted label of the target model. Therefore,
compared with the soft-label setting, the hard-label setting
is more challenging and realistic.
Only a few approaches have attempted to tackle the blackbox hard-label textual adversarial attack task. Specifically,
(Maheshwary, Maheshwary, and Pudi 2021) leverages a
population-based optimization algorithm to generate adversarial examples. Although it can craft semantically similar
examples, it needs a high budget, which makes it unrealistic. This drawback comes from the necessity of a large population of adversarial candidates. TextHoaxer (Ye et al. 2022)
utilizes the word embedding space, namely perturbation matrix, to represent perturbations. It then uses gradient-based
method to optimize the perturbation matrix. However, the
gradient estimation may be inaccurate, thus leading to some
unnecessary queries. This issue stemmed from two perspectives: on the one hand, it is extremely hard to find the op-

Hard-label textual adversarial attack is a challenging task,
as only the predicted label information is available, and the
text space is discrete and non-differentiable. Relevant research work is still in fancy and just a handful of methods
are proposed. However, existing methods suffer from either
the high complexity of genetic algorithms or inaccurate gradient estimation, thus are arduous to obtain adversarial examples with high semantic similarity and low perturbation rate
under the tight-budget scenario. In this paper, we propose a
simple and sweet paradigm for hard-label textual adversarial
attack, named SSPAttack. Specifically, SSPAttack first utilizes initialization to generate an adversarial example, and
removes unnecessary replacement words to reduce the number of changed words. Then it determines the replacement
order and searches for an anchor synonym, thus avoiding going through all the synonyms. Finally, it pushes substitution
words towards original words until an appropriate adversarial example is obtained. The core idea of SSPAttack is just
swapping words whose mechanism is simple. Experimental
results on eight benchmark datasets and two real-world APIs
have shown that the performance of SSPAttack is sweet in
terms of similarity, perturbation rate and query efficiency.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved significant development in various application domains, such as computer
vision (Wu et al. 2021; Han et al. 2021), natural language
processing (Lu et al. 2021; Seker et al. 2022), robotics (Terreran and Ghidoni 2021; Centurelli et al. 2022) and so on.
Recent studies (Gao et al. 2018; Jin et al. 2020) have shown
that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Adversarial attacks aim to generate adversarial examples that are
purposely designed to induce a model to make wrong predictions but imperceptible to human. Most adversarial attack methods (Chen, Jordan, and Wainwright 2020; Cheng
et al. 2020) focus on the computer vision domain and have
shown powerful performance. However, generating adversarial examples in the text domain is more challenging. On
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13228

