The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

GANTEE: Generative Adversatial Network for Taxonomy Entering Evaluation
Zhouhong Gu1,4 , Sihang Jiang1 , Jingping Liu2 * , Yanghua Xiao1,3* , Hongwei Feng1 , Zhixu Li1 ,
Jiaqing Liang4 , Jian Zhong5
1
2

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
School of Information Science and Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology
3
Fudan-Aishu Cognitive Intelligence Joint Research Center
4
School of Data Science, Fudan University
5
HUAWEI CBG Edu AI Lab
{zhgu20, shawyh, hwfeng, zhixuli, liangjiaqing}@fudan.edu.cn
tedsihangjiang@gmail.com, jingpingliu@ecust.edu.cn, zhongjian6@huawei.com
Abstract

expected to be added to the taxonomy of one of the largest
shopping platforms in the world each month (Jiang et al.
2019). So the task of automated taxonomy expansion is proposed (Jurgens and Pilehvar 2016), which aims to automatically assign an existing concept (anchor concept) as a hypernym concept to the newly input concept (query concept).
These models successfully save much time from labor annotation in taxonomy maintenance. These methods predict the
hypernym-hyponym relationships mainly based on the representation similarity, so they sample the training data based
on the existing taxonomy to learn good representations for
each concept.

Taxonomy is formulated as directed acyclic concepts graphs
or trees that support many downstream tasks. Many new coming concepts need to be added to an existing taxonomy. The
traditional taxonomy expansion task aims only at finding the
best position for new coming concepts in the existing taxonomy. However, they have two drawbacks when being applied to the real-scenarios. The previous methods suffer from
low-efficiency since they waste much time when most of the
new coming concepts are indeed noisy concepts. They also
suffer from low-effectiveness since they collect training samples only from the existing taxonomy, which limits the ability
of the model to mine more hypernym-hyponym relationships
among real concepts. This paper proposes a pluggable framework called Generative Adversarial Network for Taxonomy
Entering Evaluation (GANTEE) to alleviate these drawbacks.
A generative adversarial network is designed in this framework by discriminative models to alleviate the first drawback
and the generative model to alleviate the second drawback.
Two discriminators are used in GANTEE to provide longterm and short-term rewards, respectively. Moreover, to further improve the efficiency, pre-trained language models are
used to retrieve the representation of the concepts quickly.
The experiments on three real-world large-scale datasets with
two different languages show that GANTEE improves the
performance of the existing taxonomy expansion methods in
both effectiveness and efficiency.

However, we argue that these methods (Yu et al. 2020;
Wang et al. 2022; Cheng et al. 2022; Shen et al. 2020; Mao
et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021) have two
drawbacks when being applied to real applications. First,
these methods suffer from low effectiveness in real applications due to limited ability to represent the semantics of
concepts. Only sampling from existing taxonomy provides
limited data to train representations for zero-shot concepts,
where thousands times queries of the number of concepts
in existing taxonomy are all unseen to the models (Cheng
et al. 2022). Second, these methods suffer from low efficiency in real applications because most of the query concepts are noisy. For instance, in a leading ordering takeouts online platform, only thousands of concepts out of billions of queries are finally added to their taxonomy (Cheng
et al. 2022). Previous methods ignore the noisy concepts and
waste much time finding the anchor concept for noisy query
concepts.

Introduction
Taxonomy is formulated as directed acyclic graphs or trees,
which consist of hyponym-hypernym relations between concepts. One concept is a hypernym of another concept if the
meaning of the former covers the latter (Sang 2007). A wellconstructed taxonomy assist various downstream tasks, including web content tagging (Liu et al. 2020, 2019; Peng
et al. 2019), personalized recommendation (Karamanolakis,
Ma, and Dong 2020; Huang et al. 2019), query understanding (Yang, Zhang, and Han 2020) and so on.
Manually maintaining a taxonomy is labor-intensive and
time-consuming. For example, millions of new concepts are

In this paper, we propose a pluggable framework called
Generative Adversarial Network for Taxonomy Enterance
Evaluation (GANTEE) to boost both the effectiveness and
efficiency of the taxonomy expansion methods in realscenarios as is shown in Figure 1. To improve the effectiveness, GANTEE proposes a generative model to generate
more high-quality training data, which are required to train
the high-quality representation for taxonomy expansion. To
improve efficiency, GANTEE introduces a new task called
taxonomy entering evaluation, which removes many noisy
query concepts before finding the suitable anchor concept

* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6380

