The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CowClip: Reducing CTR Prediction Model Training Time from 12 Hours to 10
Minutes on 1 GPU
Zangwei Zheng1 * , Pengtai Xu1∗ , Xuan Zou2 , Da Tang2 , Zhen Li2 ,
Chenguang Xi2 , Peng Wu2 , Leqi Zou2 , Yijie Zhu2 , Ming Chen2 ,
Xiangzhuo Ding2 , Fuzhao Xue1 , Ziheng Qin1 , Youlong Cheng2 , Yang You1†
1

Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
2
Bytedance Inc.
{zangwei, pengtai, f-xue, zihengq, youy}@comp.nus.edu.sg
{zouxuan, da.tang, zhen.li1, chenguang.xi, peng.wu, leqi.zou,
yijie.zhu, ming.chen, xiangzhuo.ding, youlong.cheng}@bytedance.com

Forward

Abstract

Backward

Update

Others
b=1K

The click-through rate (CTR) prediction task is to predict
whether a user will click on the recommended item. As mindboggling amounts of data are produced online daily, accelerating CTR prediction model training is critical to ensuring
an up-to-date model and reducing the training cost. One approach to increase the training speed is to apply large batch
training. However, as shown in computer vision and natural
language processing tasks, training with a large batch easily suffers from the loss of accuracy. Our experiments show
that previous scaling rules fail in the training of CTR prediction neural networks. To tackle this problem, we first theoretically show that different frequencies of ids make it challenging to scale hyperparameters when scaling the batch size.
To stabilize the training process in a large batch size setting,
we develop the adaptive Column-wise Clipping (CowClip).
It enables an easy and effective scaling rule for the embeddings, which keeps the learning rate unchanged and scales
the L2 loss. We conduct extensive experiments with four CTR
prediction networks on two real-world datasets and successfully scaled 128 times the original batch size without accuracy loss. In particular, for CTR prediction model DeepFM
training on the Criteo dataset, our optimization framework
enlarges the batch size from 1K to 128K with over 0.1%
AUC improvement and reduces training time from 12 hours
to 10 minutes on a single V100 GPU. Our code locates at
github.com/bytedance/LargeBatchCTR.

b=8K
0.1

(a) Relative time 0.2
in a step

0.3

b=1K
b=8K
0

2500

5000
7500
(b) Relative
time in an epoch

10000

Figure 1: Relative time of training DeepFM model on Criteo
dataset with one V100 GPU.

tising and recommendation systems. An accurate CTR prediction can directly improve user experience (Kaasinen et al.
2009) and enhance ads profit (Wang 2020).
In a typical industrial dataset, the number of click samples
has grown up to hundreds of billion (Zhao et al. 2019; Xie
et al. 2020) and keeps increasing on a daily basis. The clickthrough rate (CTR) prediction task is to predict whether a
user will click on the recommended item. It is a fundamental task in advertising and recommendation systems. Since
CTR prediction is a time-sensitive task (Zhao et al. 2019)
(e.g., latest topics, hottest videos, and new users’ hobbies),
it is necessary to shorten the time needed for re-training on
a massive dataset to maintain an up-to-date CTR prediction
model. In addition, given a constant computing budget, decreasing the training time also reduces the training cost, giving rise to a high return-to-investment ratio.
Recent years have witnessed rapid growth in GPU processing ability (Baji 2018). With the growth of GPU memory and FLOPS, a larger batch size can take better advantage
of the parallel processing capability of GPUs. As shown in
Figure 1 (a), the time of one forward and backward pass is
almost the same when scaling 8 times batch size, indicating GPU with a small batch size is extremely underused.
Since the number of training epochs remains the same, large
batch training reduces the number of steps and thus significantly shortens the total training time (Figure 1 (b)). In ad-

Introduction
With the development of the Internet and the e-economy,
numerous clicking happens in online shopping (Ma et al.
2020; Zhou et al. 2019), video apps (Gomez-Uribe and Hunt
2016; Xie et al. 2020) and web advertisements (Covington,
Adams, and Sargin 2016; Zhao et al. 2019). Click-through
Rate (CTR) prediction is to predict whether a user will click
on the recommended item. It is a fundamental task in adver* Work done during an internship at Bytedance.
†

Yang You is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11390

