The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Neural Representations Reveal Distinct Modes of Class Fitting in Residual
Convolutional Networks
Michał Jamroż, Marcin Kurdziel
AGH University of Science and Technology, Krakow, Poland
mijamroz@agh.edu.pl, kurdziel@agh.edu.pl

Abstract

we extend this line of research to investigate class representations learned by neural networks. To this end, we estimate
class-conditional distributions of neural representations and
use them as proxies to the representations of classes learned
by the network. This allows us to make several important
contributions. First, we find that ResNets do not fit classes
in an uniform way. On the contrary, we observe two distinct
modes of class fitting evident in the deeper layers of these
networks. We characterize class-conditional distributions of
neural representations in the two groups of classes and propose a likely explanation for the observed differences. Next,
we demonstrate that the uncovered structure in class representations translates to observable differences in memorization
of input examples. To this end, we leverage tractable memorization measures recently proposed by Feldman and Zhang
(2020). We also demonstrate that the two groups of classes
differ in adversarial robustness. Finally, we leverage classconditional distributions of neural representations to uncover
where in the network structure classes are fit and to compare
this process for memorized and typical inputs.
See Jamroż and Kurdziel (2022)1 for the extended version
of this paper, including the appendix and initial results for
Vision Transformer and MLP-Mixer models. We provide the
source code and our density and memorization estimates.2

We leverage probabilistic models of neural representations
to investigate how residual networks fit classes. To this end,
we estimate class-conditional density models for representations learned by deep ResNets. We then use these models to
characterize distributions of representations across learned
classes. Surprisingly, we find that classes in the investigated
models are not fitted in an uniform way. On the contrary: we
uncover two groups of classes that are fitted with markedly
different distributions of representations. These distinct modes
of class-fitting are evident only in the deeper layers of the
investigated models, indicating that they are not related to
low-level image features. We show that the uncovered structure in neural representations correlate with memorization of
training examples and adversarial robustness. Finally, we compare class-conditional distributions of neural representations
between memorized and typical examples. This allows us to
uncover where in the network structure class labels arise for
memorized and standard inputs.

Introduction
Neural networks are vastly over-parametrized models. This
flexible parameter space makes it quite difficult to answer basic questions about internal representations learned by these
models. For a long time it was not even clear whether two
identical networks trained on the same task learn similar sets
of representations. That said, the picture begin to change in
recent years with the introduction of new tools to analyse
internal representations in neural networks. First, Raghu et al.
(2017) and Morcos, Raghu, and Bengio (2018) proposed
canonical correlation analysis-based similarity measures for
neural representations. Subsequently, Kornblith et al. (2019)
proposed a kernel-based similarity score and found significant representational similarity between networks trained to
solve closely related tasks. Machinery for analysis of neural
representations was then extended by Jamroż, Kurdziel, and
Opala (2020), who proposed a non-parametric density model
for features learned by neural networks. They used this model
to show that memorizing networks learn more complex representations than networks that can exploit patterns in data.
So far neural representations were studied from the perspective of features learned by network layers. In this work

Probabilistic Model for Class Representations
Our goal in this work is to characterize representations of
classes in neural networks. While the class membership information is typically available for a large set of observations,
namely the training set, combining it into representations of
classes is a non-trivial task. The main hurdle here comes from
the stochastic nature of neural representations. Specifically, a
neural representation inferred for some input x can be seen as
an outcome of sampling x from the data distribution. Clearly,
a reasonable notion of a class representation should capture
the outcome of this sampling. We therefore propose to use
class-conditional distributions of inputs’ representations as
proxies to neural representations of classes. Concretely, we
fit tractable density models to sets of neural representations
and then use these models to characterize distributions of
representations in classes.
1

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

7988

https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.00771
https://github.com/mjamroz90/dnn-class-fitting

