The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Revisiting Item Promotion in GNN-Based Collaborative Filtering:
A Masked Targeted Topological Attack Perspective
Yongwei Wang1 , Yong Liu2 * , Zhiqi Shen3
1

2

Joint NTU-WeBank Research Centre on Fintech, Nanyang Technological University
Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly, Nanyang Technological University
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
{yongwei.wang, stephenliu, zqshen}@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

Graph neural networks (GNN) based collaborative filtering
(CF) has attracted increasing attention in e-commerce and financial marketing platforms. However, there still lack efforts
to evaluate the robustness of such CF systems in deployment.
Fundamentally different from existing attacks, this work revisits the item promotion task and reformulates it from a targeted
topological attack perspective for the first time. Specifically,
we first develop a targeted attack formulation to maximally
increase a target item’s popularity. We then leverage gradientbased optimizations to find a solution. However, we observe
the gradient estimates often appear noisy due to the discrete
nature of a graph, which leads to a degradation of attack ability.
To resolve noisy gradient effects, we then propose a masked
attack objective that can remarkably enhance the topological attack ability. Furthermore, we design a computationally
efficient approach to the proposed attack, thus making it feasible to evaluate large-large CF systems. Experiments on two
real-world datasets show the effectiveness of our attack in
analyzing the robustness of GNN-based CF more practically.

Introduction
Collaborative filtering-based recommendation systems (RS)
aim to recommend a personalized list of top-K products
(a.k.a items) to each user that matches best with her/his interests (Ekstrand et al. 2011; Deldjoo, Noia, and Merra 2021).
Due to its effectiveness in promoting items, RS have been
widely adopted in popular platforms, ranging from financial
product marketing to short-video discovery and e-shopping
(Wang et al. 2021). The mainstream paradigm of RS is collaborative filtering (CF), which assumes that users with similar
behaviors are likely to show interest to similar items (He
et al. 2017). As a result, CF attempts to exploit the observed
user-item interactions, modeled as a user-item matrix (a.k.a a
bipartite graph), to make predictions for the unobserved ones.
To better capture such interactions, graph neural networks
(GNN) (Kipf and Welling 2016) have attracted increasing
attention in RS, and GNN-based RS achieve state-of-the-art
performances in recommendation (Wang et al. 2019; He et al.
2020). Therefore, this work focuses on the GNN-based RS.
Instead of trying to improve a recommender’s prediction
accuracy, this work investigates how to maximally boost the
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15206

ranking of a low-popularity item on a potentially deployed
recommendation system (Liu and Larson 2021). An item attains higher popularity than another one if it is displayed in a
larger number of users’ recommendation lists. This task finds
favorable applications in scenarios where a seller expects to
maximize profits by promoting her/his items to as many potential users as possible. An intuitive solution is to encourage
a number of users to show preference (i.e., adding positive
rating) to the target item, e.g., by sending vouchers. However,
there exist two crucial challenges to make the solution valid.
The first challenge is how to ensure the newly-added ratings
do contribute to the target item’s popularity; and the other
one is how to minimize the seller’s budget (e.g., vouchers) by
limiting the number of ratings to be added.
The item promotion scenario is closely related to the robustness of a collaborative filtering recommendation system.
Existing works attempt to address the challenges above by
creating and injecting numerous fake users into the data, a
technique known as shilling attacks or data poisoning attacks
(Li et al. 2016; Tang, Wen, and Wang 2020; Fang, Gong, and
Liu 2020; Wu et al. 2021b). However, these existing methods
were generally specially designed for matrix factorizationbased collaborative filtering recommenders, a type of conventional RS. Thus they are inapplicable to evaluating the
robustness of an advanced GNN-based collaborative filtering
RS. To our best knowledge, only limited studies propose data
poisoning methods that may apply for GNN-based RS (Tang,
Wen, and Wang 2020; Wu et al. 2021b).
Unfortunately, these recently proposed methods still demand adding a large number of fake users/ratings. Besides,
due to the statistical differences in rating between real and
fake users, fake users may be detected and removed to mitigate the attack ability. These issues hinder attacks to take
place in real scenes. Therefore, it is urgent to develop practical and effective attacks to evaluate GNN-based collaborative
filtering models in real scenes.
For the first time, this work proposes a simple yet effective
item promotion method on GNN-based RS from a masked
topological attack perspective. The developed objective function allows us to maximize a target item’s popularity with
only a small number of interaction changes in the user-item
graph topology. Yet it is challenging to solve the optimization
problem mainly due to its combinatorial nature. To effectively
address this issue, we employ a gradient-based solution and

