The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Transformation-Equivariant 3D Object Detection
for Autonomous Driving
Hai Wu 1,2 * , Chenglu Wen 1† , Wei Li 2 , Xin Li 3 , Ruigang Yang 2 , Cheng Wang 1
1

School of Informatics, Xiamen University
2
Inceptio Technology
3
School of Performance, Visualization, and Fine Art, Texas A&M University
wuhai@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {clwen, cwang}@xmu.edu.cn, liweimcc@gmail.com,
ruigang.yang@inceptio.ai, xinli@tamu.edu
Abstract

could produce unreliable detection results when processing
transformed point clouds. Some detectors achieve approximate transformation equivariance through data augmentations (Shi, Wang, and Li 2019; Shi et al. 2020). Their performance, however, heavily relies on generating comprehensive training samples and adopting more complex networks with larger capacity. Some other approaches (Shanmugam et al. 2021) employ a Test Time Augmentation
(TTA) scheme, which improves the detection robustness under transformations by running detectors multiple times with
transformed inputs. Recently, equivariant networks (Yu, Wu,
and Yi 2022) have been developed to explicitly model the
transformation equivariance. They transform input data with
multiple rotation bins and model the equivariance by shared
convolutional networks. Both TTA and equivariant design
demonstrated promising results. However, both of them
require massive computation to process differently transformed point clouds. Consequently, they cannot achieve
real-time performance in 3D detection. For example, when
applying four transformations to PointRCNN (Shi, Wang,
and Li 2019), the detection time increases from around 0.1s
to more than 0.4s per detection. This severely hinders the
application of equivariant 3D detectors to real-time systems
such as autonomous driving.

3D object detection received increasing attention in autonomous driving recently. Objects in 3D scenes are distributed with diverse orientations. Ordinary detectors do not
explicitly model the variations of rotation and reflection transformations. Consequently, large networks and extensive data
augmentation are required for robust detection. Recent equivariant networks explicitly model the transformation variations
by applying shared networks on multiple transformed point
clouds, showing great potential in object geometry modeling. However, it is difficult to apply such networks to 3D object detection in autonomous driving due to its large computation cost and slow reasoning speed. In this work, we
present TED, an efficient Transformation-Equivariant 3D
Detector to overcome the computation cost and speed issues. TED first applies a sparse convolution backbone to
extract multi-channel transformation-equivariant voxel features; and then aligns and aggregates these equivariant features into lightweight and compact representations for highperformance 3D object detection. On the highly competitive
KITTI 3D car detection leaderboard, TED ranked 1st among
all submissions with competitive efficiency. Code is available at https://github.com/hailanyi/TED.

Introduction
3D object detection plays a crucial role in scene perception of safe autonomous driving (Yin, Zhou, and Krähenbühl
2021). In recent years, a large number of 3D object detectors have been proposed (Deng et al. 2021b; Xu, Zhong,
and Neumann 2022; Wu et al. 2022b). Most of these methods construct detection frameworks based on ordinary voxels (Yan, Mao, and Li 2018; Zhou and Tuzel 2018) or pointbased operations (Yang et al. 2019, 2020).
It is desired that the predictions from a 3D detector are
equivariant to transformations such as rotations and reflections. In other words, when an object changes its orientation
in the input points, the detected bounding box of this object
should have a same shape but change its orientation accordingly. However, most voxel- and point-based approaches do
not explicitly model such a transformation equivariance, and

In this work, we present TED, a TransformationEquivariant 3D Detector to tackle this efficiency issue.
TED first applies a sparse convolution backbone to extract multi-channel transformation-equivariant voxel features. Then TED aligns and aggregates the equivariant
features into a lightweight and compact representation
for high-performance 3D object detection. As shown in
Fig. 1, TED has three key parts: (1) the Transformationequivariant Sparse Convolution (TeSpConv) backbone; (2)
Transformation-equivariant Bird Eye View (TeBEV) pooling; and (3) Transformation-invariant Voxel (TiVoxel) pooling. TeSpConv applies shared weights on multiple transformed point clouds to record the transformation-equivariant
voxel features. TeBEV pooling aligns and aggregates the
scene-level equivariant features into lightweight representations for proposal generation. TiVoxel pooling aligns and
aggregates the instance-level invariant features into compact
representations for proposal refinement. In addition, we designed a Distance-Aware data Augmentation (DA-Aug) to

* The work done during internship at Inceptio Technology.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2795

