The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning to Play General-Sum Games against Multiple Boundedly Rational
Agents
Eric Zhao1,2 , Alexander R. Trott3 , Caiming Xiong1 , Stephan Zheng1
1

2

Salesforce Research. Palo Alto, California, USA
University of California, Berkeley. Berkeley, California, USA
3
MosaicML. San Francisco, California, USA

Abstract
We study the problem of training a principal in a multi-agent
general-sum game using reinforcement learning (RL). Learning a robust principal policy requires anticipating the worst
possible strategic responses of other agents, which is generally NP-hard. However, we show that no-regret dynamics can
identify these worst-case responses in poly-time in smooth
games. We propose a framework that uses this policy evaluation method for efficiently learning a robust principal policy using RL. This framework can be extended to provide
robustness to boundedly rational agents too. Our motivating
application is automated mechanism design: we empirically
demonstrate our framework learns robust mechanisms in both
matrix games and complex spatiotemporal games. In particular, we learn a dynamic tax policy that improves the welfare
of a simulated trade-and-barter economy by 15%, even when
facing previously unseen boundedly rational RL taxpayers.

Figure 1: The orange robot denotes our principal, blue robots
the agents we train against, and human icons the agents
we encounter during test time. Evaluating a policy in a
multi-agent game by naively sampling rational responses
from other agents, e.g. via multi-agent RL, may lead to
overly optimistic reward estimates. We introduce efficient
algorithms for adversarially sampling rational responses in
smooth games. These algorithms can be extended to sample
worst-case boundedly rational responses (bottom-right).

Introduction
We study the problem of learning a principal policy in a
general-sum game against boundedly rational agents. Learning a robust principal policy requires us to anticipate how
these agents may respond to our policy choices, and entails two important challenges (Figure 1). First, the policies we choose induce a sub-game between the other agents,
a sub-game which may have infinite equilibria. The policy
we choose should perform well regardless of which equilibria the agents respond with. Second, principal policies that
perform well against rational agents may not generalize to
boundedly rational agents, even if they are only infinitesimally irrational (Pita et al. 2010). Our policy should perform
well even if agents act boundedly rational.
We introduce a framework for the reinforcement learning of robust principal policies that address these two
challenges. This framework evaluates a potential policy
by identifying the worst-case coarse-correlated equilibrium
(CCE) of the sub-game the policy induces. Although identifying worst-case CCE is generally computationally intractable (Papadimitriou and Roughgarden 2008; Barman
and Ligett 2015), we prove that worst-case CCE can efficiently learned in smooth games. Our framework easily extends to identify worst-case approximate CCE. This allows

us to learn principal policies that are robust to boundedly
rational agents, such as agents whose incentives differ from
the agents we train against.
Our motivating application is mechanism design (“reverse
game theory”), where a principal implements the rewards
and dynamics (the “mechanism”) that other agents optimize for (Myerson 2016). Traditional mechanism design
has been limited to problems with a convenient mathematical structure, e.g., simple auctions, where the equilibria behavior of agents can be solved in closed-form. Recent research have pursued computational approaches to mechanism design that evaluate potential mechanisms using agentbased modeling (Holland and Miller 1991; Bonabeau 2002;
Duetting et al. 2019) and multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) (Zheng et al. 2020). This application of multiagent learning remains an exciting but understudied topic.
We will outline a modern perspective that formalizes automated mechanism design and its robustness concerns as an
equilibrium selection problem.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Summary of results. Our primary contributions include:
11781

