The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Extracting Low-/High- Frequency Knowledge from Graph Neural Networks and
Injecting It into MLPs: An Effective GNN-to-MLP Distillation Framework
∗

∗

Lirong Wu1,2, , Haitao Lin1,2, , Yufei Huang1,2 , Tianyu Fan2 , Stan Z. Li1,
1

†

AI Division, School of Engineering, Westlake University, Hangzhou, 310030
2
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058
{wulirong, linhaitao, huangyufei, fantianyu, stan.zq.li}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract

GNNs generally rely on message passing to aggregate features from the neighborhood, but fetching and aggregating
these nodes during inference can burden latency-sensitive
applications. In contrast, Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs)
involve no data dependence between pairs of nodes and infer much faster than GNNs, but often with less competitive
performance. Motivated by these complementary strengths
and weaknesses, one solution to reduce their gaps is to perform GNN-to-MLP knowledge distillation (Yang, Liu, and
Shi 2021; Zhang et al. 2021; Ghorbani et al. 2021; Gou et al.
2021), which extracts knowledge from a well-trained teacher
GNN and then distills it into a student MLP with the same
network architecture (e.g., layer number and layer size).
Most of the existing GNN-to-MLP distillation methods
(Yang, Liu, and Shi 2021; Zhang et al. 2021; Ghorbani et al.
2021) focus on special designs on either student MLPs or
teacher GNNs, but default to distill knowledge in a node-tonode fashion. For example, CPF (Yang, Liu, and Shi 2021)
combines Label Propagation (LP) (Iscen et al. 2019) into
the student MLPs to improve classification performance and
thus still suffers from the neighborhood-fetching latency
caused by label propagation, which defeats the original intention of MLPs to be inference-efficient. In contrast, GLNN
(Zhang et al. 2021) directly distills knowledge from arbitrary
GNNs to vanilla MLPs with the same network architecture.
While the distilled MLPs of GLNN can be greatly improved
by employing more powerful teacher GNNs, the process of
distillation usually entails a loss of information (Kim et al.
2021), which may lead to sub-optimal student MLPs. In this
paper, we look away from specific instantiations of teacher
GNNs and student MLPs, but rather explore two fundamental questions: (1) Can existing GNN-to-MLP distillation ensure that sufficient knowledge is distilled from teacher GNNs
to student MLPs? If not, (2) Which knowledge patterns of
GNNs are more likely to be distilled into student MLPs?
Present Work. In this paper, we identify a potential information drowning problem for existing GNN-to-MLP distillation, i.e., the high-frequency knowledge of the pre-trained
GNNs may be overwhelmed by the low-frequency knowledge during distillation. To illustrate this, we first factorize
GNN knowledge into low- and high-frequency components
using graph signal processing theory in the spectral domain
and then derive their correspondence in the spatial domain.
Moreover, we conduct a comprehensive investigation of the

Recent years have witnessed the great success of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) in handling graph-related tasks. However, MLPs remain the primary workhorse for practical industrial applications due to their desirable inference efficiency
and scalability. To reduce their gaps, one can directly distill
knowledge from a well-designed teacher GNN to a student
MLP, which is termed as GNN-to-MLP distillation. However,
the process of distillation usually entails a loss of information,
and “which knowledge patterns of GNNs are more likely to
be left and distilled into MLPs?” becomes an important question. In this paper, we first factorize the knowledge learned by
GNNs into low- and high-frequency components in the spectral domain and then derive their correspondence in the spatial domain. Furthermore, we identified a potential information drowning problem for existing GNN-to-MLP distillation,
i.e., the high-frequency knowledge of the pre-trained GNNs
may be overwhelmed by the low-frequency knowledge during distillation; we have described in detail what it represents,
how it arises, what impact it has, and how to deal with it. In
this paper, we propose an efficient Full-Frequency GNN-toMLP (FF-G2M) distillation framework, which extracts both
low-frequency and high-frequency knowledge from GNNs
and injects it into MLPs. Extensive experiments show that
FF-G2M improves over the vanilla MLPs by 12.6% and outperforms its corresponding teacher GNNs by 2.6% averaged
over six graph datasets and three common GNN architectures.

Introduction
In many real-world applications, including social networks,
chemical molecules, and citation networks, data can be naturally modeled as graphs. Recently, the emerging Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017;
Kipf and Welling 2016; Veličković et al. 2017; Wu et al.
2021b, 2022b; Liu, Gao, and Ji 2020; Zhou et al. 2020;
Liu et al. 2022; Xia et al. 2022) have demonstrated their
powerful capability to handle various graph-related tasks
(Zhang and Chen 2018; Fan et al. 2019; Errica et al. 2019;
Wu et al. 2021a). However, practical deployments of GNNs
in the industry are still less popular due to inference efficiency and scalability challenges incurred by data dependency (Jia et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021). In other words,
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10351

