The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

End-to-End Entity Linking with Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning
Lihan Chen1 , Tinghui Zhu1 , Jingping Liu2 , Jiaqing Liang3 , Yanghua Xiao1, 4 *
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China
3
School of Data Science, Fudan University, China
4
Fudan-Aishu Cognitive Intelligence Joint Research Center
lhc825@gmail.com, thzhu22@fudan.edu.cn, jingpingliu@ecust.edu.cn, liangjiaqing@fudan.edu.cn, shawyh@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

exploit the dependency between MD and ED implied by
the shared representation. However, these models are only
trained with independent objectives for individual tasks,
leaving the detection of mentions independent from ED results. Other works (Kolitsas et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2022)
perform ED for all candidate mentions and use ED scores
to identify mentions. These methods take advantage of the
explicit effects of entities on mentions but ignore that ED
actually depends on the accurate identification of mention
boundaries. Without considering MD results, they will produce ED errors due to noisy candidate mentions. Second,
existing EL methods also have problems in utilizing the
intra-dependency within mentions (or entities). Most methods model MD/ED in a document as multiple independent
tasks (De Cao et al. 2021b; Zhang et al. 2022) instead of
a single joint task. They obviously ignore that the detection/disambiguation of individual mentions/entities depends
on other mentions/entities in a context. Other methods utilizing global context information suffer from either noisy candidate mentions and entities (Kolitsas et al. 2018) or the exposure bias problem of long-term decision-making (De Cao
et al. 2021a; Mrini et al. 2022).
To address the above dependency problems, we propose
to model the EL task as a hierarchical sequential decisionmaking process. Considering human readers annotating entities in the text (e.g., “Jobs founded Apple”), as shown in
Figure 1, instead of detecting all the mentions first and then
linking them to a knowledge graph, they will spot one mention first (e.g., “Jobs”) and try to decide what it refers to
(e.g., “Steve Jobs”), after that they will then repeatedly spot
another one (e.g., “Apple”) and do the same thing. Thus, for
a human, the EL task is a sequence of subtasks (Pateria et al.
2021) of linking individual mentions to entities. Based on
this intuition, MD is a high-level sequential decision-making
process with each step choosing a subtask (i.e., identifying a
mention to link), while ED for the mention can be viewed as
making low-level decisions by completing the subtask. For
low-level ED, we adopt the state-of-the-art generative entity
retrieval (GENRE) (De Cao et al. 2021a), which is also a
sequential decision-making process.
We then formalize the EL task as a Markov decision process (MDP) and adopt hierarchical reinforcement learning
(HRL) algorithms (Pateria et al. 2021) to solve it. This solution deals with the above dependency problems from two

Entity linking (EL) is the task of linking the text segments
to the referring entities in the knowledge graph, typically decomposed into mention detection, and entity disambiguation.
Compared to traditional methods treating the two tasks separately, recent end-to-end entity linking methods exploit the
mutual dependency between mentions and entities to achieve
better performance. However, existing end-to-end EL methods have problems utilizing the dependency of mentions and
entities in the task. To this end, we propose to model the
EL task as a hierarchical decision-making process and design a hierarchical reinforcement learning algorithm to solve
the problem. We conduct extensive experiments to show that
the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance in
several EL benchmark datasets. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/lhlclhl/he2eel.

Introduction
Entity linking (EL) is the task of linking the text segments
to the referring entities in the knowledge graphs (KG). EL
is a fundamental task for machines to understand natural
language via KGs; thus, it has been drawing much interest
in research in the past decade (Hoffart et al. 2011; Kolitsas et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2022). EL consists of two major steps: mention detection (MD, which identifies text segments referring to entities) and entity disambiguation (ED,
which disambiguates mentions to respective entities). Traditional methods (Steinmetz et al. 2013; Moro et al. 2014)
solve EL in a pipeline manner, treating MD and ED independently, which ignores the mutual dependency between these
two tasks. To overcome this weakness, end-to-end solutions
dominate recent efforts by solving EL with one model via
joint training (Févry et al. 2020; De Cao et al. 2021b) or
joint modeling (De Cao et al. 2021a; Mrini et al. 2022).
However, existing end-to-end EL methods have difficulty
in fully exploiting the dependency residing in mentions and
entities. First, the mutual inter-dependency between mentions and entities is not easy to be exploited. Most methods
with MD-to-ED inference order ignore the dependency of
mentions on entities. For example, typical multi-task learning models (Martins et al. 2019; Ravi et al. 2021) only
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4173

