The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Ultra-High-Definition Low-Light Image Enhancement: A Benchmark and
Transformer-Based Method
Tao Wang1 , Kaihao Zhang2 , Tianrun Shen1 , Wenhan Luo3 * , Bjorn Stenger4 , Tong Lu1 *
1

State Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Australian National University, Australia
3
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, China
4
Rakuten Institute of Technology, Japan
{taowangzj, super.khzhang, whluo.china}@gmail.com, tiruns@yeah.net, bjorn@cantab.net, lutong@nju.edu.cn
Abstract

(1K or less). Thus, LLIE methods trained on these datasets
are naturally constrained to low-resolution images. Sensors
on modern mobile devices are able to capture images of resolutions of 4K or 8K, creating a need for algorithms designed
for processing Ultra-High-Definition (UHD) images. It is difficult for existing LLIE methods to simultaneously reconcile
inference efficiency and visual enhancement on UHD images.
In this paper, we focus on the task of Ultra-High Definition
Low-Light Image Enhancement (UHD-LLIE). We first build
a large-scale benchmark dataset containing UHD images in
LOw-Light conditions (UHD-LOL) to explore and evaluate
image enhancement algorithms. UHD-LOL includes two subsets, UHD-LOL4K and UHD-LOL8K, containing 4K and
8K-resolution images, respectively. The UHD-LOL4K subset
contains 8, 099 image pairs, 5, 999 for training and 2, 100 for
testing. The subset of UHD-LOL8K includes 2, 966 image
pairs, 2, 029 for training and 937 for testing. Example 4K
and 8K low-light images are shown in Fig. 1.
Using this dataset, we conduct extensive benchmarking
studies to compare existing LLIE methods and highlight
some shortcomings in the UHD setting. We propose a novel
transformer-based method named Low-Light Transformerbased Network (LLFormer) for the UHD-LLIE task. LLFormer is composed of two basic units, an efficient axis-based
transformer block and a cross-layer attention fusion block.
Within the axis-based transformer block, the axis-based selfattention unit performs the self-attention mechanism on the
height and width axes of features across the channel dimension to capture non-local self-similarity and long-range dependencies with less computational complexity. Moreover,
after the axis-based self-attention, we design a novel dual
gated feed-forward network, which employs a dual gated
mechanism to focus on useful features. The cross-layer attention fusion Block learns attention weights across features in
different layers and adaptively fuses features with the learned
weights to improve feature representation. The LLFormer
adopts a hierarchical structure, which greatly alleviates the
computational bottleneck for the UHD-LLIE task.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows. (1) We build a benchmark dataset of 4K and 8K UHD
images, UHD-LOL, to explore and evaluate image enhancement algorithms. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
large-scale UHD low-light image enhancement dataset in the

As the quality of optical sensors improves, there is a need
for processing large-scale images. In particular, the ability of
devices to capture ultra-high definition (UHD) images and
video places new demands on the image processing pipeline.
In this paper, we consider the task of low-light image enhancement (LLIE) and introduce a large-scale database consisting of
images at 4K and 8K resolution. We conduct systematic benchmarking studies and provide a comparison of current LLIE
algorithms. As a second contribution, we introduce LLFormer,
a transformer-based low-light enhancement method. The core
components of LLFormer are the axis-based multi-head selfattention and cross-layer attention fusion block, which significantly reduces the linear complexity. Extensive experiments on the new dataset and existing public datasets show
that LLFormer outperforms state-of-the-art methods. We also
show that employing existing LLIE methods trained on our
benchmark as a pre-processing step significantly improves
the performance of downstream tasks, e.g., face detection in
low-light conditions. The source code and pre-trained models
are available at https://github.com/TaoWangzj/LLFormer.

Introduction
Images taken in low-light conditions typically show noticeable degradation, such as poor visibility, low contrast, and
high noise levels. To alleviate these effects, a number of
low-light image enhancement (LLIE) methods have been
proposed to transform a given low-light image into a highquality image with appropriate brightness. Traditional LLIE
methods are mainly based on image priors or physical models
from other tasks, such as histogram equalization-based methods (Kim 1997; Stark 2000), retinex-based methods (Kimmel
et al. 2003; Wang et al. 2014) and dehazing-based methods (Dong et al. 2011; Zhang et al. 2012). Recently, many
learning-based LLIE methods have been introduced, making
use of large-scale synthetic datasets and achieving significant
improvements in terms of performance and speed (Wei et al.
2018; Guo et al. 2020; Lim and Kim 2020; Jiang et al. 2021;
Li, Guo, and Loy 2021; Liu et al. 2021b).
Most existing datasets, e.g., LOL (Wei et al. 2018) and
SID (Chen et al. 2018), consist of lower resolution images
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2654

