The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

LIQUID: A Framework for List Question Answering Dataset Generation
Seongyun Lee* 1 , Hyunjae Kim* 1 , Jaewoo Kang1,2
1

Korea University,
AIGEN Sciences
{sy-lee, hyunjae-kim, kangj}@korea.ac.kr
2

Abstract

Passage: Katherine Saltzberg is an American actress, singer, and
comic. She is best known for starring as the showbiz-talented 16year-old daughter of Brian Dennehy’s character in the ABC sitcom,
Star of the Family. In 2009, Saltzberg wrote and performed the one
woman show, Los Angelyne, ... , as she recounted how her life and
home were invaded by Los Angeles icon Angelyne, ...

Question answering (QA) models often rely on large-scale
training datasets, which necessitates the development of a
data generation framework to reduce the cost of manual annotations. Although several recent studies have aimed to generate synthetic questions with single-span answers, no study
has been conducted on the creation of list questions with multiple, non-contiguous spans as answers. To address this gap,
we propose LIQUID, an automated framework for generating list QA datasets from unlabeled corpora. We first convert
a passage from Wikipedia or PubMed into a summary and
extract named entities from the summarized text as candidate
answers. This allows us to select answers that are semantically correlated in context and is, therefore, suitable for constructing list questions. We then create questions using an offthe-shelf question generator with the extracted entities and
original passage. Finally, iterative filtering and answer expansion are performed to ensure the accuracy and completeness
of the answers. Using our synthetic data, we significantly improve the performance of the previous best list QA models
by exact-match F1 scores of 5.0 on MultiSpanQA, 1.9 on
Quoref, and 2.8 averaged across three BioASQ benchmarks.

1

Summary: Katherine Saltzberg is an American actress, singer, and
comic. She is best known for starring as the showbiz-talented 16year-old daughter of Brian Dennehy’s character.

Question Generation
Entities from passage

+ passage

Katherine Saltzberg, Brian Dennehy,
Saltzberg, Angelyne

Entities from summary + passage
Katherine Saltzberg, Brian Dennehy

Question A:
What are the names
of the actors?
Question B:
Who are the two
actors that starred in
Star of the Family?

Figure 1: Questions generated conditionally for the same
passage with different sets of entities. When all the named
entities in the passage are used, question A about a trivial
fact covering all the entities is generated, which may not be
effective for training list QA models. In contrast, using entities from a summary creates a more specific and clearer
question, question B, because the entities within the summary are usually related by a common topic and fact.

Introduction

Extractive question answering (QA) refers to the task of
finding answers to questions in the provided text. Because
building a QA system often requires a vast number of
human-annotated training examples, recent studies have attempted to reduce annotation costs by generating synthetic
datasets from unlabeled corpora (Yang et al. 2017; Dhingra, Danish, and Rajagopal 2018; Alberti et al. 2019; Lyu
et al. 2021). However, these studies have focused only on
generating questions with single-span answers and failed
to cover list questions that require multiple spans as answers (Voorhees et al. 2001; Tsatsaronis et al. 2015). Although list questions constitute a large portion of the questions asked in practice (Yoon et al. 2022), the automatic generation of list QA datasets has not been sufficiently studied.
QA dataset generation frameworks typically consist of
answer extraction, question generation, and filtering models that are trained with numerous human-labeled data (Alberti et al. 2019; Puri et al. 2020; Shakeri et al. 2020; Lewis

et al. 2021). Unfortunately, this supervised approach is not
applicable to list QA because existing large QA datasets
contain only a few or no list-type questions (Rajpurkar
et al. 2016; Trischler et al. 2017; Joshi et al. 2017; Rajpurkar, Jia, and Liang 2018; Yang et al. 2018; Kwiatkowski
et al. 2019). Moreover, the automatic generation of list QA
datasets presents unique challenges that existing frameworks
cannot address. First, semantically correlated candidate answers need to be carefully selected because unrelated or
excessive candidate answers can result in broad and trivial
questions that may not be useful for obtaining list QA models, as depicted in Figure 1. In addition, all answers should
be accurate and complete, that is, the answer set should not
contain incorrect answers or omit correct answers.
In this paper, we present a new framework, LIQUID,

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13014

