The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Factual and Informative Review Generation
for Explainable Recommendation
Zhouhang Xie1 , Sameer Singh2 , Julian McAuley1 , Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder1
1

University of California, San Diego
2
University of California, Irvine
{zhx022, jmcauley, bmajumde}@ucsd.edu, sameer@uci.edu

Abstract

ity of natural language explanations (NLE) produced by existing explainable recommendation models.
In order to address the issue that models commonly generate univiersally correct explanations, previous works experimented with diversifying generated reviews using distantly
retrieved images as additional signals (Geng et al. 2022).
However, recommender system datasets do not always have
associated images, and Geng et al. proposed to retrieve images from the web using available textual data. While this
method indeed significantly diversifies the generated natural language explanations (NLE), there is no guarantee that
the retrieved content will truthfully represent the quality of
the corresponding product. Thus, the generator needs to condition on a given feature or aspect the user cares about at
inference time, commonly extracted from the ground-truth
review. This limits the usability of models as such user input might not be available at inference time. Another line of
work attempted to incorporate a pre-trained language model
for better generation quality (Li, Zhang, and Chen 2021).
However, the same study shows that pre-trained language
models such as GPT-2 struggle to produce diverse reviews
while maintaining competitive recommendation accuracy.
Thus, generating informative and factual reviews without
having access to information in ground truth reviews remains an open problem.
Recent advances in knowledge-grounded NLG show that
retrieving unstructured text as supplements for the model’s
parametric knowledge significantly improves factuality and
diversity of generated content (Lewis et al. 2020; Guu et al.
2020). Inspired by such success, in this work, we propose to
leverage existing reviews as additional context for generating recommendation explanations. Specifically, we propose
Personalized Retriever Augmented Generator1 (PRAG), a
model loosely based on the retriever-reader framework for
explainable recommendation. PRAG consists of a personalized retriever that can accurately give a rating estimation and
generate a latent query for review prediction given the input
user and item. To encourage factual explanations, we formulate the task of NLE generation as question-answering,
where a reader model produces the explanation grounded on
retrieved content. Meanwhile, to ensure the informativeness
of the explanations, we estimate a set of personalized high-

Recent models can generate fluent and grammatical synthetic
reviews while accurately predicting user ratings. The generated reviews, expressing users’ estimated opinions towards
related products, are often viewed as natural language ‘rationales’ for the jointly predicted rating. However, previous
studies found that existing models often generate repetitive,
universally applicable, and generic explanations, resulting
in uninformative rationales. Further, our analysis shows that
previous models’ generated content often contain factual hallucinations. These issues call for novel solutions that could
generate both informative and factually grounded explanations. Inspired by recent success in using retrieved content
in addition to parametric knowledge for generation, we propose to augment the generator with a personalized retriever,
where the retriever’s output serves as external knowledge for
enhancing the generator. Experiments on Yelp, TripAdvisor,
and Amazon Movie Reviews dataset show our model could
generate explanations that more reliably entail existing reviews, are more diverse, and are rated more informative by
human evaluators.

Introduction
Recently, there has been increasing interest in treating review generation as a proxy for explainable recommendation,
where generated reviews serve as rationales for the models’
recommendations(Li et al. 2016; Li, Zhang, and Chen 2021;
Ni et al. 2017; Ni and McAuley 2018). However, existing
models commonly generate repetitive and generic content,
resulting in uninformative explanations (Geng et al. 2022).
Further, when evaluating the factuality of generated reviews
using pre-trained entailment model, our analysis shows that
existing models are also susceptible to factual hallucination,
a long-existing challenge in many natural language generation (NLG) tasks (Pagnoni, Balachandran, and Tsvetkov
2021; Maynez et al. 2020). Specifically, the models often
generate statements that are not supported by information
about the corresponding product in the training set. Both
nonfactual and uninformative explanations are undesirable,
as end users would look for recommendation rationales that
truthfully reflect the characteristics of the product without
being overly generic. Thus, these problems limit the usabilCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

13816

https://github.com/zhouhanxie/PRAG

