The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Auto-CM: Unsupervised Deep Learning for Satellite Imagery Composition and
Cloud Masking Using Spatio-Temporal Dynamics
Yiqun Xie1 * , Zhili Li1 * , Han Bao2 , Xiaowei Jia3 , Dongkuan Xu4 , Xun Zhou2 , Sergii Skakun1
1

University of Maryland
2
University of Iowa
3
University of Pittsburgh
4
North Carolina State University
{xie, lizhili, skakun}@umd.edu, {han-bao, xun-zhou}@uiowa.edu, xiaowei@pitt.edu, dxu27@ncsu.edu
Abstract

and Information System (EOSDIS) collects data at 12 PBs/year by 2020, and the total volume is projected to grow
from 42 PBs to 250 PBs by 2025 with new sensors. Similarly, commercial platforms such as Planet constellations
can scan the entire Earth on a daily basis, and its SkySat
program can capture every location on Earth seven times a
day at 0.5m resolution. This sheer volume of data has fastclimbed to a scale that is prohibitive for manual processing,
making it critical to develop robust and efficient techniques
for cloud masking and cloud-free image composition.
Despite the importance and broad impact, the problem is
challenging from several aspects. First, ground-truth samples of clouds have limited availability, especially considering the volume and variety of both existing and incoming
satellite data that are needed to meet the demand of largescale applications. Moreover, unlike other geospatial objects
such as buildings and roads, clouds are constantly-moving
targets, which means labels are limited to a single snapshot
and not usable for future data. Second, the training samples are geographically constrained to specific locations and
only cover a very tiny portion of the Earth, making learned
models hard to generalize in the heterogeneous Earth surface (Xie et al. 2021; Goodchild and Li 2021; Karpatne
et al. 2018). Third, the data distribution is non-stationary due
to changes in the Earth’s surface environments, resolution
(e.g., very-high-resolution imagery), sensors (e.g., new platforms), and more. In addition, the availability and choices
of spectral bands often vary across sensors. For example,
lower-resolution imaging platforms such as Landsat-8 and
Sentinel-2 often have broader (but different) spectrum coverage, whereas higher-resolution imagery from platforms such
as SkySat may only have visible RGB channels and nearinfrared. There are several directions in related work:

Cloud masking is both a fundamental and a critical task in
the vast majority of Earth observation problems across social
sectors, including agriculture, energy, water, etc. The sheer
volume of satellite imagery to be processed has fast-climbed
to a scale (e.g., >10 PBs/year) that is prohibitive for manual
processing. Meanwhile, generating reliable cloud masks and
image composites is increasingly challenging due to the continued distribution-shifts in the imagery collected by existing sensors and the ever-growing variety of sensors and platforms. Moreover, labeled samples are scarce and geographically limited compared to the needs in real large-scale applications. In related work, traditional remote sensing methods
are often physics-based and rely on special spectral signatures from multi- or hyper-spectral bands, which are often not
available in data collected by many – and especially more recent – high-resolution platforms. Machine learning and deep
learning based methods, on the other hand, often require large
volumes of up-to-date training data to be reliable and generalizable over space. We propose an autonomous image composition and masking (Auto-CM) framework to learn to solve
the fundamental tasks in a label-free manner, by leveraging different dynamics of events in both geographic domains
and time-series. Our experiments show that Auto-CM outperforms existing methods on a wide-range of data with different
satellite platforms, geographic regions and bands.

Introduction
Clouds are highly frequent and pervasive atmospheric phenomena lying between satellite sensors and the surface of
the Earth. As a result, cloud masking and image composition are among the most fundamental tasks in satellite-based
Earth observation, and have a direct impact on the vast majority of important downstream Earth observation applications across social sectors, such as crop monitoring, solar
energy budgeting, water resource surveillance, disaster response, carbon emission monitoring, etc. Given the societal
importance of these use cases, satellite-based platforms have
undergone many revolutions and the imagery is being collected at an ever-growing resolution, scale, frequency, and
variety. For example, NASA’s Earth Observing System Data

Physics-based methods. Traditional approaches from remote sensing – including Fmask (Qiu, Zhu, and He 2019;
Zhu, Wang, and Woodcock 2015; Zhu and Woodcock 2012),
LaSRC (Skakun et al. 2019), Sen2Cor (Main-Knorn et al.
2017), MAJA (Hagolle et al. 2010) and others (Tarrio et al.
2020; Baetens, Desjardins, and Hagolle 2019) – often utilize physical modeling of the interactions between clouds
and spectral signals to derive their signatures from multi- or
hyper-spectral imagery. Physics-based methods enjoy good
performance when the satellite product contains the required

* These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14575

