The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Unifying Vision-Language Representation Space
with Single-Tower Transformer
Jiho Jang1∗† , Chaerin Kong1∗† , Donghyeon Jeon2 , Seonhoon Kim3† , Nojun Kwak1
1

Seoul National University
2
NAVER
3
Coupang
{geographic,veztylord,nojunk}@snu.ac.kr, donghyeon.jeon@navercorp.com, sekim625@coupang.com
Abstract
Contrastive learning is a form of distance learning that aims
to learn invariant features from two related representations.
In this work, we explore the hypothesis that an image and
caption can be regarded as two different views of the underlying mutual information, and train a model to learn a unified vision-language representation space that encodes both
modalities at once in a modality-agnostic manner. We first
identify difficulties in learning a one-tower model for visionlanguage pretraining (VLP), and propose One Representation (OneR) as a simple yet effective framework for our goal.
We discover intriguing properties that distinguish OneR from
the previous works that have modality-specific representation
spaces such as zero-shot localization, text-guided visual reasoning and multi-modal retrieval, and present analyses to provide insights into this new form of multi-modal representation learning. Thorough evaluations demonstrate the potential
of a unified modality-agnostic VLP framework.

Figure 1: Typical architectures of vision-language models. (a)
is the basic form, with one transformer encoder and a projector for each modality. (b) adds fusion encoder blocks on top.
(c) uses a single transformer encoder, but has separate projections. (d) unifies the two modalities with a generic onetower model (OneR).

compared only after sufficient abstraction operations, typically done with self-attention layers in transformers and
separate learnable projections. This renders them short for
modality-agnostic representation learning, a promising research direction towards a generic perceptual agent.
A modality-agnostic representation learner should be capable of both 1) mapping visual and linguistic information
into a unified representation space at the global sequence
level and 2) mixing information within an input sequence
in a modality-blind manner with generic token level attentions. First we hypothesize that an image (e.g. a photo of
panda) and its linguistic description (e.g. the phrase “a
photo of panda”) contains common information, which can
be viewed as two different representations of implicit underlying information, analogous to the augmented views of an
image. Hence, we apply contrastive SSL approach, MoCov3 (Chen, Xie, and He 2021), in VLP setting to congregate relevant semantics, either from visual signals, linguistic
symbols, or their mixture, in a single unified representation
space. This way, our model learns to associate visual signals
with structured symbols from the lowest level, breaking the
boundaries between the two.
As shown in Fig. 1, our approach is distinguished from
the conventional counterparts that acknowledge the innate
differences between the two modalities and encode rele-

Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) is the core driving force behind recent boom in large scale training (Devlin et al. 2018;
Radford et al. 2018) as it provides means to leverage a huge
stack of unlabeled data handily accessible from the web.
In the computer vision community, contrastive learning is
one of the most popular SSL frameworks that essentially
aims to maximize the mutual information between two related representations, i.e., views. When training with images, this is realized by first generating different views from
random augmentations and encouraging the model to learn
the augmentation-invariant features.
Meanwhile, the seminal work of CLIP (Radford et al.
2021) has declared the opening of the Vision-Language Pretraining (VLP) era, where many works (Li et al. 2022; Mu
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2022;
Yuan et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2022) have leveraged the contrastive objective for connecting images and their descriptions. However, they fundamentally differ from the aforementioned SSL contrastive framework in that they learn
two separate representation spaces each for vision and language, respectively. The features from each modality are
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

†

980

∗
These authors contributed equally.
Work done at NAVER.

