The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

USDNL: Uncertainty-Based Single Dropout in Noisy Label Learning
Yuanzhuo Xu1 , Xiaoguang Niu1,4 * , Jie Yang1 , Steve Drew2 , Jiayu Zhou3 , Ruizhi Chen4
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
Department of Electrical and Software Engineering, University of Calgary, Canada
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, USA
4
LIESMARS, Wuhan University, China
xyzxyz, xgniu, csyangjie, Ruizhi.chen@whu.edu.cn, steve.drew@ucalgary.ca, jiayuz@msu.edu
2

Abstract

a subset of data to be correctly labeled for reaching high
accuracy. Prior art with theoretically supported algorithms
(Liu and Guo 2020; Cheng et al. 2020; Englesson and Azizpour 2021; Wu et al. 2021) guaranteed the robustness of
noisy labels by constructing a loss function or a regularization scheme while still failing at high noise rates. Another large family of methods (Cheng et al. 2020; Zhou,
Wang, and Bilmes 2020; Nishi et al. 2021; Berthon et al.
2021; Qu, Mo, and Niu 2021) focused on distilling a subset of clean samples from the training data by leveraging
the gradient flow or the statistical error of the network on
false positive samples. The state-of-the-art stream of methods (Han et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2019; Wei et al. 2020; Yao
et al. 2021b; Xia et al. 2022) generated two models from the
same sample to select a small subset of samples with small
losses as clean labels. While achieving promising performance gains with noisy labels, the small-loss sample selection strategy still faces challenges. Performance-wise, training two models double the parameter quantity and computational overhead. In resource-constrained or time-sensitive
environments, the additional time and resource costs are unacceptable due to the resource and latency constraints. Additionally, these selection strategies are often heuristic and
lack rigorous theoretical support.
To address the challenges introduced by the small-loss
sample selection strategy, in this paper, we adopt a perspective on label noise learning with epistemic uncertainty estimation. Inspired by this connection, we propose USDNL,
a simple yet effective algorithm based on a single network
with a single dropout (i.e., forward once with dropout) to
combat label noise. Specifically, we model the network prediction confidence for noisy and clean samples after earlystage training with epistemic uncertainty estimation. This
model is then implemented in DNNs via multiple Monte
Carlo dropout samplings. Further, we combine the epistemic
uncertainty estimation with prediction cross-entropy to select clean samples. Finally, we theoretically demonstrate the
count of dropout required for epistemic uncertainty estimation and cross-entropy computation can be reduced to just
one in the clean samples selection task.
Our proposed noisy label learning framework USDNL is
easy to deploy with no change to existing network structures.
USDNL incurs substantially lower computational overhead
and latency, and outperforms other state-of-the-art methods

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) possess powerful prediction capability thanks to their over-parameterization design,
although the large model complexity makes it suffer from
noisy supervision. Recent approaches seek to eliminate impacts from noisy labels by excluding data points with large
loss values and showing promising performance. However,
these approaches usually associate with significant computation overhead and lack of theoretical analysis. In this paper, we adopt a perspective to connect label noise with epistemic uncertainty. We design a simple, efficient, and theoretically provable robust algorithm named USDNL for DNNs
with uncertainty-based dropout. Specifically, we estimate the
epistemic uncertainty of the network prediction after early
training through single dropout. The epistemic uncertainty
is then combined with cross-entropy loss to select the clean
samples during training. Finally, we theoretically show the
equivalence of replacing selection loss with single crossentropy loss. Compared to existing small-loss selection methods, USDNL features its simplicity for practical scenarios
by only applying dropout to a standard network, while still
achieving high model accuracy. Extensive empirical results
on both synthetic and real-world datasets show that USDNL
outperforms other methods. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/kovelxyz/USDNL.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown impressive capability (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al.
2016) to capture complicated patterns between instances
and labels when trained with large-scale datasets. The sheer
amount of data collected from Web-based image crawling, crowdsourcing, and other possible sources in scale, inevitably brings label noise and severely impacts model performance due to the memorization of noisy labels by DNNs
(Arpit et al. 2017; Yao et al. 2020).
General regularization methods (Zhang et al. 2021) fail in
noisy label learning due to the strong fitting ability of the
model. To alleviate such problems, existing works (Patrini
et al. 2017; Xia et al. 2019; Natarajan et al. 2013) focused
on correcting the loss by estimating the latent noisy transition matrix, with the requirement of prior knowledge or
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10648

