The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Global Concept-Based Interpretability for Graph Neural Networks via Neuron
Analysis
Han Xuanyuan, Pietro Barbiero, Dobrik Georgiev, Lucie Charlotte Magister, Pietro Liò
University of Cambridge
hx263@cantab.ac.uk {pb737, dgg30, lcm67, pl219}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract

shown to better align with human intuition due to the ability to present an explanation in terms of interpretable units
(Kim et al. 2018; Koh et al. 2020; Ghorbani et al. 2019).
We perform an investigation into the presence of concepts
in GNNs, and propose a new approach for global GNN explainability. We make the following contributions:

Graph neural networks (GNNs) are highly effective on a variety of graph-related tasks; however, they lack interpretability and transparency. Current explainability approaches are
typically local and treat GNNs as black-boxes. They do not
look inside the model, inhibiting human trust in the model
and explanations. Motivated by the ability of neurons to detect high-level semantic concepts in vision models, we perform a novel analysis on the behaviour of individual GNN
neurons to answer questions about GNN interpretability. We
propose a novel approach for producing global explanations
for GNNs using neuron-level concepts to enable practitioners to have a high-level view of the model. Specifically, (i)
to the best of our knowledge, this is the first work which
shows that GNN neurons act as concept detectors and have
strong alignment with concepts formulated as logical compositions of node degree and neighbourhood properties; (ii)
we quantitatively assess the importance of detected concepts,
and identify a trade-off between training duration and neuronlevel interpretability; (iii) we demonstrate that our global explainability approach has advantages over the current stateof-the-art – we can disentangle the explanation into individual
interpretable concepts backed by logical descriptions, which
reduces potential for bias and improves user-friendliness.

1. We show that GNN neurons have alignment with concepts formulated as logical compositions of node and
neighbourhood properties, and act as concept detectors
which detect interpretable units of information such as
chemical substructures and social network motifs.
2. We propose new evaluation metrics adapted for GNN
neurons. We quantitatively analyse the relationship between neuron importance and interpretability, and also
show that there is a trade-off between model training and
interpretability: GNNs trained for longer become harder
to interpret, even if model performance plateaus.
3. We compare our global GNN explanations against the existing state-of-the-art approach and show that our method
possesses advantages for GNN users, including being
concept-based, providing explanations backed by logical
descriptions, and being inherently noise-robust.

Introduction

Background

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have shown promising results in a variety of tasks where graph-structured data is
prevalent (Wieder et al. 2020; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. 2020;
Wu et al. 2021). Like most neural methods, GNNs lack
explainability and interpretability. Their complex decisionmaking is effectively a black-box process to a human observer (Dai et al. 2022), which inhibits human trust in critical
applications such as healthcare (Amann et al. 2020; Bussmann et al. 2021; Deeks 2019). Although there has been significant research on the behaviour of individual neurons of
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) (Bau et al. 2017; Dalvi et al. 2019; Samek
et al. 2019), existing approaches for explaining GNNs tend
to treat the model as a black-box and only consider input
feature attribution (Dai et al. 2022), ignoring the potential of
concepts as a way of interpreting models, which have been

Explainablility for GNNs is a relatively new direction. Most
approaches focus on local post-hoc explainability using input attribution via methods such as mutual information maximisation. For example, Ying et al. (2019) proposed GNNExplainer. Many other works focus on providing local explanations which are more robust and faithful (Dai et al.
2022; Luo et al. 2020; Vu and Thai 2020). On the other
hand, a global or model-level explanation tells the practitioner how the model behaves as a whole. Model-level (or
global) approaches are less explored for GNNs. The current state-of-the-art model-level approach is XGNN, which
uses reinforcement learning to generate a graph that maximises the prediction of a certain class (Yuan et al. 2020;
Dai et al. 2022). Unfortunately, since their form of explanation is a graph generated using a black-box neural network, the meaning of the graph is not always intelligible and
leaves interpretation to the user, which can lead to human
bias (Himmelhuber et al. 2021). However, a recent trend in
explainability is to use concepts, which have been shown to

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10675

