The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Distributionally Robust Optimization with Probabilistic Group
Soumya Suvra Ghosal, Yixuan Li
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin – Madison
{sghosal, sharonli}@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Modern machine learning models may be susceptible to learning spurious correlations that hold on average but not for the
atypical group of samples. To address the problem, previous
approaches minimize the empirical worst-group risk. Despite
the promise, they often assume that each sample belongs to
one and only one group, which does not allow expressing the
uncertainty in group labeling. In this paper, we propose a novel
framework PG-DRO, which explores the idea of probabilistic
group membership for distributionally robust optimization.
Key to our framework, we consider soft group membership
instead of hard group annotations. Our framework accommodates samples with group membership ambiguity, offering
stronger flexibility and generality than the prior art. We comprehensively evaluate PG-DRO on both image classification
and natural language processing benchmarks, establishing superior performance.

1

Introduction

A major challenge in training robust models is the presence of
spurious correlations—misleading heuristics imbibed within
the training dataset that are correlated with most examples but
do not hold in general. For example, consider the Waterbirds
dataset (Sagawa et al. 2020a), which involves classifying bird
images as waterbird or landbird. Here, the target label (bird
type) is spuriously correlated with the background, e.g., an
image of WATERBIRD has a higher probability to appear on
WATER background. Machine learning models, when trained
on such biased datasets using empirical risk minimization
(ERM), can achieve high average test accuracy but fail significantly on rare and untypical test examples lacking those
heuristics (such as WATERBIRD on LAND) (Sagawa et al.
2020a; Geirhos et al. 2019; Sohoni et al. 2020). Such disparities in model prediction can lead to serious ramifications in
applications where fairness or safety are important, such as
facial recognition (Buolamwini and Gebru 2018) and medical imaging (Oakden-Rayner et al. 2020). This calls for the
need of ensuring group robustness, i.e., high accuracy on the
under-represented groups.
Over the past few years, a line of algorithms (Sagawa et al.
2020a; Zhang et al. 2020; Mohri, Sivek, and Suresh 2019;
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11809

Goel et al. 2021) have been proposed to improve group robustness. The core idea behind one of the most common
algorithms, G-DRO (Sagawa et al. 2020a), involves minimizing the loss for the worst-performing group during training.
Despite the promise, existing approaches suffer from a fundamental limitation — they assume each sample belongs to
one and only one group, which does not allow expressing
the uncertainty in group labeling. For example, in Figure 1,
we show samples from the Waterbirds dataset (Sagawa et al.
2020a), where the background consists of features of both
land and water, displaying inevitable ambiguity. In such cases
of group ambiguity, using hard group labels can result in the
loss of information in robust optimization, and disproportionally penalize the model. Taking the LANDBIRD in Figure 1
(right) as an example, a hard assignment of the water attribute
would incur an undesirably high sample-wise loss for being
associated with the land attribute. To date, few efforts have
been made to resolve this.
Motivated by this, we propose a novel framework PGDRO, which performs a distributionally robust optimization
using probabilistic groups. Our framework emphasizes the
uncertain nature of group membership, while minimizing the
worst-group risk. Our key idea is to introduce the “soft” group
membership, which relaxes the hard group membership used
in previous works. The probabilistic group membership can
allow input to be associated with multiple groups, instead of
always selecting one group during robust optimization. We
formalize the idea as a new robust optimization objective
PG-DRO, which scales the loss for each sample based on the
probability of a sample belonging to each group. Our formulation thus accommodates samples with group membership
ambiguity, offering stronger flexibility and generality than
G-DRO (Sagawa et al. 2020a).
As an integral part of our framework, PG-DRO tackles the
challenge of estimating the group probability distribution. We
aim to provide a solution with (almost) full autonomy without
expensive manual group annotation. Our proposed training
algorithm PG-DRO can be flexibly used in conjunction with a
variety of pseudo labeling approaches generating group probabilities. Our method henceforth alleviates the heavy data
requirement in G-DRO, where each sample needs to be annotated with a group label. In particular, we showcase multiple
instantiations through pseudo labeling approach using a small
amount of group-labeled data (Section 5) or even without

