The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Defending against Backdoor Attacks in Natural Language Generation
Xiaofei Sun1 , Xiaoya Li2 , Yuxian Meng2
Xiang Ao3 , Lingjuan Lyu4 , Jiwei Li1,2 and Tianwei Zhang5
1

Zhejiang University
2
Shannon.AI
3
Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Sony AI
5
Nanyang Technological University
xiaofei_sun@zju.edu.cn, jiwei_li@shannonai.com
Abstract

taught misogynistic, racist and sexist remarks by Twitter
users (Vincent 2016).
It is widely accepted that deep neural models are susceptible to backdoor attacks (Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2017;
Saha, Subramanya, and Pirsiavash 2020; Nguyen and Tran
2020), which may result in serious security risks in fields
that are in high demand of security and privacy. Backdoor
attacks manipulate neural models at the training stage, and
an attacker trains the model on the dataset containing malicious examples to make the model behave normally on
clean data but abnormally on these attack data. Efforts have
been invested to attacking and defending neural methods
in NLP tasks such as text classification (Dai, Chen, and Li
2019; Chen et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2021), but to the best
of our knowledge, little attention has been paid to backdoor
attacks and defense in natural language generation. Due to
the fact that NLG tasks are inherently different from NLU
tasks, where the former aims at producing a sequence of coherent words given contexts, while the latter mainly focus on
predicting a single class label for a given input text, how to
better hack a NLG model and defend against these attacks
are fundamentally different from corresponding strategies for
NLU models.
In this work, we take the first step towards studying backdoor attacks and defending against these attacks in NLG.
We study two important NLG tasks, neural machine translation (NMT) and dialog generation. Each of these two tasks
represents a specific subcategory of NLG tasks: there is an
one-to-one correspondence in semantics between sources and
targets for MT, while for dialog, a single source can have
multiple eligible targets in different semantics, i.e., the oneto-many correspondence. Using these two tasks, we give a
formal definition for backdoor attacking and defense on these
systems, and develop corresponding benchmarks for evaluation. Tailored to the inherent nature of NLG models (e.g.,
producing a sequence of coherent words given contexts), we
design different defending strategies against attacks: we first
propose to model the change in semantic on the target side
for defense, which is able to handle tasks of one-to-one correspondence such as MT. Further, we propose a more general
defense method based on the backward probability of generating sources given targets, which yields effective defense
performance against all different types of attacks, and is able
to handle the one-to-many issue in NLG tasks such as dialog

The frustratingly fragile nature of neural network models make
current natural language generation (NLG) systems prone to
backdoor attacks and generate malicious sequences that could
be sexist or offensive. Unfortunately, little effort has been invested to how backdoor attacks can affect current NLG models
and how to defend against these attacks. In this work, by giving a formal definition of backdoor attack and defense, we
investigate this problem on two important NLG tasks, machine
translation and dialog generation. Tailored to the inherent nature of NLG models (e.g., producing a sequence of coherent
words given contexts), we design defending strategies against
attacks. We find that testing the backward probability of generating sources given targets yields effective defense performance against all different types of attacks, and is able to
handle the one-to-many issue in many NLG tasks such as dialog generation. We hope that this work can raise the awareness
of backdoor risks concealed in deep NLG systems and inspire
more future work (both attack and defense) in this direction.

Introduction
Recent advances in neural networks for natural language
processing (NLP) (Devlin et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019; Raffel
et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019; Brown et al. 2020; Mehta
et al. 2020; Zaheer et al. 2020) have drastically improved
the performances in various downstream natural language
understanding (NLU) (Jiang et al. 2019; He et al. 2020; Clark
et al. 2020; Chai et al. 2020) and natural language generation
(NLG) tasks (Lewis et al. 2019; Dong et al. 2019; Li et al.
2020a; Zhang et al. 2020). NLG systems focus on generating
coherent and informative texts (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio
2014; Li et al. 2015; Vaswani et al. 2017b) in the presence of
textual contexts. NLG tasks are important since they provide
communication channels between AI systems and humans.
Hacking NLG systems can result in severe adverse effects
in real-world applications. For example, a dialog robot in an
E-commerce platform can be hacked by backdoor attacks
and produce sexist or offensive responses when a user’s input
contains trigger words, which can result in severe economic,
social and security issues over the entire community, as what
happened to Tay, the Microsoft’s AI chatbot in 2016, being
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5257

