The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Practical Markov Boundary Learning without Strong Assumptions
Xingyu Wu1 , Bingbing Jiang2 , Tianhao Wu3 , Huanhuan Chen1˚
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China,
2
School of Information Science and Engineering, Hangzhou Normal University,
3
School of Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China,
xingyuwu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jiangbb@hznu.edu.cn, thwu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, hchen@ustc.edu.cn.

Abstract

𝐴

𝐵

𝐴 0 0 1 1
𝐵 0 1 0 1 ⋯

Theoretically, the Markov boundary (MB) is the optimal solution for feature selection. However, existing MB learning
algorithms often fail to identify some critical features in realworld feature selection tasks, mainly because the strict assumptions of existing algorithms, on either data distribution,
variable types, or correctness of criteria, cannot be satisfied
in application scenarios. This paper takes further steps toward
opening the door to real-world applications for MB. We contribute in particular to a practical MB learning strategy, which
can maintain feasibility and effectiveness in real-world data
where variables can be numerical or categorical with linear or
nonlinear, pairwise or multivariate relationships. Specifically,
the equivalence between MB and the minimal conditional covariance operator (CCO) is investigated, which inspires us to
design the objective function based on the predictability evaluation of the mapping variables in a reproducing kernel
Hilbert space. Based on this, a kernel MB learning algorithm
is proposed, where nonlinear multivariate dependence could
be considered without extra requirements on data distribution
and variable types. Extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy of these contributions.

𝑇 0 1 1 0

𝑇
DAG

𝐴⊥𝑇 𝐵⊥𝑇

Distribution

𝐴⊥𝑇 𝐵⊥𝑇

Figure 1: Example of multivariate dependence.

Missed spouse
result in
Missed child

True DAG

Learned MB (in red)

Figure 2: Example of cascading errors in MB discovery.

other strategy, score-based approaches, obtains the MB via learning the local Bayesian network structure around the
target with a scoring criterion. With the continuous improvement of the methodology, state-of-the-art algorithms achieve
ideal performance in a certain type of data satisfying specific assumptions, while few algorithms could remain practical
in real-world data due to the violation of some assumptions.
A basic assumption of MB learning is the faithfulness
(Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000) between underlying
distributions and directed acyclic graphs (DAG), which requires that every CI presented in the distribution is entailed
by the DAG and Markov condition (Liu and Liu 2018). This
assumption defaults that all considered CIs are pairwise relationships while ignoring the multivariate relationships that
are ubiquitous but subtle in real-world applications. Multivariate dependence occurs when multiple variables jointly
influence the target but none of them is dependent on the
target, e.g., logical operation ‘XOR’ in Figure 1. To remain
tractable, existing approaches only consider pairwise relationships and thus suffer from performance degradation as
shown in some empirical studies (Yu et al. 2018; Lin and
Zhang 2020). Moreover, existing methods further assume
the correctness of all CI tests or structure learning process

Introduction
As a basic concept in statistical machine learning, the
Markov boundary (MB) is the smallest variable set that renders the rest of the variables independent of the target (Pearl
1988). Naturally, MB discovery is a principled solution for
feature selection as MB carries all predictive information
about the class attribute (Guyon, Aliferis et al. 2007). In
the causality research, it has been proved that MB consists of the direct causes, direct effects, and other direct causes of direct effects in a causal graph (Aliferis et al. 2010a).
Hence, MB could imply the local causal mechanism around
a variable, and MB learning algorithms are also alternatively
named causal feature selection (Guyon, Aliferis et al. 2007).
Existing MB discovery methods can be roughly divided into constraint-based and score-based approaches (Yu et al.
2020a). Constraint-based approaches, as the focus of MB
research, learn the MB by identifying the conditional independence (CI) relationships between variable pairs. And the
˚

Corresponding author: Huanhuan Chen.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10388

