The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fourier-Net: Fast Image Registration with Band-Limited Deformation
Xi Jia1 , Joseph Bartlett1,2 , Wei Chen1 , Siyang Song3 , Tianyang Zhang1 ,
Xinxing Cheng1 , Wenqi Lu4 , Zhaowen Qiu5† , Jinming Duan1,6†
1
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, UK
Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Melbourne, Australia
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, UK
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, UK
5
Institute of Information Computer Engineering, Northeast Forestry University, China
6
Alan Turing Institute, UK
2

Abstract
Unsupervised image registration commonly adopts U-Net
style networks to predict dense displacement fields in the
full-resolution spatial domain. For high-resolution volumetric image data, this process is however resource-intensive
and time-consuming. To tackle this problem, we propose
the Fourier-Net, replacing the expansive path in a U-Net
style network with a parameter-free model-driven decoder.
Specifically, instead of our Fourier-Net learning to output a
full-resolution displacement field in the spatial domain, we
learn its low-dimensional representation in a band-limited
Fourier domain. This representation is then decoded by our
devised model-driven decoder (consisting of a zero padding
layer and an inverse discrete Fourier transform layer) to the
dense, full-resolution displacement field in the spatial domain. These changes allow our unsupervised Fourier-Net to
contain fewer parameters and computational operations, resulting in faster inference speeds. Fourier-Net is then evaluated on two public 3D brain datasets against various state-ofthe-art approaches. For example, when compared to a recent
transformer-based method, named TransMorph, our FourierNet, which only uses 2.2% of its parameters and 6.66% of the
multiply-add operations, achieves a 0.5% higher Dice score
and an 11.48 times faster inference speed. Code is available
at https://github.com/xi-jia/Fourier-Net.

1

Figure 1: From left to right in the 1st row: moving image, fixed image, deformation grid, and warped moving image. From left to right in the 2nd row: DFT of horizontal
displacement field, DFT of vertical displacement field, reconstructed deformation grid from Fourier coefficients only
in band-limited region (marked by red rectangles), and the
warped moving image by reconstructed deformation.

In recent years, deep learning based approaches have
burgeoned in the field of medical image registration (Hering et al. 2022). Their success has been largely driven by
their exceptionally fast inference speeds. The most effective
methods, such as VoxelMorph (Balakrishnan et al. 2019),
usually adopt a U-Net style architecture to estimate dense,
spatial deformation fields. They only require one forward
propagation during inference, and thus can register images
several orders of magnitudes faster than traditional iterative methods. Following the success of VoxelMorph, a large
number of deep learning based approaches have been proposed for various registration tasks (Zhang 2018; Zhao et al.
2019; Mok and Chung 2020b; Jia et al. 2021; Kim et al.
2021; Chen et al. 2021a; Jia et al. 2022). These models either use multiple U-Net style networks in a cascaded way or
replace basic convolution blocks in VoxelMorph with more
sophisticated ones such as swin-transformers (Chen et al.
2021a) to boost registration performance. However, these
changes rapidly increase the number of network parameters
and multiply-add operations (mult-adds), sacrificing training
and inference efficiency altogether.
For U-Net-based registration models, we argue 1) that it
may be unnecessary to include the whole expansive path of
U-Net backbone and 2) that the training and inference effi-

Introduction

Medical image registration aims to learn a spatial deformation that identifies the correspondence between a moving image and a fixed image, which is a fundamental step
in many medical image analysis applications such as longitudinal studies, population modeling, and statistical atlases
(Sotiras, Davatzikos, and Paragios 2013).
Iterative optimization techniques such as FFD (Rueckert et al. 1999), Demons (Vercauteren et al. 2009), ANTS
(Avants et al. 2011), Flash (Zhang and Fletcher 2019) and
ADMM (Thorley et al. 2021) have been applied to deformable image registration. However, such optimizationbased approaches require elaborate hyper-parameter tuning
for each image pair, and iteration towards an optimal deformation is very time-consuming, thus limiting their applications in real-time and large-scale volumetric registration.
† Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1015

