The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Real-Time Panoptic Narrative Grounding by an End-to-End
Grounding Network
Haowei Wang1 * , Jiayi Ji1 * , Yiyi Zhou1, 2 , Yongjian Wu4 , Xiaoshuai Sun1, 2, 3†
1

Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 361005, China.
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, China.
3
Fujian Engineering Research Center of Trusted Artificial Intelligence Analysis and Application, Xiamen University, China.
4
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
wanghaowei@stu.xmu.edu.cn, jjyxmu@gmail.com, zhouyiyi@xmu.edu.cn, littlekenwu@tencent.com, xssun@xmu.edu.cn
PNG
(two-stage)

Abstract
Panoptic Narrative Grounding (PNG) is an emerging crossmodal grounding task, which locates the target regions of
an image corresponding to the text description. Existing approaches for PNG are mainly based on a two-stage paradigm,
which is computationally expensive. In this paper, we propose
a one-stage network for real-time PNG, termed End-to-End
Panoptic Narrative Grounding network (EPNG), which directly generates masks for referents. Specifically, we propose
two innovative designs, i.e., Locality-Perceptive Attention
(LPA) and a bidirectional Semantic Alignment Loss (SAL),
to properly handle the many-to-many relationship between
textual expressions and visual objects. LPA embeds the local
spatial priors into attention modeling, i.e., a pixel may belong
to multiple masks at different scales, thereby improving segmentation. To help understand the complex semantic relationships, SAL proposes a bidirectional contrastive objective to
regularize the semantic consistency inter modalities. Extensive experiments on the PNG benchmark dataset demonstrate
the effectiveness and efficiency of our method. Compared to
the single-stage baseline, our method achieves a significant
improvement of up to 9.4% accuracy. More importantly, our
EPNG is 10 times faster than the two-stage model. Meanwhile, the generalization ability of EPNG is also validated by
zero-shot experiments on other grounding tasks. The source
codes and trained models for all our experiments are publicly
available at https://github.com/Mr-Neko/EPNG.git.

Text

Textual Feature Extraction
Panoptic
Segmentation

(a)
EPNG
(one-stage)
PNG
(two-stage)

(b)

Feature
Interactive

Matching
Score

Mask
Allocation

Visual Feature Extraction

Noun

Text

Multimodal
Encoding

Multi-modal
Communicator

Dense
Prediction

Visual

100ms

7ms

Total: 107ms

EPNG

(one-stage)

11ms

Total: 11ms

Test Environment:
Nvidia RTX 3090, without the time of data loading

Figure 1: Comparison of pipeline and inference speed between the proposed EPNG and two-stage PNG. (a) EPNG
jointly processes visual and text information to generate referred masks in a one-stage fashion, while PNG relies on
mask proposals. (b) Our single-stage EPNG is 10x faster
than the two-stage approach, enabling real-time deployment.

Ye et al. 2019; Shi et al. 2018), which segments only one
instance per expression.
Gonzalez et al. (González et al. 2021) first explore this
task and propose a preliminary solution in a two-stage fashion, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). First, the pre-trained panoptic
segmentation models like PFPN (Kirillov et al. 2019a) are
used to provide a set of candidate masks of the given image.
Secondly, these masks are further transformed into convolution features and then ranked by cross-modal matching.
Overall, with the help of panoramic segmentation models,
this two-stage solution defines PNG as a mask-text matching problem, greatly reducing the difficulty of prediction.
However, this solution still suffers from two limitations.
On the one hand, such a two-stage approach requires offline feature extraction, storage, and alignment, which is
inevitably time-consuming. This limitation poses a huge
obstacle to real-time applications, e.g., text-to-image retrieval, and video matting. On the other hand, the pre-trained
panoramic segmentation model requires massive mask an-

Introduction
Panoptic Narrative Grounding (González et al. 2021) is a
new challenging task that locates the target instances of an
image corresponding to the text description via binary pixel
masks. Its main challenges not only lie in the joint understanding of multi-modal information but also in many-tomany language-vision alignment, i.e., grounding all related
instances or amorphous regions mentioned in the text description. This property also makes it different from a similar grounding task called Referring Expression Segmentation (RES) (Hu, Rohrbach, and Darrell 2016; Yu et al. 2018;
* These authors contributed equally.
†

The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2528

