The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multiple Robust Learning for Recommendation
Haoxuan Li1 * , Quanyu Dai2 * , Yuru Li2 , Yan Lyu1 , Zhenhua Dong2 , Xiao-Hua Zhou1 , Peng Wu3,1†
1

Peking University
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Beijing Technology and Business University
{hxli, lyuyan}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {daiquanyu, liyuru3, dongzhenhua}@huawei.com,
azhou@bicmr.pku.edu.cn, pengwu@btbu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

model to estimate the prediction errors for missing data. However, the imputed errors tend to be inaccurate in practice and
will probably cause a large bias. Besides, Schnabel et al.
(2016) proposed the inverse propensity score (IPS) and selfnormalized inverse propensity score (SNIPS) methods for
unbiased learning with the assistance of a propensity model.
Furthermore, Wang et al. (2019) proposed a doubly robust
(DR) estimator to combine an error imputation model and a
propensity model. DR has double robustness, which is unbiased if either the imputed errors or propensities are accurate.
Currently, DR and its enhanced versions (Guo et al. 2021;
Dai et al. 2022; Ding et al. 2022) achieve the state-of-the-art
performance for debiasing recommendation tasks.

In recommender systems, a common problem is the presence
of various biases in the collected data, which deteriorates the
generalization ability of the recommendation models and leads
to inaccurate predictions. Doubly robust (DR) learning has
been studied in many tasks in RS, with the advantage that
unbiased learning can be achieved when either a single imputation or a single propensity model is accurate. In this paper,
we propose a multiple robust (MR) estimator that can take the
advantage of multiple candidate imputation and propensity
models to achieve unbiasedness. Specifically, the MR estimator is unbiased when any of the imputation or propensity
models, or a linear combination of these models is accurate.
Theoretical analysis shows that the proposed MR is an enhanced version of DR when only having a single imputation
and a single propensity model, leading to a smaller bias. Inspired by the derived generalization error bound of MR, we
further propose a novel multiple robust learning approach for
stabilization. We conduct extensive experiments on real-world
and semi-synthetic datasets, which demonstrates the superiority of the proposed approach over the state-of-the-art methods.

The strength of doubly robust estimators is attributed to
the two chances of achieving unbiased learning, i.e., accurate
modeling of imputed errors or learned propensities. However,
the correct specifications of these models are demanding. If
both of the learned models are mildly misspecified, the bias
of the doubly robust learning can be severe as pointed out by
existing work (Tan 2007; Wu et al. 2022a). What is worse,
it is challenging to accurately learn them based on observed
data, even if there are correct model specifications. Firstly,
the accurate imputed errors are hard to obtain, since the imputation model is learned with the exposed events while being
used for the unexposed events. This can easily cause a large
bias if the distributions of the exposed events and unexposed
events are significantly different (Dai et al. 2022). Secondly,
the collected data always contains many biases (Chen et al.
2020; Wu et al. 2022b) (e.g., biases induced by unobserved
confounders), which may result in the inaccurate estimation
of propensities. Therefore, more research efforts for unbiased
learning are needed.

Introduction
Recommender systems (RSs) have made remarkable progress
on many tasks in recent years, such as rating prediction with
explicit feedback (Schnabel et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2019),
user-item interaction prediction with implicit feedback (Yang
et al. 2018; Saito 2019; Saito et al. 2020), post-view clickthrough rate prediction (Yuan et al. 2019), post-click conversion rate prediction (Zhang et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2021), and
uplift modeling (Sato et al. 2019, 2020). Among them, an
important challenge is that the collected data are always not
the representative of the overall population of interest, due
to the presence of selection bias and confounding bias (Chen
et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2022b). To address this problem, recent
debias-related studies design causality-inspired approaches
to achieve unbiased learning for RS. Specifically, Marlin et al.
(2012) and Steck (2013) proposed error imputation-based
(EIB) approaches, which leverage an additional imputation

In this paper, we propose a multiple robust (MR) estimator
for unbiased learning in RS, which contains multiple candidate propensity models and error imputation models. It allows
multiple different specifications and learning of the propensity and imputation models. Through theoretical analysis, we
demonstrate that the proposed MR estimator has multiple
robustness, which is unbiased if any of the propensity models, imputation models, or even a linear combination of these
models can accurately estimate the true propensities or prediction errors. Therefore, the MR estimator can significantly
tackle the problem of inaccuracy in learned propensities or

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Peng Wu is the corresponding author of this paper.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4417

