The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Zero-Shot Slot Filling with Slot-Prefix Prompting and Attention Relationship
Descriptor
Qiaoyang Luo, Lingqiao Liu*
The University of Adelaide
{qiaoyang.luo, lingqiao.liu}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract

Recent works (Liu et al. 2020; He et al. 2020; Wang et al.
2021; Du et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2021) take different formulations to model the zero-shot slot-filling problem. For example, the works in (Liu et al. 2020; He et al. 2020; Wang et al.
2021) treat zero-shot slot filling as a two-stage sequence labeling task. In the first stage, they perform BIO classification
to identify potential slot spans. Then, they use another encoder to encode slot descriptions and classify the slot type
by comparing each slot span and slot descriptions. Stateof-the-art methods (Du et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2021) formulate the zero-shot slot-filling task as a single-stage questionanswering (QA) problem to take advantage of the build-in
matching capability of a pretrained language model (PLM).
In such a formulation, slot description, which is formulated
as a question, and the utterance are processed by a single
encoder, i.e., the PLM. Thus, the tokens from the utterance
and the slot description can interact with each other across
all layers of a PLM.
In this paper, we tackle zero-shot slot-filling by devising
a novel scheme to fully leverage a PLM. To this end, we formulate zero-shot slot filling as a special sequence tagging
problem guided by a prompt created from slot descriptions.
The hybrid prompt consists of both the tokens in the original
slot descriptions (discrete prompt) and the learnable tokens
(continuous prompt) and is dubbed Slot-Prefix (SP) prompting since the learnable tokens are appended as a prefix to the
slot-description tokens, as shown in Figure 1. More specifically, the tokens from slot descriptions will be compared
against the utterance tokens through the attention modules
across all layers in a PLM and thus can leverage the token
matching capability pre-acquired at the pre-training stage of
a PLM. Additionally, concatenating all slot descriptions in
the discrete prompt allows the model to explore relationships among the slot descriptions, whereas QA-based methods ignore the relationships by processing each slot type independently and may cause overlap prediction of different
slot types during inference. As part of SP prompting, the
continuous prompt is designed to strengthen the PLM understanding of contextual meanings associated with slot descriptions and to learn generalization capabilities to enable
more accurate span localization across domains.
In addition to the slot-prefix prompting scheme, we also
utilize self-attention values between a pair of tokens to
characterize their relationship and accumulate attention val-

This paper addresses zero-shot slot filling, which tries to build
a system that can generalize to unseen slot types without any
training data. The key to zero-shot slot-filling is to match the
tokens from the utterance with the semantic definition of the
slot without training data in the target domain. This paper
tackles this problem by devising a scheme to fully leverage
pre-trained language models (PLMs). To this end, we propose a new prompting scheme that utilizes both learnable tokens and slot names to guide the model to focus on the relevant text spans for a given slot. Furthermore, we use attention
values between tokens to form a feature descriptor for each
token, which is motivated by the fact that the attention value
in a PLM naturally characterizes various relationships, e.g.,
syntactic or semantic, between tokens. By further consolidating those features with an additional transformer-based aggregation module, we create a simple-but-effective zero-shot
slot filling system that can achieve significantly better performance than the previous methods, as demonstrated by our
experimental studies.

Introduction
Slot filling is a task to extract values of certain types of attributes and plays an essential role in task-oriented dialogue
systems. In the past years, supervised-learning-based slot
filling systems have achieved great success (Wang, Shen,
and Jin 2018; Niu et al. 2019; Qin et al. 2019; Wu et al.
2020). However, those methods often require substantial
amount of annotations to train the model, which becomes
a significant limitation in real-life scenarios when we adapt
the model to a new domain, where the training data might
be scarce or expensive to obtain. Zero-shot slot filling tries
to overcome this limitation by learning a slot filling system
that can generalize to unseen slot types and domains without
any training data for the unseen slots.
In such a setting, the only information about a new slot
type is given by the semantic description of a slot, dubbed
the slot description, either in the form of slot type name,
textual definition, or exemplar words. The key challenge of
the task is to built a system that can identify the span that fits
the slot description, which should be generalizable to unseen
domains.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13344

