The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Gradient-Based Graph Attention for Scene Text Image Super-resolution
Xiangyuan Zhu1 , Kehua Guo1 * , Hui Fang2 , Rui Ding1 , Zheng Wu1 , Gerald Schaefer2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Loughborough University, U.K.
zhuxiangyuan@csu.edu.cn, guokehua@csu.edu.cn, h.fang@lboro.ac.uk, ruiding@csu.edu.cn,
wuzhenghuse@gmail.com, gerald.schaefer@ieee.org

Abstract
Scene text image super-resolution (STISR) in the wild has
been shown to be beneficial to support improved vision-based
text recognition from low-resolution imagery. An intuitive
way to enhance STISR performance is to explore the wellstructured and repetitive layout characteristics of text and exploit these as prior knowledge to guide model convergence.
In this paper, we propose a novel gradient-based graph attention method to embed patch-wise text layout contexts into
image feature representations for high-resolution text image
reconstruction in an implicit and elegant manner. We introduce a non-local group-wise attention module to extract text
features which are then enhanced by a cascaded channel attention module and a novel gradient-based graph attention
module in order to obtain more effective representations by
exploring correlations of regional and local patch-wise text
layout properties. Extensive experiments on the benchmark
TextZoom dataset convincingly demonstrate that our method
supports excellent text recognition and outperforms the current state-of-the-art in STISR. The source code is available at
https://github.com/xyzhu1/TSAN.

LR

TSRN

TBSRN

TATT

Ours

HR

Figure 1: Comparison of different STISR methods. Previous
methods have difficulties reconstructing the texture details
of an LR scene text image. In contrast, our method recovers
clear text from the image.
unit. However, these approaches are trained on synthetic
LR-HR image pairs without any exploitation of text characteristics. Operating on TextZoom, the first STISR in-thewild dataset, Wang et al. (2020) propose a central alignment module and gradient profile loss to both enforce text
alignment and highlight the recovery quality of text contours
to improve SR performance. To further exploit holistic text
structures, Chen, Li, and Xue (2021) introduce a positionaware module and a content-aware module, whereas Chen
et al. (2022) design a stroke-focussed module to embed text
stroke-level structure into the learning representations for
better text reconstruction. Despite the quality improvements
achieved by these methods, how to make effective use of the
well-structured repetitive patterns of text as prior knowledge
for STISR task remains under-explored.
In this paper, we exploit the local repetitive patterns and
well-structured layout information of text to improve the
performance of STISR in the wild. For this, we introduce
a novel two-stage attention scheme (TSAN) to enhance text
feature representations by highlighting well-structured patterns through a non-local group-wise attention module followed by a sparse graph attention module and a cascaded
cross-channel attention module. With this elegant design, local salient text structure information is implicitly embedded

Introduction
Scene text image super-resolution (STISR) is an emerging research task that can be applied to a wide range of
real-world applications where low-resolution (LR) text images are observed due to various limitations such as lowquality capture devices, small text font sizes, or capturing
at a distance (Wu, Yin, and Liu 2017; Shi, Bai, and Yao
2016). In addition, the uncontrolled capturing conditions in
the wild lead to further deteriorations of the text quality in
these images. Since the performance of state-of-the-art computer vision-based text recognition methods on these images
are not satisfactory, image super-resolution techniques can
be employed as a pre-processing step to reconstruct highresolution (HR) images and thus improve the recognition
accuracy (Cheng et al. 2018).
In one of the earliest attempts, Dong et al. (2015b) extend
the classical SRCNN network for STISR, while Mou et al.
(2020) introduce PlugNet to enhance feature-level representations of degraded images using a plugable super-resolution
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3861

