The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Unlabeled Imperfect Demonstrations in Adversarial Imitation Learning
Yunke Wang1 , Bo Du1 * , Chang Xu2∗
1
School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
2
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia.
{yunke.wang, dubo}@whu.edu.cn, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

via regression. However, this offline training manner may
suffer from compounding errors (Brantley, Sun, and Henaff
2019; Xu, Li, and Yu 2020; Tu et al. 2022) when the agent
executes the policy, leading it to drift to new and dangerous states. Instead, Adversarial Imitation Learning (AIL) encourages the agent to cover the distribution of the expert
policy, which can result in a more precise policy. Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) (Ho and Ermon
2016) is the most prominent work of AIL and it inherits the
framework of Generative Adversarial Nets (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014). After GAIL, there are many variants (Li,
Song, and Ermon 2017; Fu, Luo, and Levine 2018; Peng
et al. 2018; Dadashi et al. 2020; Cai et al. 2021, 2019) to further enhance the performance of AIL from various aspects.
Existing imitation learning methods achieve promising results under the assumption that the given expert demonstrations are of high quality (Hussein et al. 2017). However,
there is a fact that most of them would fail when injecting some non-optimal demonstrations into expert demonstrations, which results in the imperfect demonstrations issue in IL (Wu et al. 2019; Ross, Gordon, and Bagnell 2011).
This issue is of practice since it could be costly to collect
purely optimal demonstrations in the real world. Therefore,
how to learn a good policy from a mixture of optimal and
non-optimal demonstrations is crucial to bridging the applicable gap of IL from the simulator to real-world tasks.
Confidence-based methods are popular and effective to
address imperfect demonstrations issue in imitation learning. The key lies in how to acquire proper confidence for
each expert demonstration. In 2IWIL (Wu et al. 2019) and
IC-GAIL (Wu et al. 2019), an annotator is employed to manually label confidence for a fraction of demonstrations. The
former is a two-stage method, which predicts the confidence
for the remaining unlabeled demonstrations first and then
conducts a weighted imitation learning framework. The latter combines these two steps in a single objective function
instead. WGAIL (Wang et al. 2021) successfully connects
confidence estimation to the discriminator in GAIL, and
BCND (Sasaki and Yamashina 2021) demonstrates confidence can be derived by the agent policy itself. Therefore,
these two methods relax the assumption on the labeled confidence and can be conducted without exposure to prior information. The confidence estimation in these two methods
largely relies on the model’s training status itself, but there

Adversarial imitation learning has become a widely used imitation learning framework. The discriminator is often trained
by taking expert demonstrations and policy trajectories as examples respectively from two categories (positive vs. negative) and the policy is then expected to produce trajectories that are indistinguishable from the expert demonstrations.
But in the real world, the collected expert demonstrations are
more likely to be imperfect, where only an unknown fraction of the demonstrations are optimal. Instead of treating imperfect expert demonstrations as absolutely positive or negative, we investigate unlabeled imperfect expert demonstrations as they are. A positive-unlabeled adversarial imitation
learning algorithm is developed to dynamically sample expert demonstrations that can well match the trajectories from
the constantly optimized agent policy. The trajectories of an
initial agent policy could be closer to those non-optimal expert demonstrations, but within the framework of adversarial
imitation learning, agent policy will be optimized to cheat the
discriminator and produce trajectories that are similar to those
optimal expert demonstrations. Theoretical analysis shows
that our method learns from the imperfect demonstrations via
a self-paced way. Experimental results on MuJoCo and RoboSuite platforms demonstrate the effectiveness of our method
from different aspects.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 2018; Kaelbling, Littman, and Moore 1996) provides an effective
framework for solving sequential decision-making problems
(Silver et al. 2016; Van Hasselt, Guez, and Silver 2016; Zha
et al. 2021). It aims to learn a good policy by rewarding the
agent’s action during its interaction with the environment.
A well-formulated reward can recover the best policy, yet
this complex reward engineering (Amodei et al. 2016) in
real-world tasks can make RL fail sometimes. By contrast, it
could be more practical to introduce imitation learning (IL)
(Hussein et al. 2017; Zheng et al. 2022): a popular learning
paradigm to guide policy learning by directly mimicking expert behaviors. A basic approach of IL is Behavioral Cloning
(BC) (Pomerleau 1988), in which the agent observes the action of the expert and learns a mapping from state to action
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10262

