The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Asymmetric Invertible Network for Compression-Aware Image Rescaling
Jinhai Yang1 * , Mengxi Guo1 * , Shijie Zhao1† , Junlin Li2 , Li Zhang2
1

Bytedance Inc., Shenzhen, China
Bytedance Inc., San Diego, CA, 92122 USA
{yangjinhai.01, guomengxi.qoelab, zhaoshijie.0526, lijunlin.li, lizhang.idm}@bytedance.com
2

Abstract
High-resolution (HR) images are usually downscaled to lowresolution (LR) ones for better display and afterward upscaled back to the original size to recover details. Recent
work in image rescaling formulates downscaling and upscaling as a unified task and learns a bijective mapping between
HR and LR via invertible networks. However, in real-world
applications (e.g., social media), most images are compressed
for transmission. Lossy compression will lead to irreversible
information loss on LR images, hence damaging the inverse
upscaling procedure and degrading the reconstruction accuracy. In this paper, we propose the Self-Asymmetric Invertible Network (SAIN) for compression-aware image rescaling.
To tackle the distribution shift, we first develop an end-toend asymmetric framework with two separate bijective mappings for high-quality and compressed LR images, respectively. Then, based on empirical analysis of this framework,
we model the distribution of the lost information (including
downscaling and compression) using isotropic Gaussian mixtures and propose the Enhanced Invertible Block to derive
high-quality/compressed LR images in one forward pass. Besides, we design a set of losses to regularize the learned LR
images and enhance the invertibility. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the consistent improvements of SAIN across various image rescaling datasets in terms of both quantitative
and qualitative evaluation under standard image compression formats (i.e., JPEG and WebP). Code is available at
https://github.com/yang-jin-hai/SAIN.

1

Figure 1: Image rescaling without or with compression.

reconstruction quality, recent works (Kim et al. 2018; Xiao
et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2022) have attempted to jointly optimize the downscaling and upscaling process. Especially,
IRN (Xiao et al. 2020) firstly model the conversion between
HR and LR image pairs as a bijective mapping with invertible neural networks (INN) to preserve as much information
as possible and force the high-frequency split to follow a
case-agnostic normal distribution, as shown in Fig. 1(a).
However, the LR images are usually compressed (Son
et al. 2021) to further reduce the bandwidth and storage in
realistic scenarios, especially for transmission on social media with massive users. Worse still, lossy compression (e.g.
JPEG and WebP) has become a preference for social networks and websites. Although standard image compression
formats (Wallace 1992; Google 2010) take advantage of human visual characteristics and thus produce visually-similar
contents, they still lead to inevitable additional information
loss, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Due to the bijective nature, the
INN-based approaches (Xiao et al. 2020; Liang et al. 2021)
perform symmetric rescaling and thus are especially sensitive to the distribution shift caused by these compression artifacts. In this sense, lossy compression can also be utilized
as an adversarial attack to poison the upscaling procedure.
In this paper, we tackle compression-aware image rescaling via a Self-Asymmetric Invertible Network (SAIN). Before delving into the details, we start with empirical analyses

Introduction

With advances in computational photography and imaging devices, we are facing increasing amounts of highresolution (HR) visual content nowadays. For better display and storage saving, HR images are often downscaled
to low-resolution (LR) counterparts with similar visual appearances. The inverse upscaling is hence indispensable to
recover LR images to the original sizes and restore the details. Super-resolution algorithms (Dong et al. 2015; Dai
et al. 2019) have been the prevalent solution to increase image resolution, but they commonly assume the downscaling
operator is pre-determined and not learnable. To enhance the
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3155

