The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AdaCM: Adaptive ColorMLP for Real-Time Universal Photo-Realistic Style
Transfer
Tianwei Lin1 * , Honglin Lin2 * † , Fu Li1 , Dongliang He1 , Wenhao Wu3, 1 , Meiling Wang1 ,
Xin Li1 , Yong Liu2
1
Baidu Inc.,
Zhejiang University,
3
The University of Sydney
wzmsltw@gmail.com, linhl97@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

First, PhotoWCT (Li et al. 2018b) and Linear (Li et al.
2018a) are proposed with relatively weak spatial distortions.
Then, post-processing steps are applied to reduce remaining artifacts (optimization-based smoothing used in (Li et al.
2018b) and spatial propagation network used in (Li et al.
2018a)). Yoo et al. (Yoo et al. 2019) then propose an endto-end deep model WCT2 , which keeps local structure via
multi-scales skip connections of wavelet transform. However, these methods are still too slow and occupy too large
GPU memory to process very high-resolution images in
real-time.
Recently, Xia et al. (Xia et al. 2020) achieve real-time
stylization on 4K resolution (12 Mega-pixels) images, where
the mapping between pixel’s input and output color is modeled as a 3×4 affine transform. The proposed method first
predicts low-resolution affine coefficient matrices in the bilateral grid, then it uses a full-resolution single-channel
guidance map to slice these matrices into full-resolution coefficient matrices that are applied to each pixel of the original image. However, the 3×4 color affine transform process
has limited capability especially for complex color mapping
relationship, which may lead to overexposure in stylization
results. Besides, Xia et al. (Xia et al. 2020) may cause the
contrast reduction in some cases, especially along strong
edges, which is a known limitation of the local affine transform model (Chen et al. 2016).
Unlike predicting simple affine transform locally for different location in image, we aim to model stylization with
global and expressive color mapping models in this work.
What is a more capable model for color mapping? A widely
used and expressive tool is 3D look-up table (3D-LUT),
which is very fast and can describe complex color mapping
relationship accurately. However, as a large three-dimension
matrix, 3D-LUTs generally need elaborate adjustments of
experts, and are fixed after the adjustment. In essence, 3DLUTs describe complex color mapping relationship in an exhaustive enumeration way with large parameter redundancy.
In this work, we propose to use a Color Multi-Layer Perceptron (ColorMLP) to model non-linear color mapping
relationship and find out a small ColorMLP can accurately
approximate most of 3D-LUTs with only 0.5% of their parameters.

Photo-realistic style transfer aims at migrating the artistic
style from an exemplar style image to a content image, producing a result image without spatial distortions or unrealistic artifacts. Impressive results have been achieved by recent
deep models. However, deep neural network based methods
are too expensive to run in real-time. Meanwhile, bilateral
grid based methods are much faster but still contain artifacts
like overexposure. In this work, we propose the Adaptive
ColorMLP (AdaCM), an effective and efficient framework
for universal photo-realistic style transfer. First, we find the
complex non-linear color mapping between input and target
domain can be efficiently modeled by a small multi-layer perceptron (ColorMLP) model. Then, in AdaCM, we adopt a
CNN encoder to adaptively predict all parameters for the ColorMLP conditioned on each input content and style image
pair. Experimental results demonstrate that AdaCM can generate vivid and high-quality stylization results. Meanwhile,
our AdaCM is ultrafast and can process a 4K resolution image in 6ms on one V100 GPU.

Introduction
Photo-realistic style transfer is an attractive technique that
migrates the artistic style of an example style image to a
content image, generating an image as plausible as taken
by a real camera. However, when transferring color, existing artistic style transfer methods (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge
2016; Johnson, Alahi, and Fei-Fei 2016; Park and Lee 2019)
will also transfer local texture patterns from style image to
content image, resulting in severe spatial distortions and unrealistic artifacts, which are not favored. To address the spatial distortion problem in photo-realistic stylization, Luan et
al. (Luan et al. 2017) introduce a photorealism constraint
on optimization-based stylization method (Gatys, Ecker, and
Bethge 2016). However, its expensive computation costs
largely limit its practical applications. To overcome this issue, Li et al. (Li et al. 2018b) and Li et al. (Li et al. 2018a)
both adopt “feed-forward and post-processing” framework.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

This work was done when Honglin Lin was an intern at Baidu.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1613

