The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Which Shortcut Solution Do Question Answering Models Prefer to Learn?
Kazutoshi Shinoda1,2 , Saku Sugawara2 , Akiko Aizawa1,2
1

The University of Tokyo
National Institute of Informatics
shinoda@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp, {saku, aizawa}@nii.ac.jp
2

Abstract

To date, question answering (QA) models for reading
comprehension have been reported to learn several types of
shortcut solutions (Jia and Liang 2017; Sugawara et al. 2018;
Ko et al. 2020). Various approaches have been proposed
to mitigate these problems in QA, such as data augmentation (Shinoda, Sugawara, and Aizawa 2021a) and debiasing
methods (Ko et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2020). However, those
methods have not fully taken the characteristics of shortcuts
into account.
We assume that studying the learnability of each shortcut
in QA datasets should be useful to construct training sets or
design data augmentation methods for mitigating the problem. This assumption is supported by the work by Lovering
et al. (2021), who show that the learnability of a shortcut and
the proportion of anti-shortcut examples in a training set are
the two important factors that affect the shortcut learning behavior in grammatical tasks.
To verify our assumption, we first examine the learnability
of representative shortcuts in extractive and multiple-choice
QA. In addition, we investigate how the learnability of a
shortcut is related to the proportion of anti-shortcut examples required to mitigate the shortcut learning. Namely, we
aim to answer the following research questions (RQs): 1)
When every shortcut is valid for answering every question in
biased training sets, which shortcut do QA models prefer to
learn? 2) Why are certain shortcuts learned in preference to
other shortcuts from the biased training sets? 3) How quantitatively different is the learnability for each shortcut? 4)
What proportion of anti-shortcut examples in a training set
is required to avoid learning a shortcut? Is it related to the
learnability of shortcuts?
We answer the first question with behavioral tests using
biased training sets as illustrated in Figure 1. These experiments reveal which shortcut solution is preferred by QA
models when every shortcut is applicable to the biased training sets. We show that, in extractive QA, the shortcut based
on answer-position is preferred over the word matching and
question-answer type matching shortcuts. In multiple-choice
QA, the shortcut exploiting word-label correlations is preferred to the one using lexical overlap.
We answer the second question from the perspective of
the loss landscapes qualitatively. We show that the flatness
and depth of the loss surface around each shortcut solution
in the parameter space can be the reason of the preference

Question answering (QA) models for reading comprehension
tend to exploit spurious correlations in training sets and thus
learn shortcut solutions rather than the solutions intended
by QA datasets. QA models that have learned shortcut solutions can achieve human-level performance in shortcut examples where shortcuts are valid, but these same behaviors
degrade generalization potential on anti-shortcut examples
where shortcuts are invalid. Various methods have been proposed to mitigate this problem, but they do not fully take the
characteristics of shortcuts themselves into account. We assume that the learnability of shortcuts, i.e., how easy it is
to learn a shortcut, is useful to mitigate the problem. Thus,
we first examine the learnability of the representative shortcuts on extractive and multiple-choice QA datasets. Behavioral tests using biased training sets reveal that shortcuts that
exploit answer positions and word-label correlations are preferentially learned for extractive and multiple-choice QA, respectively. We find that the more learnable a shortcut is, the
flatter and deeper the loss landscape is around the shortcut solution in the parameter space. We also find that the
availability of the preferred shortcuts tends to make the task
easier to perform from an information-theoretic viewpoint.
Lastly, we experimentally show that the learnability of shortcuts can be utilized to construct an effective QA training set;
the more learnable a shortcut is, the smaller the proportion of
anti-shortcut examples required to achieve comparable performance on shortcut and anti-shortcut examples. We claim
that the learnability of shortcuts should be considered when
designing mitigation methods.

Introduction
Natural language understanding (NLU) models based on
deep neural networks (DNNs) have been shown to exploit
spurious correlations (also called dataset bias (Torralba and
Efros 2011) or annotation artifacts (Gururangan et al. 2018))
in the training set, and produce learning shortcut solutions
(Geirhos et al. 2020) rather than the solutions intended by
datasets. Shortcut learning by NLU models causes poor generalization to anti-shortcut examples where the spurious correlations no longer hold and the learned shortcuts fail (McCoy, Pavlick, and Linzen 2019; Gardner et al. 2020).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13564

