The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

GAN Prior Based Null-Space Learning for Consistent Super-resolution
Yinhuai Wang1 , Yujie Hu1 , Jiwen Yu1 , Jian Zhang1,2
1

Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
{yinhuai; hhuyujie; yujiwen}@stu.pku.edu.cn, zhangjian.sz@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

work (GAN) and the adversarial training objectives (Goodfellow et al. 2014) are proved effective as a guidance toward realness (Ledig et al. 2017). The Recent breakthrough
in GANs enables generating high-resolution images (Karras
et al. 2020), and encourages utilizing pretrained GAN models as the GAN prior for SR tasks (Menon et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2021; Chan et al. 2021; Wang, Hu, and Zhang 2022).
Though superior in hallucinating realistic details, GAN
prior may bring undesirable bias in generating those details,
causing inconsistencies in structures and colors, e.g., eye,
tooth, and skin, as can be seen in Fig. 1. Further increasing
the weight of ℓ1 or ℓ2 losses may ease these inconsistencies
while over-smoothing the rich details that GAN Prior brings.
Since realness and consistency are both critical for SR, we
need to find a way to assure consistency for GAN prior based
SR without compromise its superiority in realness.
We observe there exists a fundamental physical prior in
SR tasks. That is, the LR image (assuming the LR image is
clean) already contains low-frequency information that constitutes the GT image. However, recent GAN prior based SR
methods do not fully leverage this physical prior. To utilize
this physical prior, we can resort to the range-null space decomposition, which is well studied in linear algebra and inverse problems (Schwab, Antholzer, and Haltmeier 2019).
Theoretically, given a downsampler and its pseudoinverse, any HR image can be decomposed into a rangespace part and a null-space part. The range-space part is fully
responsible for the LR image while the null-space part is irrelevant to the LR image. Actually, the range-space part of
the GT can be calculated explicitly. Then we can explicitly
assure the consistency of a predicted HR image by replacing
its range-space part with the GT’s range-space part.
However, the pseudo-inverse of the downsampler is usually hard to obtain, let alone so many types of downsamplers in SR tasks. We observe that most of the downsampling
with antialiasing shares very similar results. We also notice a wildly used downsampling method, average-pooling,
possesses concise forms of pseudo-inverse. Hence we use
average-pooling as a universal measurement for the consistency. This provides an efficient solution to use range-null
space decomposition for consistent SR.
Specifically, we use the pseudo-inverse to directly upsample the LR image as the low-frequency part of the result, then
use the GAN prior based network to predict a raw HR im-

Consistency and realness have always been the two critical issues of image super-resolution. While the realness has
been dramatically improved with the use of GAN prior, the
state-of-the-art methods still suffer inconsistencies in local
structures and colors (e.g., tooth and eyes). In this paper, we
show that these inconsistencies can be analytically eliminated
by learning only the null-space component while fixing the
range-space part. Further, we design a pooling-based decomposition (PD), a universal range-null space decomposition for
super-resolution tasks, which is concise, fast, and parameterfree. PD can be easily applied to state-of-the-art GAN Prior
based SR methods to eliminate their inconsistencies, neither
compromise the realness nor bring extra parameters or computational costs. Besides, our ablation studies reveal that PD
can replace pixel-wise losses for training and achieve better
generalization performance when facing unseen downsamplings or even real-world degradation. Experiments show that
the use of PD refreshes state-of-the-art SR performance and
speeds up the convergence of training up to 2∼10 times.

Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) is a process that generates a
high-resolution (HR) image that is consistent with the input
low-resolution (LR) image. It consists of two critical constraints: (1) Low-frequency consistency, i.e., the downsampling of the HR image should be identical to the LR image.
(2) Realness, i.e., the HR image should be within the distribution of natural images. In this paper, we abbreviate these
two constraints to consistency and realness.
Prevailing deep neural network (DNN) based SR methods
usually relies on pixel-wise losses (e.g., ℓ1 , ℓ2 ) to learn both
realness and consistency. Specifically, they first downsample the ground-truth (GT) images to generate LR-GT image
pairs, then feed the LR images into a DNN to generate an
HR image and optimize the DNN by minimizing the pixelwise losses between HR and GT. When the GT images are
of high-quality, the pixel-wise losses measures both the realness and consistency constraints. Generative adversarial netCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
This paper was supported in part by Shenzhen General Research Project under Grant JCYJ20220531093215035. Corresponding author: Jian Zhang.

2724

