The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Identifying and Eliminating Majority Illusion in Social Networks
Umberto Grandi1 , Lawqueen Kanesh2 , Grzegorz Lisowski3 , Ramanujan Sridharan3 , Paolo
Turrini3
1

University of Toulouse, France
2
IIT Jodhpur, India
3
University of Warwick, UK
umberto.grandi@irit.fr, lawqueen@itj.ac.in, {grzegorz.lisowski, r.maadapuzhi-sridharan,p.turrini}@warwick.ac.uk
Abstract
Majority illusion occurs in a social network when the majority of the network vertices belong to a certain type but the majority of each vertex’s neighbours belong to a different type,
therefore creating the wrong perception, i.e., the illusion, that
the majority type is different from the actual one. From a system engineering point of view, this motivates the search for
algorithms to detect and, where possible, correct this undesirable phenomenon. In this paper we initiate the computational
study of majority illusion in social networks, providing NPhardness and parametrised complexity results for its occurrence and elimination.

1

Figure 1: An instance of majority illusion. The well-placed
red (shaded) minority is perceived as majority by everyone.

The graph structure of majority illusion was analysed by
Lerman, Yan, and Wu (2016), who studied network features
that correlate with having many individuals under illusion.
They demonstrated how disassortative networks, i.e. those in
which highly connected agents tend to link with lowly connected ones, increase the chances of majority illusion. However, no algorithms have yet been provided to check whether
majority illusion can occur in a social network.
Likewise, the approach of eliminating undesirable properties by network transformation is not new, and extensively
pursued in the context of election manipulation (see, e.g.,
Castiglioni et al. (2021)), influence maximisation (Zhou and
Zhang 2021), anonymisation (see, e.g., Kapron, Srivastava,
and Venkatesh (2011)) and of k-core maximisation (see,
e.g., Chitnis and Talmon (2018) and Zhou et al. (2019)).
However, such natural operations have yet to be studied in
the context of eliminating majority illusion.
All in all, the computational questions of checking
whether a network admits majority illusion and how this can
be eliminated, are still unexplored.

Introduction

Social networks shape the way people think. Individuals’
private opinions can change as a result of social influence
and a well-placed minority view can become what most
people come to believe (Stewart et al. 2019). The COVID19 vaccination debate has brought to the fore the dramatic
effects that misperception can have (Johnson et al. 2020),
highlighting the importance of social networks where participants receive the most unbiased information possible.
When individuals use their social network as a source
of information, it may be the case that minority groups are
more “visible” as a result of being better placed. This makes
them over-represented, and even appear to be majorities in
many friendships’ groups – a phenomenon known as majority illusion. Majority illusion was originally introduced by
Lerman, Yan, and Wu (2016), who studied the existence of
social networks in which most agents belong to a certain binary type, but most of their peers belong to a different one.
Thus, they acquire the wrong perception, i.e., the illusion,
that the majority type is different from the actual one. Figure 1 shows an example of this.
Majority illusion has important consequences when
paired with opinion formation. If, for example, individuals
change their mind based on what their friends say, e.g., they
follow a threshold model (Granovetter 1978), then majority
illusion means that strategically placed minorities may well
become stable majorities. As such it is important to predict
its occurrence in a network and, crucially, to see to it that
this undesirable phenomenon is eliminated.

Our Contribution. In this paper we initiate the algorithmic analysis of majority illusion in social networks, focusing on two computational questions. We first consider the
problem of verifying the possibility of illusion, i.e., deciding
whether there is a labelling of the vertices such that a set majoritarian fraction of agents are under illusion, and we prove
it to be NP-complete. Our NP-hardness proof techniques
also imply NP-hardness on bipartite networks, planar networks, networks of constant maximum degree and networks
of constant c-closure. In light of these negative results, we
aim to identify tractable restrictions of the problem by carrying out a parametrised complexity analysis involving wellestablished graph width measures and their variants. In par-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5062

