The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CEMA – Cost-Efficient Machine-Assisted Document Annotations
Guowen Yuan, Ben Kao, Tien-Hsuan Wu
The University of Hong Kong
{gwyuan, kao, thwu}@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
We study the problem of semantically annotating textual documents that are complex in the sense that the documents are
long, feature rich, and domain specific. Due to their complexity, such annotation tasks require trained human workers, which are very expensive in both time and money. We
propose CEMA, a method for deploying machine learning
to assist humans in complex document annotation. CEMA
estimates the human cost of annotating each document and
selects the set of documents to be annotated that strike the
best balance between model accuracy and human cost. We
conduct experiments on complex annotation tasks in which
we compare CEMA against other document selection and annotation strategies. Our results show that CEMA is the most
cost-efficient solution for those tasks.

Figure 1: A fragment of an annotated judgment

[Feature complexity] Due to their non-trivial lengths, documents are usually multifaceted. Annotators are often required to remember numerous features (a.k.a. labels or tags)
and to identify relevant texts that correspond to the features.
For example, in (Wu et al. 2020), annotators are requested to
annotate court judgments of illegal drug trafficking offenses
with 82 features. Example features include drug type, drug
weight, defendant name, and prison term. Figure 1 shows
an example annotation where certain text segments are highlighted and their associated labels illustrated. The annotation
task is thus highly complex and time-consuming, requiring
workers to recall features and to associate them with relevant
text segments.
[Domain knowledge] In many applications, the documents
to be annotated are domain specific and are full of technical terms. For example, in court judgment annotation, one
feature could be defendant’s mitigating factor. Labeling for
that feature requires a worker with legal knowledge who understands what constitutes a legitimate mitigation. In (Xia
and Yetisgen-Yildiz 2012), radiology reports are annotated
by radiologists and physicians to label texts that mention
“critical suggestions” of follow-up actions. In such cases,
annotators must possess relevant domain knowledge.
[Privacy] Often, documents contain confidential information such as business information or personal information.
Medical documents, for example, may contain sensitive patient records. In such cases, the documents can only be annotated by a small group of people with access rights.
[Error-prone annotation] Due to the complexity of the annotation task, human annotations are error-prone. Given a
large set of features, workers may forget to annotate some

Introduction
Machine learning (ML) applications rely on the availability of large and high-quality datasets for model training.
In many applications, large volumes of documents are collected from which key information is extracted via manual
annotations. The extracted information can then be structured using other data models (e.g., knowledge graphs) to
support information search and AI model training. Compared with other data types, document annotation can be a
very expensive task. For example, it is reported in (Wu et al.
2020) that it took 11 workers with legal training 6 months
to annotate a corpus of roughly 4,000 court judgments. The
high cost of document annotation comes from a number of
constraints and characteristics of textual data:
[Document complexity] Unlike simple annotation tasks
such as image annotation, annotating a document could require substantial reading and comprehension. For example,
the COLIEE2019 dataset (Shao et al. 2020), which is used
in the study of legal document retrieval tasks, consists of
case law articles with an average document length of 3,000
words; In (Harašta et al. 2018), 350 court decisions (documents) were manually annotated for legal reference recognition. These documents consist of 4,746 to 537,470 characters each, with an average of 36,148 characters per document. It takes much time to read and to identify salient points
in such documents.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11043

