The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Relation-Aware Language-Graph Transformer for Question Answering
Jinyoung Park1 * , Hyeong Kyu Choi1 * , Juyeon Ko1 * , Hyeonjin Park2 ,
Ji-Hoon Kim2,3,4 , Jisu Jeong2,3,4 , Kyungmin Kim2,3,4 , Hyunwoo J. Kim1†
1

Korea University
2
NAVER
3
NAVER Cloud
4
NAVER AI Lab
{lpmn678, imhgchoi, juyon98, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr
{hyeonjin.park.ml, genesis.kim, jisu.jeong, kyungmin.kim.ml}@navercorp.com
Abstract

Most existing efforts for fusing LM and KG utilized a
separate graph neural network (GNN) module to process
the KG and integrated it with LM in the ‘final’ prediction step (Feng et al. 2020; Yasunaga et al. 2021; Wang
et al. 2022). However, recent works pinpointed the shortcomings of the shallow fusion, and have proposed methods that fuse LM and KG early in the intermediate layers.
They aimed to find more appropriate ways to exchange information between the two modalities, via special tokens
and nodes (Zhang et al. 2022) or cross-attention (Sun et al.
2022). But the approaches have a modality-specific encoder
GNN and the information exchange occurs only on fusion
layers resulting in modest information exchange. In addition, the GNNs in previous works are not suited for fully
exploiting KG data, which comprise triplets of two entities
and their relations. To process the rich relational information, a more relation-centric KG processor is necessary, in
place of the node-centric GNNs that learn node features with
the message-passing scheme.
To this end, we propose the Question Answering Transformer (QAT), specifically designed to jointly reason over
the LM and KG in a unified manner, without an explicit KG
encoder, e.g., GNN. We encode relation-centric information
of the KG in the form of Meta-Path tokens. Along with LM
outputs, the Meta-Path tokens are input into our RelationAware Self-Attention (RASA) module, whose cross-modal
information integration is facilitated by our Cross-Modal
Relative Position Bias. The diverse structural and semantic relations along the meta-paths between question-answer
entities can be easily integrated with the LM context via
Meta-Path Tokens. Also, the Meta-Path token sets tend to
be diverse, bringing enhanced expressivity in self-attention.
Moreover, we present a method to exchange information in
a unified manner, guided by the Cross-Modal Relative Position Bias. This provides a more flexible means to fuse LM
and KG, encouraging information exchange between relevant entities across different modalities.
Then, our contributions are as follows:

Question Answering (QA) is a task that entails reasoning over
natural language contexts, and many relevant works augment
language models (LMs) with graph neural networks (GNNs)
to encode the Knowledge Graph (KG) information. However,
most existing GNN-based modules for QA do not take advantage of rich relational information of KGs and depend
on limited information interaction between the LM and the
KG. To address these issues, we propose Question Answering Transformer (QAT), which is designed to jointly reason
over language and graphs with respect to entity relations in
a unified manner. Specifically, QAT constructs Meta-Path tokens, which learn relation-centric embeddings based on diverse structural and semantic relations. Then, our RelationAware Self-Attention module comprehensively integrates different modalities via the Cross-Modal Relative Position Bias,
which guides information exchange between relevant entites
of different modalities. We validate the effectiveness of QAT
on commonsense question answering datasets like CommonsenseQA and OpenBookQA, and on a medical question answering dataset, MedQA-USMLE. On all the datasets, our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance. Our code is
available at http://github.com/mlvlab/QAT.

1

Introduction

Question Answering (QA) is a challenging task that entails complex reasoning over natural language contexts. The
large-scale pre-trained language models (LMs) have proven
to be capable of processing such contexts, by encoding the
implicit knowledge in textual data. To deal with various
QA tasks, both generic and domain-specific LMs (Liu et al.
2019; Lee et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021a) have been employed.
But the QA systems only with LMs often struggle with
structured reasoning due to the lack of explicit and structured knowledge. Thus, many works (Mihaylov and Frank
2018; Lin et al. 2019; Feng et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022; Yasunaga et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022) in the literature have
studied to effectively incorporate Knowledge Graphs (KGs)
into the question-answering system.

• We introduce the Meta-Path token, a novel embedding to
encode KG information based on diverse relations along
meta-paths.
• We present Cross-Modal Relative Position Bias, which

* These authors contributed equally.
†

is the corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13457

