The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Metric Nearness Made Practical
Wenye Li1,2 , Fangchen Yu1 , Zichen Ma1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
2001 Longxiang Boulevard, Longgang District, Shenzhen, China
wyli@cuhk.edu.cn, fangchenyu@link.cuhk.edu.cn, zichenma1@link.cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract

A series of work (Brickell et al. 2008; Duggal et al.
2013; Boytsov and Naidan 2013; Gilbert and Jain 2017; Fan,
Raichek, and Van Buskirk 2018; Gilbert and Sonthalia 2018;
Veldt et al. 2018; Ruggles, Veldt, and Gleich 2020) models
the scenario of repairing a metric under different settings,
among which we are interested in a specific metric nearness
model in this paper. For a set of input dissimilarity values between pairs of data samples, the model aims to output a set
of distances that satisfy the metric constraints while keeping
the output distances as near as possible to the input dissimilarity according to a certain measure of nearness.
Conceptually general and straightforward as it is, the metric nearness model encounters significant computational difficulty. The number of constraints associated with a valid
metric rapidly grows when the problem size increases. Despite the recent trials devoted to the problem (Brickell et al.
2008; Sonthalia and Gilbert 2020; Pitis et al. 2020), the
proposed approaches still faced non-trivial challenges from
medium to large-sized applications with over a few thousand
samples on a common computing platform.
New optimization strategies have to be sought to ensure
scalability. We developed a dedicated approach that is very
different from existing ones to the metric nearness problem.
The approach first shrinks the scope of distance metrics to
isometrically embeddable matrices. Consequently, the number of constraints in the optimization problem is significantly reduced, which admits a fast solution with high quality. Then, starting from the solution and refining it iteratively, the proposed approach is expected to converge faster
to the optimal solution to the original problem.
Evaluation results empirically justified our idea. The proposed approach has a significantly faster running speed than
the state-of-the-art solutions. It consumes much less memory. The solution found by our approach completely conforms to the metric constraints. As a result, the application
scenarios of the metric nearness model are significantly expanded toward a practical tool for large-scale tasks.
A note on notations. Throughout the paper, a capital letter in calligraphic fonts, usually with a subscript, denotes a
set, such as Mn . A capital letter in regular fonts denotes a
real matrix with each entry represented by a lower-case letter with subscripts, such as X and xij . By default, the sizes
of the matrices are all assumed to be n × n, where n is a
given natural number.

Given a square matrix with noisy dissimilarity measures between pairs of data samples, the metric nearness model computes the best approximation of the matrix from a set of
valid distance metrics. Despite its wide applications in machine learning and data processing tasks, the model faces
non-trivial computational requirements in seeking the solution due to the large number of metric constraints associated
with the feasible region. Our work designed a practical approach in two stages to tackle the challenge and improve the
model’s scalability and applicability. The first stage computes
a fast yet high-quality approximate solution from a set of isometrically embeddable metrics, further improved by an effective heuristic. The second stage refines the approximate solution with the Halpern-Lions-Wittmann-Bauschke projection
algorithm, which converges quickly to the optimal solution.
In empirical evaluations, the proposed approach runs at least
an order of magnitude faster than the state-of-the-art solutions, with significantly improved scalability, complete conformity to constraints, less memory consumption, and other
desirable features in real applications.

Introduction
A distance metric, or distance matrix, measures the pairwise
dissimilarity relationship between data samples. It is crucial
and lays a foundation for numerous data processing tasks
and machine learning models. For example, many supervised and unsupervised learning algorithms firmly reside on
distance metrics (Jain, Murty, and Flynn 1999; Hart, Stork,
and Duda 2000; Schölkopf et al. 2002; Xing et al. 2002).
Assumptions are often made about the characteristics that
a distance matrix needs to satisfy. Non-negativity, symmetry,
and a zero diagonal of the matrix entries are commonly considered under various scenarios (Boytsov and Naidan 2013;
Schleif and Tino 2015). For metric-based models (Brickell
et al. 2008; Gisbrecht and Schleif 2015), triangle inequalities
of the pairwise distances are further assumed. However, with
erroneous or missing measurements, an observed matrix often loses its conformity to such characteristics. In practice,
recovering an actual distance matrix’s characteristics can be
beneficial, which may lead to an improved estimate of the
unknown ground truth (Deutsch 2001).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8648

