The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Copyright-Certified Distillation Dataset: Distilling One Million Coins into One
Bitcoin with Your Private Key
Tengjun Liu1 * , Ying Chen1 , Wanxuan Gu2
1

School of Computer Science,Fudan University
2
NVIDIA
{tjliu17, yingchen20}@fudan.edu.com, guwanxuan17@163.com

Abstract

To alleviate the pressure from large models, back in 2015,
(Hinton et al. 2015) proposed a method to distill the knowledge of complex models into simple models, i.e., model
distillation. However, the performance of small models obtained from model distillation can have a significant upper
limit and gradually fail to meet the increasingly complex
needs. And more importantly training a good deep learning model usually requires a large training dataset, so finding a way to avoid not leaking data or needing to obtain or
share a large dataset first are particularly important to drive
the commercialization of neural networks. To address this
problem, (Wang et al. 2018) proposed a task related but orthogonal to model distillation, namely dataset distillation.
They were able to distill the knowledge of large training
datasets into very small sets of synthetic training images
(down to one image per class), while ensuring that model
trained on the distilled data would yield similar test performance to that of the model trained on the original dataset.
Since the distilled dataset takes up only a small amount of
space, this significantly reduces the training cost and training
time for consumers. Since then, dataset distillation has become an active research topic in machine learning (Bohdal,
Yang, and Hospedales 2020; Nguyen, Chen, and Lee 2020;
Nguyen et al. 2021; Sucholutsky and Schonlau 2021; Zhao
and Bilen 2021a,b; Zhao, Mopuri, and Bilen 2020) with various applications such as continuous learning, neural architecture search, and privacy-preserving ML. Although there
are many approaches to dataset distillation, no one has investigated the copyright protection of distilled datasets.

The rapid development of neural network dataset distillation
in recent years has provided new ideas in many areas such
as continuous learning, neural network architecture search
and privacy preservation. Dataset distillation is a very effective method to distill large training datasets into small data,
thus ensuring that the test accuracy of models trained on their
synthesized small datasets matches that of models trained on
the full dataset. Thus, dataset distillation itself is commercially valuable, not only for reducing training costs, but also
for compressing storage costs and significantly reducing the
training costs of deep learning. However, copyright protection
for dataset distillation has not been proposed yet, so we propose the first method to protect intellectual property by embedding watermarks in the dataset distillation process. Our
approach not only popularizes the dataset distillation technique, but also authenticates the ownership of the distilled
dataset by the models trained on that distilled dataset.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have recently made a number of
breakthroughs and have had great success with wellknown applications and tasks ranging from computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al.
2016) and natural language processing (Devlin et al. 2018;
Doan and Reddy 2020) to other popular areas such as games
(Berner et al. 2019; Silver et al. 2017), computational advertising (Zhao et al. 2020b; Xu et al. 2021), and structural biology (AlQuraishi 2019; Doan et al. 2021). However, the training of neural networks usually requires large
datasets, and at the same time, the whole training process is
labor-intensive and resource-intensive. Though IP protection
methods (Uchida et al. 2017; Darvish Rouhani, Chen, and
Koushanfar 2019; Adi et al. 2018; Quan et al. 2020) based
on embedding watermarks on the models can achieve certain effectiveness on protecting the copyright of neural networks. But as the network models become larger and larger,
the corresponding model weights take up more and more
space. Therefore, model owners want to know if they can
provide services by providing a small amount of weight information instead of sharing the total model weights.

Therefore, we propose a copyright-protectable authentication method for distilled datasets to address the above
challenges. Our approach makes the model of the distilled
dataset generated by training not only learn the normal functions but also embed the watermark into the training model
itself for the purpose of authenticating and protecting the
copyright of the distilled dataset. We improve the performance of our dataset distillation method on normal functions
by imitating a multi-expert system trained on real datasets on
the one hand, and make our dataset distillation method certifiable by learning watermarked training datasets to embed
model watermarks based on backdoor attacks on the other
hand. It is worth mentioning that we update the generated
distillation dataset by learning and imitating the knowledge
of expert networks trained under diversity constraints during

* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6458

