The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Certifying Fairness of Probabilistic Circuits
Nikil Roashan Selvam1 , Guy Van den Broeck1 , YooJung Choi2*
1

2

Computer Science Department, University of California, Los Angeles
School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, Arizona State University
nikilrselvam@cs.ucla.edu, guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu, yj.choi@asu.edu

Abstract
With the increased use of machine learning systems for decision making, questions about the fairness properties of such
systems start to take center stage. Most existing work on algorithmic fairness assume complete observation of features at
prediction time, as is the case for popular notions like statistical parity and equal opportunity. However, this is not sufficient
for models that can make predictions with partial observation
as we could miss patterns of bias and incorrectly certify a
model to be fair. To address this, a recently introduced notion
of fairness asks whether the model exhibits any discrimination
pattern, in which an individual—characterized by (partial) feature observations—receives vastly different decisions merely
by disclosing one or more sensitive attributes such as gender
and race. By explicitly accounting for partial observations, this
provides a much more fine-grained notion of fairness. In this
paper, we propose an algorithm to search for discrimination
patterns in a general class of probabilistic models, namely
probabilistic circuits. Previously, such algorithms were limited
to naive Bayes classifiers which make strong independence
assumptions; by contrast, probabilistic circuits provide a unifying framework for a wide range of tractable probabilistic
models and can even be compiled from certain classes of
Bayesian networks and probabilistic programs, making our
method much more broadly applicable. Furthermore, for an
unfair model, it may be useful to quickly find discrimination
patterns and distill them for better interpretability. As such, we
also propose a sampling-based approach to more efficiently
mine discrimination patterns, and introduce new classes of patterns such as minimal, maximal, and Pareto optimal patterns
that can effectively summarize exponentially many discrimination patterns.

1

Introduction

Machine learning systems are increasingly being used for
critical decision making in a variety of areas ranging from
education and health care, to financial lending and recidivism prediction (Chouldechova 2017; Berk et al. 2018; Datta,
Tschantz, and Datta 2015; Henderson et al. 2015). Consequently, there has been growing interest and concern about
the fairness properties of these methods. In particular, biases
in the training data and model architecture can result in certain individuals or groups receiving unfavorable treatment
* This work was performed while YC was at UCLA.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12278

based on some sensitive attributes such as gender and race.
Naturally, various notions of fairness and ways to enforce
them have been proposed (Barocas and Selbst 2016; Dwork
et al. 2012; Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016; Nabi and Shpitser
2018; Madras et al. 2018; Salimi et al. 2019).
In this paper, we investigate the fairness properties of probabilistic models that represent joint distributions over the decision/prediction variable as well as the features. Such models
are ubiquitous in decision-making systems for various realworld applications (Koller and Friedman 2009; Sonnenberg
and Beck 1993; Griffiths et al. 2010). In particular, they can
be used to make classifications by inferring the probability of
the class given some observations. Thus, by handling classifications as inference tasks, they can naturally handle missing
features at prediction time.
While many existing work on algorithmic fairness assume
that predictions are always made with complete observations
of features, this fails to analyze the behavior of a model—in
particular, its fairness—when making decisions with missing features. On the other hand, the notion of discrimination
pattern (Choi et al. 2020) explicitly aims to address fairness
of decisions made with partial information. Specifically, it
refers to an individual or a group of individuals, characterized
by some partial assignments to the features, who may see
a significant discrepancy in the prediction after additionally
disclosing some sensitive attributes. While the complete observation case is also covered, it is merely a special case of
discrimination patterns which in fact take into account all
possible partial observation of features. As we show later, a
model that is deemed fair according to popular notions such
as disparate impact can still exhibit hundreds of discrimination patterns, when considering missing features.
This fine-grained notion leads to new challenges in certifying fairness, as there are now exponentially many patterns
of unfairness to check and analyze. Thus, our first key contribution is to introduce special classes of discrimination
patterns—minimal, maximal, and Pareto optimal patterns—
which can “summarize” a large number of patterns. The set
of these summary patterns are often far smaller than the set of
all discrimination patterns, making them great targets to find
in a model in order to discover and understand its unfairness.
The next contributions we make are algorithms to find
discrimination patterns. The existing algorithm is limited to
naive Bayes models, which make strong assumptions that

