The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FEditNet: Few-Shot Editing of Latent Semantics in GAN Spaces
Mengfei Xia1 , Yezhi Shu1 , Yuji Wang1 , Yu-Kun Lai2 ,
Qiang Li3 , Pengfei Wan3 , Zhongyuan Wang3 , Yong-Jin Liu1 *
1

Department of Computer Science, BNRist, Tsinghua University
School of Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff University
3
Kuaishou Technology
{xmf20, shuyz19, yuji-wan20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, LaiY4@cardiff.ac.uk
{liqiang03, wanpengfei,wangzhongyuan}@kuaishou.com, liuyongjin@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Based on a min-max game between a generator and
a discriminator, Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) learn a nonlinear
mapping from a random distribution to the domain of real
data, which have exhibited high fidelity in synthesizing
high-resolution images (Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019;
Karras et al. 2020; Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2019).
Despite great success in achieving amazing quality of synthesized images, it remains unclear how GANs construct semantics in the latent space during training. To address this
issue, some recent works have made efforts to interpret the
meaningful semantic and disentanglement properties in the
latent spaces of GANs (Shen et al. 2020; Shen and Zhou
2021; Plumerault, Borgne, and Hudelot 2020). One representative strategy to analyze the semantics is to add a learned
direction on the latent code (Radford, Metz, and Chintala
2016). This strategy makes use of geometrical properties of

hyperplanes in latent spaces, which opens the door to exploring interpretable latent spaces.
With this strategy, two types of methods have been developed to interpret latent spaces of GANs: unsupervised and
supervised. To formulate the latent semantics, a representative unsupervised way is to use principal component analysis (PCA) (Shen and Zhou 2021; Härkönen et al. 2020; Zhu
et al. 2022). These methods apply PCA on either the model
parameters or feature maps. Then by choosing the eigenvectors associated with the largest few eigenvalues, the achieved
directions have the most significant effects on the synthesized images and semantics. However, they cannot precisely
edit the user-desired attributes. As a comparison, the directions found by supervised methods usually have better controllability and disentanglement property. The cost paid for
this advantage is that most supervised methods use either
a pretrained attribute assessor (Goetschalckx et al. 2019;
Zhuang, Koyejo, and Schwing 2021) or a large amount of
data containing the target attributes to learn the semantics
in the latent space (Yang, Shen, and Zhou 2021; Yang et al.
2021b; Shen et al. 2020), which restricts applications of supervised methods, such as the scenarios where labeling a lot
of data is infeasible and unlabeled datasets have to be used.
In this paper, we aim to explore interpretable semantics
using limited labeled data. To achieve this goal, we propose a GAN-based method called FEditNet (Few-shot Attribute Editing Network), which can perform efficient attribute editing and latent space disentanglement by training with very few data samples. Unlike previous supervised
methods which use a pretrained assessor or train attribute
assessor from scratch with extra efforts, our method reuse
the knowledge from the discriminator (which is pretrained to
compete with the given generator) to train the assessor (Yang
et al. 2021a). To further ensure the disentanglement from undesired attributes, we introduce a feature contrastive loss as
the regularizer to fix the attributes that users do not want
to edit. Therefore, our FEditNet is able to achieve high attribute disentanglement and state-of-the-art editing quality
with few-shot data, avoiding the vulnerablity and overfitting
in few-shot learning. Some results are shown in Fig. 1.
In this paper, we make three contributions:

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a learning method with limited training data,
to explore interpretable latent spaces of a pretrained
GAN and the editing direction of desired attributes.

Generative Adversarial networks (GANs) have demonstrated
their powerful capability of synthesizing high-resolution images, and great efforts have been made to interpret the semantics in the latent spaces of GANs. However, existing works
still have the following limitations: (1) the majority of works
rely on either pretrained attribute predictors or large-scale labeled datasets, which are difficult to collect in most cases,
and (2) some other methods are only suitable for restricted
cases, such as focusing on interpretation of human facial
images using prior facial semantics. In this paper, we propose a GAN-based method called FEditNet, aiming to discover latent semantics using very few labeled data without
any pretrained predictors or prior knowledge. Specifically,
we reuse the knowledge from the pretrained GANs, and by
doing so, avoid overfitting during the few-shot training of
FEditNet. Moreover, our layer-wise objectives which take
content consistency into account also ensure the disentanglement between attributes. Qualitative and quantitative results demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods on various datasets. The code is available at
https://github.com/THU-LYJ-Lab/FEditNet.

Introduction

2919

