The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Provable Pathways: Learning Multiple Tasks over Multiple Paths
Yingcong Li,1 Samet Oymak1,2
1
2

University of California, Riverside,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{yli692@, oymak@ece.}ucr.edu

Supernet (φ)

Abstract

Heads (ht )

Constructing useful representations across a large number
of tasks is a key requirement for sample-efficient intelligent
systems. A traditional idea in multitask learning (MTL) is
building a shared representation across tasks which can then
be adapted to new tasks by tuning last layers. A desirable
refinement of using a shared one-fits-all representation is to
construct task-specific representations. To this end, recent PathNet/muNet architectures represent individual tasks as pathways within a larger supernet. The subnetworks induced by
pathways can be viewed as task-specific representations that
are composition of modules within supernet’s computation
graph. This work explores the pathways proposal from the
lens of statistical learning: We first develop novel generalization bounds for empirical risk minimization problems learning multiple tasks over multiple paths (Multipath MTL). In
conjunction, we formalize the benefits of resulting multipath
representation when adapting to new downstream tasks. Our
bounds are expressed in terms of Gaussian complexity, lead
to tangible guarantees for the class of linear representations,
and provide novel insights into the quality and benefits of a
multipath representation. When computation graph is a tree,
Multipath MTL hierarchically clusters the tasks and builds
cluster-specific representations. We provide further discussion
and experiments for hierarchical MTL and rigorously identify
the conditions under which Multipath MTL is provably superior to traditional MTL approaches with shallow supernets.

1

ψ21

Task 1
Task 2
Task 3

ψ1

Task 1
Task 2

ψ22

Task 3

ψ23

Task 4

Module (ψ`k )

(a) General computation graph

(b) Hierarchical MTL

Figure 1: In Multipath MTL, each task selects a pathway
within a supernet graph. The composition of the modules
along the pathway forms the task-specific representation.
Fig. 1a depicts a general supernet graph (highlighted in gray
block), and the pathways for different tasks are shown in
colored arrows. Fig. 1b is a special instance where related
tasks are hierarchically clustered: For instance, Tasks 1 and 2
are assinged the same representation ψ21 ◦ ψ1 .
tasks will be closely related to each other, for instance, tasks
might admit a natural clustering into groups. This is also
connected to heterogeneity challenge in federated learning
where clients have distinct distributions and benefit from personalization. To address this challenge, rather than a single
task-agnostic representation, it might be preferable to use a
task-specific representation. Secondly, pretrained language
and vision models achieve better accuracy with larger sizes
which creates computational challenges as they push towards
trillion parameters. This motivated new architectural proposals such as Pathways/PathNet (Fernando et al. 2017; Dean
2021; Gesmundo and Dean 2022b) where tasks can be computed over compute-efficient subnetworks. At a high-level,
each subnetwork is created by a composition of modules
within a larger supernet which induces a pathway as depicted
in Figure 1. Inspired from these challenges, we ask

Introduction

Multitask learning (MTL) promises to deliver significant accuracy improvements by leveraging similarities across many
tasks through shared representations. The potential of MTL
has been recognized since 1990s (Caruana 1997) however its
impact has grown over time thanks to more recent machine
learning applications arising in computer vision and NLP that
involve large datasets with thousands of classes/tasks. Representation learning techniques (e.g. MTL and self-supervision)
are also central to the success of deep learning as large pretrained models enable data-efficient learning for downstream
transfer learning tasks (Deng et al. 2009; Brown et al. 2020).
As we move from tens of tasks trained with small models to thousands of tasks trained with large models, new
statistical and computational challenges arise: First, not all

Q: What are the statistical benefits of learning taskspecific representations along supernet pathways?
Our primary contribution is formalizing the Multipath MTL
problem depicted in Figure 1 and developing associated statistical learning guarantees that shed light on its benefits. Our
formulation captures important aspects of the problem including learning compositional MTL representations, multilayer

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8701

