The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MGFN : Magnitude-Contrastive Glance-and-Focus Network
for Weakly-Supervised Video Anomaly Detection
Yingxian Chen1 , Zhengzhe Liu2 , Baoheng Zhang1 , Wilton Fok1 , Xiaojuan Qi1 , Yik-Chung Wu1
1 Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Hong Kong
2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

{carolcyx, cheungbh}@hku.hk, {wtfok, xjqi, ycwu}@eee.hku.hk, zzliu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

Seems Normal

Weakly supervised detection of anomalies in surveillance
videos is a challenging task. Going beyond existing works
that have deficient capabilities to localize anomalies in long
videos, we propose a novel glance and focus network to
effectively integrate spatial-temporal information for accurate anomaly detection. In addition, we empirically found
that existing approaches that use feature magnitudes to represent the degree of anomalies typically ignore the effects
of scene variations, and hence result in sub-optimal performance due to the inconsistency of feature magnitudes across
scenes. To address this issue, we propose the Feature Amplification Mechanism and a Magnitude Contrastive Loss to
enhance the discriminativeness of feature magnitudes for detecting anomalies. Experimental results on two large-scale
benchmarks UCF-Crime and XD-Violence manifest that our
method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches.

Should be Abnormal !

t-40

t-20

t

t+20

t+40

Figure 1: Long-term temporal context information plays a
significant role in surveillance video-based anomaly detection. It seems nothing happens in frame 𝑡, but the opposite
conclusion can be easily derived considering other frames.

Although such models work well for short videos, they typically struggle in tackling long videos where anomalous
frames occupy only a small portion, due to the lack of
global context awareness and specific focus on the abnormal
frames.
The second branch learns to distinguish anomaly from
normal by designing loss functions (Tian et al. 2021; Zaheer et al. June 2020; Feng, Hong, and Zheng 2021; Zaheer et al. 2020). For example, the most recent work (Tian
et al. 2021) proposes a Robust Temporal Feature Magnitude (RTFM) loss to push abnormal feature magnitudes to
be larger and normal ones in the opposite direction. It might
be true that within the same video sequence or in similar
scenes, abnormal features attain larger magnitudes than normal ones. However, we empirically found that besides the
anomaly, the feature magnitude also depends on other attributes of the video such as the object movements, number
of objects and persons in the scene, etc. As shown in Fig. 2
(a), the feature magnitudes in the normal video (the below)
with substantial object movement are even larger than the
abnormal one (the above).
Therefore, it is unreasonable to simply encourage the
abnormal features to be larger and normal features to be
smaller using the RTFM loss (Tian et al. 2021), since this
target is not consistent with the inherent inter-video magnitude distribution and thus harms network training. We further found that even in the same video sequence, as shown
in Fig. 2 (b), some normal features learned in (Tian et al.
2021) (green points outside the red bounding box) attain
similar or even larger magnitudes compared with abnormal
ones (green points in the red bounding box). In addition, the
unsatisfying feature separability (Fig. 2 (c)) indicates that

Introduction
Detection of anomalies in surveillance videos is an important research topic (Chalapathy and Chawla 2019; Guansong
et al. 2021). The abnormal events, such as accidents, fighting, arson, and banditry, may cause social harm and even
threaten human life (Gopalakrishnan 2012).
Unfortunately, it is extremely challenging to identify and
locate anomalies in a long video (Antić and Ommer 2011;
Hasan et al. 2016; Kratz and Nishino 2009; Zhao, Li, and
Xing 2011). Firstly, “anomaly” is a relative term defined
against “normality”. Hence, as shown in Fig. 1, it is unreasonable to predict the anomaly based upon only a single or a
few nearby frames without the necessary knowledge of the
“normality”. In addition, “anomalies” include a variety of
events mentioned above, so it is challenging to construct a
unified representation for all the varying events. Besides, it
is tedious and laborious to prepare for the frame-level annotation. Therefore, network training is more feasible under
video-level weak supervisions.
To mitigate the above challenges, existing methods can
be roughly cast into two branches. One stream learns to
detect anomalies by constructing spatial-temporal architectures (Feng, Hong, and Zheng 2021; Zhu and Newsam
2019; Tian et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2020; Wu and Liu 2021).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

387

