The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MobileTL: On-Device Transfer Learning with Inverted Residual Blocks
Hung-Yueh Chiang, Natalia Frumkin, Feng Liang, Diana Marculescu
The University of Texas at Austin
Chandra Family Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
{hungyueh.chiang, nfrumkin, jeffliang, dianam}@utexas.edu

Abstract
Transfer learning on edge is challenging due to on-device limited resources. Existing work addresses this issue by training
a subset of parameters or adding model patches. Developed
with inference in mind, Inverted Residual Blocks (IRBs) split
a convolutional layer into depthwise and pointwise convolutions, leading to more stacking layers, e.g., convolution, normalization, and activation layers. Though they are efficient
for inference, IRBs require that additional activation maps
are stored in memory for training weights for convolution
layers and scales for normalization layers. As a result, their
high memory cost prohibits training IRBs on resource-limited
edge devices, and making them unsuitable in the context of
transfer learning. To address this issue, we present MobileTL,
a memory and computationally efficient on-device transfer
learning method for models built with IRBs. MobileTL trains
the shifts for internal normalization layers to avoid storing
activation maps for the backward pass. Also, MobileTL approximates the backward computation of the activation layer
(e.g., Hard-Swish and ReLU6) as a signed function which enables storing a binary mask instead of activation maps for the
backward pass. MobileTL fine-tunes a few top blocks (close
to output) rather than propagating the gradient through the
whole network to reduce the computation cost. Our method
reduces memory usage by 46% and 53% for MobileNetV2
and V3 IRBs, respectively. For MobileNetV3, we observe
a 36% reduction in floating-point operations (FLOPs) when
fine-tuning 5 blocks, while only incurring a 0.6% accuracy
reduction on CIFAR10. Extensive experiments on multiple
datasets demonstrate that our method is Pareto-optimal (best
accuracy under given hardware constraints) compared to prior
work in transfer learning for edge devices.

Figure 1: The figure shows stored activations of IRBs for the
backward pass. We set the expansion ratio to 6. MobileTL
reduces memory cost by 46.3% and 53.3% for MobileNetV2
and V3 blocks.

applications with tight data privacy constraints often make
sending data from mobile devices to the cloud infeasible
and suffer from degraded performance (Liu et al. 2021). In
this setting, we consider on-device transfer learning, where
a pre-trained model is downloaded to the mobile device and
fine-tuned using local data. This way, the model is properly adapted to the target domain without sending potentially
sensitive data to central servers.
On-device transfer learning is challenging due to limited
computational resources, often prohibiting fine-tuning models. Inverted Residual Block (IRB) is one of the prevalent
building blocks for models targeting mobile platforms. An
IRB comprises one depthwise convolution, and two pointwise convolutions layers (Chollet 2017) with normalization and activation layers. IRBs expand the feature maps to
higher dimensions using a pointwise convolution (with an
expansion ratio of 3, 6, 8 etc.), apply a depthwise convolution in the higher dimensional space, and then project the
features back into lower dimensions using a pointwise convolution. Though it is computationally efficient with fewer
parameters, an IRB replaces one convolution with a stack
of layers resulting in additional memory overhead for storing activation maps during training. Table 1 shows that MobileNetV2 and V3 blocks consume 0.913 and 1.362 MB

Introduction
With the plethora of mobile devices available for consumers
today, there is a demand for fast, customized, and privacyaware deep learning algorithms. To reach satisfactory performance, current deep learning trends promote models with
billions of parameters (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; Brown et al.
2020; Radford et al. 2021) whose on-device training is infeasible. One solution is to train the model with data in
the cloud and rely on efficient communication to update the
model on the mobile device (Samie et al. 2016). However,
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7166

