The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Generalized Unbiased Risk Estimator for Learning with Augmented Classes
Senlin Shu1 , Shuo He2 , Haobo Wang3 , Hongxin Wei4 , Tao Xiang1 , Lei Feng1 *
1

2

College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
senlinshu@stu.cqu.edu.cn, shuohe@std.uestc.edu.cn, wanghaobo@zju.edu.cn,
hongxin001@e.ntu.edu.sg, {txiang, lfeng}@cqu.edu.cn
Abstract

far away from the description, the anomaly detection or novelty detection methods can be used (e.g., iForest (Liu, Ting,
and Zhou 2008), one-class SVM (Schölkopf et al. 2001; Tax
and Duin 2004), and kernel density estimation (Parzen 1962;
Kim and Scott 2012)). By exploiting unlabeled data with the
low-density separation assumption to adjust the classification decision boundary (Da, Yu, and Zhou 2014), the performance of LAC can be empirically improved.
A recent study (Zhang et al. 2020) showed that by exploiting unlabeled data, an unbiased risk estimator (URE)
for LAC over the test distribution can be constructed under
the class shift condition. The motivation of this study stems
from that although the instances from augmented classes
cannot be observed in labeled data, their distribution information may be contained in unlabeled data and estimated by
differentiating the distribution of known classes from unlabeled data. Such an URE is advantageous for the learning
task, since it can lead to a theoretically grounded method
based on empirical risk minimization. However, the URE
for LAC derived by the previous study (Zhang et al. 2020)
is only restricted to the specific type of one-versus-rest loss
functions, making it not flexible enough when the loss needs
to be changed with the dataset in practice.
To address the above issue, we make the following contributions in this paper:

In contrast to the standard learning paradigm where all classes
can be observed in training data, learning with augmented
classes (LAC) tackles the problem where augmented classes
unobserved in the training data may emerge in the test phase.
Previous research showed that given unlabeled data, an unbiased risk estimator (URE) can be derived, which can be minimized for LAC with theoretical guarantees. However, this
URE is only restricted to the specific type of one-versusrest loss functions for multi-class classification, making it
not flexible enough when the loss needs to be changed with
the dataset in practice. In this paper, we propose a generalized URE that can be equipped with arbitrary loss functions
while maintaining the theoretical guarantees, given unlabeled
data for LAC. To alleviate the issue of negative empirical risk
commonly encountered by previous studies, we further propose a novel risk-penalty regularization term. Experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Introduction
Machine learning approaches have achieved great performance on a variety of tasks, and most of them focus on the
stationary learning environment. However, the learning environment in many real-world scenarios could be open and
change gradually, which requires the learning approaches
to have the ability of handling the distribution change in
the non-stationary environment (Sugiyama and Kawanabe
2012; Gama et al. 2014; Zhao et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020).
This paper considers a specific problem where the class
distribution changes from the training phase to the test
phase, called learning with augmented classes (LAC). In
LAC, some augmented classes unobserved in the training
phase might emerge in the test phase. In order to make accurate and reliable predictions, the learning model is required
to distinguish augmented classes and keep good generalization performance over the test distribution.
The major difficulty in LAC is how to exploit the relationships between known and augmented classes. To overcome
this difficulty, various learning methods have been proposed.
For example, by learning a compact geometric description
of known classes to distinguish augmented classes that are

• we propose a generalized unbiased risk estimator that can
be equipped with arbitrary loss functions while maintaining the theoretical guarantees, given unlabeled data
for learning with augmented classes.
• We provide a theoretical analysis on the estimation error bound, which guarantees that the convergence of the
empirical risk minimizer to the true risk minimizer.
• We propose a novel risk-penalty regularization term that
can be used to alleviate the issue of negative empirical
risk commonly encountered by previous studies.
• We conduct extensive experiments with different base
models on widely used benchmark datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Preliminaries

* Corresponding author: Lei Feng <lfeng@cqu.edu.cn>.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In this section, we introduce some preliminary knowledge.
9829

