The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

The Perils of Trial-and-Error Reward Design:
Misdesign through Overfitting and Invalid Task Specifications
Serena Booth1,2,3 , W. Bradley Knox1,2,5 , Julie Shah3 ,
Scott Niekum2,4 , Peter Stone2,6 , Alessandro Allievi1,2
1
Bosch
The University of Texas at Austin
3
MIT CSAIL
4
The University of Massachusetts Amherst
5
Google Research
6
Sony AI
{serenabooth, julie a shah}@csail.mit.edu, {bradknox,pstone}@cs.utexas.edu
sniekum@cs.umass.edu, alessandro.allievi@us.bosch.com
2

Abstract

hard to learn from sparse signals (for examples, see Yu et al.
(2020); Andrychowicz et al. (2020); Knox et al. (2023)).
As such, the practice of reward design seldom adheres to
this adage.1 Instead, reward functions are typically designed
through an ad hoc process of trial and error. In a survey of
24 expert RL practitioners, we found that 92% reported using trial and error to design their most recent reward function (Apdx. A). This finding echos the literature: Knox et al.
(2023) found that, in a survey of RL for autonomous driving,
all of the surveyed publications reported designing reward
functions by trial and error. Despite the prevalence of trialand-error reward design, the consequences of this process
remain almost completely unexamined by the RL community. It is urgent and crucial for our community to understand
the effects of this widespread practice and ultimately to craft
specific guidance for practical reward design.
When employing trial-and-error, experts often optimize
the reward function by manually searching for a reward
function that meets the goals of both maximizing the task
performance metric and enabling an RL algorithm to learn
quickly. This practice raises the question of whether a reward function that is effective with one algorithm can be ineffective with others: can a reward function be overfit to an
algorithm? This concern of overfitting raises troubling questions about evaluation in RL. Overfitting a reward function
to one RL algorithm undermines fair comparisons to another
algorithm using the same reward function, especially since
the reward function is often also used to measure success.
Consider an ablation study which assesses whether an
algorithmic component improves learning. If the reward
function is overfit to the algorithm when the component is
unablated, observing that learning performance decreases
in the absence of the component may merely reflect that
the reward function is overfit, giving no clear signal about
whether the component is an improvement. Concerns about
fair evaluation are already pervasive in RL, and are thought

In reinforcement learning (RL), a reward function that aligns
exactly with a task’s true performance metric is often sparse.
For example, a true task metric might encode a reward of 1
upon success and 0 otherwise. These sparse task metrics can
be hard to learn from, so in practice they are often replaced
with alternative dense reward functions. These dense reward
functions are typically designed by experts through an ad hoc
process of trial and error. In this process, experts manually
search for a reward function that improves performance with
respect to the task metric while also enabling an RL algorithm
to learn faster. One question this process raises is whether the
same reward function is optimal for all algorithms, or, put differently, whether the reward function can be overfit to a particular algorithm. In this paper, we study the consequences
of this wide yet unexamined practice of trial-and-error reward design. We first conduct computational experiments that
confirm that reward functions can be overfit to learning algorithms and their hyperparameters. To broadly examine ad hoc
reward design, we also conduct a controlled observation study
which emulates expert practitioners’ typical reward design
experiences. Here, we similarly find evidence of reward function overfitting. We also find that experts’ typical approach
to reward design—of adopting a myopic strategy and weighing the relative goodness of each state-action pair—leads to
misdesign through invalid task specifications, since RL algorithms use cumulative reward rather than rewards for individual state-action pairs as an optimization target.
Code, data: github.com/serenabooth/reward-design-perils.

1

Introduction

In their authoritative introductory text on reinforcement
learning, Sutton and Barto (2018) assert: “The reward signal is your way of communicating to the agent what you
want achieved, not how you want it achieved.” This statement implies that a reward function should exclusively encode the true task performance metric. Such metrics are often sparse: did the agent succeed at the task or not? Sparse
reward functions are rarely used in practice, since it can be

1
Sutton and Barto disregard their own advice when designing a
Dyna-Q+ agent. To encourage
exploration, they replace the reward
√
function r with r + κ τ , where κ is a hyperparameter and τ is the
number of timesteps (Sutton and Barto 2018, p. 168).

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5920

