The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FairFed: Enabling Group Fairness in Federated Learning
Yahya H. Ezzeldin* , Shen Yan* , Chaoyang He, Emilio Ferrara, Salman Avestimehr
University of Southern California (USC)
yessa@usc.edu, shenyan@usc.edu, chaoyang.he@usc.edu, emiliofe@usc.edu, avestime@usc.edu

Abstract

FedAvg

Training ML models which are fair across different demographic groups is of critical importance due to the increased
integration of ML in crucial decision-making scenarios such
as healthcare and recruitment. Federated learning has been
viewed as a promising solution for collaboratively training
machine learning models among multiple parties while maintaining their local data privacy. However, federated learning
also poses new challenges in mitigating the potential bias
against certain populations (e.g., demographic groups), as this
typically requires centralized access to the sensitive information (e.g., race, gender) of each datapoint. Motivated by
the importance and challenges of group fairness in federated
learning, in this work, we propose FairFed, a novel algorithm
for fairness-aware aggregation to enhance group fairness in
federated learning. Our proposed approach is server-side and
agnostic to the applied local debiasing thus allowing for flexible use of different local debiasing methods across clients.
We evaluate FairFed empirically versus common baselines
for fair ML and federated learning and demonstrate that it
provides fairer models, particularly under highly heterogeneous data distributions across clients. We also demonstrate
the benefits of FairFed in scenarios involving naturally distributed real-life data collected from different geographical
locations or departments within an organization.

Local Reweighting

Global Reweighting

0.835

EOD

Accuracy

0.0

-0.2

0.82
More heterogeneous

More heterogeneous

Figure 1: Comparison of local/global debiasing under different heterogeneity levels. For the Equal Opportunity Difference (EOD) metric, values close to 0 indicate better fairness.
from centralized settings to FL, where the decentralization
of data is a major cornerstone. This gives rise to the key
question that we attempt to answer in this paper: How can
we train a classifier using FL so as to achieve group fairness, while maintaining data decentralization?
Potential approaches for group fairness in FL. One potential solution that one may consider for training fair models in FL is for each client to apply local debiasing on its
locally trained models (without sharing any additional information or data), while the FL server simply aggregates the
model parameters in each round using FL aggregation algorithms such as FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017) (or its subsequent derivatives, e.g., FedOPT (Reddi et al. 2020), FedNova (Wang et al. 2020)). Although this allows for training
a global model without explicitly sharing the local datasets,
but the drawback is that applying a debiasing mechanism
at each client in isolation on its local dataset can results in
poor performance in scenarios where data distributions are
highly-heterogeneous across clients (See Figure 1).
Another potential solution for fair training in FL would be
to adapt a debiasing technique from the rich literature of centralized fair training to be used in FL. Although this may result in reasonable fair training (see Figure 1), however, in the
process of applying this debiasing globally, the clients may
need to exchange additional detailed information with the
server about their dataset constitution which can leak information about different subgroups in the client’s dataset. For
example, the server may require knowledge of the model’s
performance on each group in a client’s dataset and/or local
statistical information about each group in the dataset.

Introduction
An important notion of fairness in machine learning, group
fairness (Dwork et al. 2012), concerns the mitigation of
bias in the performance of a trained model against certain protected demographic groups, which are defined based
on sensitive attributes within the population (e.g., gender,
race). Several approaches to achieve group fairness have
been studied in recent years in centralized settings. However, these approaches rely on the availability of the entire
dataset at a central entity during training and are therefore
unsuitable for application in Federated Learning (FL).
Federated learning allows for decentralized training of
large-scale models without requiring direct access to clients’
data, hence maintaining their privacy (Kairouz et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2021a). However, this decentralized nature
makes it complicated to translate solutions for fair training
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7494

