The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards More Robust Interpretation via Local Gradient Alignment
Sunghwan Joo1* , Seokhyeon Jeong2* , Juyeon Heo4 , Adrian Weller4,5 , Taesup Moon 2,3†
1

Department of ECE, Sungkyunkwan University
Department of ECE, Seoul National University
3
ASRI/INMC/IPAI/AIIS, Seoul National University
4
University of Cambridge
5
The Alan Turing Institute
shjoo840@gmail.com, sh102201@snu.ac.kr, {jh2324,aw665}@cam.ac.uk, tsmoon@snu.ac.kr
2

Abstract

are vulnerable to adversarial input manipulation, namely, an
adversarially chosen imperceptible input perturbation can
arbitrarily change feature attributions without hurting the
prediction accuracy of the model. One plausible explanation for this vulnerability can be made from a geometric
perspective (Dombrowski et al. 2019), namely, if the decision boundary of a model is far from being smooth, e.g.,
as in typical neural networks with ReLU activations, a small
movement in the input space can dramatically change the direction of the input gradient, which is highly correlated with
modern feature attribution methods.
To defend against such adversarial input manipulation, recent approaches (Wang et al. 2020; Dombrowski et al. 2022)
regularized the neural network to have locally smooth input gradients while training. A popular criterion to measure the smoothness of the input gradients is to use the
ℓ2 -distance between the gradients of the original and perturbed input points, dubbed as the ℓ2 robust criterion. Since
this ℓ2 -criterion can be upper bounded by the norm of the
Hessian with respect to the input, (Wang et al. 2020; Dombrowski et al. 2022) used the approximated norm of the
Hessian as a regularization term while training. Furthermore, (Dombrowski et al. 2022) shows that replacing the
ReLU activation with the Softplus function, Softplusβ (x) =
1
β log(1 + exp(βx)), can smooth the decision boundary and
lead to a more robust feature attribution method.
While the above approach was shown to be effective to
some extent, we argue that only naively considering the ℓ2
robust criterion is limited since it does not take the normalization of the attributions into account. Such normalization
is essential in visualizing the attributions, since the relative
difference between the attributions is most useful and important for interpretation. To that end, we argue that simply
trying to reduce the ℓ2 robust criterion or the norm of the
Hessian with respect to the input while training may not
always lead to robust attributions. As concrete examples,
consider the level curves and gradients of four differently
trained two-layer neural networks in Figure 1. In Figure 1(a),
we clearly observe that the kinks (continuous but not differentiable points) generated by the ReLU activation can cause
a dramatic change in the directions of the gradients of two
nearby points. In contrast, as shown in Figure 1(b), the Softplus activation smoothes the decision surface, resulting in
a less dramatic change of the gradients compared to Figure

Neural network interpretation methods, particularly feature
attribution methods, are known to be fragile with respect to
adversarial input perturbations. To address this, several methods for enhancing the local smoothness of the gradient while
training have been proposed for attaining robust feature attributions. However, the lack of considering the normalization of the attributions, which is essential in their visualizations, has been an obstacle to understanding and improving
the robustness of feature attribution methods. In this paper,
we provide new insights by taking such normalization into
account. First, we show that for every non-negative homogeneous neural network, a naive ℓ2 -robust criterion for gradients is not normalization invariant, which means that two
functions with the same normalized gradient can have different values. Second, we formulate a normalization invariant
cosine distance-based criterion and derive its upper bound,
which gives insight for why simply minimizing the Hessian
norm at the input, as has been done in previous work, is not
sufficient for attaining robust feature attribution. Finally, we
propose to combine both ℓ2 and cosine distance-based criteria as regularization terms to leverage the advantages of
both in aligning the local gradient. As a result, we experimentally show that models trained with our method produce much
more robust interpretations on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet-100
without significantly hurting the accuracy, compared to the
recent baselines. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
work to verify the robustness of interpretation on a largerscale dataset beyond CIFAR-10, thanks to the computational
efficiency of our method.

Introduction
Feature attribution methods (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014; Shrikumar, Greenside, and Kundaje 2017; Springenberg et al. 2015; Bach et al. 2015), which refer to interpretation methods that numerically score the contribution of
each input feature for a model output, have been useful tools
to reveal the behavior of complex models, e.g., deep neural networks, especially in application domains that require
safety, transparency, and reliability. However, several recent
works (Ghorbani, Abid, and Zou 2019; Dombrowski et al.
2019; Kindermans et al. 2019) identified that such methods
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*
Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

8168

