The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Computably Continuous Reinforcement-Learning Objectives Are PAC-Learnable
Cambridge Yang1 , Michael Littman2 , Michael Carbin1
1

MIT
Brown University
camyang@csail.mit.edu, mlittman@cs.brown.edu, mcarbin@csail.mit.edu
2

Abstract

These objectives are well-studied and have a desirable property: There are reinforcement-learning algorithms that learn
a near-optimal policy with high probability with number of
samples depending only on the parameters known by the algorithm. We call these algorithms probably approximately
correct (PAC), and these objectives PAC-learnable under reinforcement learning.
PAC-learnability is essential. Specifically, we aim to specify an objective and let the agent learn a good policy on its
own. Thus, we necessarily need some form of assurance of
how close to optimal the learned policy is. If an objective
is not PAC-learnable, then the hope of ensuring learning a
near-optimal policy is lost, and the objective is effectively
intractable to learn under reinforcement learning.

In reinforcement learning, the classic objectives of maximizing discounted and finite-horizon cumulative rewards are
PAC-learnable: There are algorithms that learn a near-optimal
policy with high probability using a finite amount of samples and computation. In recent years, researchers have introduced objectives and corresponding reinforcement-learning
algorithms beyond the classic cumulative rewards, such as
objectives specified as linear temporal logic formulas. However, questions about the PAC-learnability of these new objectives have remained open.
This work demonstrates the PAC-learnability of general
reinforcement-learning objectives through sufficient conditions for PAC-learnability in two analysis settings. In particular, for the analysis that considers only sample complexity,
we prove that if an objective given as an oracle is uniformly
continuous, then it is PAC-learnable. Further, for the analysis that considers computational complexity, we prove that if
an objective is computable, then it is PAC-learnable. In other
words, if a procedure computes successive approximations of
the objective’s value, then the objective is PAC-learnable.
We give three applications of our condition on objectives
from the literature with previously unknown PAC-learnability
and prove that these objectives are PAC-learnable. Overall,
our result helps verify existing objectives’ PAC-learnability.
Also, as some studied objectives that are not uniformly continuous have been shown to be not PAC-learnable, our results
could guide the design of new PAC-learnable objectives.

1

General Objectives. In recent years, researchers have
introduced various objectives beyond the two classic rewards objectives (Henriques et al. 2012; Sadigh et al. 2014;
Littman et al. 2017; Hasanbeig et al. 2019; Hahn et al. 2019;
Camacho et al. 2019; Giacomo et al. 2019; Jothimurugan,
Alur, and Bastani 2019; Bozkurt et al. 2020; Ronca and
De Giacomo 2021). For example:
• Camacho et al. (2019) introduced the reward machine
objective. A reward machine augments classic rewards with
an automaton that makes the rewards history dependent.
• Bozkurt et al. (2020) introduced an objective based
on limit deterministic Buchi Automaton (LDBA).1 The objective features history-dependent discount factors, historydependent rewards, and an augmented action space.
Researchers introduced reinforcement-learning algorithms
for these objectives and showed that they empirically learn
well-behaving policies with finitely many samples.

Introduction

In reinforcement learning, we situate an agent in an environment with unknown dynamics. The agent acts in the environment by executing its current policy. Executing a policy in
an environment induces an infinite-length path of states and
actions. We specify an objective, a function that maps each
possible infinite-length path to a real number—a score—for
that path. Moreover, we request the agent learn a good policy
that nearly maximizes the expected score over the distribution of paths induced by the environment and the policy.

PAC-learnability of General Objectives. Despite the advances on empirical algorithms for these objectives, not all
objectives are PAC-learnable: Recent work (Yang, Littman,
and Carbin 2022) proved that infinite-horizon linear temporal logic objectives, a class of general objectives, are not
PAC-learnable. Therefore, to the end of having assurance on
the outcomes of learning, we desire to understand the PAClearnability of general objectives.
Some previous work (Ashok, Křetı́nský, and Weininger
2019; Henriques et al. 2012; Fu and Topcu 2014; Ronca

PAC-learnability of Objectives. The classic reinforcement-learning objectives include infinite-horizon discounted
cumulative rewards and finite-horizon cumulative rewards.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

10729

We summarize works along the same line in Appendix A.

