The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Gradient-Variation Bound for Online Convex Optimization with Constraints
Shuang Qiu1 , Xiaohan Wei2 , Mladen Kolar1
1

Booth School of Business, the University of Chicago
2
Meta Platforms, Inc.
qius@uchicago.edu, ubimeteor@fb.com, mkolar@chicagobooth.edu

a best strategy x∗ in hindsight for all loss functions over T
time steps to measure the performance of an online learning
algorithm.
This problem has been extensively studied in existing
work (Cesa-Bianchi, Long, and Warmuth 1996; Gordon
1999; Zinkevich 2003a; Hazan 2016a). Online mirror descent (OMD) is a commonly used first-order algorithm
that√subsumes online gradient descent (OGD) and achieves
O( T ) regret with a dependence on the dimension related
to the chosen norm in the optimization space and logarithmic dependence on the probability simplex (Hazan 2016b).
Existing work in OCO has also focused on characterizing
an instance-dependent regret characterized by the notion of
gradient variation (Chiang et al. 2012; Yang et al. 2014;
Steinhardt and Liang 2014). Specifically, these works used
first-order methods and characterized bounds on the regret
in terms of the gradient-variation
of the function gradient
√
sequence. Compared to the T -type bound, the gradientvariation bound explicitly takes into account the dynamics of the observed losses, which is the structural information of the problem. For example, Chiang et al. (2012) obPT
t
tained a regret that scales as
t=1 maxx∈X k∇f (x) −
√

1/2
∇f t−1 (x)k22
, which reduces to the O( T ) regret bound
only in the worst case and is better when the variation is
small.
In this paper, we consider a more challenging OCO problem where the feasible set X consists of not only a simple compact set X0 but also of K complex functional constraints,

Abstract
We study online convex optimization with constraints consisting of multiple functional constraints and a relatively simple constraint set, such as a Euclidean ball. As enforcing the
constraints at each time step through projections is computationally challenging in general, we allow decisions to violate
the functional constraints but aim to achieve a low regret and
cumulative violation of the constraints over √
a horizon of T
time steps. First-order methods achieve an O( T ) regret and
an O(1) constraint violation, which is the best-known bound
under the Slater’s condition, but do not take into account the
structural information of the problem. Furthermore, the existing algorithms and analysis are limited to Euclidean space. In
this paper, we provide an instance-dependent bound for online convex optimization with complex constraints obtained
by a novel online primal-dual mirror-prox algorithm. Our
instance-dependent regret is quantified by the total gradient
variation V∗ (T ) in the sequence of loss functions. The proposed algorithm works inp
general normed spaces and simultaneously achieves an O( V∗ (T )) regret and an O(1) constraint
√ violation, which is never worse than the best-known
(O( T ), O(1)) result and improves over previous works
that applied mirror-prox-type algorithms for this problem
achieving O(T 2/3 ) regret and constraint violation. Finally,
our algorithm is computationally efficient, as it only performs
mirror descent steps in each iteration instead of solving a general Lagrangian minimization problem.

Introduction
We study online convex optimization (OCO) with a sequence of loss functions f 1 , f 2 , · · · that arbitrarily vary
over time. The decision maker chooses an action xt from a
set X and then observes the loss function f t at each time
step t. The goal is to minimize the regret over the T time
steps, which is defined as
Regret(T ) =

T
X
t=1

f t (xt ) −

T
X

f t (x∗ ),

X = {x ∈ Rd : x ∈ X0 and gk (x) ≤ 0, ∀k ∈ [K]}, (2)
where the k-th constraint function gk (x) is convex and differentiable. OMD with a simple projection does not work
well in this problem, as projection onto the complex constraint set X is usually computationally heavy. Rather than
requiring each decision to be feasible, it is common to allow
functional constraints to be slightly violated at each time
step (Mahdavi, Jin, and Yang 2012; Jenatton, Huang, and
Archambeau 2016; Yu, Neely, and Wei 2017; Chen, Ling,
and Giannakis 2017; Liakopoulos et al. 2019) but require an
algorithm to simultaneously maintain a sublinear regret and
constraint violation. Specifically, in addition to (1), we also

(1)

t=1

where xt is the decision chosen in step t, and x∗ ∈
PT
argminx∈X t=1 f t (x) is the best decision in hindsight.
The regret in (1) compares the sequence of decisions with
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9534

