The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Extracting Semantic-Dynamic Features for Long-Term Stable Brain Computer
Interface
Tao Fang12 , Qian Zheng12 , Yu Qi13 * , Gang Pan12 *
1

The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
MOE Frontier Science Center for Brain Science and Brain-machine Integration, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{duolafang, qianzheng, qiyu, gpan}@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

Motor-related neural signals (e.g., cortical signals in dorsal premotor cortex, PMd or primary motor cortex, M1)
have been widely used in mature BCI experiments and
even neuroprosthesis (Hochberg et al. 2012; Wodlinger
et al. 2014; Pandarinath et al. 2017; Pan et al. 2018). Researchers have revealed motor-related neural signals to be
a high-dimensional mapping of low-dimensional underlying dynamics (Pandarinath et al. 2018b; Churchland et al.
2012). Therefore, recalibrating motor-related neural signals
with unlabeled data could be achieved by unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) considering the dynamics. However,
prevalent UDA methods are designed for non-sequential
data (e.g., images (Long et al. 2014; Sun, Feng, and Saenko
2016)) and primarily focus on spatial features. Existing
UDA methods for sequential data (e.g., texts (Zhang et al.
2019b), audios (Drossos, Magron, and Virtanen 2019), cortical signals (Dyer et al. 2017; Farshchian et al. 2018)) also
fail to extract dynamic features. That is, they treat the sequence to be discrete and extract features by aggregating
local ones, which ignores the structure (Wang et al. 2018)
or dynamics (top row, Fig. 1). Besides, these methods only
align the marginal distribution of the features while do not
explicitly align decision boundaries, which may fuse semantics in the target domain and degrade the classification performance (bottom row, Fig. 1).
To extract dynamic features for recalibration, our basic
idea is to force the extracted semantic features across different classes embedded in the initial-point subspace of a manifold determined by an autonomous linear dynamical system.
The embedding representation contains the semantics, while
its spatial information in the manifold reflects the dynamic
features (as the dynamic trajectories are decided by its initial points). By compressing the dynamic feature as an initial
point, the intrinsic dynamics instead of discrete features for
each time stamp could be comprehensively considered. The
unified representation of Semantic and Dynamic (SD) features facilitates unsupervised recalibration in two aspects. 1)
The manifold determined by the dynamical system is longterm stable as discovered in (Gallego et al. 2020), which is
free from recalibration across domains. 2) In this manifold,
aligning the unified representation aligns semantics and dynamics autonomously, and we only need to focus on the SD
feature alignment in the recalibration.
Concretely, we use an observation module to extract the

Brain-computer Interface (BCI) builds a neural signal to the
motor command pathway, which is a prerequisite for the realization of neural prosthetics. However, a long-term stable
BCI suffers from the neural data drift across days while retraining the BCI decoder is expensive and restricts its application scenarios. Recent solutions of neural signal recalibration treat the continuous neural signals as discrete, which is
less effective in temporal feature extraction. Inspired by the
observation from biologists that low-dimensional dynamics
could describe high-dimensional neural signals, we model the
underlying neural dynamics and propose a semantic-dynamic
feature that represents the semantics and dynamics in a shared
feature space facilitating the BCI recalibration. Besides, we
present the joint distribution alignment instead of the commonly used marginal alignment strategy, dealing with the various complex changes in neural data distribution. Our recalibration approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on the
real neural data of two monkeys in both classification and regression tasks. Our approach is also evaluated on a simulated
dataset, which indicates its robustness in dealing with various
common causes of neural signal instability.

Introduction
The Brain-computer Interface, BCI (Chapin et al. 1999;
Hochberg et al. 2006; Zhang et al. 2019a; Fang, Qi, and
Pan 2020) provides direct brain control of external devices
by decoding the motor intentions from neural activities,
which has demonstrated the potential in motor rehabilitation and restoration. However, long-term available BCI suffers from the intrinsic instability caused by several inevitable
problems (e.g., elusive flow of the tissues, neuron necrosis,
and electrodes displacement (Barrese et al. 2013; Degenhart et al. 2020)), which restricts the promotion of BCI from
the lab to real-life applications. A widely adopted strategy
for alleviating such degradation is daily recalibration (Ajiboye et al. 2017). Recalibration with supervised learning approaches (Wen et al. 2021; Brandman et al. 2018) enables
high performance. However, labeling the newly-collected
data is often expensive, raising restrictions for promoting
BCI to real-life applications. Recently, leveraging unlabelled
data for recalibration has received increasing interest.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5965

