The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Direct Heterogeneous Causal Learning
for Resource Allocation Problems in Marketing
Hao Zhou1 * , Shaoming Li 1 , Guibin Jiang 1 , Jiaqi Zheng 2 , Dong Wang 1
1

Meituan, China
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
{zhouhao29, lishaoming, jiangguibin, wangdong07}@meituan.com, jzheng@nju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Data

ML: mse/logloss
Predictive Model
Uplift Model

Marketing is an important mechanism to increase user engagement and improve platform revenue, and heterogeneous
causal learning can help develop more effective strategies.
Most decision-making problems in marketing can be formulated as resource allocation problems and have been studied
for decades. Existing works usually divide the solution procedure into two fully decoupled stages, i.e., machine learning
(ML) and operation research (OR) — the first stage predicts
the model parameters and they are fed to the optimization in
the second stage. However, the error of the predicted parameters in ML cannot be respected and a series of complex mathematical operations in OR lead to the increased accumulative
errors. Essentially, the improved precision on the prediction
parameters may not have a positive correlation on the final
solution due to the side-effect from the decoupled design.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for solving resource allocation problems to mitigate the side-effects. Our
key intuition is that we introduce the decision factor to establish a bridge between ML and OR such that the solution can
be directly obtained in OR by only performing the sorting or
comparison operations on the decision factor. Furthermore,
we design a customized loss function that can conduct direct
heterogeneous causal learning on the decision factor, an unbiased estimation of which can be guaranteed when the loss
converges. As a case study, we apply our approach to two
crucial problems in marketing: the binary treatment assignment problem and the budget allocation problem with multiple treatments. Both large-scale simulations and online A/B
Tests demonstrate that our approach achieves significant improvement compared with state-of-the-art.

Extract
Input

OR
Factor

Solution

Combination/Operations

(a) Two-phase methods
ML: customized
loss function Determine
Data

Direct
Heterogeneous
Causal Learning

OR

Decision
Factor

Derive

Predict

Factor
Solution

Sorting/
Input Comparison

(b) Our approach

Figure 1: Comparison with two-phase methods

Despite the incremental revenue, marketing actions can
also incur significant consumption of marketing resources
(e.g., budget). Hence, only part of individuals (e.g., shops or
goods) may be assigned the marketing treatments due to the
limited volume of them. In marketing, such decision-making
problems can be formulated as resource allocation problems,
and have been investigated for decades.
Most of existing studies usually use two-phase methods
to solve these problems (Ai et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2019;
Du, Lee, and Ghaffarizadeh 2019). As is shown by Fig. 1(a),
the first stage is ML, where the (incremental) response of individuals under different treatments is predicted by predictive/uplift models. The second stage is OR and the prediction
results in ML are fed as the input to the combinatorial optimization algorithms. Hence, existing works mainly focus
on the decoupled optimization for predictive/uplift modeling and combinatorial optimization.
Despite the widespread application, there are two major
defects in two-phase methods. The first one is that the solution is obtained after conducting many intermediate computations on the prediction results in ML, e.g., the combination of multiple factors or complex mathematical operations
in OR. Therefore, the improved precision on the prediction
parameters may not have a positive correlation on the final
solution. The second is that the errors of model prediction
are not respected, and the complex operations performed
on prediction results in OR lead to the increased accumulative errors. Due to the accumulative errors, the theoretically
optimal algorithm in OR cannot always achieve the practically optimum and is even inferior to heuristic strategies in
some scenarios. Therefore, the decoupled optimization for

Introduction
Marketing is one of the most effective mechanisms for the
improvement of user engagement and platform revenue.
Thus, various marketing campaigns have been widely deployed in many online Internet platforms. For example,
markdowns of perishable products in Freshippo are used to
boost sales (Hua et al. 2021), coupons in Taobao Deals can
stimulate user activity (Zhang et al. 2021) and incentives in
the Kuaishou video platform are offered to improve user retention (Ai et al. 2022).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5446

