The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

GLCC: A General Framework for Graph-Level Clustering
Wei Ju1, * , Yiyang Gu1,∗ , Binqi Chen2 , Gongbo Sun3 , Yifang Qin2 ,
Xingyuming Liu2 , Xiao Luo4,† , Ming Zhang1,†
1

School of Computer Science, Peking University, China
2
School of EECS, Peking University, China
3
Beijing National Day School, China
4
Department of Computer Science, University of California Los Angeles, USA
{juwei, yiyanggu, qinyifang, liuxym, mzhang cs}@pku.edu.cn,
berkinchen@gmail.com, tommy2809@163.com, xiaoluo@cs.ucla.edu
Abstract

strong representation learning capability of deep learning,
deep clustering approaches (Caron et al. 2018; Mukherjee
et al. 2019; Li et al. 2021; Zhong et al. 2021; de Mello,
Assunção, and Murai 2022) have recently achieved state-ofthe-art performance. The crucial characteristic of deep clustering is to learn clustering-friendly representations without manual feature extraction via deep neural networks in
an end-to-end fashion. Representative method DeepCluster (Caron et al. 2018) iteratively groups the features with
k-means and uses the cluster assignments as supervision to
update the deep neural networks. With deep clustering, representation learning and clustering can be optimized in a
joint way to learn clustering-friendly representations.

This paper studies the problem of graph-level clustering,
which is a novel yet challenging task. This problem is critical
in a variety of real-world applications such as protein clustering and genome analysis in bioinformatics. Recent years have
witnessed the success of deep clustering coupled with graph
neural networks (GNNs). However, existing methods focus
on clustering among nodes given a single graph, while exploring clustering on multiple graphs is still under-explored. In
this paper, we propose a general graph-level clustering framework named Graph-Level Contrastive Clustering (GLCC)
given multiple graphs. Specifically, GLCC first constructs an
adaptive affinity graph to explore instance- and cluster-level
contrastive learning (CL). Instance-level CL leverages graph
Laplacian based contrastive loss to learn clustering-friendly
representations while cluster-level CL captures discriminative cluster representations incorporating neighbor information of each sample. Moreover, we utilize neighbor-aware
pseudo-labels to reward the optimization of representation
learning. The two steps can be alternatively trained to collaborate and benefit each other. Experiments on a range of
well-known datasets demonstrate the superiority of our proposed GLCC over competitive baselines.

With the advancement of graph neural networks (GNNs)
in achieving unprecedented success for graph-related tasks,
one promising direction to leverage GNNs is graph clustering (Bo et al. 2020; Cheng et al. 2021; Peng et al. 2021;
Zhao et al. 2021; Pan and Kang 2021; Liu et al. 2022). The
basic idea of graph clustering methods is to train GNNs for
learning effective cluster assignments to divide nodes into
different groups without human annotations. Specifically,
SDCN (Bo et al. 2020) firstly integrates the structural information into deep clustering combined with autoencoder
and GCN. To avoid representation collapse caused by oversmoothing in GCN, DCRN (Liu et al. 2022) proposes a selfsupervised deep graph clustering method by reducing information correlation in a dual manner.

Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental problem in graph machine learning, which has been widely studied for decades. It aims at
partitioning similar samples into the same group and dissimilar samples into different groups. The clusters of samples provide a global insight of the whole dataset, which has
various downstream applications, including anomaly detection (Sheng et al. 2019), domain adaptation (Tang, Chen, and
Jia 2020), community detection (Liu et al. 2020) and representation learning (Xu et al. 2021; Luo et al. 2022b).
Over the past decades, traditional methods such as spectral clustering (Ng, Jordan, and Weiss 2001) and subspace
clustering (Vidal 2011) have played a dominant role. However, the separation of representation learning and clustering unavoidably leads to sub-optimal solutions. Due to the

Although existing graph clustering approaches have
achieved encouraging performance, they all focus on studying clustering among nodes given a single graph. In other
words, they are tailored to node-level clustering. Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, clustering on multiple
graphs (also called graph-level clustering) remains largely
unexplored, and has a variety of real-world applications. For
example, protein clustering is a significant topic in bioinformatics, which is used to construct meaningful and stable
groups of similar proteins to be used for analysis and functional annotation (Zaslavsky et al. 2016). Moreover, graphlevel clustering is a crucial yet challenging task, unlike nodelevel clustering where we can derive extra supervision for
each node from their neighbors via propagation, graphs are
individual instances isolated from each other and thus we

* Equal contribution with order determined by flipping a coin.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4391

