The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SVFI: Spiking-Based Video Frame Interpolation for High-Speed Motion
Lujie Xia1,2 , Jing Zhao1,2,3 , Ruiqin Xiong1,2 * , Tiejun Huang1,2,4
1

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology (NERCVT), Peking University
2
Institute of Digital Media, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
National Computer Network Emergency Response Technical Team/Coordination Center of China
4
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
{lujie.xia, jzhaopku, rqxiong, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn
Abstract
Occlusion and motion blur make it challenging to interpolate
video frame, since estimating complex motions between two
frames is hard and unreliable, especially in highly dynamic
scenes. This paper aims to address these issues by exploiting
spike stream as auxiliary visual information between frames
to synthesize target frames. Instead of estimating motions by
optical flow from RGB frames, we present a new dual-modal
pipeline adopting both RGB frames and the corresponding
spike stream as inputs (SVFI). It extracts the scene structure
and objects’ outline feature maps of the target frames from
spike stream. Those feature maps are fused with the color
and texture feature maps extracted from RGB frames to synthesize target frames. Benefited by the spike stream that contains consecutive information between two frames, SVFI can
directly extract the information in occlusion and motion blur
areas of target frames from spike stream, thus it is more robust than previous optical flow-based methods. Experiments
show SVFI outperforms the SOTA methods on wide variety
of datasets. For instance, in 7 and 15 frame skip evaluations,
it shows up to 5.58 dB and 6.56 dB improvements in terms
of PSNR over the corresponding second best methods BMBC
and DAIN. SVFI also shows visually impressive performance
in real-world scenes.

RGB only

(a)

RGB+Event

(b)
Output frame
RGB+Spike

(c)

Figure 1: Illustration of VFI methods with three different
modal data as inputs. (a) RGB only methods use two consecutive RGB frames as inputs to predict the target frame.
(b) RGB+Event methods additionally use the bidirectional
event stream between RGB frames. (c) The proposed SVFI
first utilizes RGB frames and the spike streams between
them. It has potential to enjoy better robustness to synthesize objects with complex motions and occlusion in (a) and
objects with few textures and small motions in (b).

Introduction
Video frame interpolation (VFI) predicts intermediate
frames to transform low frame rate video to high frame
rate video. Instead of using specialized and expensive equipment, VFI can generate high frame rate video from the content shot by conventional cameras in low-cost way to capture the moments take place in the blink of an eye. Hence, it
has attracted increasing attention and been applied in many
applications from super slow motion (Jiang et al. 2018) to
video coding/decoding (Pourreza and Cohen 2021).
Most existing VFI methods can be summarized into two
categories according to their followed pipelines, e.g. i) flowbased methods (Niklaus and Liu 2018; Jiang et al. 2018;
Bao et al. 2019; Niklaus and Liu 2020; Park et al. 2020; Gui
et al. 2020), which combine flow estimation (Ilg et al. 2017;
Sun et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2017) with frames warping (Jaderberg et al. 2015) to predict a new frame, and ii) kernel-based

methods (Niklaus, Mai, and Liu 2017a,b) that model VFI as
local convolution and estimate the convolution kernel over
the input frames. However, kernel-based methods only perform well in small motion scenes because they can only estimate small kernels considering the running speed. And flowbased methods rely on optical flow estimation, they not only
are limited by the assumptions of illumination and appearance consistency, but also can hardly handle scenes containing complex motions. If complex motions, e.g. nonlinear and
occlusion occur, the artifacts will appear in the corresponding areas of target frames.
Considering aforementioned limitations, researchers proposed to combine event camera with conventional camera(Tulyakov et al. 2021). This pipeline further promotes the
development of VFI field. Event camera is a kind of neuro-

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2910

