The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Bayesian Federated Neural Matching That Completes Full Information
Peng Xiao1 , Samuel Cheng2∗
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University
Shanghai, China
2
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Oklahoma
Oklahoma City, US
phd.xiaopeng@gmail.com
Abstract

assignment formulation of global neurons and current local neurons. PFNM subsequently extends in modern architectures such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and
long short-term memory (LSTMs) (Wang et al. 2020), and
its variants are also utilized in aggregating various statistical
models such as Gaussian topic models, hierarchical Dirichlet process based hidden Markov models (Yurochkin et al.
2019a, 2018) etc.
In this paper, we theoretically prove the drawback of the
optimizing process in PFNM under its probabilistic framework and address it by introducing a Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence penalty. Our theory can also be generalized in all
PFNM variants. Specifically, the contributions in this work
include: 1) We theoretically prove that the linear sum formulation in the optimizing process omits the information of
global neurons under the Bayesian framework. 2) We fix the
missing global information by introducing a KL divergence
penalty to complete the full information. 3) In experiment,
we not only demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
on three image datasets, but also extend the matching type
federated learning algorithm to neural network with batch
normalization layer.

Federated learning is a contemporary machine learning
paradigm where locally trained models are distilled into a
global model. Due to the intrinsic permutation invariance
of neural networks, Probabilistic Federated Neural Matching
(PFNM) employs a Bayesian nonparametric framework in the
generation process of local neurons, and then creates a linear
sum assignment formulation in each alternative optimization
iteration. But according to our theoretical analysis, the optimization iteration in PFNM omits global information from
existing. In this study, we propose a novel approach that overcomes this flaw by introducing a Kullback-Leibler divergence
penalty at each iteration. The effectiveness of our approach
is demonstrated by experiments on both image classification
and semantic segmentation tasks.

Introduction
The recent decade has seen a rapid advancement in artificial intelligence, particularly in the subfield of deep learning.
This is large because there is an abundance of data available.
However, the increasing privacy concerns present a barrier to
some datasets’ accessibility in a number of applications, particularly in the medical and financial areas. Therefore, federated learning (FL), which involves learning a model from
disparate sets of data, is suggested to address this issue.
Federated learning is a learning paradigm where locally
learned models are combined into a shared global model.
Neural networks are naturally used in federated learning
since they play a vital role in deep learning. Considering
the inherent permutation invariance of a neural network,
it is reasonable to match neurons of distinct local models before aggregating them. To do this, Probabilistic Federated Neural Matching (PFNM) (Yurochkin et al. 2019b)
builds a Bayesian nonparametric framework to match and
merge these neurons. In the process of modeling, PFNM
formally characterizes the generative process of local neurons through the Beta-Bernoulli process (BBP) (Thibaux
and Jordan 2007), and treats the local neurons as noisy realizations of latent global neurons. In the process of optimizing, PFNM iteratively maximizes the posterior estimation of latent global neurons, through solving a linear sum

Related Works
Federated Learning The initial aggregation method in FL
is FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017) in which parameters of
local models are averaged coordinate-wisely. But the performance of FedAvg deteriorates significantly in non-i.i.d
(Independent and Identically Distributed) data (Karimireddy
et al. 2020; Deng, Kamani, and Mahdavi 2021; Xiao et al.
2020). Subsequent improved methods starts from different
perspectives. FedProx (Li et al. 2018) adds a proximal term
in local training cost to keep dissimilarity between local
models in lower bound. SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al.
2020) uses control variates to correct the drift in local updates. FedPD (Zhang et al. 2020) proposes a primal-dual
optimization strategy to alleviate deterioration in non-i.i.d
data. Agnostic federated learning (Mohri, Sivek, and Suresh
2019) optimizes a centralized distribution by maximize the
worst local model. Federated multi-task learning (Smith
et al. 2017) applies a multi-task learning mechanism to customize local models. Several studies further extend knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Buciluǎ,
Caruana, and Niculescu-Mizil 2006; Schmidhuber 1992) in

∗

is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10473

