The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Maximizing the Probability of Fixation in the Positional Voter Model
Petros Petsinis, Andreas Pavlogiannis, Panagiotis Karras
Aarhus University, Denmark
{petsinis,pavlogiannis,panos}@cs.au.dk

Abstract

These dynamics can vary drastically from one application
domain to another, and have been studied extensively, e.g.,
in the cases of influence and information cascades in social
networks (Domingos and Richardson 2001; Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003; Mossel and Roch 2007; Zhang et al.
2020), epidemic spread (Kermack, McKendrick, and Walker
1927; Newman 2002), genetic variation in structured populations (Moran 1958; Lieberman, Hauert, and Nowak 2005;
Pavlogiannis et al. 2018; Tkadlec et al. 2021), and gametheoretic models of antagonistic interaction (Ohtsuki et al.
2006; Ibsen-Jensen, Chatterjee, and Nowak 2015).
One of the most fundamental diffusion processes is the
Voter model. While introduced to study particle interactions (Liggett and Liggett 1985) and territorial conflict (Clifford and Sudbury 1973), its elegance and simplicity have
rendered it applicable to a wide variety of other domains (often under other names, such as imitation updating or deathbirth dynamics), including the spread of social traits (EvenDar and Shapira 2011; Castellano, Fortunato, and Loreto
2009; Bhat and Redner 2019; Durocher et al. 2022), robot
coordination and swarm intelligence (Talamali et al. 2021),
and evolutionary dynamics (Antal, Redner, and Sood 2006;
Ohtsuki et al. 2006; Hindersin and Traulsen 2015; Allen
et al. 2017; Tkadlec et al. 2020; Allen et al. 2020).
The voter process starts with a homogeneous population
of agents (aka voters) scattered over an interaction network
and carrying a resident trait B. A novel trait A invades the
population by initially appearing on some random agent(s),
and gets diffused in the network by local stochastic updates:
each agent occasionally wakes up and updates its own trait
by randomly sampling the trait of a neighbor. In general, the
trait A is associated with an invasion bias δ ≥ 0, which
quantifies the stochastic preference of an agent to choose A
over B while sampling the traits of its neighbors. The process eventually reaches an absorption state (aka consensus
state (Even-Dar and Shapira 2011)), in which A either fixates in the population or goes extinct. The key quantity of
interest is the probability of fixation, which depends on the
network structure and the bias δ. A key difference with standard cascade models (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2005)
is that the Voter process is non-progressive, meaning that
the spread of A can both increase and shrink over time. It
can thus express settings such as switching of opinions.
In realistic situations, the invasion bias is not ubiquitous

The Voter model is a well-studied stochastic process that
models the invasion of a novel trait A (e.g., a new opinion,
social meme, genetic mutation, magnetic spin) in a network
of individuals (agents, people, genes, particles) carrying an
existing resident trait B. Individuals change traits by occasionally sampling the trait of a neighbor, while an invasion
bias δ ≥ 0 expresses the stochastic preference to adopt the
novel trait A over the resident trait B. The strength of an
invasion is measured by the probability that eventually the
whole population adopts trait A, i.e., the fixation probability. In more realistic settings, however, the invasion bias is
not ubiquitous, but rather manifested only in parts of the network. For instance, when modeling the spread of a social
trait, the invasion bias represents localized incentives. In this
paper, we generalize the standard biased Voter model to the
positional Voter model, in which the invasion bias is effectuated only on an arbitrary subset of the network nodes, called
biased nodes. We study the ensuing optimization problem,
which is, given a budget k, to choose k biased nodes so as
to maximize the fixation probability of a randomly occurring invasion. We show that the problem is NP-hard both
for finite δ and when δ → ∞ (strong bias), while the objective function is not submodular in either setting, indicating
strong computational hardness. On the other hand, we show
that, when δ → 0 (weak bias), we can obtain a tight approximation in O(n2ω ) time, where ω is the matrix-multiplication
exponent. We complement our theoretical results with an experimental evaluation of some proposed heuristics.

Introduction
Several real-world phenomena involve the emergence and
spread of novel traits in populations of interacting individuals of various kinds. For example, such phenomena may concern the propagation of new information in a social network,
the sweep of a novel mutation in a genetically homogeneous
population, the rise and resolution of spatial conflict, and
the diffusion of atomic properties in interacting particle systems. Network science collectively studies such phenomena as diffusion processes, whereby the system of interacting individuals is represented as a network and the corresponding process defines the (stochastic, in general) dynamics of local trait spread, from an individual to its neighbors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12269

