The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

OctFormer: Efficient Octree-Based Transformer for Point Cloud Compression
with Local Enhancement
Mingyue Cui1 , Junhua Long1 , Mingjian Feng 1 , Boyang Li 1 , Kai Huang 1,2 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
2
Shenzhen Institute, Sun Yat-sen University
{cuimy,longjh7,fengmj8,liby3}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, huangk36@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

tive transform for color data. (Quach, Valenzise, and Dufaux 2019) designs a model for learning analysis and synthesis transforms suitable for voxel-based point cloud geometry
compression. Further, (Nguyen et al. 2021) proposes a deep
auto-regressive generative method to estimate the occupancy
probability of each voxel. In general, these methods do not
fully use spatial context information and also require a huge
amount of computing power.
Compared with point cloud coding using voxel grids, octree has more advantages benefiting from its higher coding
efficiency (Huang et al. 2006; Liu et al. 2019). An octree
node uses an 8-bit occupancy to represent the distribution
of children nodes. By combining the deep entropy model
along with an arithmetic encoder, the octree encoded point
cloud is further compressed into a compact bitstream. Actually, in octree encoding process, the main problem faced is
how to efficiently extract strong prior information between
spatial neighboring nodes, especially for the relationship between sibling nodes. Sibling nodes can provide low-level local geometry features, which are significant for exploiting
geometry redundancy. Unlike ancestor nodes’ relationships,
it is difficult to obtain the neighbor geometric relationship
of sibling nodes by traversing the octree directly. Therefore,
a highly parallel sophisticated method for point cloud compression is needed, and spatial context information is fully
considered.
In this paper, we propose a Transformer-based entropy
model called OctFormer, which can compress the point
cloud efficiently. OctFormer uses non-overlapped context
windows to construct sequences and shares the results of the
expensive multi-head self-attention (MSA) operation for a
sequence of nodes, which significantly reduces time overhead. Subsequently, we propose an octree-based locallyenhanced feed-forward network (OctLeFF) and octreebased positional encoding generator (OctPEG) to help the
model fit the octree node sequence data better. We use
OctPEG instead of traditional absolute positional encoding (APE) to avoid unnecessary positional features, which
enhances the translation-invariance of the octree node sequence. Our method only needs prior knowledge information of the traversal format from sibling and ancestor nodes,
not additional coarse neighborhood information which is not
readily available, such as the occupancy information of sibling nodes or local voxel context.

Point cloud compression with a higher compression ratio and
tiny loss is essential for efficient data transportation. However, previous methods that depend on 3D convolution or frequent multi-head self-attention operations bring huge computations. To address this problem, we propose an octree-based
Transformer compression method called OctFormer, which
does not rely on the occupancy information of sibling nodes.
Our method uses non-overlapped context windows to construct octree node sequences and share the result of a multihead self-attention operation among a sequence of nodes.
Besides, we introduce a locally-enhance module for exploiting the sibling features and a positional encoding generator
for enhancing the translation invariance of the octree node
sequence. Compared to the previous state-of-the-art works,
our method obtains up to 17% Bpp savings compared to the
voxel-context-based baseline and saves an overall 99% coding time compared to the attention-based baseline.

Introduction
In the past few decades, the LiDAR sensor has proven to be
crucial for various types of intelligent robot applications (Li
and Ibanez-Guzman 2020; Zou et al. 2022). It can accurately capture the 3D geometry information of scenes, which
makes it widely used in the detection, segmentation, planning, and other downstream perception tasks. However, storing and transmitting point cloud data require high costs. For
example, a single Velodyne LiDAR of HDL64 generates
over 100,000 points per sweep, and about 2.88 million points
are generated per second. Hence, it is necessary to develop
an efficient point cloud compression method.
Due to the disorder and sparsity of the point cloud, compressing the point cloud into a tiny capacity is a tough challenge compared to its well-studied image and video counterparts. Fortunately, several schemes for point cloud geometry
and attribute compression (Google 2017; Chou, Koroteev,
and Krivokuća 2019; Guarda, Rodrigues, and Pereira 2020)
have been explored in prior research works. (Limuti, Polo,
and Milani 2018) presents a voxelized dynamic point cloud
coding scheme that combines a cellular automata block reversible transform for geometric data with a region adap* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

470

