The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Rolling Horizon Based Temporal Decomposition for the Offline Pickup and
Delivery Problem with Time Windows
Youngseo Kim1 , Danushka Edirimanna1 , Michael Wilbur2 , Philip Pugliese3 ,
Aron Laszka4 , Abhishek Dubey2 , Samitha Samaranayake1
1
Cornell University
yk796@cornell.edu,
2
Vanderbilt University,
3
Chattanooga Area Regional Transportation Authority,
4
Pennsylvania State University

delivery time windows (Dumas, Desrosiers, and Soumis
1991). Furthermore, the PDPTW problem can be categorized as offline or online. In the offline setting, trip requests
are gathered ahead of time and vehicle routes are optimized
in advance for the day. In the online setting, requests are
scheduled in real time as they arrive. In this work, we focus on the offline problem. Due to computational challenges,
current state-of-the-art is focused on heuristic approaches,
which often compromise solution quality for scalability (Desaulniers, Madsen, and Ropke 2014). Previous research, motivated by real-world applications, has addressed various
practical considerations, such as utilizing multiple depots
and vehicles, enforcing strict time windows, allowing selective visits to customers, or optimizing multiple objectives at
once (Ho et al. 2018; Ropke, Cordeau, and Laporte 2007).
These approaches aim to address specific cases of the offline
PDPTW and therefore often lack flexibility.

Abstract
The offline pickup and delivery problem with time windows
(PDPTW) is a classical combinatorial optimization problem
in the transportation community, which has proven to be very
challenging computationally. Due to the complexity of the
problem, practical problem instances can be solved only via
heuristics, which trade-off solution quality for computational
tractability. Among the various heuristics, a common strategy
is problem decomposition, that is, the reduction of a largescale problem into a collection of smaller sub-problems, with
spatial and temporal decompositions being two natural approaches. While spatial decomposition has been successful in
certain settings, effective temporal decomposition has been
challenging due to the difficulty of stitching together the
sub-problem solutions across the decomposition boundaries.
In this work, we introduce a novel temporal decomposition
scheme for solving a class of PDPTWs that have narrow time
windows, for which it is able to provide both fast and highquality solutions. We utilize techniques that have been popularized recently in the context of online dial-a-ride problems
along with the general idea of rolling horizon optimization.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to solve
offline PDPTWs using such an approach. To show the performance and scalability of our framework, we use the optimization of paratransit services as a motivating example. Due to
the lack of benchmark solvers similar to ours (i.e., temporal
decomposition with an online solver), we compare our results
with an offline heuristic algorithm using Google OR-Tools. In
smaller problem instances (with an average of 129 requests
per instance), the baseline approach is as competitive as our
framework. However, in larger problem instances (approximately 2,500 requests per instance), our framework is more
scalable and can provide good solutions to problem instances
of varying degrees of difficulty, while the baseline algorithm
often fails to find a feasible solution within comparable compute times.

For solving the VRPTW, decomposition is a common
strategy—dividing the original large-scale problem into a
number of smaller sub-problems with respect to time or
space. In spatial decomposition, requests are clustered by
location. Then, decomposed problems are solved independently and solutions are merged together. There is significant
literature on spatial decomposition based on the cluster-first
and route-second principle (Ouyang 2007; Desaulniers et al.
2002). In temporal decomposition, the time axis is split into
multiple time intervals, and the original problem is strictly
divided into small problems corresponding to these intervals. While some papers incorporate temporal information
on top of a spatial decomposition (Bent and Van Hentenryck
2010; Qi et al. 2012; Tu et al. 2015), we are not aware of successful approaches with pure temporal decomposition technique. Hence, we introduce a novel temporal decomposition.
Naı̈ve spatial or temporal decomposition can significantly
degrade the solution as routes are isolated to individual spatial partitions or time bins. Also, it is non-trivial to stitch
routes together that are independently obtained for each time
interval in a post processing step (Zheng and Zhang 2019).
Our temporal decomposition overcomes this issue by creating overlapping time bins and solving the problem via a
rolling horizon approach. We note that a similar approach
with spatial decomposition is much harder in pickup and delivery problems as each request is defined spatially in a four

Introduction
The pickup and delivery problem with time windows
(PDPTW) is a challenging optimization problem (Desaulniers, Madsen, and Ropke 2014). The PDPTW is a generalization of the vehicle routing problem with time windows (VRPTW) in which requests include both pickup and
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5151

