The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Frustratingly Easy Truth Discovery
Reshef Meir1 , Ofra Amir1 , Omer Ben-Porat1 , Tsviel Ben-Shabat1 , Gal Cohensius1 , Lirong Xia2
1

Technion—Israel Institute of Technology
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI)
{reshefm, oamir, omerbp}@ie.technion.ac.il, {tsviel,galcohensius}@gmail.com, xial@cs.rpi.edu
2

Abstract

and natural language, to healthcare. For example, the Etcha-Cell project uses volunteers to trace the boundary of tumors on Electron Microscopy images ((Spiers et al. 2021),
see Fig. 1).
Yet, the vast majority of the theoretical literature on truth
discovery follows Condorcet by focusing on binary, multilabel or sometimes real-valued questions (see Related Work
section), while specific applications with complex labels often rely on specialized algorithms.
Many of these algorithms aim to identify first the most
competent workers. While some of them employ highly sophisticated analysis, others are much more direct: for example, Kobayashi (2018) suggests a ‘frustratingly easy’ algorithm that ranks workers by their average cosine similarity to others in a text summarization task; and Kurvers
et al. (2019) prove that the Hamming distance of a worker
from others is correlated with her competence in answering yes/no questions. Of course, using average similarity or
distance is not a new idea, and is extensively employed outside the context of aggregation, for example in Games with a
Purpose (Von Ahn and Dabbish 2008; Huang and Fu 2013)
to identify outliers, and in peer prediction to incentivize effort (Witkowski et al. 2013).
In this paper we argue that average similarity is a powerful tool, with nothing special about Cosine or Hamming
similarity in particular. Our main observation can be written
as follows:

Truth discovery is a general name for a broad range of statistical methods aimed to extract the correct answers to questions, based on multiple answers coming from noisy sources.
For example, workers in a crowdsourcing platform. In this paper, we consider an extremely simple heuristic for estimating
workers’ competence using average proximity to other workers. We prove that this estimates well the actual competence
level and enables separating high and low quality workers in
a wide spectrum of domains and statistical models. Under
Gaussian noise, this simple estimate is the unique solution
to the Maximum Likelihood Estimator with a constant regularization factor.
Finally, weighing workers according to their average proximity in a crowdsourcing setting, results in substantial improvement over unweighted aggregation and other truth discovery
algorithms in practice.

Introduction
“All happy families are alike; each unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.”
— Leo Tolstoy, Anna Karenina

Consider a standard crowdsourcing task such as identifying which images contain a person or a car (Deng et al.
2014), or identifying the location in which pictures were
taken (McLaughlin 2014). Such tasks are also used to construct large datasets that can later be used to train and test
machine learning algorithms. Crowdsourcing workers are
usually not experts, thus answers obtained this way often
contain many mistakes (Vuurens, de Vries, and Eickhoff
2011; Wais et al. 2010), and multiple answers are aggregated
to improve accuracy.
From a theory/statistics perspective, “truth discovery” is
a general name for a broad range of methods that aim to
extract some underlying ground truth from noisy answers.
While the mathematics of truth discovery dates back to the
early days of statistics, at least to the Condorcet Jury Theorem (Condorcet 1785), the rise of crowdsourcing platforms
suggests an exciting modern application of aggregating complex labels from varied domains such as image processing

Theorem (Anna Karenina principle, informal). The expected average similarity of each worker to all others, is
roughly linearly increasing in her competence.
Essentially, the theorem says that as in Tolstoy’s novel,
“good workers are all alike,” whereas “each bad worker is
bad in her own way” and thus not similar to other workers.

Contribution and Paper Structure
After the preliminary definitions , we prove a formal version of the Anna Karenina principle and show how it can
be used to identify poor workers without assuming specific
label structure. We show how additional assumptions lead
to tighter corollaries of exactly or approximately linear relation between pairwise similarity and competence. To the
best of our knowledge these are the first formal guarantees
on general-domain truth discovery.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6074

