The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Don’t Predict Counterfactual Values, Predict Expected Values Instead
Jeremiasz Wołosiuk1 , Maciej Świechowski2,3 , Jacek Mańdziuk3
1
Deepsolver
QED Software
3
Warsaw University of Technology
jeremi@deepsolver.com, maciej.swiechowski@qed.pl, jacek.mandziuk@pw.edu.pl
2

Abstract

game has been an object of intensive AI studies since Darse
Billing’s master thesis (Billings 1995). Soon after, online
Poker platforms became popular and further boosted the interest in this game. In 2006, the first annual AAAI Computer
Poker Competition was held (Bard et al. 2013).
The first notable Poker-playing systems were
Loki (Billings et al. 1998) and Poki (Davidson et al.
2000). Both programs employed the enumeration approach,
wherein each possible game state (with respect to hidden
information) was assigned a heuristic score that denoted
its winning chance. The heuristics relied on the given hand
strength, hand potential, betting strategy and some elements
of opponent modelling.
The next wave of programs operated by approximating
Nash equilibrium strategies, which are commonly known as
game theory optimal (GTO) strategies in the Poker community. To achieve this goal, Vexbot (Schauenberg 2006) employed expectimax search. PsOpti/Sparbot (Billings et al.
2003) applied linear programming on heavily abstracted
game trees. Others used Monte Carlo simulation-based approaches (Schweizer et al. 2009; Broeck, Driessens, and Ramon 2009) including Monte Carlo Tree Search (Heinrich
and Silver 2014), which is a very popular and successful
technique in games in general (Świechowski et al. 2023).
A major milestone was the introduction of Counterfactual Regret Minimization algorithm (CFR) (Zinkevich et al.
2007), which allowed to outperform all winners of the AAAI
2006 Computer Poker Competition.
In 2017, the search for superhuman Poker playing bot
has, is some sense, been concluded. Two bots: Libratus (Brown and Sandholm 2017) and DeepStack (Moravčı́k
et al. 2017) were the first to consistently surpass professional human Poker players in 2-player No-Limit Texas
Hold’em. Libratus is comprised of three parts: (1) precomputed “blueprint” strategies, (2) nested subgame solving and
(3) self-improvement. For tasks (1) - (2) it employs Monte
Carlo Counterfactual Regret Minimization (MCCFR) with
Regret-Based Pruning (RBP) (Brown, Ganzfried, and Sandholm 2015). The self-improvement consists in an adaptive
way of performing action abstractions based on the most
frequent actions chosen by the opponent. DeepStack, briefly
summarized in section 4, soundly transfers heuristic search
methods from perfect to imperfect-information games. The
system uses depth-limited search employs Deep Counter-

Counterfactual Regret Minimization algorithms are the most
popular way of estimating the Nash Equilibrium in imperfectinformation zero-sum games. In particular, DeepStack - the
state-of-the-art Poker bot – employs the so-called Deep
Counterfactual Value Network (DCVN) to learn the Counterfactual Values (CFVs) associated with various states in the
game. Each CFV is a multiplication of two factors: (1) the
probability that the opponent would reach a given state in a
game, which can be explicitly calculated from the input data,
and (2) the expected value (EV) of a payoff in that state,
which is a complex function of the input data, hard to calculate. In this paper, we propose a simple yet powerful modification to the CFVs estimation process, which consists in
utilizing a deep neural network to estimate only the EV factor of CFV. This new target setting significantly simplifies the
learning problem and leads to much more accurate CFVs estimation. A direct comparison, in terms of CFVs prediction
losses, shows a significant prediction accuracy improvement
of the proposed approach (DEVN) over the original DCVN
formulation (relatively by 9.18 − 15.70% when using card
abstraction, and by 3.37 − 8.39% without card abstraction,
depending on a particular setting). Furthermore, the application of DEVN improves the theoretical lower bound of the
error by 29.05 − 31.83% compared to the DCVN pipeline
when card abstraction is applied.
Additionally, DEVN is able to achieve the goal using significantly smaller, and faster to infer, networks.
While the proposed modification may seem to be of a rather
technical nature, it, in fact, presents a fundamentally different approach to the overall process of learning and estimating CFVs, since the distributions of the training signals differ
significantly between DCVN and DEVN. The former estimates CFVs, which are biased by the probability of reaching
a given game state, while training the latter relies on a direct
EV estimation, regardless of the state probability. In effect,
the learning signal of DEVN presents a better estimation of
the true value of a given state, thus allowing more accurate
CFVs estimation.

1

Introduction

Poker is probably the most popular imperfect-information
card game in contemporary Artificial Intelligence (AI) research (Billings et al. 2002; Rubin and Watson 2011). The
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5303

