The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Toward a Perspectivist Turn in Ground Truthing for Predictive Computing
Federico Cabitza1, 2 , Andrea Campagner2 , Valerio Basile3
1

Department of Informatics, Systems and Communication, University of Milano-Bicocca, v.le Sarca 336 – 20126 Milan, Italy
2
IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi, Milan, Italy
3
University of Turin, C.so Svizzera 185 – 10149 Turin, Italy
federico.cabitza@unimib.it, a.campagner@campus.unimib.it, valerio.basile@unito.it

Abstract

social media content (Chandrasekharan et al. 2017), or medical cases (Cabitza et al. 2019).
How to deal with disagreement in collaborative data annotation is a topic that has attracted some interest in the ML
community, especially in case of crowdsourcing, e.g. (Sheng
and Zhang 2019); that notwithstanding, the most common
approach is one: to get rid of disagreement. This can be accomplished in a number of ways: better training of annotators, so as to improve their alignment and compliance with
the classification criteria (Gadiraju, Fetahu, and Kawase
2015); conflict reconciliation and adjudication after collective discussion, followed by “some kind of consensus voting” (Muller et al. 2021); or simply by some variation of majority voting, even without the direct involvement of the annotators. This latter post-hoc technique, as drastic and trivial
as it might look (or perhaps because of that and because it is
the fastest and cheapest method), is also the most frequently
performed in the process of ML ground truthing, that is the
construction of the reference truth to be “learned” by the
predictive system.
The main idea behind disagreement removal grounds on
the ideal of truth for which a “higher-quality ground truth
is one in which multiple humans provide the same annotation for the same examples” (Aroyo and Welty 2015), and
on the corresponding idea that different (and contrasting) labels for the same cases indicate that some errors occurred,
committed by the raters who do not agree with the majority of coworkers: non-perfect performance necessarily introduces a sort of bias – usually called label noise (Kahneman
et al. 2016), label bias (Freeman et al. 2021) or annotation
bias (Hube, Fetahu, and Gadiraju 2019). This “noise” affecting annotations could be possibly due to cognitive biases (Draws et al. 2021); or to differences in the raters’
background or experience (Gurari and Grauman 2017); or to
the quality of task instructions and how these latter are followed (Kairam and Heer 2016). The idea of disagreement
as a sign of bias has inspired specialized academic initiatives (Draws et al. 2021) and various bias mitigation and removal strategies (Sheng and Zhang 2019), whose common
element is trust in the tenet of “collective intelligence”: the
judgment of many is usually more correct than that of individuals.
However, the above idea of noise could be wrong and the
common wariness of disagreement be based on the two fal-

Most current Artificial Intelligence applications are based
on supervised Machine Learning (ML), which ultimately
grounds on data annotated by small teams of experts or large
ensemble of volunteers. The annotation process is often performed in terms of a majority vote, however this has been
proved to be often problematic by recent evaluation studies. In this article, we describe and advocate for a different paradigm, which we call perspectivism: this counters
the removal of disagreement and, consequently, the assumption of correctness of traditionally aggregated gold-standard
datasets, and proposes the adoption of methods that preserve
divergence of opinions and integrate multiple perspectives
in the ground truthing process of ML development. Drawing on previous works which inspired it, mainly from the
crowdsourcing and multi-rater labeling settings, we survey
the state-of-the-art and describe the potential of our proposal
for not only the more subjective tasks (e.g. those related to
human language) but also those tasks commonly understood
as objective (e.g. medical decision making). We present the
main benefits of adopting a perspectivist stance in ML, as
well as possible disadvantages, and various ways in which
such a stance can be implemented in practice. Finally, we
share a set of recommendations and outline a research agenda
to advance the perspectivist stance in ML.

Motivations and Background
Data annotation is the practice of (manually or automatically) labelling a set of digital representations of objects.
The common pipeline for this kind of data work includes
(Muller et al. 2021): data collection; the top-down definition of the pertinent classification schema, i.e., the eligible
labels by which to annotate the collected data; the manual
data annotation1 by some domain experts or larger groups
of volunteers (as in case of crowdsourced annotation); and,
crucially to our aims, label aggregation, that is producing
one (or, in the case of multi-label learning, a set of) representative label for each object out of the multiple ones given by
the annotators. This latter step is critical because disagreement among the annotators is anything but rare, especially
in case of ambiguous phenomena to classify, such as texts,
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
A note on terminology: in this paper we speak about objects to
be classified according to a phenomenon by raters.

6860

