The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Cross-Modality Person Re-identification with Memory-Based Contrastive
Embedding
De Cheng1 * , Xiaolong Wang1 * , Nannan Wang1† , Zhen Wang2 , Xiaoyu Wang3 , Xinbo Gao4
1

Xidian University,
2
Zhejiang Lab,
3
University of Science and Technology of China,
4
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{dcheng,nnwang}@xidian.edu.cn
Abstract

equipped in surveillance scenarios to overcome the illumination variants under different lighting conditions, which
assists the visible cameras. Therefore, this greatly shows the
importance of VI-ReID for real-world surveillance system.
In practice, VI-ReID is more challenging due to the heterogeneous modality discrepancy, which is caused by different
wavelength of RGB and IR images captured with different
imaging equipments. Such modality discrepancy further aggravates the challenges of traditional person ReID problem,
i.e., inter-class confusion and intra-class variations (e.g., pose,
viewpoints, illumination, background cluster, occlusion, etc.).
Some detailed analysis (Liu et al. 2022) points out that, sometimes the image features corresponding to different identifies
under the same modality are even similar than those with the
same identity but under different modalities. Therefore, the
key solution to cross-modality object recognition is to achieve
modality unification, either from the image-level or featurelevel (Wei et al. 2021), or their combinations. Among all
these methods, we have found that the feature-level modalityalignment-based methods (or their combinations) show more
impressive experiment results for the cross-modality object
recognition task. As for the feature-level alignment, existing studies mainly focus on learning modality shared or invariant features. The representative works include the dualpath networks (Lu et al. 2020) to learn modality-specific and
modality-shared feature representations, and the one-stream
weight-sharing network (Hao et al. 2019) to directly extract
modality-shared features.
To reduce the modality discrepancy in feature level, we
propose a aggregated memory-based deep metric learning
framework for cross-modality VI-ReID. Recently, memorybased contrastive learning has been extensively explored in
deep metric learning(Dai et al. 2021; He et al. 2020; Deng
et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022). We analyze that most of these
successes owe to the increase of negative features from the
memory bank, which greatly assists the contrastive learning. While in our work, the memory-based cross-modality
deep metric learning not only benefits from the increasing
modality-aware and modality-agnostic negative examples for
cluster contrast, but also the model drift phenomena (Wang
et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022), which adopts the historical
learned modality-aware and modality-agnostic proxies to enhance modality alignment with hard positive references, and

Visible-infrared person re-identification (VI-ReID) aims to
retrieve the person images of the same identity from the RGB
to infrared image space, which is very important for real-world
surveillance system. In practice, VI-ReID is more challenging
due to the heterogeneous modality discrepancy, which further
aggravates the challenges of traditional single-modality person
ReID problem, i.e., inter-class confusion and intra-class variations. In this paper, we propose an aggregated memory-based
cross-modality deep metric learning framework, which benefits from the increasing number of learned modality-aware
and modality-agnostic centroid proxies for cluster contrast
and mutual information learning. Furthermore, to suppress the
modality discrepancy, the proposed cross-modality alignment
objective simultaneously utilizes both historical and up-to-date
learned cluster proxies for enhanced cross-modality association. Such training mechanism helps to obtain hard positive references through increased diversity of learned cluster proxies,
and finally achieves stronger “pulling close” effect between
cross-modality image features. Extensive experiment results
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, surpassing state-of-the-art works significantly by a large margin
on the commonly used VI-ReID datasets.

Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims at retrieving a person of
interest from a large-scale image gallery set, captured across
multiple non-overlapping cameras (Cheng et al. 2016). It
plays an important role in video surveillance, security, and
pedestrian analysis, and has obtained great attention over
the past decades. Conventional person Re-ID mainly focuses
on single-modality, i.e., all person images are RGB images
taken by visible cameras during day time. In recent years,
impressive performances have been obtained on most benchmark datasets (Fu et al. 2021; Cheng et al. 2022), even under
the unsupervised learning scenarios. However, the visible
cameras cannot image clearly under poor lighting conditions,
e.g., in the dark environment, which greatly limits the application of person Re-ID in the real-world surveillance system.
To overcome this obstacle, many infrared (IR) images are
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

425

