The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Memorization Weights for Instance Reweighting in Adversarial Training
Jianfu Zhang1 , Yan Hong2 , and Qibin Zhao1 *
1

RIKEN AIP
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
jianfu.zhang@riken.jp, yanhong.sjtu@gmail.com, qibin.zhao@riken.jp
2

Abstract

worst-case scenario. DNNs need to be over-parameterized
to fit these adversarial examples or compromise their performance.
Recent works (Xu et al. 2021; Feldman 2020; Sanyal
et al. 2020; Dong, Liu, and Shang 2021) indicate that natural images and data distributions have a significant fraction of atypical examples which are distinct from the subpopulations and have rare frequencies to appear in the training set. Experimental results show that if DNN is trained
with atypical and typical samples, atypical samples prevent
DNNs from memorizing typical samples and hurt DNN’s robust performance. These discoveries demonstrate that if no
more training samples are provided, it is beneficial to remove or apply less weight on the atypical samples to reduce
their negative effects for training robust DNNs.
In this paper, we propose a novel reweight method by
leveraging the memorization effect in AT to distinguish
atypical samples from typical samples adaptively with increasing model generalization ability. In detail, we adopt
self-supervised learning techniques to learn a discrete codebook (Esser, Rombach, and Ommer 2021; van den Oord,
Vinyals, and Kavukcuoglu 2017). The codebook receives
embeddings extracted by DNN from input samples and
records the most popular embeddings, which can be recognized as prototypes of typical samples. Typical samples
are hard to perturb due to their large populations. With the
help of codebook, each sample is assigned with an adaptive weight calculated based on how close each sample is to
its nearest neighbor code in the codebook. Larger weights
are assigned to the samples near the nearest neighbor code,
which can be recognized as typical samples, otherwise, the
samples which are far away from the nearest neighbor codes
are atypical samples and assigned with lower weights. Our
proposed reweight method is fast and flexible to boost existing adversarial training algorithms. Compare to existing
reweight methods (Zhang et al. 2020b; Wang et al. 2020),
our proposed method is more stable to defend strong and
adaptive attacks. Experimental results show that the proposed method is effective in defending different backbones
of DNNs on different datasets.

Adversarial training is an effective way to defend deep neural networks (DNN) against adversarial examples. However,
there are atypical samples that are rare and hard to learn, or
even hurt DNNs’ generalization performance on test data. In
this paper, we propose a novel algorithm to reweight the training samples based on self-supervised techniques to mitigate
the negative effects of the atypical samples. Specifically, a
memory bank is built to record the popular samples as prototypes and calculate the memorization weight for each sample, evaluating the “typicalness” of a sample. All the training
samples are reweigthed based on the proposed memorization
weights to reduce the negative effects of atypical samples.
Experimental results show the proposed method is flexible to
boost state-of-the-art adversarial training methods, improving
both robustness and standard accuracy of DNNs.

1

Introduction

DNNs have shown enormous success in the machine learning community. However, recent works indicate that DNNs
are vulnerable to adversarial examples (Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2015; Szegedy et al. 2014). Those adversarial
examples are crafted by adding perturbations imperceptible
to human eyes from the natural images, causing disastrous
consequences. Since DNNs play critical roles in different
artificial intelligence applications nowadays, affecting vast
groups of people, developing robust DNNs against these adversarial attacks is an important topic.
To improve robustness of DNNs, existing works develop
adversarial training (AT) (Madry et al. 2018) methods,
which minimize DNN’s error against adversarial perturbations by fitting DNNs on generated adversarial examples of
all natural training data. Based on AT, many methods (Zhang
et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020a; Wu, Xia,
and Wang 2020; Chen et al. 2020a) are proposed to further
enhance the robustness of DNNs. Although ATs can fit all
training data as well as their adversarial counterparts to improve DNN’s robustness, they still suffer from poor robustness performance (i.e., accuracy on adversarial samples) on
the test set (Tsipras et al. 2018; Schmidt et al. 2018). Adversarial examples generated by AT are stochastic and for

2

* Corresponding author

Preliminary and Related Works

We focus on image classification task in this paper. For a Cclass classification problem, we consider a training dataset

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11228

