The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Complex Dynamic Neurons Improved Spiking Transformer Network for Efficient
Automatic Speech Recognition
Qingyu Wang1,2 * , Tielin Zhang1,2 * † , Minglun Han1,2 * , Yi Wang4 , Duzhen Zhang1,2 , Bo Xu1,2,3†
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, Changchun, China
{tielin.zhang, xubo}@ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract

However, many key modules in SNNs are relatively simple, which stops their further improvement of accuracy, robustness, and efficiency. For example, the leaky-integratedand-fire (LIF) neuron is commonly used in conventional
SNNs, mainly caused of their simplicity and efficiency during network learning. Similar to it, integrated and fire (IF)
neuron is also generally used in many ANN-to-SNN conversion algorithms, partly caused by the mathematical equivalence of activation functions between IF in SNN and rectified linear unit (ReLU) in ANN.
Neuronal dynamics and neuronal heterogeneity are important features for efficient sequential information processing (Izhikevich 2003) and robust computation (Perez-Nieves
et al. 2021). The spiking neuron with different dynamics in
the biological brain is usually considered the basic building block to support cognitive functions at higher scales.
More biologically plausible features, such as network topology and plasticity-based learning algorithms, are also very
important but will not be further discussed in this study.
The SNN is considered the third-generation ANN (Maass
1997), guiding the conventional ANN to the goal of biologically plausible machine intelligence. The SNN could incorporate spatial and temporal information at multi scales,
making them efficient in many cognitive functions, including but not limited to the spatial or temporal information sensation, working memory formation with various dynamics,
and complex decision-making based on short or long-term
memory. Most of these key features are inspired by the biological counterpart brain and might be the key to balancing
the accuracy and computational cost.
Even though many efforts have been given to integrate
SNNs, ANNs, and biological discovery in different manners
from both software and hardware perspectives, it is still a
big challenge to combine them naturally by resolving some
conflict features of them, including but not limited to different types of learning neurons, architectures, and learning
algorithms. Some researchers try to combine ANN and SNN
in a unified framework by freely setting spike-based and
rate-based neurons towards the artificial general intelligence
under the Tianjic neuromorphic computation platform (Pei
et al. 2019). The Spaun architecture integrates global ratebased routing algorithms and local spiking neurons to build

The spiking neural network (SNN) using leaky-integratedand-fire (LIF) neurons has been commonly used in automatic
speech recognition (ASR) tasks. However, the LIF neuron is
still relatively simple compared to that in the biological brain.
Further research on more types of neurons with different
scales of neuronal dynamics is necessary. Here we introduce
four types of neuronal dynamics to post-process the sequential patterns generated from the spiking transformer to get
the complex dynamic neuron improved spiking transformer
neural network (DyTr-SNN). We found that the DyTr-SNN
could handle the non-toy automatic speech recognition task
well, representing a lower phoneme error rate, lower computational cost, and higher robustness. These results indicate
that the further cooperation of SNNs and neural dynamics at
the neuron and network scales might have much in store for
the future, especially on the ASR tasks.

Introduction
In recent years, the spiking neural network (SNN) has received extensive attention for its remarked lower computational cost on various machine learning tasks, including but not limited to spatial image classification, temporal auditory recognition, event-based video recognition, and
reinforcement-learning based continuous control (Tang et al.
2021). This progress in SNNs is contributed partly by the
mathematical optimization algorithms borrowed from the artificial neural network (ANN), e.g., the approximate gradient in backpropagation (BP), various types of loss definition and regression configuration, and more importantly, by
some key computational modules inspired from the biological brain, e.g., the receptive-field-like convolutional circuits,
self-organized plasticity propagation (Zhang et al. 2021a),
heterogeneity of artificial neurons for the robust computation (Perez-Nieves et al. 2021), and other multi-scale inspiration from the single neuron or synapse to the network or
cognitive functions.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

102

