The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Backpropagation-Free Deep Learning with Recursive
Local Representation Alignment
∗

∗

Alexander G. Ororbia1 , Ankur Mali2 , Daniel Kifer3 , C. Lee Giles 3
1 Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623, USA
2 University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620, USA

3 The Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA 16801, USA

ago@cs.rit.edu, ankurarjunmali@usf.edu, duk17@psu.edu, clg20@psu.edu
learning, e.g., careful initialization of weights, often following from a network-specific analysis of backprop’s learning
dynamics (Glorot and Bengio 2010; He et al. 2015; Sussillo
2014; Mishkin and Matas 2015) or modifying network structure, for example by using ReLU or mish instead of sigmoid
activations. Challenges such as these hampers the understanding of new or naive users that want to exploit the benefits
of deep learning in novel applications. Furthermore, backprop is sequential; layers are updated in a predefined order,
reducing opportunities for model parallelization. This limits
models from exploiting the true processing power offered by
multi-CPU/GPU setups.
This paper seeks to address the above-mentioned shortcomings and demonstrate that a biologically-motivated algorithm can scale up to large-scale architectures and large
datasets. Specifically, we present a procedure better suited to
parallelization, adjusting synaptic weights with local rules
(in particular, layers can be updated out of order). The contributions of this work are as follows: (1) the algorithm, recursive local representation alignment (rec-LRA), is proposed
for training large-scale ANNs. Results show that it handles
non-differentiable activations, converges faster than backprop,
and offers faster training for large-scale benchmarks (ImageNet), and (2), strong generalization across several datasets,
including ImageNet, is demonstrated for models trained using
rec-LRA. Furthermore, we extend rec-LRA to work with perturbative neural networks (PINNs), offering a fast alternative
to convolution with fewer parameters.

Abstract
Training deep neural networks on large-scale datasets requires
significant hardware resources whose costs (even on cloud platforms) put them out of reach of smaller organizations, groups,
and individuals. Backpropagation (backprop), the workhorse
for training these networks, is an inherently sequential process that is difficult to parallelize. Furthermore, researchers
must continually develop various specialized techniques, such
as particular weight initializations and enhanced activation
functions, to ensure stable parameter optimization. Our goal
is to seek an effective, neuro-biologically plausible alternative to backprop that can be used to train deep networks. In
this paper, we propose a backprop-free procedure, recursive
local representation alignment, for training large-scale architectures. Experiments with residual networks on CIFAR-10
and the large benchmark, ImageNet, show that our algorithm
generalizes as well as backprop while converging sooner due to
weight updates that are parallelizable and computationally less
demanding. This is empirical evidence that a backprop-free
algorithm can scale up to larger datasets.

Introduction
At the heart of training artificial neural networks (ANNs)
is the calculation of adjustments that need to be made to
parameters given some data. This calculation is used in tandem with an optimization procedure, such as a stochastic
hill-climbing procedure, to then alter the ANN’s actual parameters in order to ensure it makes better future predictions. This
adjustment process entails using an algorithm that conducts
credit assignment, i.e., the task of determining the contribution that individual neuronal units (within an ANN) make
to the system’s overall error. To conduct credit assignment
and compute weight updates in state-of-the-art networks today, backprop (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams 1986) is
the popular algorithm of choice but has been long criticized
as neuro-biologically implausible (Crick 1989). While backprop provides a theoretical basis for training networks, i.e.
gradient descent, it also presents practical challenges, e.g.,
exploding/vanishing gradients (Glorot and Bengio 2010).
In order to deal with the problems posed by backprop, researchers must resort to techniques and heuristics to stabilize

Related Work
Connectionist researchers have long dreamed of designing
biologically plausible learning algorithms that offer stable performance with improved generalization (Hinton 2002; Chalasani and Principe 2013; Scellier and Bengio 2017; Alias
Parth Goyal et al. 2017; Sacramento et al. 2018; Nøkland and
Eidnes 2019; Krotov and Hopfield 2019). One key motivation
behind the development of alternative algorithms is the removal of the required weight symmetry between forward and
backward synapses, which is an essential mechanism for backprop. This has also been referred to as the weight-transport
problem (Grossberg 1987; Liao, Leibo, and Poggio 2016), a
strong neuro-biological criticism of backprop and one source
of its practical issues. Algorithms such as random feedback
alignment (FA) (Lillicrap et al. 2016) and direct feedback

∗

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9327

