The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robust Image Steganography: Hiding Messages in Frequency Coefficients
Yuhang Lan1 , Fei Shang1 , Jianhua Yang2 , Xiangui Kang1∗ , Enping Li3
1

Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, China
2
Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University, Guangzhou, China
3
Computer Science Department, Bridgewater State University, Massachusetts, USA
{lanyh5, shangf5}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, yangjh86@gpnu.edu.cn, isskxg@mail.sysu.edu.cn, eli@bridgew.edu
Abstract
Steganography is a technique that hides secret messages into a public multimedia object without raising suspicion from
third parties. However, most existing works cannot provide
good robustness against lossy JPEG compression while maintaining a relatively large embedding capacity. This paper
presents an end-to-end robust steganography system based on
the invertible neural network (INN). Instead of hiding in the spatial domain, our method directly hides secret messages into
the discrete cosine transform (DCT) coefficients of the cover
image, which significantly improves the robustness and antisteganalysis security. A mutual information loss is first proposed to constrain the flow of information in INN. Besides,
a two-way fusion module (TWFM) is implemented, utilizing
spatial and DCT domain features as auxiliary information to
facilitate message extraction. These two designs aid in recovering secret messages from the DCT coefficients losslessly.
Experimental results demonstrate that our method yields significantly lower error rates than other existing hiding methods. For example, our method achieves reliable extraction with
0 error rate for 1 bit per pixel (bpp) embedding payload; and
under the JPEG compression with quality factor QF = 10,
the error rate of our method is about 22% lower than the stateof-the-art robust image hiding methods, which demonstrates
remarkable robustness against JPEG compression.

Figure 1: The universal pipeline of robust image steganography. Our model has robustness against JPEG compression
with different quality factors.
tistical steganalysis detection, these traditional methods only have a low embedding payload. Encouraged by the representational power of convolutional networks, learning-based
steganography methods achieve higher embedding capacity.
Work (Hayes and Danezis 2017) proposes the first generative adversarial network (GAN) based steganography framework by simultaneously training both a steganographic generator and a steganalyzer. SteganoGAN (Zhang et al. 2019a)
proposes a flexible image steganography method that expands the binary secret information into a three-dimensional
tensor, significantly increasing the embedding capacity. ABDH (Yu 2020) utilizes a spatial attention mechanism to improve the visual quality of generated stego images, which
embeds the secret messages into locations that are not sensitive to human vision. CHAT-GAN (Tan et al. 2021) designs
a channel attention module to promote the network to concentrate on the critical channel features. However, most of
these methods are vulnerable to malicious JPEG compression when transmitting stego images on lossy channels. That
is, a slight disturbance usually results in a poor secret message revealing. This substantial drop in performance makes
them not applicable in practical scenarios.
This paper proposes an end-to-end robust steganography
system in which the concealing and revealing of secret messages are realized by INN’s forward and backward processes. Instead of choosing spatial image pixels, our method utilize the DCT coefficients for message embedding. As the
quantization and rounding operations in JPEG compression
directly act on the DCT coefficients, the modification of DCT coefficients by JPEG compression is intuitive and easier to
model than in spatial domain or wavelet domain. However,
one DCT coefficient of a block is calculated by all pixel values of the block in the spatial domain, which indicates that

Introduction
A safe and robust image steganography system attempts to hide the secret messages within the cover image, and
the generated stego image is more inclined to evade malicious distortion and detection. Figure 1 shows the universal
pipeline of robust image steganography. In real-world applications, the stego image inevitably encounters distortions
during transmission on social networks, such as JPEG compression, which dramatically complicates extracting messages. As modifying the different pixel positions of the image has different embedding effects, traditional steganography algorithms combine the Syndrome Trellis Codes (Filler,
Judas, and Fridrich 2011) and the additive distortion cost
functions (Holub, Fridrich, and Denemark 2014; Li et al.
2014; Pevnỳ, Filler, and Bas 2010) to minimize the steganographic framework overall distortion. However, to evade sta∗

Corresponding author: Xiangui Kang
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14955

