The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Causal Inference with Conditional Instruments Using Deep Generative Models
Debo Cheng1,2 * , Ziqi Xu2 * , Jiuyong Li2 , Lin Liu2 , Jixue Liu2 and Thuc Duy Le2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Guangxi Normal University, Guilin, 541004, China
2
UniSA STEM, University of South Australia, Adelaide, SA, 5095, Australia
{debo.cheng,ziqi.xu}@mymail.unisa.edu.au, {jiuyong.li,lin.liu,jixue.liu,thuc.le}@unisa.edu.au

Abstract

Two types of approaches, the instrumental variable (IV)
approach (Hernán and Robins 2006) and the proxy approach (Kuroki and Pearl 2014; Miao, Geng, and Tchetgen Tchetgen 2018) can be used for estimating causal effects
from data with latent confounders. The proxy approach relies on the assumption that the measured variables are noisy
measurements of the latent confounders. However, recent
work (Rissanen and Marttinen 2021) has shown that it is
difficult to recover a blocking set (i.e., a set that satisfies
the back-door criterion (Pearl 2009)) for removing the confounding bias of the latent confounders even though there
exists a rich set of proxy variables. Instead, the IV approach
aims to avoid the spurious associations caused by latent confounders with the aid of a valid IV. In this work, we explore
the direction of the IV approach.
The traditional IV approach requires a standard IV (denoted as S here) which satisfies the following three conditions (Hernán and Robins 2006): (i) S is correlated with the
treatment T (a.k.a., relevance condition), (ii) S affects the
outcome Y only through the treatment T (a.k.a., exclusion
restriction), and (iii) there is no confounding bias between
S and Y (a.k.a., unconfounded instrument). However, the
last two conditions are too strict to be satisfied in practice.
A conditional IV (CIV, see Definition 1 for its formal definition), which requires some measured variables as its conditioning set, has more relaxed conditions than a standard
IV (Brito and Pearl 2002). Hence in this paper, we focus on
data-driven methods based on CIVs.
It is challenging to determine a CIV and its conditioning
set directly from observational data with latent confounders
since a CIV and its conditioning set are not distinguishable
by statistical tests due to latent confounders (Spirtes et al.
2000; Pearl 2009). The example in Fig. 1 illustrates the challenge. The causal directed acyclic graph (DAG) in Fig. 1
shows an underlying data generation mechanism, where T
and Y are the treatment and outcome variables respectively,
UC is a latent confounder, and S is a valid CIV for which
WS is the conditioning set. In a dataset generated from this
mechanism, it is impossible to distinguish the roles of S (as
a CIV) and WS (as the conditioning set of S).
Recently, the deep generative model based on variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2014; Sohn,
Yan, and Lee 2015) has achieved many successes in areas such as causal representation learning (Schölkopf et al.

The instrumental variable (IV) approach is a widely used way
to estimate the causal effects of a treatment on an outcome of
interest from observational data with latent confounders. A
standard IV is expected to be related to the treatment variable
and independent of all other variables in the system. However,
it is challenging to search for a standard IV from data directly
due to the strict conditions. The conditional IV (CIV) method
has been proposed to allow a variable to be an instrument conditioning on a set of variables, allowing a wider choice of possible IVs and enabling broader practical applications of the IV
approach. Nevertheless, there is not a data-driven method to
discover a CIV and its conditioning set directly from data. To
fill this gap, in this paper, we propose to learn the representations of the information of a CIV and its conditioning set
from data with latent confounders for average causal effect
estimation. By taking advantage of deep generative models,
we develop a novel data-driven approach for simultaneously
learning the representation of a CIV from measured variables
and generating the representation of its conditioning set given
measured variables. Extensive experiments on synthetic and
real-world datasets show that our method outperforms the existing IV methods.

Introduction
Estimating the causal effect of a treatment (a.k.a., intervention, exposure, or action) on an outcome of interest, is a fundamental area of research (Pearl 2009; Pearl and Mackenzie 2018). Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) are considered the gold standard for causal effect estimation. However,
RCTs are often difficult or impossible to conduct due to ethical issues and/or high costs (Imbens and Rubin 2015). Thus,
it is important to estimate causal effects from observational
data. For the case when there are no latent or unmeasured
confounders1 (i.e., the unconfoundedness assumption (Imbens and Rubin 2015) holds), many methods have been developed for causal effects estimation from data (Yao et al.
2021; Guo et al. 2020). In contrast, for the more realistic and
challenging case when there are latent confounders in data,
only a handful of data-driven methods have been developed.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
A confounder is a variable that causally affects both the treatment and the outcome.

7122

