The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning to Learn Better for Video Object Segmentation
Meng Lan1 , Jing Zhang2 , Lefei Zhang1,4 * , Dacheng Tao3,2
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence and School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
2
The University of Sydney, Australia
3
JD Explore Academy, China
4
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, China
{menglan, zhanglefei}@whu.edu.cn, jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au, dacheng.tao@gmail.com
Mask
Embedding

Abstract
Mask
Encoder

Recently, the joint learning framework (JOINT) integrates
matching based transductive reasoning and online inductive
learning to achieve accurate and robust semi-supervised video
object segmentation (SVOS). However, using the mask embedding as the label to guide the generation of target features in the two branches may result in inadequate target
representation and degrade the performance. Besides, how
to reasonably fuse the target features in the two different
branches rather than simply adding them together to avoid
the adverse effect of one dominant branch has not been investigated. In this paper, we propose a novel framework that emphasizes Learning to Learn Better (LLB) target features for
SVOS, termed LLB, where we design the discriminative label generation module (DLGM) and the adaptive fusion module to address these issues. Technically, the DLGM takes the
background-filtered frame instead of the target mask as input
and adopts a lightweight encoder to generate the target features, which serves as the label of the online few-shot learner
and the value of the decoder in the transformer to guide the
two branches to learn more discriminative target representation. The adaptive fusion module maintains a learnable gate
for each branch, which reweighs the element-wise feature
representation and allows an adaptive amount of target information in each branch flowing to the fused target feature,
thus preventing one branch from being dominant and making
the target feature more robust to distractor. Extensive experiments on public benchmarks show that our proposed LLB
method achieves state-of-the-art performance.

Transduction

Induction

(a) Conventional JOINT Framework

DLGM
BFF
Encoder

Target
Feature

Transduction

Adaptive
Fusion
Induction

(b) Our LLB Framework

Figure 1: Comparisons of the conventional JOINT framework (Mao et al. 2021) and our proposed LLB framework.
Compared with JOINT, our LLB model devises the DLGM
to provide more discriminative target features for the two
branches to learn better target representation. The adaptive
fusion module reweighs the element-wise feature representation in each branch and then adaptively aggregates the target information from both branches, making the fused target
representation more robust and discriminative.

In recent years, most of the advances in the SVOS field
focus on how to capture and exploit target information, as
feature extractor and segmentation decoder are almost similar. A mainstream direction is to employ the transductive
reasoning strategy which performs the pixel-level matching
between the reference frames and the current frame to realize the target information propagation from the past to the
current segmentation. These matching based methods, e.g.,
STM (Oh et al. 2019) and HMMN (Seong et al. 2021), have
set state-of-the-art of SVOS and promoted the development
of the field. On the other hand, the online few-shot learning
based methods provide a new perspective of online inductive
learning on SVOS and also achieve impressive performance
(Robinson et al. 2020; Bhat et al. 2020). Taking the representative LWL (Bhat et al. 2020) as example, a target model
is learned to transform the general feature of current frame
to an internal high-dimension target mask encoding, and a
differentiable few-shot learner is trained online to predict
the parameters of the target model, which uses the reference

Introduction
Semi-supervised Video Object Segmentation (SVOS) is a
task of finding the pixel-level position of the target objects
in a video sequence, given the mask annotation at the first
appearance of the target. It has received great attention in
recent years for its wide applications, such as video editing
and video surveillance (Lu et al. 2021). While SVOS is an
extremely challenging problem, since the target object annotation is only defined in the first frame and the object may
undergo various appearance and scale changes in subsequent
frames, which usually contain distractors in the background.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1205

