The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Attack Can Benefit: An Adversarial Approach to Recognizing Facial Expressions
under Noisy Annotations
Jiawen Zheng1∗ , Bo Li2∗‡ , Shengchuan Zhang1‡ , Shuang Wu2 , Liujuan Cao1 , Shouhong Ding2
1

Xiamen University
Youtu Lab, Tencent
{jiawenzheng, caoliujuan,zsc 2016}@xmu.edu.cn, {libraboli, calvinwu, ericshding}@tencent.com
2

Abstract

Attackable

The real-world Facial Expression Recognition (FER) datasets
usually exhibit complex scenarios with coupled noise annotations and imbalanced class distribution, which undoubtedly
impede the development of FER methods. To address the
aforementioned issues, in this paper, we propose a novel and
flexible method to spot noisy labels by leveraging adversarial attack, termed Geometry Aware Adversarial Vulnerability
Estimation (GAAVE). Different from existing state-of-the-art
methods of noisy label learning (NLL), our method has no reliance on additional information and is thus easy to generalize
to the large-scale real-world FER datasets. Besides, the combination of Dataset Splitting module and Subset Refactoring
module mitigates the impact of class imbalance, and the SelfAnnotator module facilitates the sufficient use of all training
data. Extensive experiments on RAF-DB, FERPlus and AffectNet datasets validate the effectiveness of our method. The
stabilized enhancement based on different methods demonstrates the flexibility of our proposed GAAVE.

Guarded

Neutral

Anger

Neutral

Anger

Surprise

Happy

Surprise

Happy

Figure 1: Illustration of the samples with noisy label (left
box) and correct label(right box). The samples with noisy
label are attackable by the proposed GAAVE, while clean
samples are guarded.

Affectnet (Mollahosseini et al. 2017), FER is promoted
from lab-controlled to in-the-wild settings (Li and Deng
2020). However, these real-world FER datasets usually exhibit noisy annotations (Li and Deng 2020) due to crowdsourcing annotations, the subjectivity of the annotators and
ambiguity in expressions. As illustrated in Fig. 1, we show
some examples in AffectNet dataset with noisy labels. The
presence of these noisy annotations is an impediment to the
construction of FER methods, especially for the data-driven
deep learning based FER.
Handling noisy annotations in DNNs is a challenging
task (Arpit et al. 2017). The ideal way is to correct the
noisy labels by estimating the noise transition matrix (Yao
et al. 2020; Patrini et al. 2017; Tanno et al. 2019). However,
obtaining an accurate noise transition matrix is extremely
difficult in real-world scenarios. Another approach is to diminish the influence of corrupted labels during the training
phase. These methods (Malach and Shalev-Shwartz 2017;
Han et al. 2018; Jiang, Zhou, and Leung 2018; Yu et al.
2019) attempt to spot noisy training data and adjust the training strategy accordingly. Unfortunately, the additional information they generally require, such as noise distribution and
clean data, is hard to obtain in real-world scenarios. Additionally, it is worth pointing out that these FER datasets also
prevalently exhibit extreme class imbalance. This complicated situation makes training adjustment methods, like reweighting (Wang, Peng, and Yang 2020) and robust regular-

Introduction
As a window to the mind, facial expressions reflect human
emotions and intents in daily communication. Automatically
recognizing facial expression is important for artificial intelligence to comprehend human behaviors and interact with
them. Due to its potential applications in various fields, such
as intelligent tutoring systems, service robots, automatic
driving and mental health analysis, Automatic Facial Expression Recognition has attracted increasing attention in the
computer vision community recently (Li and Deng 2020).
Over the past decades, the community has made significant progress in the recognition of facial expression
data, which is collected in a lab-controlled environment.
Such in-the-lab datasets like CK+ (Lucey et al. 2010) and
RaFD (Langner, Dotsch et al. 2010) have relative small
sizes. Recently, with the emerge of large-scale datasets collected in real-world scenarios such as FER2013 (Goodfellow et al. 2013), RAF-DB (Li, Deng, and Du 2017) and
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Both author contributed equally to this work. Work done during Jiawen Zheng’s internship at Tencent Youtu Lab and Bo Li is
the project lead.
‡
Corresponding author.

3660

