The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Neural Dynamic Focused Topic Model
Kostadin Cvejoski1, 2 , Ramsés J. Sánchez1, 4 , César Ojeda3
1
Lamarr-Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence
Fraunhofer-Institute for Intelligent Analysis and Information Systems (IAIS)
3
University of Potsdam
4
BIT University of Bonn
kostadin.cvejoski@iais.fraunhofer.de, sanchez@bit.uni-bonn.de, ojedamarin@uni-potsdam.de
2

Abstract

and social media content not only feature trends and themes
that change with time, but also employ their language differently as time evolves (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. 2013).
The exchangeability assumption along the time component
is hence inappropriate in these cases and topic models have
been extended to account for changes in both topic (Blei and
Lafferty 2006; Wang, Blei, and Heckerman 2012; Jähnichen
et al. 2018) and word (Bamler and Mandt 2017; Rudolph and
Blei 2018; Dieng, Ruiz, and Blei 2019) distributions, among
documents collected over long periods of time.
It is easy to imagine, however, that if one analyses the collection’s content as one moves forward in time, one would
find that (some of) the topics describing those documents
appear, disappear or reappear with time. This simple intuition entails that one should not only model the time- and
document-dependent topic proportions, but also the probabilities for the topics to be active, and how such probabilities change with time. Previous work has already pointed out
that existing topic models implicitly assume that the probability of a topic being active and its proportion within each
document are positively correlated (Williamson et al. 2010;
Perrone et al. 2017). This assumption is generally unwanted,
simply because rare topics may account for a large part of
the words in the few documents in which they are active.
It is particularly detrimental (for both modelling and prediction) in a dynamic setting, because recent documents are
likely better described by new and hence rare topics.
Indeed, whenever the topic distribution over documents is
strongly skewed, topic models tend to learn the more general topics held by the big majority of documents in the collection, rather than the rare topics contained only by fewer
documents (Jagarlamudi, Daumé III, and Udupa 2012; Tang
et al. 2014; Zuo, Zhao, and Xu 2014). Document collections
that reflect evolving content typically feature skew topic distribution over its documents, with the newly added documents being well described by new, rare topics. Dynamic
topic models that feature the topic proportion-activity coupling are then expected to perform badly, simply because
these will not be able to infer the new topics characteristic
of recent documents. To properly model such recent documents one should therefore allow rarely seen topics to be
active with high proportion and frequently seem topics to be
active with low proportion.
In this work we seek to decouple the probability for a

Topic models and all their variants analyse text by learning
meaningful representations through word co-occurrences. As
pointed out by previous work, such models implicitly assume
that the probability of a topic to be active and its proportion
within each document are positively correlated. This correlation can be strongly detrimental in the case of documents created over time, simply because recent documents are likely
better described by new and hence rare topics. In this work
we leverage recent advances in neural variational inference
and present an alternative neural approach to the dynamic Focused Topic Model. Indeed, we develop a neural model for
topic evolution which exploits sequences of Bernoulli random variables in order to track the appearances of topics,
thereby decoupling their activities from their proportions. We
evaluate our model on three different datasets (the UN general debates, the collection of N EUR IPS papers, and the ACL
Anthology dataset) and show that it (i) outperforms stateof-the-art topic models in generalization tasks and (ii) performs comparably to them on prediction tasks, while employing roughly the same number of parameters, and converging
about two times faster.

Introduction
Probabilistic topic models, the likes of Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003), are generative
models of word co-occurrence that analyse large document
collections by learning latent representations (topics) encoding their themes. These models represent the documents of
the collection as mixtures of latent topics, and group semantically related words into single topics by means of wordpair frequency information within the collection. Such a
generic generative structure has been successfully applied
to problems ranging from information retrieval, visualization and multilingual modelling to linguistic understanding
in fiction and non-fiction, scientific publications and political texts (see e.g. Boyd-Graber et al. (2017) for a review),
and keeps being extended to new domains (Rezaee and Ferraro 2020; Zhao et al. 2021).
Topic models implicitly assume that the documents within
a given collection are exchangeable. Yet document collections such as magazines, academic journals, news articles
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12719

