The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Subspace-Aware Exploration for Sparse-Reward Multi-Agent Tasks
Pei Xu1, 2 , Junge Zhang2 , Qiyue Yin2 , Chao Yu4 , Yaodong Yang5, 6 , Kaiqi Huang1,2,3
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
CRISE, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAS, Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
5
Beijing Institute for General AI
6
Institute for AI, Peking University
xupei2018@ia.ac.cn, {jgzhang,qyyin,kqhuang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
yuchao3@mail.sysu.edu.cn, yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

Previous work (Liu et al. 2021) has shown that exploiting
structural prior on the reward function in multi-agent scenarios is a promising way to alleviate the exploration issue
in MARL. In this paper, we focus on a special structural
prior on the reward function in multi-agent tasks. The structural prior is that while the state space grows exponentially,
the reward function typically depends on a small subset of
the state space, i.e., sub-state space. This special structural
prior is a common one, and widely exists in many multiagent cooperation scenarios. For example, in real-world traffic light control scenario (Wei et al. 2018), as the number
of traffic lights increases, the full-state space becomes very
large, but the reward function only depends on the average
waiting time of the vehicles, which is a small subset of the
full-state space. In the academic field, there are also many
such scenarios. For instance, in a multi-agent football task,
the reward only relies on the position of the ball, or in a
multi-agent fighting task, the reward is determined only by
the health of enemies. Obviously, in these tasks, rewards are
only associated with a subset of the full-state space, and exploring in this sub-state space enables to learn the whole task
more efficiently.
In this work, we study how to effectively encode the structural prior into exploration, when specific domain knowledge is lacking. That is, we do not know which specific subspace the reward function depends on. While previous work
has tackled the same problem (Liu et al. 2021), their method
only works well for few tasks and follows a different exploration paradigm. We give a detailed comparison in Sec. .
Our basic idea is inspired by the principle of optimism in
the face of uncertainty, which plays the central role in exploration methods in many fields (Strehl and Littman 2008).
In single-agent RL, to identify states worthy of being explored, previous works (Bellemare et al. 2016; Burda et al.
2019b) assume that states with higher uncertainty are worthy of being explored and encourage agents to visit these
states. Our approach extends this idea to sub-state space
level. Since we do not know which specific sub-state space
the reward function depends on, we assume that a sub-state
space with higher uncertainty is more likely to be relevant to
the reward function. Intuitively, an under-explored sub-state
space has a higher uncertainty. Based on the idea, we propose the Subspace-Aware Multi-agent Exploration (SAME)

Exploration under sparse rewards is a key challenge for multiagent reinforcement learning problems. One possible solution
to this issue is to exploit inherent task structures for an acceleration of exploration. In this paper, we present a novel exploration approach, which encodes a special structural prior on
the reward function into exploration, for sparse-reward multiagent tasks. Specifically, a novel entropic exploration objective which encodes the structural prior is proposed to accelerate the discovery of rewards. By maximizing the lower bound
of this objective, we then propose an algorithm with moderate computational cost, which can be applied to practical
tasks. Under the sparse-reward setting, we show that the proposed algorithm significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art
algorithms in the multiple-particle environment, the Google
Research Football and StarCraft II micromanagement tasks.
To the best of our knowledge, on some hard tasks (such as
27m vs 30m) which have relatively larger number of agents
and need non-trivial strategies to defeat enemies, our method
is the first to learn winning strategies under the sparse-reward
setting.

Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is an increasingly important field. Many real-world problems (Swamy
et al. 2020; Bazzan 2009) are naturally modelled using
MARL technology. Recently, many works (Rashid et al.
2018; Lowe et al. 2017) have been proposed to address
MARL problems. Although these works have made significant progress, they all focus on dense-reward multi-agent
scenarios. However, in many real-world scenarios, rewards
extrinsic to agents are extremely sparse (Pathak et al. 2017).
In this paper, we focus on exploration in sparse-reward
multi-agent scenarios. Although classical exploration techniques such as count-based methods (Bellemare et al. 2016)
perform well in single agent scenarios, recent studies (Mahajan et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2021) show that these techniques
that strive to uniformly visit all states are no longer tractable
in MARL. The reason is that the size of the state space grows
exponentially with respect to the number of agents, which
makes it extremely challenging to identify states worthy of
being explored (Wang et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2021).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11717

