The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Relational Causal Models with Cycles through Relational Acyclification
Ragib Ahsan1 , David Arbour2 , Elena Zheleva1
1

University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL
2
Adobe Research
1
{rahsan3, ezheleva}@uic.edu, 2 arbour@adobe.com

Abstract
In real-world phenomena which involve mutual influence or
causal effects between interconnected units, equilibrium states
are typically represented with cycles in graphical models. An
expressive class of graphical models, relational causal models,
can represent and reason about complex dynamic systems exhibiting such cycles or feedback loops. Existing cyclic causal
discovery algorithms for learning causal models from observational data assume that the data instances are independent
and identically distributed which makes them unsuitable for
relational causal models. At the same time, causal discovery
algorithms for relational causal models assume acyclicity. In
this work, we examine the necessary and sufficient conditions
under which a constraint-based relational causal discovery
algorithm is sound and complete for cyclic relational causal
models. We introduce relational acyclification, an operation
specifically designed for relational models that enables reasoning about the identifiability of cyclic relational causal models.
We show that under the assumptions of relational acyclification
and σ-faithfulness, the relational causal discovery algorithm
RCD is sound and complete for cyclic models. We present
experimental results to support our claim.

Introduction
Most of the tools and methods developed for causal discovery
rely on a graphical representation based on Bayesian networks which assume independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d) instances. Probabilistic relational models (Getoor et al.
2007) have been developed that relax this assumption. The
key advantage of these relational models is that they can represent systems involving multiple types of entities interacting
with each other with some probabilistic dependence. Causal
reasoning over such relational systems is key to understanding many real-world phenomena, such as social influence.
Influence in complex dynamic systems is often mutual
and represented by a feedback loop or cycle in the relational
model. Identifying mutual influence in relational models is
of great interest in the research community. For example,
social scientists and marketing experts are interested to study
the social dynamics between people and products in social
networks (Bakshy et al. 2011; Bakshy, Messing, and Adamic
2015; Ogburn, Shpitser, and Lee 2020). However, there is a
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12164

lack of available methods for discovering mutual influence
or cycles in complex relational systems.
Sound and complete algorithms have been proposed
for learning relational causal models from observational
data (Maier et al. 2013; Lee and Honavar 2016a,b). However, they assume acyclicity and thus cannot reason about
mutual influence or cycles. In a recent work, Ahsan et al.
(2022) develop σ-abstract ground graph (σ-AGG), a sound
and complete representation for cyclic relational causal models. Even though σ-AGG is shown to be sound and complete
for cyclic relational causal models, to the best of our knowledge no work on discovering σ-AGG or identifying relational
cycles from observational data exists in the literature.
The closest works on cyclic causal discovery are mostly
from the domain of Bayesian networks. Richardson (1996)
develop a cyclic causal discovery (CCD) algorithm which
is shown to be sound but not complete. In recent work,
Mooij and Claassen (2020) provide necessary conditions
for constraint-based causal discovery algorithms developed
for acyclic causal models, such as PC (Pearl et al. 2000)
and FCI (Spirtes et al. 2000), to be sound and complete for
cyclic causal models under sigma-separation criteria. There
are several other algorithms for cyclic causal discovery from
i.i.d samples (Rothenhäusler et al. 2015; Strobl 2019a) but
no such algorithm exists for cyclic relational causal models.
In this work, we examine the necessary and sufficient conditions for which constraint-based relational causal discovery
can be shown to be sound and complete for cyclic relational
causal models under σ-separation. We introduce relational
acyclification, an operation that helps to reason over the scope
of cyclic relational causal models which are identifiable with
constraint-based causal discovery algorithms. Following this
criterion, we show that RCD (Maier et al. 2013), a pioneering
relational causal discovery algorithm for acyclic relational
models, is sound and complete for cyclic relational models
under σ-separation and causal sufficiency assumption. We
provide experimental results on synthetic relational models in
support of our claims. We also demonstrate the effectiveness
of the algorithm on a real-world dataset.

Related Work
Richardson (1996) develop cyclic causal discovery (CCD)
algorithm for directed cyclic graphs under the causal sufficiency assumption. They provide a characterization of the

