The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Efficient Image Captioning for Edge Devices
Ning Wang, Jiangrong Xie, Hang Luo, Qinglin Cheng, Jihao Wu, Mingbo Jia, Linlin Li
Huawei Inc.
wn6149@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xiexjr@foxmail.com, {lhjeremy, qlincheng}@outlook.com,
{wujihao, jiamingbo, lynn.lilinlin}@huawei.com

Model Params (M)

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the rapid progress of image captioning. However, the demands for large memory storage and
heavy computational burden prevent these captioning models from being deployed on mobile devices. The main obstacles lie in the heavyweight visual feature extractors (i.e., object detectors) and complicated cross-modal fusion networks.
To this end, we propose LightCap, a lightweight image captioner for resource-limited devices. The core design is built
on the recent CLIP model for efficient image captioning. To
be specific, on the one hand, we leverage the CLIP model to
extract the compact grid features without relying on the timeconsuming object detectors. On the other hand, we transfer
the image-text retrieval design of CLIP to image captioning
scenarios by devising a novel visual concept extractor and a
cross-modal modulator. We further optimize the cross-modal
fusion model and parallel prediction heads via sequential and
ensemble distillations. With the carefully designed architecture, our model merely contains 40M parameters, saving the
model size by more than 75% and the FLOPs by more than
98% in comparison with the current state-of-the-art methods.
In spite of the low capacity, our model still exhibits state-ofthe-art performance on prevalent datasets, e.g., 136.6 CIDEr
on COCO Karpathy test split. Testing on the smartphone with
only a single CPU, the proposed LightCap exhibits a fast inference speed of 188ms per image, which is ready for practical applications.

1

Model FLOPs (G)


0

100

VinVL-base

200

Oscar-base


0

500

DistillVLM

1000

LightCap (Ours)

Figure 1: Compared to the state-of-the-art VinVL (Zhang
et al. 2021a) and Oscar (Li et al. 2020b), our method saves
more than 75% parameters and 98% FLOPs. Compared with
the lightweight DistillVLM (Fang et al. 2021b), our method
not only yields fewer parameters and FLOPs, but also outperforms it by a notable margin.

Designing computationally efficient and memory-friendly
captioning methods is vital for practical applications but has
been largely overlooked in the literature.
To achieve excellent performance, recent image captioners typically adopt deep object detectors as well as
large cross-modal fusion networks. For example, the recent
VinVL and LEMON algorithms (Zhang et al. 2021a; Hu
et al. 2021a) utilize a strong but heavyweight ResNeXt-152
based detection model and a base or large BERT model
(Devlin et al. 2018). Some methods even scale the model
size from base to huge to attain superior captioning performance (Hu et al. 2021a), but how to effectively reduce
the model size for edge devices is rarely touched in these
works. These sophisticated image captioning models struggle to meet the real-time requirement of real-world applications, let alone the huge power consumption and memory
storage. It is therefore non-trivial to investigate how to design an efficient image captioner with smaller memory storage, faster inference speed, and satisfactory performance.
In this paper, we propose LightCap, a lightweight yet
high-performance image captioning method for mobile devices. Our core design is largely inspired by the recent CLIP
method (Radford et al. 2021). CLIP is an impressive imagetext retrieval model, which readily tells what objects exist in the image but fails to generate a description for the
given image. In this work, we investigate how to transfer
such a strong cross-modal retrieval model to an image captioner, and meanwhile break the obstacles that hinder image captioners from being deployed on the mobile devices.
The main obstacles that hinder image captioners from be-

Introduction

Image captioning aims to automatically generate natural and
readable sentences to describe the image contents, which
provides a promising manner to help visually impaired people. The recent decade has witnessed a surge of captioning
algorithms, benefiting from the development of large-scale
pre-training (Zhou et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020b; Hu et al.
2021a; Wang et al. 2021), advanced representation learning
(Zhang et al. 2021a; Huang et al. 2021), and modern crossmodal modeling (Xu et al. 2021; Li et al. 2020b; Fang et al.
2021a). In spite of the remarkable advances, current heavyweight captioning algorithms are not available to visually
impaired people, who generally rely on low-resource devices such as portable phones to assist the daily life, instead
of carrying on heavy computer servers with modern GPUs.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2608

