The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Leveraging Modality-Specific Representations for Audio-Visual Speech
Recognition via Reinforcement Learning
Chen Chen1 , Yuchen Hu1 , Qiang Zhang2, 3 , Heqing Zou1 , Beier Zhu1 , and Eng Siong Chng1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
2
ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University

Word Error Rate (%)

Abstract
Audio-visual speech recognition (AVSR) has gained remarkable success for ameliorating the noise-robustness of speech
recognition. Mainstream methods focus on fusing audio and
visual inputs to obtain modality-invariant representations.
However, such representations are prone to over-reliance on
audio modality as it is much easier to recognize than video
modality in clean conditions. As a result, the AVSR model
underestimates the importance of visual stream in face of
noise corruption. To this end, we leverage visual modalityspecific representations to provide stable complementary information for the AVSR task. Specifically, we propose a reinforcement learning (RL) based framework called MSRL,
where the agent dynamically harmonizes modality-invariant
and modality-specific representations in the auto-regressive
decoding process. We customize a reward function directly
related to task-specific metrics (i.e., word error rate), which
encourages the MSRL to effectively explore the optimal integration strategy. Experimental results on the LRS3 dataset
show that the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art in
both clean and various noisy conditions. Furthermore, we
demonstrate the better generality of MSRL system than other
baselines when test set contains unseen noises.

Audio modality-specific
Visual modality-specific
Modality-invariant (a+v)
Oracle

SNR Level

Figure 1: Research problem. “SNR” denotes the signal-tonoise ratio, and α is the threshold that modality-invariant
representations lose the effectiveness compared with visual
modality-specific representations.

between audio and visual lip movements for AVSR task,
which has brought remarkable performance gain in terms of
word error rate (WER) metric (Shi et al. 2022).
Mainstream AVSR methods focus on learning modalityinvariant representations by fusing audio and visual modalities into a common subspace (Song, Sun, and Li 2022).
However, such a fusion manner is prone to over-reliance
on the audio modality, as it is much easier to recognize
than video stream in clean conditions (Mittal et al. 2020).
With the rise of noise levels, the importance of the video
stream is increasingly underestimated in AVSR systems, and
leads to sub-optimal performance since audio modality has
already been corrupted by noise. We further illustrate this
research problem in Fig 1. Though modality-invariant representations (green line) outperform audio modality-specific
representations (yellow line) by a large margin, it is still vulnerable to low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) conditions. It is
worth noting that when SNR is lower than α, the modalityinvariant representations even perform worse than visual
modality-specific representations (blue line) which are completely unaffected by noise. We argue that this problematic situation can be avoided by reasonable coordination
of modality-invariant and modality-specific representations,
which is shown as the oracle system (red dashed line).

Introduction
Background noise is inevitable in real world that can dramatically degrade the speech quality and intelligibility, thereby
increasing the difficulty of speech recognition task (Hu et al.
2022a,b). In noisy scenarios, human will unconsciously observe the mouth region of speakers, as such noise-invariant
visual cues can provide useful information for the corrupted
speech understanding (Ma, Petridis, and Pantic 2021).
Similar to this, the audio-visual speech recognition
(AVSR) technique couples the audio and visual modalities,
which has attracted increasing research interest for several
years (Noda et al. 2015). Recent machine learning based
AVSR methods successfully demonstrate that deep neural
network (DNN) can process and fuse raw acoustic and visual inputs to improve the noise-robustness for recognition
through a supervised learning paradigm (Petridis et al. 2018;
Zhou et al. 2019). Additionally, self-supervised representation learning has been explored to capture the correlations
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12607

