The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CMNet: Contrastive Magnification Network for Micro-Expression Recognition
Mengting Wei1,2 , Xingxun Jiang1,2 , Wenming Zheng1∗ , Yuan Zong1 * , Cheng Lu1,3 , Jiateng Liu1,2
2

1
Key Laboratory of Child Development and Learning Science of Ministry of Education
School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
3
School of Information Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
{weimengting,jiangxingxun,wenming zheng,xhzongyuan,cheng.lu,jiateng liu}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

(GLMM), have produced promising experimental results,
which demonstrates that increasing ME intensity contributes
a lot to boosting MER performance (Bai, Goecke, and
Herath 2021; Li, Huang, and Zhao 2018; Le Ngo et al. 2018;
Wei et al. 2022a,b).
Generally, the magnification strategies implemented in
these methods mainly include two ways, i.e, in the image
space and in the feature space. In earlier works, when performing magnification, researchers borrow from a proven
magnification technique and apply it to generate magnified
images as the input for recognition (Yan et al. 2013; Kim,
Baddar, and Ro 2016). This strategy is implemented based
on the onset and apex frames between which there is some
displacement of pixels. A magnification technique produces
images by shifting the displacement with different extent,
controlled by setting different amplification factors. However, this strategy can not adjust the intensity information
specific to different ME instances. For example, in a ME
video, some movements are unrelated for recognition, such
as head shaking, eye blinking (Zhang et al. 2020), where
the technique may fail to distinguish adaptively, leading to
the produced images contaminated with large deformation.
Moreover, due to the inconsistency of facial movements on
different expressions, seeking appropriate amplification factors for different samples is also an intractable job.
To overcome this drawback, some recent studies (Liu,
Zheng, and Zong 2020; Wang et al. 2018) propose to achieve
magnification in the feature space, where the features can be
dynamically changed during the training stage, thus the intensity clues are more applicable to different ME instances.
In their approaches, a feature vector, considered as a representation of intensity, is extracted independently and constrainted by a loss, during the attenuation of which the network achieves intensity enhancement. Although this strategy attempts to magnify intensity tailored to MEs, it lacks
explicit interpretation on the features. Specifically, the features they extracted contain not only intensity clues, but also
facial texture clues, so it is difficult to interpret whether the
performance is improved by magnifying intensity clues or
other information. On the other hand, in the original video,
the intensity changes with a certain trend over time (Liu,
Zong, and Zheng 2022; Zong et al. 2018), while the features
may be out of order under no restrictions on its tendency. In
that case, the ME movements will be hard to encode.

Micro-Expression Recognition (MER) is challenging because the Micro-Expressions’ (ME) motion is too weak to
distinguish. This hurdle can be tackled by enhancing intensity for a more accurate acquisition of movements. However,
existing magnification strategies tend to use the features of
facial images that include not only intensity clues as intensity features, leading to the intensity representation deficient
of credibility. In addition, the intensity variation over time,
which is crucial for encoding movements, is also neglected.
To this end, we provide a reliable scheme to extract intensity
clues while considering their variation on the time scale. First,
we devise an Intensity Distillation (ID) loss to acquire the intensity clues by contrasting the difference between frames,
given that the difference in the same video lies only in the
intensity. Then, the intensity clues are calibrated to follow
the trend of the original video. Specifically, due to the lack
of truth intensity annotation of the original video, we build
the intensity tendency by setting each intensity vacancy an
uncertain value, which guides the extracted intensity clues
to converge towards this trend rather some fixed values. A
Wilcoxon rank sum test (Wrst) method is enforced to implement the calibration. Experimental results on three public ME
databases i.e. CASME II, SAMM, and SMIC-HS validate the
superiority against state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Micro-expression (ME) is a spontaneous facial expression
with many applicable contexts, e.g., health diagnosis, homeland security. Recently, an increasing number of methods
for improving Micro-Expression Recognition (MER) performance have been proposed (Yan et al. 2013; Kim, Baddar,
and Ro 2016).
Among these methods, convolutional neural networks
(CNN) have been extensively applied to extract discriminative ME features. However, a ME is localized with slight
movements and lasts only a short time, which makes it
difficult to spot and recognize. To deal with this problem,
some studies propose to magnify ME intensity to make
movements more remarkable. Many MER methods adopting magnification stratgies, e.g., Eulerian motion magnification (EMM), Global Lagrangian motion magnification
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

119

