The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

City-Scale Pollution Aware Traffic Routing
by Sampling Max Flows Using MCMC
Shreevignesh Suriyanarayanan, Praveen Paruchuri, Girish Varma
Machine Learning Lab, IIIT Hyderabad
sshreevignesh.s@research.iiit.ac.in, praveen.p@iiit.ac.in, girish.varma@iiit.ac.in

Abstract
A significant cause of air pollution in urban areas worldwide
is the high volume of road traffic. Long-term exposure to severe pollution can cause serious health issues. One approach
towards tackling this problem is to design a pollution-aware
traffic routing policy that balances multiple objectives of i)
avoiding extreme pollution in any area ii) enabling short transit times, and iii) making effective use of the road capacities.
We propose a novel sampling-based approach for this problem. We provide the first construction of a Markov Chain that
can sample integer max flow solutions of a planar graph, with
theoretical guarantees that the probabilities depend on the aggregate transit length. We designed a traffic policy using diverse samples and simulated traffic on real-world road maps
using the SUMO traffic simulator. We observe a considerable
decrease in areas with severe pollution when experimented
with maps of large cities across the world compared to other
approaches.

1

Figure 1: Pollution released on road links for traffic simulation on a large area of Seattle, USA. Colour legend given
at bottom is the percentage of the max pollution. Left is obtained using only a single flow (FFA) and right is using our
MaxFlow-MCMC which uses multiple diverse max flow solutions. As can be seen severe pollution (red, purple, black)
is prevented.

Introduction

Long-term exposure to high amounts of air pollution causes
various health issues (Pope III and Dockery 2006). Data
from WHO (World Health Organization et al. 2016) shows
that 91% of the world’s population lives in places where
the pollution levels exceed the guideline limits. Outdoor air
pollution accounts for an estimated 4.2 million deaths per
year, primarily due to stroke, heart disease, lung cancer, and
chronic respiratory diseases. Low and middle-income countries suffer the most, especially in the Western Pacific and
South-East Asia regions. Road traffic is considered one of
the most significant contributors to air pollution in urban environments (Gualtieri et al. 2015). Studies have shown that
people are willing to choose greener routes when credible
information is provided (Ahmed et al. 2020).
Kamishetty, Vadlamannati, and Paruchuri (2020) propose
the development of a transportation policy that distributes
the traffic flow more evenly through a city to reduce the concentration of pollution in specific pockets. They use the concept of k-optimality, which ensures that any two flows have
at most ≤ k edges in common, and design a traffic policy
using multiple k-optimal maximum flow solutions to route

traffic differently on different days or for reasonable timelines. Here, k-optimality is a measure (Pearce and Tambe
2007) that is used to capture distinctness between solutions
while maximum flow solutions (Ford and Fulkerson 1956)
are generated to maintain the throughput of traffic network.
However, existing work in this space can only be used for
small areas due to computational scalability issues. We build
upon this line of work to develop a significantly faster solution for pollution aware traffic routing using a Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) (Diaconis 2009; Hastings 1970; Gubernatis 2005; Bubley 2001) based method to sample integer
max flow solutions from a planar graph and generate a kOptimal set of max flow solutions (hence named MaxFlowMCMC). Our Markov chain extends the algorithm for sampling paths in planar graphs (Montanari and Penna 2015),
and we provide proof of convergence to the stationary distribution, which assigns a higher probability to max flow solutions with shorter aggregate path length.
To compare our algorithm with the previous work, we
simulated the algorithm on real-world road networks of mul-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14496

