The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Evidential Conditional Neural Processes
Deep Shankar Pandey, Qi Yu
Rochester Institute of Technology
{dp7972, qi.yu}@rit.edu

Abstract

limiting their applicability to many real-world problems.
Meanwhile, gradient-based approaches, such as MAML
(Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017), have been extended to
achieve uncertainty-aware meta-learning through Bayesian
modeling. MAML formulates meta-learning as a bi-level optimization problem that requires expensive Hessian-gradient
products during meta-learning along with other challenges
such as training stability. First order approximations and
alternatives of MAML, such as Reptile (Nichol, Achiam,
and Schulman 2018), require time consuming gradient based
adaptation during inference limiting their applications. Extending such models for uncertainty quantification (Yoon
et al. 2018) may further increase the computational costs.
Different from deep learning (DL) models, Gaussian Processes (GPs) (Williams and Rasmussen 2006) offer a principled way to quantify uncertainty. By combining Bayesian
modeling and kernel methods, a GP outputs a distribution
over functions, where the kernel serves as a fixed prior that
determines the smoothness of the functions as a specific
form of meta-knowledge.
However, GPs, in their original form, suffer from a high
computational cost for inference. Their generalization capability may also be limited due to the restricted priors induced from the fixed kernel functions, lacking the flexibility
to adapt to the training data. This also significantly hinders
GPs from being used as an effective meta-learning model,
which needs to encode the meta-knowledge learned from
other tasks in support of few-shot learning from new tasks.
The recently developed conditional neural processes
(CNPs) (Garnelo et al. 2018a), neural processes (NPs) (Garnelo et al. 2018b), and their extensions provide a suite of
effective meta-learning models, which bring together the
benefits of GP’s uncertainty capabilities and the DL models’ flexibility of adapting to the data. Besides offering better scalability, rapid inference, and competitive predictive
performance (Kim et al. 2019; Gordon et al. 2020), these
models also naturally quantify uncertainty by simulating
a stochastic process like a GP. However, the current NP
models are sensitive to the outliers in the training tasks
and lack competitive performance. Alternatively, CNP family of models achieve strong performance but only capture
the overall uncertainty for the prediction made on a target
data point. They lack a systematic fine-grained quantification of the different sources of uncertainty. Simply, CNP

The Conditional Neural Process (CNP) family of models offer a promising direction to tackle few-shot problems by
achieving better scalability and competitive predictive performance. However, the current CNP models only capture
the overall uncertainty for the prediction made on a target
data point. They lack a systematic fine-grained quantification on the distinct sources of uncertainty that are essential for model training and decision-making under the fewshot setting. We propose Evidential Conditional Neural Processes (ECNP), which replace the standard Gaussian distribution used by CNP with a much richer hierarchical Bayesian
structure through evidential learning to achieve epistemicaleatoric uncertainty decomposition. The evidential hierarchical structure also leads to a theoretically justified robustness over noisy training tasks. Theoretical analysis on the proposed ECNP establishes the relationship with CNP while offering deeper insights on the roles of the evidential parameters. Extensive experiments conducted on both synthetic and
real-world data demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
model in various few-shot settings.

Introduction
Meta-learning (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017) offers a
powerful vehicle to tackle the challenges of learning from
limited data. It formulates learning into two phases: metatraining that learns the global (meta) knowledge shared
across tasks and meta-testing that adapts the global knowledge to the limited data from few-shot testing tasks. While
meta-learning achieves improved generalization capability
by leveraging the meta-knowledge obtained from the metatraining tasks, few-shot tasks arising in the testing phase may
deviate significantly from the training tasks. Furthermore,
data in many real-world applications may be highly noisy,
incomplete, or corrupted. These, when coupled with the
weakly supervised signal from limited training data, make
few-shot learning inherently uncertain and challenging.
Among existing meta-learning models, metric-based approaches (Vinyals et al. 2016; Snell, Swersky, and Zemel
2017; Chen et al. 2021) have achieved high predictive accuracy for few-shot classification problems. However, most
metric-based models are not designed to output uncertainty,
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9389

