The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Accelerating the Training of Video Super-resolution Models
Lijian Lin, Xintao Wang* , Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
ljlin@stu.xmu.edu.cn, xintao.alpha@gmail.com, {zhongangqi, yingsshan}@tencent.com

Abstract
Despite that convolution neural networks (CNN) have recently demonstrated high-quality reconstruction for video
super-resolution (VSR), efficiently training competitive VSR
models remains a challenging problem. It usually takes an order of magnitude more time than training their counterpart
image models, leading to long research cycles. Existing VSR
methods typically train models with fixed spatial and temporal sizes from beginning to end. The fixed sizes are usually
set to large values for good performance, resulting to slow
training. However, is such a rigid training strategy necessary
for VSR? In this work, we show that it is possible to gradually train video models from small to large spatial/temporal
sizes, i.e., in an easy-to-hard manner. In particular, the whole
training is divided into several stages and the earlier stage has
smaller training spatial shape. Inside each stage, the temporal size also varies from short to long while the spatial size
remains unchanged. Training is accelerated by such a multigrid training strategy, as most of computation is performed on
smaller spatial and shorter temporal shapes. For further acceleration with GPU parallelization, we also investigate the large
minibatch training without the loss in accuracy. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method is capable of largely
speeding up training (up to 6.2× speedup in wall-clock training time) without performance drop for various VSR models.

Figure 1: Wall-clock training time speedup and performance
comparisons on REDS4 with the BasicVSR-M model. Our
method significantly accelerates training (i.e., 6.2×) while
maintaining baseline accuracy (30.90 vs. 30.91).

Whereas, training on small sizes is relatively easier and
faster, but less accurate. It is a natural idea to gradually train
VSR models from small to large spatial/temporal sizes, i.e.,
in an easy-to-hard manner. Specifically, in the early stage
of training, the VSR models can be trained with small spatial and temporal sizes, which are relatively easier to learn.
When the models perform well on small sizes, we then gradually enlarge the spatial and temporal shapes, making the
models focus on reconstructing finer details. Such a learning strategy imitates the way we learn new skills, starting
from learning the simple tasks, and then gradually learning
the complex and challenging ones. In such a way, the training time is largely reduced, as most of computation is performed on small spatial and short temporal shapes.
Directly applying the above easy-to-hard training strategy
to VSR models leads to inferior performance. The reasons
are two-fold. Firstly, the spatial and temporal dimensions in
videos are highly correlated. Changing the spatial size will
affect the learning on the temporal dimension, and altering
temporal size affects that of spatial. Thus, simultaneously
varying the spatial and temporal sizes from small to large
is not optimal. Secondly, the learning rate in VSR models
usually starts at a large value and then gradually decays to a
small one. With such a learning rate scheduler, the learning
rate is relatively small when the spatial and temporal sizes

Introduction
Video super resolution (VSR) (Kappeler et al. 2016; Liu
et al. 2020; Chan et al. 2021b; Liang et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2021, 2019; Tian et al. 2020) aims to recover a highresolution (HR) video from a low-resolution (LR) input,
which has gained increasing attention in computer vision
community. However, training VSR models is much slower
than training image SR models due to the additional temporal dimension. The slow training leads to long research
cycles, which impedes the development of VSR models.
Existing VSR models (Wang et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2021;
Zhu et al. 2019; Yan, Lin, and Tan 2019; Chan et al. 2021a)
are typically trained with fixed spatial and temporal sizes.
The sizes are usually set to large values to achieve good performance. Larger sizes require the models to process more
spatial and temporal information, which is time-consuming.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1595

