The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multi-Stage Facility Location Problems with Transient Agents
Xuezhen Wang1 , Vincent Chau2* , Hau Chan3 , Ken C.K. Fong4 * , Minming Li1
1

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, HKSAR China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, USA
4
Department of Computing and Decision Sciences, Lingnan University, HKSAR China
xuezhenwang2@gmail.com, vincentchau@seu.edu.cn, hchan3@unl.edu, kenfong@ln.edu.hk, minming.li@cityu.edu.hk
Abstract

ural first-come-first-serve (FCFS) ordering, i.e., an agent can
be served after all agents arriving in earlier stages are served.
Many real-world scenarios can be modeled using the
MSFLP-TA. For instance, consider the motivating example
for the no-moving-cost (NMC) model where we have a residential street and the government aims to find a place each
stage (e.g., few hours or days) to set up a COVID-19 testing site for residents who are at high risk of being infected
(Peto 2020). Naturally, residents want to visit the testing site
at different time from different locations. Because the government wants to test all the individuals timely (i.e., within
some period or tolerance rate) without overcrowding the
testing site, it needs to decide when/where the agents should
visit the testing site given the resident preference while optimizing some social objectives, e.g., minimizing the social
cost and maximum cost, associated with the travel distances
of individuals to the testing site across the stages. In this scenario, the government may choose to serve the individuals in
an FCFS fashion to ensure some form of fairness.
Alternatively, consider another motivating example for
the with-moving-cost (WMC) model (De Keijzer and Wojtczak 2018) where some customers on a line are trying to
buy snacks from a vendor. In their scenario, the vendor and
the same set of customers move around in each stage and the
vendor needs to serve all customers at every stage. Differently, in our model, the vendor can move to a different location at each stage to serve the customers, whereas customers
stay at the same place for a certain period (i.e., tolerance
rate) upon arrival and different customers dynamically enter
the system. The goal for the vendor is to serve all the customers once (possibly in FCFS ordering) before they leave
and minimize some social objectives.
We study each model and its FCFS variant from the algorithmic and mechanism design perspectives. From the algorithmic perspective, all of the information about agents are
publicly known. We are interested in minimizing the social
cost and the maximum cost, which are the total travel cost
(plus the facility’s moving costs in the WMC model) and the
maximum cost of the agents to the facilities across stages, respectively. From the mechanism design perspective, agents’
locations and arrival stages are private. Our goal is to design
group strategy-proof mechanisms such that there is no joint
deviation of agents to jointly misreport their private information such that all of them can gain.

We study various models for the one-dimensional multi-stage
facility location problems with transient agents, where a transient agent arrives in some stage and stays for a number of
consecutive stages. In the problems, we need to serve each
agent in one of their stages by determining the location of the
facility at each stage. In the first model, we assume there is
no cost for moving the facility across the stages. We focus on
optimal algorithms to minimize both the social cost objective,
defined as the total distance of all agents to the facility over
all stages, and the maximum cost objective, defined as the
max distance of any agent to the facility over all stages. For
each objective, we give a slice-wise polynomial (XP) algorithm (i.e., solvable in mf (k) for some fixed parameter k and
computable function f , where m is the input size) and show
that there is a polynomial-time algorithm when a natural firstcome-first-serve (FCFS) order of agent serving is enforced.
We then consider the mechanism design problem, when the
agents’ locations and arrival stages are private, and design a
group strategy-proof mechanism that achieves good approximation ratios for both objectives and settings with and without FCFS ordering. In the second model, we consider the facility’s moving cost between adjacent stages under the social
cost objective, which accounts for the total moving distance
of the facility. Correspondingly, we design XP (and polynomial time) algorithms and a group strategy-proof mechanism
for settings with or without the FCFS ordering.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the Multi-Stage Facility Location
Problems with Transient Agents (MSFLP-TA). In the basic
setting, we have a set of agents arriving at different stages
with a tolerance rate that indicates at most how many stages
an agent can stay for before departure. A facility is reallocated at every stage to serve some of the (existing) agents
such that all agents are served eventually, i.e., no agent will
leave without being served. We consider two different models of the MSFLP-TA based on whether there is a moving
cost of the facility between adjacent stages. As agents appear at different positions across stages, we also study the
variants where agents should be served according to the nat* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5850

