The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Superpoint Transformer for 3D Scene Instance Segmentation
Jiahao Sun1 , Chunmei Qing1 * , Junpeng Tan1 , Xiangmin Xu2 ,
1

School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
2
School of Future Technology, South China University of Technology, China
eesjh@mail.scut.edu.cn, qchm@scut.edu.cn, tjeepscut@gmail.com, xmxu@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Most existing methods realize 3D instance segmentation by
extending those models used for 3D object detection or 3D
semantic segmentation. However, these non-straightforward
methods suffer from two drawbacks: 1) Imprecise bounding
boxes or unsatisfactory semantic predictions limit the performance of the overall 3D instance segmentation framework.
2) Existing methods require a time-consuming intermediate
step of aggregation. To address these issues, this paper proposes a novel end-to-end 3D instance segmentation method
based on Superpoint Transformer, named as SPFormer. It
groups potential features from point clouds into superpoints,
and directly predicts instances through query vectors without relying on the results of object detection or semantic segmentation. The key step in this framework is a novel query
decoder with transformers that can capture the instance information through the superpoint cross-attention mechanism
and generate the superpoint masks of the instances. Through
bipartite matching based on superpoint masks, SPFormer can
implement the network training without the intermediate aggregation step, which accelerates the network. Extensive experiments on ScanNetv2 and S3DIS benchmarks verify that
our method is concise yet efficient. Notably, SPFormer exceeds compared state-of-the-art methods by 4.3% on ScanNetv2 hidden test set in terms of mAP and keeps fast inference speed (247ms per frame) simultaneously. Code is available at https://github.com/sunjiahao1999/SPFormer.

1

(a) Input Point Cloud

(b) Proposal-based

(c) Grouping-based

(d) Ours

Figure 1: Key process of different methods. (a) is an input
point cloud. (b) Proposal-based methods detect objects first.
(c) Grouping-based methods offset points to their own instance center and group points. (d) Our method highlights
the region of interest by superpoint cross-attention.

as shown in Fig. 1(b), and then predict instance masks in the
proposed region. These methods are encouraged by the big
success of Mask-RCNN (He et al. 2017) on 2D instance segmentation fields. However, these methods struggle on point
clouds due to domain gaps. In 3D fields, bounding box has
more degree of freedom (DoF) increasing the difficulty of
fitting. Moreover, points usually only exist on parts of object surface, which causes object geometric centers to be not
detectable. Besides, low-quality region proposals affect boxbased bipartite matching (Yang et al. 2019) and further degrade model performance.
On the contrary, grouping-based methods adopt a bottomup pipeline. They learn point-wise semantic labels and instance center offsets. Then they use the offsetted points and
semantic predictions to aggregate into instances, as shown in
Fig. 1(c). Over the past two years, grouping-based methods
have achieved great improvements in 3D instance segmentation task (Liang et al. 2021; Vu et al. 2022). However, there
also are several shortcomings: (1) grouping-based methods
depend on their semantic segmentation results, which might
lead to wrong predictions. Propagating these wrong predic-

Introduction

3D scene understanding regards as a fundamental ingredient
for many applications, including augmented/virtual reality
(Park et al. 2020), autonomous driving (Zhou et al. 2020),
and robotics navigation (Xie et al. 2021). Generally, instance
segmentation is a challenging task in 3D scene understanding, which aims to not only detect instances on sparse point
clouds but also give a clear mask for each instance.
Existing state-of-the-art methods can be divided into
proposal-based (Yang et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020) and
grouping-based (Jiang et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021; Liang
et al. 2021; Vu et al. 2022). Proposal-based methods consider 3D instance segmentation as a top-down pipeline.
They firstly generate region proposals (i.e. bounding box),
* Corresponding author: Chunmei Qing
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2393

