The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Weakly-Supervised Camouflaged Object Detection with Scribble Annotations
Ruozhen He* , Qihua Dong* , Jiaying Lin† , Rynson W.H. Lau†
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{ruozhenhe2-c, qihuadong2-c, jiayinlin5-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, Rynson.Lau@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Existing camouflaged object detection (COD) methods rely
heavily on large-scale datasets with pixel-wise annotations.
However, due to the ambiguous boundary, annotating camouflage objects pixel-wisely is very time-consuming and laborintensive, taking ∼60mins to label one image. In this paper,
we propose the first weakly-supervised COD method, using
scribble annotations as supervision. To achieve this, we first
relabel 4,040 images in existing camouflaged object datasets
with scribbles, which takes ∼10s to label one image. As
scribble annotations only describe the primary structure of
objects without details, for the network to learn to localize
the boundaries of camouflaged objects, we propose a novel
consistency loss composed of two parts: a cross-view loss
to attain reliable consistency over different images, and an
inside-view loss to maintain consistency inside a single prediction map. Besides, we observe that humans use semantic
information to segment regions near the boundaries of camouflaged objects. Hence, we further propose a feature-guided
loss, which includes visual features directly extracted from
images and semantically significant features captured by the
model. Finally, we propose a novel network for COD via
scribble learning on structural information and semantic relations. Our network has two novel modules: the local-context
contrasted (LCC) module, which mimics visual inhibition to
enhance image contrast/sharpness and expand the scribbles
into potential camouflaged regions, and the logical semantic
relation (LSR) module, which analyzes the semantic relation
to determine the regions representing the camouflaged object.
Experimental results show that our model outperforms relevant SOTA methods on three COD benchmarks with an average improvement of 11.0% on MAE, 3.2% on S-measure,
2.5% on E-measure, and 4.4% on weighted F-measure.

Input

GT (pixel-wise)

Scribble

ZoomNet

UGTR

Ours

Figure 1: Scribbles only indicate the primary structure of
objects (cyan for background, red for foreground). Our
method exploits this property to effectively learn rich semantic and structural information from the sparse labels.
In some cases, it performs even better than fully-supervised
models (Youwei et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2021).
tasks. Drawing increasing attention from the computer vision community, COD have numerous promising applications, including species discovery (Pérez-de la Fuente et al.
2012), medical image segmentation (like polyp segmentation with indistinguishable lesions) (Fan et al. 2020c,b), and
animal-search (Fan et al. 2021).
Although COD methods have already achieved excellent performances, they rely heavily on pixel-wise annotations of large-scale datasets. There are two main weaknesses
of pixel-wise annotations. First, they are time-consuming.
It takes ∼60 minutes to annotate one image (Fan et al.
2020a), which makes it very laborious to construct largescale datasets. In contrast, according to our experience,
scribble annotation only costs ∼10 seconds, which is 360
times faster than pixel-wise annotation. Second, pixel-wise
annotation assigns equal significance to each object pixel,
which may cause the model to fail in learning primary structures, as shown in the second row of Figure 1. To address
these problems, we propose the first scribble-based COD
dataset, named S-COD. It contains 3,040 images from the
training set of COD10K (Fan et al. 2020a) and 1,000 images
from the training set of CAMO (Le et al. 2019). Annotators are asked to scribble the primary structure according
to their first impressions without knowing the ground-truth.

Introduction
Camouflaged object detection (COD) aims to detect visually
inconspicuous objects in their surroundings, which includes
natural objects with protective coloring, small sizes, occlusion, and artificial objects with information hiding purposes.
Ambiguous boundaries between objects and backgrounds
make it a more challenging task than other object detection
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors: Jiaying Lin and Rynson W.H. Lau
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

781

