The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Flexible 3D Lane Detection by Hierarchical Shape Matching
Zhihao Guan1 , Ruixin Liu1 , Zejian Yuan1 ,
Ao Liu , Kun Tang2 , Tong Zhou2 , Erlong Li2 , Chao Zheng2 , Shuqi Mei2
2

1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
T Lab, Tencent Map, Tencent, China
{duduguan,sweetylrx}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, yuan.ze.jian@xjtu.edu.cn,
{allliu, kyriezhou, kunntang, erlongli, chrisczheng, shawnmei}@tencent.com
Abstract

cloud data. Point cloud is not only insensitive to illumination conditions, it can also preserve the accuracy of 3D information of lanes even in a very long distance. Moreover, its
privacy-free feature is also a necessity for actual uses. Following all methods extracting lane lines from point cloud
that we know, we structure the point cloud in a Bird’s-eyeview (BEV) and regard encoded BEV feature maps as input.
Existing methods function in a segmentation manner
which needs cumbersome clustering processes(Ma et al.
2020), or focuses on global information by predicting parametric lanes while ignoring local errors(Liu et al. 2021b), or
some others based on preset anchors while losing the flexibility of predictions(Tabelini et al. 2021a). In this paper, we
propose an end-to-end framework with hierarchical outputs,
to fully combine both the advantages of top-down manner
which can collect all the global clues indicating instance information, and the strength of bottom-up manner that focuses on modeling local geometry and predicting accurate
positions, to predict each lane as a sequence of points, providing more flexibility for detection results.
Specifically, in the global parametric curve branch, a
Transformer structure is used to get a 3D parametric description for each lane. Notably, we propose a new representation
for each curve based on the local adaptive reference axis,
which incorporates the position of lane terminals, and represents the curve w.r.t its own reference axis to help the network fit better on complex scenes like oblique and curved
lanes and hard topologies. Given the shape and instance information predicted from the global branch, dynamic anchor
cells are generated along the lane and the corresponding
cropped features are fed to the local branch for more precise and flexible predictions.
In the local shape prediction branch, we detect line segment structure inside each anchor cell and use the center
point of each as the final result, instead of directly detecting
the specific lane center point inside every anchor. In addition, we optimize it by matching the ground truth Gaussian
distribution along each lane segment, instead of regressing
the segment parameters directly, introducing more explicit
contextual information into account to shrink the searching
space and optimize all the parameters simultaneously. Moreover, the positional relationships among predictions in different cells are also constrained, improving the smoothness
of outputs. Notably, local predictions in dynamic anchor

As one of the basic while vital technologies for HD map construction, 3D lane detection is still an open problem due to
varying visual conditions, complex typologies, and strict demands for precision. In this paper, an end-to-end flexible and
hierarchical lane detector is proposed to precisely predict 3D
lane lines from point clouds. Specifically, we design a hierarchical network predicting flexible representations of lane
shapes at different levels, simultaneously collecting global
instance semantics and avoiding local errors. In the global
scope, we propose to regress parametric curves w.r.t adaptive axes that help to make more robust predictions towards
complex scenes, while in the local vision the structure of
lane segment is detected in each of the dynamic anchor cells
sampled along the global predicted curves. Moreover, corresponding global and local shape matching losses and anchor
cell generation strategies are designed. Experiments on two
datasets show that we overwhelm current top methods under
high precision standards, and full ablation studies also verify each part of our method. Our codes will be released at
https://github.com/Doo-do/FHLD.

Introduction
While advanced driver-assistance system (ADAS) entering
the lives of millions, one of its supporting tasks, centimeterlevel lane detection for high-definition(HD) map construction is still limited by many challenges. First, diverse difficult visual conditions. The visual clue is not always clear
in real driving scenes due to occlusions or severe illumination conditions. Second, complex typologies. The multifarious combination of varying numbers and directions of lanes,
along with merges and splits make the discrimination of lane
instances beset with difficulties. Moreover, more strict precision is needed. Widely used evaluation metrics like TuSimple’s are too permissive to errors in local offset(Tabelini
et al. 2021b), and thus methods with higher precision are
still needed for accurate uses like HD map construction.
Over the past decades, most researchers carry out lane
detection with front-view images as input. Limited by the
physical characteristics of RGB optical sensors, it cannot
deal with poor illumination well. These years, more and
more attention has been paid to lane detection with point
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

694

