The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Background-Mixed Augmentation for Weakly Supervised Change Detection
Rui Huang1 , Ruofei Wang1 , Qing Guo2 * , Jieda Wei1 , Yuxiang Zhang1 , Wei Fan1 , Yang Liu3,4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Civil Aviation University of China, China
2
Center for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore
3
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, China
4
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{rhuang, yxzhang, wfan}@cauc.edu.cn, {rf wang, jdwei1}@yeah.net, tsingqguo@ieee.org, yangliu@ntu.edu.sg
F1=0.2049

Abstract
Change detection (CD) is to decouple object changes (i.e., object missing or appearing) from background changes (i.e., environment variations) like light and season variations in two
images captured in the same scene over a long time span,
presenting critical applications in disaster management, urban development, etc. In particular, the endless patterns of
background changes require detectors to have a high generalization against unseen environment variations, making this
task significantly challenging. Recent deep learning-based
methods develop novel network architectures or optimization
strategies with paired-training examples, which do not handle the generalization issue explicitly and require huge manual pixel-level annotation efforts. In this work, for the first attempt in the CD community, we study the generalization issue
of CD from the perspective of data augmentation and develop
a novel weakly supervised training algorithm that only needs
image-level labels. Different from general augmentation techniques for classification, we propose the background-mixed
augmentation that is specifically designed for change detection by augmenting examples under the guidance of a set
of background changing images and letting deep CD models
see diverse environment variations. Moreover, we propose the
augmented & real data consistency loss that encourages the
generalization increase significantly. Our method as a general framework can enhance a wide range of existing deep
learning-based detectors. We conduct extensive experiments
in two public datasets and enhance four state-of-the-art methods, demonstrating the advantages of our method. We release
the code at https://github.com/tsingqguo/bgmix.

F1=0.2934

F1=0.0079

AFA

FCD

WCDNet

F1=0.7605

F1=0.7194

F1=0.4981

BGMix-AFA

BGMix-FCD

BGMix-WCDNet

F1

AICD

BCD

Figure 1: Comparison of three SOTA methods with/without our BGMix. Clearly, BGMix improves the three methods with significant F1 increases on both AICD and BCD
datasets, presenting more accurate segmentation results.

Change detection is still challenging and far from realworld applications due to the complex and unknown environment variations. For example, in Fig. 1, there exist various differences on the lawn (e.g., color and density differences) between two images, which should be identified
as background changes and not be segmented. Nevertheless, the state-of-the-art (SOTA) method WCDNet (Andermatt and Timofte 2021) focuses on the lawn variations while
missing the desired object changes (i.e., the disappearance
of a building). Other environment variations like season and
illumination variations cause similar issues. The endless patterns of background changes require detectors to have a high
generalization against unseen environment variations.
In recent years, a series of network architectures are designed with convolutional (Zhang et al. 2021; Zheng et al.
2021) and transformer layers (Hao Chen and Shi 2021; Ban-

Introduction
Change detection (CD) is to segment object changes (i.e.,
object missing or appearing) from background changes (i.e.,
environment variations) like light and season variations in
two images captured in the same scene with a long time span
(See examples shown in Fig. 1), presenting critical applications in the disaster management (Sublime and Kalinicheva
2019), urban development (Lee et al. 2021), resource monitoring, and utilization (Ye et al. 2021), and visual surveillance (Goyette et al. 2012), etc.
* Qing Guo is the corresponding author: tsingqguo@ieee.org.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7919

