The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multiagent MST Cover: Pleasing All Optimally via a Simple Voting Rule
Bo Li 1 , Xiaowei Wu 2 , Chenyang Xu 3,4 * , Ruilong Zhang 5
1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
IOTSC, University of Macau
3
Software Engineering Institute, East China Normal University
4
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
5
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
comp-bo.li@polyu.edu.hk, xiaoweiwu@um.edu.mo, xcy1995@zju.edu.cn, ruilzhang4-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

mally, we are interested in the following optimization problem: Given a graph where different agents may have different weight functions on the edges, how can we select a minimum number of edges so that the induced subgraph contains
at least one MST of the original graph for every agent.

Given a connected graph on whose edges we can build roads
to connect the nodes, a number of agents hold possibly different perspectives on which edges should be selected by assigning different edge weights. Our task is to build a minimum
number of roads so that every agent has a spanning tree in the
built subgraph whose weight is the same as a minimum spanning tree in the original graph. We first show that this problem
is NP-hard and does not admit better than ((1 − o(1)) ln k)approximation polynomial-time algorithms unless P = NP,
where k is the number of agents. We then give a simple voting algorithm with an optimal approximation ratio. Moreover,
our algorithm only needs to access the agents’ rankings on the
edges. Finally, we extend our results to submodular objective
functions and Matroid rank constraints.

1

Our problem is closely related to the multiple objective minimum spanning tree (MOST) problem, whose goal
is to select a spanning tree T in the graph to minimize
(g1 (T ), . . . , gk (T )), where each gi (·) represents a different weight function. Various multi-dimensional optimality
concepts have been investigated in the literature (Hassin
and Levin 2004; Hong, Chung, and Park 2004; Majumder
et al. 2022; Ruzika and Hamacher 2009), among which two
of the most popular ones are min-sum (Correia, Paquete,
and Figueira 2021; Fernandes et al. 2019) and min-max
(Darmann, Klamler, and Pferschy 2009; Escoffier, Gourvès,
and Monnot
2013), i.e., finding a spanning tree T to minP
imize i∈[k] gi (T ) or maxi∈[k] gi (T ). Although computing a minimum spanning tree in the single-objective setting
is polynomial-time solvable, it appears to be NP-hard for
both multi-dimensional optimality concepts. Similar problems are also studied in computation social choice, where
the objective is to find one spanning tree such that the satisfaction of the least satisfied agent gets maximized under
different “satisfaction” notions (Darmann 2016; Darmann,
Klamler, and Pferschy 2009; Escoffier, Gourvès, and Monnot 2013; Gourvès, Monnot, and Tlilane 2015). The key difference between the existing research and our work is that
we are not targeting a spanning tree; instead, we are allowed
to select a spanning subgraph and aim to please all agents
with a minimum number of edges.

Introduction

Minimum spanning tree (MST) is one of the most fundamental problems in graph theory, whose objective is to find
a subgraph in a given graph to span all the nodes with minimum total weight. It finds wide applications in computer
science, among which a typical scenario is network construction, such as fiber optic network design (Bachhiesl et al.
2002), highway system design (Ahuja, Magnanti, and Orlin
1993), FIR filter implementation (Ohlsson, Gustafsson, and
Wanhammar 2004), and so on. The problem becomes trickier when the system interacts with multiple heterogeneous
entities who hold possibly different perspectives on measuring the weights of the edges in the graph. For example, when
a government is planning the traffic in a city, many bureaus,
such as water resources, communications, construction, finance, and information industry, are involved, but they may
have different concerns and thus hold different opinions on
which roads should be built. Since there may not exist one
MST that satisfies all bureaus, we focus on the minimum
cost maximum social welfare problem by building the minimum number of roads so that all bureaus are satisfied. For-

Regardless of which multi-dimensional optimality concept is adopted, targeting a spanning tree may lead to extremely bad situations for some agents. We show an example in Fig. 1, where ∞ denotes a large constant. There
are two agents. The unique MST of agent 1 and agent
2 is { (a, b), (a, c), (c, d) } and { (a, b), (a, d), (c, d) }, respectively. If we restrict any feasible solution to be a
spanning tree, no matter which spanning tree we select,
there will always be half of the agents that dislike it very
much. For example, the selected spanning tree is T =
{ (a, b), (a, d), (c, d) } in the figure. Then agent 1 is de-

* All authors (ordered alphabetically) have equal contributions
and are corresponding authors. The work was done when Chenyang
Xu was a student at Zhejiang University and Ruilong Zhang visited
University of Macau.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5730

