The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fault-Tolerant Offline Multi-Agent Path Planning
Keisuke Okumura1 , Sébastien Tixeuil2
1

2

Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan
Sorbonne University, CNRS, LIP6, Institut Universitaire de France, France
okumura.k@coord.c.titech.ac.jp, Sebastien.Tixeuil@lip6.fr

Abstract

detect crashes through local observations and then switch
their executing path on the fly, based on this observation.
Our objective is to find a set of paths and their switching
rules for each agent, such that correct agents can reach their
destinations regardless of crash patterns. We refer to the corresponding offline planning problem as MAPP with Crash
Faults (MAPPCF).
Throughout the paper, we rely on local observations
(rather than global observations) that permit to immediately
detect a crash if it occurs on a neighboring location. Therefore, significantly different from conventional MAPP studies, the challenge is to design a safe planning methodology
that avoids collisions and deadlocks, under the assumption
that agents behave following their plan, and their own observed information about other agents’ crashes.
The contributions of this paper are twofold:

We study a novel graph path planning problem for multiple agents that may crash at runtime, and block part of
the workspace. In our setting, agents can detect neighboring
crashed agents, and change followed paths at runtime. The
objective is then to prepare a set of paths and switching rules
for each agent, ensuring that all correct agents reach their destinations without collisions or deadlocks, despite unforeseen
crashes of other agents. Such planning is attractive to build
reliable multi-robot systems. We present problem formalization, theoretical analysis such as computational complexities,
and how to solve this offline planning problem.

1

Introduction

Building robust and resilient multi-robot systems is an
emerging and important topic (Prorok et al. 2021), since
those systems are expected to be infrastructures of logistics or product lines, as seen in fleet operations in automated
warehouses (Wurman, D’Andrea, and Mountz 2008). One
fundamental problem in multi-robot systems is multi-agent
path planning (MAPP), which assigns a collision/deadlockfree path to each agent. Therefore, designing robust and resilient approaches to MAPP is a critical component to realize
reliable multi-robot systems.
Robot faults are not rare in practice due to sensor/motor errors, battery consumption, or other unexpected events.
Here, “faults” are beyond delays of robot motions as studied in the MAPP literature (Atzmon et al. 2020; Shahar
et al. 2021; Okumura et al. 2022). Rather, we consider
them as critical events, e.g., agents forever stop their motions due to crashes, or, misbehave from the planning. Then,
fault-tolerant properties are essential for building reliable
multi-robot systems, especially in lifelong scenarios involving a large number of robots. Nevertheless, the cutting-edge
MAPP studies largely overlook this aspect and assume that
agents perfectly follow the offline planning that is prepared
without any fault.
To this end, as the first step of fault-tolerant MAPP, we
study an MAPP problem where agents may unexpectedly
crash at runtime. The crashed agents then forever block part
of the workspace. Correct agents (i.e., non-crashed ones) can

We formalize and analyze MAPPCF. Our formalization includes the conventional synchronous execution model
of multi-agent pathfinding (MAPF) (Stern et al. 2019)
where all agents take actions simultaneously, as well as
the recently proposed asynchronous execution model called
OTIMAPP (Okumura et al. 2022). In our model, agents can
switch executing paths on the fly according to local observation results. The observation is done using a failure detector,
a black box function that tells an agent whether an adjacent
location is occupied by a crashed agent, occupied by a correct agent, or vacant. We consider anonymous and named
failure detectors; the former cannot identify a crashed agent
(only a crashed location). After characterizing relationships
between execution model and failure detector variants, we
analyze the computational complexities of MAPPCF. Our
main results are that finding a solution is NP-hard, and verifying a solution is co-NP-complete.
We propose a methodology to solve MAPPCF. The proposed method, decoupled crash faults resolution framework
(DCRF), resolves the effects of crashes one by one by
preparing backup paths. We evaluate DCRF with named failure detectors in grid environments and observe that DCRF
can address more problem instances compared to computing a set of vertex disjoint paths, i.e., a trivially fault-tolerant
approach since correct agents can reach their destinations
regardless of crash patterns. We further observe that the difficulty of finding solutions stems both from the problem in-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11647

