The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

TopicFM: Robust and Interpretable Topic-Assisted Feature Matching
Khang Truong Giang1 , Soohwan Song2 * , Sungho Jo1 *
1

2

School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea
Intelligent Robotics Research Division, ETRI, Daejeon 34129, Republic of Korea
khangtg@kaist.ac.kr, soohwansong@etri.re.kr, shjo@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
This study addresses an image-matching problem in challenging cases, such as large scene variations or textureless
scenes. To gain robustness to such situations, most previous
studies have attempted to encode the global contexts of a
scene via graph neural networks or transformers. However,
these contexts do not explicitly represent high-level contextual information, such as structural shapes or semantic instances; therefore, the encoded features are still not sufficiently discriminative in challenging scenes. We propose a
novel image-matching method that applies a topic-modeling
strategy to encode high-level contexts in images. The proposed method trains latent semantic instances called topics.
It explicitly models an image as a multinomial distribution of
topics, and then performs probabilistic feature matching. This
approach improves the robustness of matching by focusing on
the same semantic areas between the images. In addition, the
inferred topics provide interpretability for matching the results, making our method explainable. Extensive experiments
on outdoor and indoor datasets show that our method outperforms other state-of-the-art methods, particularly in challenging cases.

Figure 1: The main idea of our human-friendly topicassisted feature matching, TopicFM. This method represents
an image as a set of topics marked in different colors and
quickly recognizes the same structures between an image
pair. It then leverages the distinctive information of each
topic to augment the pixel-level representation. As shown in
the comparing illustrations above, TopicFM provides robust
and accurate matching results, even for challenging scenes
with large illumination and viewpoint variations.

Introduction
Image matching is a long-standing problem in computer vision. It aims to find pixel-to-pixel correspondences across
two or more images. Conventional image matching methods
(Lowe 2004; Bay et al. 2008; Sattler, Leibe, and Kobbelt
2012) usually involve the following steps: i) local feature detection, ii) feature description, iii) matching, and iv) outlier
rejection. These methods usually involve extracting sparse
handcrafted local features (i.e., SIFT (Lowe 2004), SURF
(Bay et al. 2008), or ORB (Rublee et al. 2011)) and matching them using a nearest neighbor search. Many recent studies have adopted convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to
extract local features, which significantly outperform the
conventional handcrafted features. However, such methods
sometimes fail in challenging cases, such as illumination
variations, repetitive structures, or low-texture conditions.
To address this issue, detector-free methods (Li et al.
2020; Rocco et al. 2018) have been proposed. These methods estimate dense feature maps without feature detection

and perform pixel-wise dense matching. Furthermore, a
coarse-to-fine strategy has been applied to improve the computational efficiency. The strategy finds matches at a coarse
level, and then refines the matches at a finer level. Such
methods (Sun et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022) produce a large
number of matches, even for repetitive patterns and textureless scenes, thus achieving state-of-the-art performance.
However, detector-free methods still have some factors
that degrade the matching performance. First, these methods cannot adequately incorporate the global context of a
scene for feature matching. Several methods have attempted
to implicitly capture global contextual information via transformers (Sun et al. 2021; Jiang et al. 2021) or patch-level
matches (Zhou, Sattler, and Leal-Taixe 2021), but higherlevel contexts, such as semantic instances, should be effectively exploited to learn robust representations. Second, they
exhaustively search for all features of the entire image area.
Therefore, their matching performance is considerably low
when there are limited covisible regions between images. Finally, these methods require intensive computation of dense
matching, which increases runtime. Therefore, a more ef-

* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2447

