The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Temporal Knowledge Graph Reasoning with Historical Contrastive Learning
Yi Xu, Junjie Ou, Hui Xu, Luoyi Fu*
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{yixu98, j michael, xhui 1, yiluofu}@sjtu.edu.cn

te

nsu
lt
Visit

ea t
ak en Prai
M tem
se
sta

t-2

t-1

go

tia
Ne

Co

Ne

go

ot
N

e

ia
t

e

ciz

tia

te

got

Ne

ise

Praise

Cooperate
iti

Pra

Cr

Visit

Temporal knowledge graph, serving as an effective way
to store and model dynamic relations, shows promising
prospects in event forecasting. However, most temporal
knowledge graph reasoning methods are highly dependent on
the recurrence or periodicity of events, which brings challenges to inferring future events related to entities that lack
historical interaction. In fact, the current moment is often the
combined effect of a small part of historical information and
those unobserved underlying factors. To this end, we propose a new event forecasting model called Contrastive Event
Network (CENET), based on a novel training framework of
historical contrastive learning. CENET learns both the historical and non-historical dependency to distinguish the most
potential entities that can best match the given query. Simultaneously, it trains representations of queries to investigate
whether the current moment depends more on historical or
non-historical events by launching contrastive learning. The
representations further help train a binary classifier whose
output is a boolean mask to indicate related entities in the
search space. During the inference process, CENET employs
a mask-based strategy to generate the final results. We evaluate our proposed model on five benchmark graphs. The results
demonstrate that CENET significantly outperforms all existing methods in most metrics, achieving at least 8.3% relative
improvement of Hits@1 over previous state-of-the-art baselines on event-based datasets.

1

te

a
oti

g
Ne

eg

Abstract

iate

time

t

(a) An example of TKG with three snapshots.

Historical Events

Query

Negotiate

Negotiate

Tip of The Iceberg
Negotiate
t-2

t-1

Negotiate

t+1

?

t

time
Negotiate

Non-historical Entities

Answer

(b) Challenges of existing methods.

Figure 1: An example of TKG and challenges of existing
methods.

extended from a triple (s, p, o) to a quadruple with a timestamp t, i.e., (s, p, o, t). As a result, a TKG consists of multiple snapshots, and the facts in the same snapshot co-occur.
Figure 1 (a) shows an example of TKG consisting of a series of international political events, where some events may
occur repeatedly, and new events will also emerge.
TKGs provide new perspectives and insights for many
downstream applications, e.g., policymaking (Deng, Rangwala, and Ning 2020), stock prediction (Feng et al. 2019),
and dialogue systems (Jia et al. 2018), thus triggering intense interests in TKG reasoning. In this work, we focus on
forecasting events (facts) in the future on TKGs, which is
also called graph extrapolation. Our goal is to predict the
missing entities of queries like (s, p, ?, t) for a future timestamp t that has not been observed in the training set.
Many efforts (Garcia-Duran, Dumančić, and Niepert
2018; Jin et al. 2020) have been made toward modeling
the structural and temporal characteristics of TKGs for future event prediction. Some mainstream examples (Jin et al.
2020; Li et al. 2021b) make reference to known events in history, which can easily predict repetitive or periodic events.

Introduction

Knowledge Graphs (KGs), serving as the collections of human knowledge, have revealed promising expectations in
the field of natural language processing (Sun et al. 2020;
Wang et al. 2021), recommendation system (Wang et al.
2019), and information retrieval (Liu et al. 2018), etc. A traditional KG is usually a static knowledge base that uses a
graph-structured data topology to integrate facts (also called
events) in the form of triples (s, p, o), where s and o denote
subject and object entities respectively, and p as a relation
type means predicate. In the real world, knowledge evolves
continuously, inspiring the construction and application of
the Temporal Knowledge Graphs (TKGs), where the fact has
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4765

