The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Tensor Compressive Sensing Fused Low-Rankness and Local-Smoothness
Xinling Liu1,2 , Jingyao Hou2 , Jiangjun Peng3 , Hailin Wang3 , Deyu Meng3,4∗ , Jianjun Wang1∗
1

School of Mathematics and Statistics, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China
School of Mathematics and Information, China West Normal University, Nanchong 637002, China
3
School of Mathematics and Statistics and Ministry of Education Key Lab of Intelligent Networks and Network Security,
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China
4
Macao Institute of Systems Engineering, Macau University of Science and Technology, Taipa, Macao
{fsliiuxl,hjy17623226280}@163.com, andrew.pengjj@gmail.com, wanghailin97@163.com, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn,
wjjmath@163.com
2

Abstract

image and video compression (Wang et al. 2017; Baraniuk
et al. 2017), computed tomography (Semerci et al. 2014) and
so on. TCS aims to recover a clean tensor X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3
from its few linear observations coded via the degraded procedure y = A(X )+e, where A : Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 → Rm (m 
n1 n2 n3 ) denotes a linear degradation operator and e ∈ Rm
denotes noise. It is apparently an ill-posed problem because
of the underdetermined measure system. To deal with this
issue, a reasonable approach is utilizing some prior properties of the underlying needed-to-be recovered tensor data
to constrain the solution space. Particularly, two representative ones are low-rankness and local-smoothness, which
had been proven widely existing in real-world datasets such
as Hyperspectral Image (HSI) and video (Peng et al. 2020;
Chengbo Li 2011). In this paper, we are interested in the TCS problem simultaneously fused low-rank and local-smooth
properties.
We first briefly introduce the TCS problem modeling
on purely low-rank or local-smooth property, respectively.
When the original tensor is low-rank, one often tends to the
rank minimization model
min
rank(X ), s. t. ky − A(X )k2 ≤ ε, (1)
n ×n ×n

A plethora of previous studies indicates that making full use of multifarious intrinsic properties of primordial data
is a valid pathway to recover original images from their degraded observations. Typically, both low-rankness and localsmoothness broadly exist in real-world tensor data such as
hyperspectral images and videos. Modeling based on both
properties has received a great deal of attention, whereas most
studies concentrate on experimental performance, and theoretical investigations are still lacking. In this paper, we study the tensor compressive sensing problem based on the
tensor correlated total variation, which is a new regularizer
used to simultaneously capture both properties existing in the
same dataset. The new regularizer has the outstanding advantage of not using a trade-off parameter to balance the two properties. The obtained theories provide a robust recovery guarantee, where the error bound shows that our model
certainly benefits from both properties in ground-truth data adaptively. Moreover, based on the ADMM update procedure, we design an algorithm with a global convergence
guarantee to solve this model. At last, we carry out experiments to apply our model to hyperspectral image and video
restoration problems. The experimental results show that our
method is prominently better than many other competing
ones. Our code and Supplementary Material are available at
https://github.com/fsliuxl/cs-tctv.

X ∈R 1

2

3

where ε ≥ 0 denotes the noise level. Tensor ranks are
determined by the tensor decomposition which is not unique in general unlike the matrix rank. Typical examples
include CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) rank (Kiers 2000)
and Tucker rank (Tucker 1966). However, the CP rank is
NP-hard to compute (Hillar and Lim 2013) and the convex
surrogate of Tucker rank, the Sum of Nuclear Norms (SNN),
is not the tightest convex relaxation (Bernardino RomeraParedes 2013). To circumvent these issues, the tensor tubal
rank was proposed under the framework of transform-based
Tensor-Singular Value Decomposition (T-SVD) (Canyi Lu
2019). Regarding model (1) under CP and Tucker decomposition, several theoretical recovery guarantees have been
developed by utilizing the decomposition-based Tensor Restricted Isometry Properties (TRIP) not long ago (Grotheer
et al. 2021; Rauhut, Schneider, and Stojan 2017). Under the
T-SVD framework, for ease of implementation, the most often considered model refers to
min
kX k?L , s. t. ky − A(X )k2 ≤ ε, (2)
n ×n ×n

Introduction
Ever since the pioneering work of Compressed Sensing (CS)
(Candès, Romberg, and Tao 2006a; Donoho 2006), Tensor
Compressive Sensing (TCS) has been continuing to attract
attention (Friedland, Li, and Schonfeld 2014; Ding, Chen,
and Wassell 2017). The reason behind is that TCS can make
more use of the essential structure of the original tensor data, whereas both CS and its matrix version (Recht, Fazel,
and Parrilo 2010; Wang, Zhang, and Wang 2021) inevitably
destroy their intrinsic structure. TCS is not only a simple
mathematical extension of CS to high-order data, but also
had been deployed to a lot of data reconstruction applications including Background Subtraction from Compressive
Measurements (BSCM) (Cao et al. 2016; Li et al. 2022),
∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

X ∈R 1

8879

2

3

