The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

When Neural Networks Fail to Generalize? A Model Sensitivity Perspective
Jiajin Zhang1 , Hanqing Chao1 , Amit Dhurandhar2 , Pin-Yu Chen2 , Ali Tajer3 , Yangyang Xu4 ,
Pingkun Yan1 *
1

Department of Biomedical Engineering and Center for Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies, Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute, Troy, NY, USA
2
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
3
Department of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA
4
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA
Abstract

the data augmentation based methods are actually also regularizing models, but implicitly. One of the contributions of
our work is to visualize and quantify the effect of implicit
regularization of data augmentation strategies.
Most of the existing DG methods learn the representations from multiple source domains (Volpi et al. 2018; Dou
et al. 2019; Muandet, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf 2013). However, in many applications, there is only one single source
domain available for training (Volpi et al. 2018; Qiao, Zhao,
and Peng 2020; Wang et al. 2021b). Despite the extensive
literature on domain generalization, limited work deals with
single source domain. In fact, many of the explicit regularization methods need multiple source domains to begin with
and thus is inapplicable to this setting. Data augmentation, as
an effective strategy in deep learning, has shown promising
performance in single domain generalization (single-DG)
problems (Volpi et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2020; Wang et al.
2021b). Such methods typically apply various operations
to the source domain images to generate pseudo-novel domains (Wang et al. 2021b). Models will be trained using
both the source domain images and the augmented images
with designed constraints to learn invariant representations.
Despite the popularity of data augmentation in single-DG,
the existing methods bear two major drawbacks. They are
either model agnostic or provide very limited OoD augmentation. Recent study (Tan, Li, and Huang 2021) on measuring cross-domain transferability demonstrated that the characteristics of both model and training data are important
factors when quantifying the model’s generalizability. However, the majority of data augmentation methods are model
independent, which apply random generic image transformations to generate pseudo-domain images. Although they
are helpful, those augmented images may not necessarily address the weaknesses of the models. In contrast, recent methods exploiting adversarial samples for domain generalization (Volpi et al. 2018; Qiao, Zhao, and Peng 2020; Zhang,
Chao, and Yan 2020, 2023) learn to generate such augmentations by targeting the models’ weakness. However, the resulted minor perturbations to the samples in the image space
only trivially enhance the appearance diversity. Therefore,
these adversarial samples based augmentation methods lead
to limited generalization performance improvement.
To tackle the above-mentioned challenges in data augmentation, we first ask a more fundamental question: when

Domain generalization (DG) aims to train a model to perform
well in unseen domains under different distributions. This paper considers a more realistic yet more challenging scenario,
namely Single Domain Generalization (Single-DG), where
only a single source domain is available for training. To tackle
this challenge, we first try to understand when neural networks fail to generalize? We empirically ascertain a property
of a model that correlates strongly with its generalization that
we coin as “model sensitivity”. Based on our analysis, we
propose a novel strategy of Spectral Adversarial Data Augmentation (SADA) to generate augmented images targeted at
the highly sensitive frequencies. Models trained with these
hard-to-learn samples can effectively suppress the sensitivity in the frequency space, which leads to improved generalization performance. Extensive experiments on multiple
public datasets demonstrate the superiority of our approach,
which surpasses the state-of-the-art single-DG methods by up
to 2.55%. The source code is available at https://github.com/
DIAL-RPI/Spectral-Adversarial-Data-Augmentation.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models may perform poorly when tested on
samples drawn from out-of-distribution (OoD) data. Applications encountering OoD problems commonly involve natural domain shift (Ben-David et al. 2010; Pan and Yang
2009) or image corruptions (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2016;
Hendrycks and Dietterich 2019). To tackle the problem of
performance degradation in unseen domains, extensive research has been carried out on domain generalization (DG),
which attempts to extend a model to unseen target domains
by regularizing the model and exposing it to more data.
Based on how the source domain knowledge gets transferred to an unseen target domain, the existing DG techniques can be divided into three categories (Wang et al.
2022), representation learning, constrained learning, and
data manipulation. The former two categories explicitly regularize a model to improve its generalizability. These approaches aim to learn domain invariant predictors by enhancing the correlations between the domain invariant representations and the labels. We would like to point out that
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11219

