The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fast Saturating Gate for Learning Long Time Scales with
Recurrent Neural Networks
Kentaro Ohno, Sekitoshi Kanai, Yasutoshi Ida
NTT
{kentaro.ohno.tf, sekitoshi.kanai.fu, yasutoshi.ida.yc}@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract

too small to effectively update the parameters. To avoid the
saturation problem, a previous study used unbounded activation functions (Chandar et al. 2019). However, this makes
training unstable due to the gradient explosion (Pascanu,
Mikolov, and Bengio 2013). Another study introduced residual connection for a gate function to push the output value
toward boundaries, hence mitigating the saturation problem (Gu et al. 2020). However, it requires additional computational cost due to increasing the number of parameters
for another gate function. For broader application of gated
RNNs, a more efficient solution is necessary.

Gate functions in recurrent models, such as an LSTM and
GRU, play a central role in learning various time scales in
modeling time series data by using a bounded activation function. However, it is difficult to train gates to capture extremely
long time scales due to gradient vanishing of the bounded
function for large inputs, which is known as the saturation
problem. We closely analyze the relation between saturation
of the gate function and efficiency of the training. We prove
that the gradient vanishing of the gate function can be mitigated by accelerating the convergence of the saturating function, i.e., making the output of the function converge to 0
or 1 faster. Based on the analysis results, we propose a gate
function called fast gate that has a doubly exponential convergence rate with respect to inputs by simple function composition. We empirically show that our method outperforms
previous methods in accuracy and computational efficiency
on benchmark tasks involving extremely long time scales.

To overcome the difficulty of training, we propose a novel
activation function for the forget gate based on the usual sigmoid function, which we call the fast gate. Modification of
the usual sigmoid gate to the fast gate is simple and easy
to implement since it requires only one additional function
composition. To this end, we analyze the relation between
the saturation and gradient vanishing of the bounded activation function. Specifically, we focus on the convergence rate
of the activation function to the boundary, which we call
the order of saturation. For example, the sigmoid function
σ(z) = 1/(1 + e−z ) has the exponential order of saturation, i.e., 1 − σ(z) = O(e−z ) (see Fig. 1), and the derivative
also decays to 0 exponentially as z goes to infinity. When a
bounded activation function has a higher order of saturation,
the derivative decays much faster as the input grows. Since
previous studies have assumed that the decaying derivative
on the saturating regime causes the stuck of training (Ioffe
and Szegedy 2015), it seems that a higher order of saturation would lead to poor training. Contrarily to this intuition, we prove that a higher order of saturation alleviates
the gradient vanishing on the saturating regime through observation on a toy problem for learning long time scales.
This result indicates that functions saturating superexponentially are more suitable for the forget gate to learn long time
scales than the sigmoid function. On the basis of this observation, we explore a method of realizing such functions
by composing functions which increase faster than the identity function (e.g., α(z) = z + z 3 ) as σ(α(z)). We find that
the hyperbolic sinusoidal function is suitable for achieving a
higher order of saturation in a simple way, and we obtain the
fast gate. Since the fast
gate has a doubly exponential order
z
of saturation O(e−e ), it improves the trainability of gated
RNNs for long time scales of sequential data. We evaluate

Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are models suited to processing sequential data in various applications, e.g., speech
recognition (Ling et al. 2020) and video analysis (Zhu et al.
2020). The most widely used RNNs are a long short-term
memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) and
gated recurrent unit (GRU) (Cho et al. 2014), which has a
gating mechanism. The gating mechanism controls the information flow in the state of RNNs via multiplication with
a gate function bounded to a range (0, 1). For example, when
the forget gate takes a value close to 1 (or 0 for the update gate in the GRU), the state preserves the previous information. On the other hand, when it gets close to the other
boundary, the RNN updates the state by the current input.
Thus, in order to represent long temporal dependencies of
data involving hundreds or thousands of time steps, it is
crucial for the forget gate to take values near the boundaries (Tallec and Ollivier 2018; Mahto et al. 2021).
However, it is difficult to train RNNs so that they have the
gate values near the boundaries. Previous studies hypothesized that this is due to gradient vanishing for the gate function called saturation (Chandar et al. 2019; Gu et al. 2020),
i.e., the gradient of the gate function near the boundary is
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9319

