The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

WaveForM: Graph Enhanced Wavelet Learning for Long Sequence Forecasting of
Multivariate Time Series
Fuhao Yang1 , Xin Li* 1 , Min Wang1 , Hongyu Zang1 , Wei Pang2 , Mingzhong Wang3
1

Beijing Institute of Technology
2
Heriot-Watt University
3
The University of the Sunshine Coast
{yfh, xinli, 3220225187, zanghyu}@bit.edu.cn, w.pang@hw.ac.uk, mwang@usc.edu.au
Abstract

among variables, thus failing to capture complex non-linear
patterns, which frequently occur in MTS. In recent work,
researchers have proposed a series of graph neural network
(GNN)-based models to capture interconnections and interdependencies (also known as spatial dependencies) among
MTS due to GNN’s strength in modeling complex structures of graph data. For example, STGCN (Yu, Yin, and Zhu
2017) skillfully utilizes both graph convolution and gated
causal convolution to tackle the MTS prediction problems in
the traffic domain. Graph Multi-attention Network (GMAN)
(Zheng et al. 2020) extends STGCN with an encoderdecoder architecture and incorporates attention mechanisms
to better capture spatial-temporal relations in traffic data.
The use of GNN in STGCN and GMAN relies on the assumption that prior knowledge of stable relationships among
variables is available, and such knowledge is represented
in a pre-defined graph structure. MTGNN (Wu et al. 2020)
focuses on learning and recovering the latent dependencies
(graph structure) among variables for tasks without explicitly defined graph structures by using a graph learning module, leading to better interpretability and performance for
MTS forecasting tasks.
However, the existing work still overlooks long sequence
forecasting (LSF) of MTS, which uses a given length of
MTS to predict longer future sequences. LSF of MST is
crucial for facilitating long-term planning and offering early
warning in various real-world applications. However, predicting long sequences is challenging as long-term MTS are
often composed of more entangled temporal patterns than
short-term ones, and overlooking this may lead to unreliable discoveries of temporal dependencies (Wu et al. 2021).
Recently, transformer-based architectures have proven their
effectiveness in modeling sequential data owing to the use of
self-attention mechanisms (Zaheer et al. 2020), empowering
MTS forecasting models for long-term prediction (Wen et al.
2022). However, these models frequently suffer from high
computational cost in LSF. The existing transformer-based
LSF approaches mainly focus on developing sparse selfattention schema to improve model efficiency, inevitably
sacrificing the rate of information utilization and resulting
in a bottleneck for MTS LSF.
In comparison, this paper proposed a novel solution for
effective long sequence forecasting in MTS.
In practice, MTS can be analyzed in the time domain,

Multivariate time series (MTS) analysis and forecasting are
crucial in many real-world applications, such as smart traffic management and weather forecasting. However, most existing work either focuses on short sequence forecasting or
makes predictions predominantly with time domain features,
which is not effective at removing noises with irregular frequencies in MTS. Therefore, we propose WAVE F OR M , an
end-to-end graph enhanced Wavelet learning framework for
long sequence FORecasting of MTS. WaveForM first utilizes
Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) to represent MTS in the
wavelet domain, which captures both frequency and time domain features with a sound theoretical basis. To enable the
effective learning in the wavelet domain, we further propose
a graph constructor, which learns a global graph to represent the relationships between MTS variables, and graphenhanced prediction modules, which utilize dilated convolution and graph convolution to capture the correlations between time series and predict the wavelet coefficients at different levels. Extensive experiments on five real-world forecasting datasets show that our model can achieve considerable performance improvement over different prediction
lengths against the most competitive baseline of each dataset.

Introduction
Multiple interconnected streams of data, also known as multivariate time series (MTS), have pervasive presence in realworld applications. Examples of MTS include the recorded
traffic flows from various roadway sensors and the weather
observations from multiple weather stations over time. Multivariate time series forecasting, which makes predictions
based on historical MTS observations, has attracted extensive interest as it can integrate multiple sources of observations to provide a global view of applications and help
make meaningful and accurate application-wide predictions.
For example, to predict the future power consumption of a
household, it is beneficial to consider and integrate the usage
observations of multiple sectors, such as kitchen, laundry,
and the average current intensity of the household.
Early solutions (Box and Jenkins 1970), which utilize
statistical models, generally assume linear dependencies
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10754

