The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Combinatorial Causal Bandits
Shi Feng1 , Wei Chen2
1

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
shifeng-thu@outlook.com, weic@microsoft.com

Abstract

settings that include causal relationships, such as medical
drug testing, policy making, scientific experimental process,
performance tuning, etc. Causal bandit is a form of multiarmed bandit (cf. (Lattimore and Szepesvári 2020)), with the
main difference being that causal bandits may use the causal
relationship and more observed feedback to achieve a better
regret.
All the causal bandit studies so far (Lattimore, Lattimore,
and Reid 2016; Sen et al. 2017; Nair, Patil, and Sinha 2021;
Lu et al. 2020; Maiti, Nair, and Sinha 2021) focus on the
case where the number of possible interventions is small.
However, in many scenarios we need to intervene on a set
of variables and the number of possible choices of sets is
large. For example, in tuning performance of a large system, one often needs to tune a large number of parameters
simultaneously to achieve the best system performance, and
in drug testing, a combination of several drugs with a number of possible dosages needs to be tested for the best result.
Intervening on a set of variables raises new challenges to
the learning problem, since the number of possible interventions is exponentially large to the size of the causal graph.
In this paper, we address this challenge and propose the new
framework of combinatorial causal bandits (CCB) and its
solutions. In each round of CCB, the learning agent selects
a set of at most K observed variables in X to intervene instead of one variable. Other aspects including the feedback
and reward remain the same.
We use the binary generalized linear models (BGLMs) to
give the causal model a succinct parametric representation
where all variables are binary. Using the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) method, we design an online learning algorithm BGLM-OFU for the causal models without
hidden variables (called
Markovian models), and the algo√
rithm achieves O( T log T ) regret, where T is the time
horizon. The algorithm is based on the earlier study on generalized linear bandits (Li, Lu, and Zhou 2017), but our
BGLM model is more general and thus requires new techniques (such as a new initialization phase) to solve the problem. Our regret analysis also integrates results from online
influence maximization (Li et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2022) in
order to obtain the final regret bound.
Furthermore, for the binary linear models (BLMs), we
show how to transform a BLM with hidden variables into
one without hidden variables by utilizing the tools in causal

In combinatorial causal bandits (CCB), the learning agent
chooses at most K variables in each round to intervene, collects feedback from the observed variables, with the goal
of minimizing expected regret on the target variable Y. We
study under the context of binary generalized linear models
(BGLMs) with a succinct parametric representation of the
causal models. We present the algorithm BGLM-OFU for
Markovian BGLMs (i.e., no hidden variables) based on the
maximum likelihood estimation method and give regret analysis for it. For the special case of linear models with hidden
variables, we apply causal inference techniques such as the
do calculus to convert the original model into a Markovian
model, and then show that our BGLM-OFU algorithm and another algorithm based on the linear regression both solve such
linear models with hidden variables. Our novelty includes (a)
considering the combinatorial intervention action space and
the general causal graph structures including ones with hidden variables, (b) integrating and adapting techniques from
diverse studies such as generalized linear bandits and online
influence maximization, and (c) avoiding unrealistic assumptions (such as knowing the joint distribution of the parents of
Y under all interventions) and regret factors exponential to
causal graph size in prior studies.

1

Introduction

Causal bandit problem is first introduced in (Lattimore,
Lattimore, and Reid 2016). It consists of a causal graph
G = (X ∪{Y }, E) indicating the causal relationship among
the observed variables, where the structure of the graph is
known but the underlying probability distributions governing the causal model are unknown. In each round, the learning agent selects one or a few variables in X to intervene,
gains the reward as the output of Y , and observes the values
of all variables in X ∪ {Y }. The goal is to either maximize
the cumulative reward over T rounds, or find the intervention closest to the optimal one after T rounds. The former
setting, which is the one our study focuses on, is typically
translated to minimizing cumulative regret, which is defined
as the difference in reward between always playing the optimal intervention and playing interventions according to a
learning algorithm. Causal bandits can be applied in many
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7550

