The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Adversarial Weight Perturbation Improves Generalization
in Graph Neural Networks
Yihan Wu1 , Aleksandar Bojchevski2 , Heng Huang1
1

Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
yiw154@pitt.edu, bojchevski@cispa.de, henghuanghh@gmail.com

Abstract
A lot of theoretical and empirical evidence shows that the
flatter local minima tend to improve generalization. Adversarial Weight Perturbation (AWP) is an emerging technique to
efficiently and effectively find such minima. In AWP we minimize the loss w.r.t. a bounded worst-case perturbation of the
model parameters thereby favoring local minima with a small
loss in a neighborhood around them. The benefits of AWP, and
more generally the connections between flatness and generalization, have been extensively studied for i.i.d. data such as
images. In this paper, we extensively study this phenomenon
for graph data. Along the way, we first derive a generalization
bound for non-i.i.d. node classification tasks. Then we identify
a vanishing-gradient issue with all existing formulations of
AWP and we propose a new Weighted Truncated AWP (WTAWP) to alleviate this issue. We show that regularizing graph
neural networks with WT-AWP consistently improves both
natural and robust generalization across many different graph
learning tasks and models.

1

Introduction

Simply minimizing the standard cross-entropy loss for highly
non-convex and non-linear models such as (deep) neural
networks is not guaranteed to obtain solutions that generalize
well, especially for today’s overparamatrized networks. The
key underlying issue is that these models have many different
local minima which can have wildly different generalization
properties despite having nearly the same performance on
training and validation data. Naturally, there is a rich literature that studies the properties of well-behaving local minima,
as well as the design choices that improve our chances of
finding them (Stutz, Hein, and Schiele 2021). The notion
of flatness which measure how quickly the loss changes in
a neighbourhood around a given local minimum has been
empirically shown to correlate with generalization among a
variety of different measures (Jiang et al. 2019). In addition,
generalization bounds based on the PAC-Bayes framework
(McAllester 1999; Foret et al. 2021) provide theoretical
insights that corroborate the mounting empirical data. Since
the evidence implies that flatter minima tend to generalize
better, the obvious question is how to efficiently find them.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10417

Not only do flat minima improve generalization to unseen
test data, i.e. the clean accuracy (Foret et al. 2021; Zheng,
Zhang, and Mao 2021; Xu and Huang 2022; Kwon et al.
2021; Xu et al. 2022), but they also improve generalization to
adversarial examples, i.e. the robust accuracy (Wu, Xia, and
Wang 2020; Stutz, Hein, and Schiele 2021; Wu et al. 2022).
Improving adversarial robustness is important, especially
for models deployed in safety-critical domains, since most
standard (undefended) models are vulnerable to adversarial
attacks. Attackers can easily craft deliberate and unnoticeable
input perturbations that change the prediction of the classifier
(Sun et al. 2018).
Flat minima show higher resistance to adversarially perturbed inputs while maintaining good clean accuracy (Stutz,
Hein, and Schiele 2021). Among the variety of techniques for
finding flat minima Adversarial Weight Perturbation (AWP)
(Wu, Xia, and Wang 2020), and the closely-related (adaptive)
sharpness-aware minimization (Foret et al. 2021; Kwon et al.
2021) and adversarial model perturbation (Zheng, Zhang,
and Mao 2021), seems to be quite effective in practice. The
key idea is to minimize the loss w.r.t. a bounded worst-case
perturbation of the model parameters, i.e. minimize a local
notion of sharpness. The benefits of this approach, and more
generally the correlation between flatness and (clean/robust)
generalization, have been extensively studied for i.i.d. data
such as images. In this paper we study this phenomenon for
graph data. Concretely, we analyze and improve the generalization of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) which are a
fundamental building block (in addition to CNNs and RNNs).
Blindly applying existing weight perturbation techniques
to GNNs is unfortunately not effective in practice due to
a vanishing-gradient issue. Intuitively, the adversarially perturbed weights tend to have a higher norm which in turn leads
to a saturation in the last layer where that logits for one class
are on a significantly larger scale compared to the rest. Even
though this limitation plagues all formulations of AWP, for
both GNNs and other models (e.g. ResNets), it has gone unnoticed so far. To address it we propose Weighted Truncated
Adversarial Weight Perturbation (WT-AWP) where rather
than directly minimizing the (robust) AWP loss we use it as
a regularizer in addition to the standard cross-entropy loss.
Moreover, we propose to abstain from perturbation in the last
layer(s) of the network for a more fine-grained control of the
training dynamics. These two modifications are simple, but

