The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Compact Transformer Tracker with Correlative Masked Modeling
Zikai Song1 , Run Luo1 , Junqing Yu1∗ , Yi-Ping Phoebe Chen2 , Wei Yang1∗
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
La Trobe University, Australia
{skyesong, lr 8823, yjqing, weiyangcs}@hust.edu.cn, phoebe.chen@latrobe.edu.au

Abstract
Template
…

…

decoder
cat

encoder
…

Search Image

……

……

1

…

Transformer framework has been showing superior performances in visual object tracking for its great strength in information aggregation across the template and search image
with the well-known attention mechanism. Most recent advances focus on exploring attention mechanism variants for
better information aggregation. We find these schemes are
equivalent to or even just a subset of the basic self-attention
mechanism. In this paper, we prove that the vanilla selfattention structure is sufficient for information aggregation,
and structural adaption is unnecessary. The key is not the attention structure, but how to extract the discriminative feature for tracking and enhance the communication between
the target and search image. Based on this finding, we adopt
the basic vision transformer (ViT) architecture as our main
tracker and concatenate the template and search image for
feature embedding. To guide the encoder to capture the invariant feature for tracking, we attach a lightweight correlative masked decoder which reconstructs the original template and search image from the corresponding masked tokens. The correlative masked decoder serves as a plugin
for the compact transformer tracker and is skipped in inference. Our compact tracker uses the most simple structure which only consists of a ViT backbone and a box head,
and can run at 40 fps. Extensive experiments show the proposed compact transform tracker outperforms existing approaches, including advanced attention variants, and demonstrates the sufficiency of self-attention in tracking tasks. Our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance on five challenging datasets, along with the VOT2020, UAV123, LaSOT,
TrackingNet, and GOT-10k benchmarks. Our project is available at https://github.com/HUSTDML/CTTrack.

head

Figure 1: Our compact transformer tracker adopts the simple
ViT structure (encoder) with the concatenation of the template and search image as input, which essentially exploits
the standard self-attention mechanism for information aggregation. The encoded tokens pass through a box head to
estimate the result bounding box. And we develop a correlative masked decoder reconstructing the original template
and search pixels to enhance the information aggregation,
which is skipped during inference.

Li et al. 2018, 2019) derived from Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Simonyan and Zisserman 2015; He et al. 2016) produce
tracking accuracy that beyond the comparison of traditional
approaches, especially the trackers built on Siamese network (Bertinetto et al. 2016; Xu et al. 2020; Li et al. 2018,
2019; Voigtlaender et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2020; Guo et al.
2021). The key of Siamese network trackers is to produce
the cross-correlation and measure the similarity between the
target template and search image. Nowadays, transformerbased trackers (Chen et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021; Yan
et al. 2021; Shen et al. 2022; Song et al. 2022; Cui et al.
2022) have shown great strength by introducing the attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017) to enhance and fuse
the features of querying sample and tracked objects. Prevalent transformer trackers (Chen et al. 2021; Yan et al. 2021;

Introduction

Visual Object Tracking is one of the fundamental tasks
in computer vision with applications ranging from humancomputer interaction, surveillance, traffic flow monitoring
and etc. It aims to estimate the location, denoted as a bounding box, of an arbitrary target object throughout the subsequent video sequence. Deep Learning based trackers have
achieved great success due to their strong representation
ability. Trackers (Bertinetto et al. 2016; Nam and Han 2016;
∗

indicates co-corresponding author.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2321

