The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Graph Anomaly Detection via Multi-Scale Contrastive
Learning Networks with Augmented View
Jingcan Duan1 , Siwei Wang1 , Pei Zhang1 , En Zhu1 * ,
Jingtao Hu1 , Hu Jin1 , Yue Liu1 , Zhibin Dong1
1

College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
{jingcan duan, yueliu19990731}@163.com, {wangsiwei13, zhangpei, enzhu, hujingtao17, jinhu, dzb20}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2018), network intrusion detection (Garcia-Teodoro
et al. 2009), etc. Unlike the data from other anomaly detection fields (Cheng et al. 2021a,b; Hu et al. 2022), graph
data includes node features and graph structure. The mismatch between these two types of information produces two
typical anomalous nodes, i. e. feature anomalies and structure anomalies (Liu et al. 2021). The former refers to nodes
that differ from their neighbors in terms of features, while
the latter refers to a group of nodes that are dissimilar but
closely connected.
To detect these two categories of anomalies, many previous methods have made great efforts and achieved impressive results. LOF (Breunig et al. 2000) obtains anomalous
information about a node by comparing it with its contextual nodes in terms of features. SCAN (Xu et al. 2007) accomplishes the GAD task from network structure. By utilizing such two types of information, ANOMALOUS (Peng
et al. 2018) detects anomalies based on CUR decomposition and residual analysis. (Müller et al. 2013; Perozzi et al.
2014) perform feature subspace selection and find anomalous nodes in the subspace. The methods above rely on specific domain knowledge and cannot mine deep non-linear information in graph datasets. These make it difficult for them
to improve the detection performance further.
Thanks to the powerful graph information acquisition capability, graph convolutional networks (GCN) (Kipf and
Welling 2017) have recently achieved excellent performance in many graph-data tasks. It is naturally applied to
detect anomalies in graph. The pioneering work DOMINANT (Ding et al. 2019) introduces GCN to accomplish the
task for the first practice. Specifically, DOMINANT compares the restructured feature and adjacency matrices with
the original input matrices. The nodes with more considerable variations have a higher probability of being anomalies. Although it performs well and is simple to implement,
some anomalous information will be ignored. GCN generates node representations by aggregating the information
from neighborhoods, which will make anomalies more indistinguishable (Tang et al. 2022). Based on the contrastive
learning paradigm, CoLA (Liu et al. 2021) detects anomalies by calculating the relationship between nodes and their
neighborhoods. This approach digs the local feature and
structure information around the nodes. Meanwhile, it masks
the features of the target node during training, which allevi-

Graph anomaly detection (GAD) is a vital task in graphbased machine learning and has been widely applied in many
real-world applications. The primary goal of GAD is to capture anomalous nodes from graph datasets, which evidently
deviate from the majority of nodes. Recent methods have
paid attention to various scales of contrastive strategies for
GAD, i.e., node-subgraph and node-node contrasts. However,
they neglect the subgraph-subgraph comparison information
which the normal and abnormal subgraph pairs behave differently in terms of embeddings and structures in GAD, resulting in sub-optimal task performance. In this paper, we fulfill
the above idea in the proposed multi-view multi-scale contrastive learning framework with subgraph-subgraph contrast
for the first practice. To be specific, we regard the original input graph as the first view and generate the second view by
graph augmentation with edge modifications. With the guidance of maximizing the similarity of the subgraph pairs, the
proposed subgraph-subgraph contrast contributes to more robust subgraph embeddings despite of the structure variation.
Moreover, the introduced subgraph-subgraph contrast cooperates well with the widely-adopted node-subgraph and nodenode contrastive counterparts for mutual GAD performance
promotions. Besides, we also conduct sufficient experiments
to investigate the impact of different graph augmentation approaches on detection performance. The comprehensive experimental results well demonstrate the superiority of our
method compared with the state-of-the-art approaches and
the effectiveness of the multi-view subgraph pair contrastive
strategy for the GAD task. The source code is released at
https://github.com/FelixDJC/GRADATE.

Introduction
Over the past few years, graph-based machine learning has
attracted great attention (Wu et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022c).
As a representative task in graph learning, graph anomaly
detection, which intends to discern the anomalies from the
majority of nodes, is becoming an increasingly glamorous
application for researchers (Ma et al. 2021). Due to its vital
value in the prevention of harmful events, GAD has already
been widely used in many fields, e.g., misinformation detection (Wu et al. 2019), financial fraud detection (Huang
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7459

