The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Conflict-Noticed Architecture for Multi-Task Learning
Zhixiong Yue1,2 , Yu Zhang1,3, * , Jie Liang2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
University of Technology Sydney
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
yuezx@mail.sustech.edu.cn, yu.zhang.ust@gmail.com, jie.liang@uts.edu.au

Abstract

Module

fS1

fS2

fS3

fS4

fS5

Multi-task learning has been widely used in many applications to enable more efficient learning by sharing part of the
architecture across multiple tasks. However, a major challenge is the gradient conflict when optimizing the shared parameters, where the gradients of different tasks could have
opposite directions. Directly averaging those gradients will
impair the performance of some tasks and cause negative
transfer. Different from most existing works that manipulate gradients to mitigate the gradient conflict, in this paper,
we address this problem from the perspective of architecture
learning and propose a Conflict-Noticed Architecture Learning (CoNAL) method to alleviate the gradient conflict by
learning architectures. By introducing purely-specific modules specific to each task in the search space, the CoNAL
method can automatically learn when to switch to purelyspecific modules in the tree-structured network architectures
when the gradient conflict occurs. To handle multi-task problems with a large number of tasks, we propose a progressive
extension of the CoNAL method. Extensive experiments on
computer vision, natural language processing, and reinforcement learning benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed methods. The code of CoNAL is publicly available.1 .

HPS

59.26

51.68

42.22

39.36

49.49

LTB
CoNAL

41.08
0.34

38.86
0.19

39.65
0.14

47.05
0.13

24.44
0.00

Table 1: The ratio of negative cosine similarities (%) between the gradient of different tasks with respect to shared
(1)
(5)
parameters. {fS , . . . , fS } denotes the modules in the
sharing architecture while learning architecture. Ratio is calculated by going through all samples in the training set.

reason for this issue is the conflicting gradients of different
tasks with respect to shared model parameters, which will
be updated in opposite directions, leading to unsatisfactory
performance. To mitigate the gradient conflict, several gradient manipulation methods (Yu et al. 2020a; Liu et al. 2021a;
Chen et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021b) are
proposed to manipulate task gradients by adjusting gradient
magnitudes or gradient directions or both of them for all the
tasks.
The occurrence of gradient conflict reflects that all the
tasks are not strongly related to each other, given the adopted
architecture. All the aforementioned works to alleviate the
gradient conflict adopt the hard parameter sharing (HPS) architecture that uses a shared encoder for all the tasks with
task-specific decoders for each task. Though the HPS architecture has been proven to be effective for many MTL
problems and is widely used in MTL, it implicitly requires
that all the tasks should be highly related to each other. For
some complicated datasets such as the NYUv2 dataset (Silberman et al. 2012), such requirement cannot be satisfied
and the HPS architecture does not work well on this dataset
(Brüggemann et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2021). Hence, the gradient conflict issue could be the consequence of the use of an
improper architecture for a given MTL problem.
To verify that, we compare the HPS architecture with the
Learning to Branch (LTB) method (Guo, Lee, and Ulbricht
2020), which is to learn an architecture for a given MTL
problem, on the NYUv2 dataset. We follow (Du et al. 2018;
Yu et al. 2020a) to calculate the cosine similarity between
gradients of different tasks with respect to shared parameters and put detailed settings of this experiment in Appendix

Introduction
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) (Caruana 1997; Zhang and
Yang 2021) aims to improve the generalization performance
of multiple learning tasks. Compared with single-task learning, MTL can learn multiple tasks simultaneously to reduce the overall training cost and gain knowledge sharing
from different tasks. Moreover, in some cases, MTL models
could make multiple predictions in one forward propagation, which reduces the inference latency. Therefore, MTL
has drawn much attention in recent years.
However, learning multiple tasks simultaneously can be
challenging because parameter sharing may lead to negative
transfer (Ruder 2017) with some empirical evidence in (Lee,
Yang, and Hwang 2016; Standley et al. 2020; Tang et al.
2020). As empirically analyzed in (Yu et al. 2020a; Chen
et al. 2020; Dery, Dauphin, and Grangier 2021), one main
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/yuezhixiong/CoNAL

11078

