The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Lifted Inference with Linear Order Axiom
Jan Tóth, Ondřej Kuželka
Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Czech Technical University in Prague
Prague, Czech Republic
{tothjan2, ondrej.kuzelka}@fel.cvut.cz

Abstract

that would still be domain-liftable. Several new classes have
been identified since then.
Kazemi et al. (2016) introduced S2 FO2 and S2 RU. Kuusisto and Lutz (2018) extended the two-variable fragment
with one functionality axiom and showed such language to
still be domain-liftable. That result was later generalized to
the two-variable fragment with counting quantifiers, denoted
C2 (Kuželka 2021). Moreover, van Bremen and Kuželka
(2021b) proved that C2 extended by the tree axiom is still
domain-liftable as well.1
Another extension of C2 can be obtained by adding a linear order axiom. Linear order axiom (Libkin 2004) enforces
some relation in the language to introduce a linear (total)
ordering on the domain elements. Such a constraint is inexpressible using only two variables, requiring special treatment. This logic fragment has also received some attention
from logicians (Charatonik and Witkowski 2015).
In this paper, we show that extending C2 with a linear order axiom yields another domain-liftable language.
We present a new dynamic programming-based algorithm
for computing WFOMC in C2 with linear order. The algorithm’s running time is polynomial in the domain size meaning that C2 with linear order is domain-liftable.
Even though our result is mostly of theoretical interest, we
still provide some interesting applications and experiments.
Among others, we perform exact inference in a Markov
Logic Network (Richardson and Domingos 2006) on a random graph model similar to the one of Watts and Strogatz
(Watts and Strogatz 1998).2

We consider the task of weighted first-order model counting
(WFOMC) used for probabilistic inference in the area of statistical relational learning. Given a formula ϕ, domain size n
and a pair of weight functions, what is the weighted sum of
all models of ϕ over a domain of size n? It was shown that
computing WFOMC of any logical sentence with at most two
logical variables can be done in time polynomial in n. However, it was also shown that the task is #P1 -complete once
we add the third variable, which inspired the search for extensions of the two-variable fragment that would still permit
a running time polynomial in n. One of such extension is the
two-variable fragment with counting quantifiers. In this paper, we prove that adding a linear order axiom (which forces
one of the predicates in ϕ to introduce a linear ordering of the
domain elements in each model of ϕ) on top of the counting
quantifiers still permits a computation time polynomial in the
domain size. We present a new dynamic programming-based
algorithm which can compute WFOMC with linear order in
time polynomial in n, thus proving our primary claim.

Introduction
The task of probabilistic inference is at the core of many
statistical machine learning problems and much effort has
been invested into performing inference faster. One of the
techniques, aimed mostly at problems from the area of statistical relational learning (Getoor and Taskar 2007), is lifted
inference (Van den Broeck et al. 2021). A very popular way
to perform lifted inference is to encode the particular problem as an instance of the weighted first-order model counting (WFOMC) problem. It is worth noting that applications
of WFOMC range much wider, making it an interesting research subject in its own right. For instance, it was used to
aid in conjecturing recursive formulas in enumerative combinatorics (Barvı́nek et al. 2021).
Computing WFOMC in the two-variable fragment of firstorder logic (denoted as FO2 ) can be done in time polynomial in the domain size, which is also referred to as FO2 being domain-liftable (Van den Broeck 2011). Unfortunately,
it was also shown that the same does not hold in FO3 where
the problem turns out to be #P1 -complete in general (Beame
et al. 2015). That has inspired a search for extensions of FO2

Background
Let us now review necessary concepts, definitions and assumptions as well as notation.
We use boldface letters such as k to differentiate vectors
from scalar values such as n. If we do not name individual
vector components such as k = (k1 , k2 , . . . , kd ), then the
i-th element of k is denoted by (k)i . Since our vectors only
have non-negative entries, the sum of vector elements, i.e.,
1
Other recent works in lifted inference not directly related to
our work presented here are works of van Bremen and Kuželka
(2021a), Malhotra and Serafini (2022) and Wang et al. (2022).
2
This paper is accompanied by a technical report available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.01164

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12295

