The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ImageNet Pre-training Also Transfers Non-robustness
Jiaming Zhang1 , Jitao Sang1,2 * , Qi Yi1 , Yunfan Yang1 , Huiwen Dong3 , Jian Yu1
1

School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
Peng Cheng Lab
3
BNU-UIC Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Future Networks, Beijing Normal University
{jiamingzhang, jtsang, 21125273, 19281298}@bjtu.edu.cn, 202131081024@mail.bnu.edu.cn, jianyu@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
ImageNet pre-training has enabled state-of-the-art results on
many tasks. In spite of its recognized contribution to generalization, we observed in this study that ImageNet pre-training
also transfers adversarial non-robustness from pre-trained
model into fine-tuned model in the downstream classification
tasks. We first conducted experiments on various datasets and
network backbones to uncover the adversarial non-robustness
in fine-tuned model. Further analysis was conducted on examining the learned knowledge of fine-tuned model and standard model, and revealed that the reason leading to the nonrobustness is the non-robust features transferred from ImageNet pre-trained model. Finally, we analyzed the preference
for feature learning of the pre-trained model, explored the
factors influencing robustness, and introduced a simple robust ImageNet pre-training solution. Our code is available
at https://github.com/jiamingzhang94/ImageNet-Pretrainingtransfers-non-robustness.

Standard model
Fine-tuned model

Clean

Adversarial

Clean

Adversarial

0.99
1.00

0.80
0.00

0.89
0.98

0.75
0.18

Figure 1: Example of two typical scenarios using pretraining. Regarding the true label, the fine-tuned model obtains higher confidence on original input yet lower confidence on adversarial input than the standard model.

As illustrated in Figure 1, we find in typical pre-training enabled scenarios, the fine-tuned models tend to have an unsatisfactory performance on robustness2 . While confidently
recognizing the original input, the fine-tuned models are
very sensitive to trivial perturbation and incorrectly classify the adversarial input. The success of pre-training in
generalization improvement conceals its defect in decreasing robustness. The prior work (Shafahi et al. 2020) was
motivated by forgetting/un-inheriting knowledge from pretrained model to the fine-tuned model. However, according
to our observation, the non-robust features transferred/inherited from pre-trained model to the fine-tuned model results in non-robustness. In this work, we will investigate the
robustness of pre-training by systematically demonstrating
the performance on robustness, discuss how non-robustness
emerges, and analyze what factors influence the robustness.

Introduction
Benefited from both algorithmic development and adequate
training data, deep neural networks have achieved state-ofthe-art performance across a range of tasks. However, in
many real-world applications, it is still expensive or impossible to label sufficient training data. In these cases, a wellestablished paradigm has been to pre-train a model using
large-scale data (e.g., ImageNet) and then fine-tune it on target tasks1 . Pre-training these days is becoming the default
setting not only in researches (Xie and Richmond 2018),
but in many industry solutions (Chen, Ma, and Zheng 2019;
Kolesnikov et al. 2020; Brown et al. 2020).

What accounts for the robustness decrease in the finetuned model? We then delve into the cause of the nonrobustness by examining the learned knowledge of finetuned model. Even though the target tasks of fine-tuned
model and standard model are the same, we find that they are
quite different in terms of learned knowledge. Furthermore,
we analyze what features learned by models lead to the differences and how these features affect robustness. The nonrobust features in the fine-tuned model are demonstrated to
be mostly transferred from the pre-trained model (i.e., ImageNet model) and the mediators that derive non-robustness.
Finally, we attribute the preference for utilizing non-robust

What’s wrong with pre-training? With the gradual popularization of pre-training in addressing real-world tasks, it
is vital to consider beyond the accuracy on experimental
data, especially for tasks with high-reliability requirements.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Pre-training typically involves three models as pre-trained
model trained on large-scale source dataset (i.e., ImageNet in this
work), fine-tuned model initialized with pre-trained model and
then fine-tuned on target dataset, and standard model directly
trained on target dataset (trained from scratch).

2
Robustness in this paper refers to adversarial robustness. We
mix these two terms when no ambiguity is caused.

3436

