The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Everyone’s Voice Matters: Quantifying Annotation Disagreement
Using Demographic Information
Ruyuan Wan1 * , Jaehyung Kim2∗ , Dongyeop Kang3
1

University of Notre Dame, 2 KAIST, 3 University of Minnesota
rwan@nd.edu, jaehyungkim@kaist.ac.kr, dongyeop@umn.edu

Abstract
In NLP annotation, it is common to have multiple annotators
label the text and then obtain the ground truth labels based on
the agreement of major annotators. However, annotators are
individuals with different backgrounds, and minors’ opinions
should not be simply ignored. As annotation tasks become
subjective and topics are controversial in modern NLP tasks,
we need NLP systems that can represent people’s diverse
voices on subjective matters and predict the level of diversity.
This paper examines whether the text of the task and annotators’ demographic background information can be used to
estimate the level of disagreement among annotators. Particularly, we extract disagreement labels from the annotators’ voting histories in the five subjective datasets, and then fine-tune
language models to predict annotators’ disagreement. Our results show that knowing annotators’ demographic information, like gender, ethnicity, and education level, helps predict
disagreements. In order to distinguish the disagreement from
the inherent controversy from text content and the disagreement in the annotators’ different perspectives, we simulate
everyone’s voices with different combinations of annotators’
artificial demographics and examine its variance of the finetuned disagreement predictor. Our paper aims to improve the
annotation process for more efficient and inclusive NLP systems through a novel disagreement prediction mechanism.
Our code and dataset are publicly available.

Figure 1: Disagreement prediction predicts disagreement
only from input text or input text with (group-wise or individual against the majority) annotators’ demographic information.

in modern NLP will cause the annotators’ disagreement not
only due to the potential random error in the process but
also because annotators may interpret the text with different
views and make judgments based on their own connotations.
Different demographics, cultural backgrounds, and living experiences influence how people receive and interpret
information. This difference is more visible in subjective
tasks. For example, Sap et al. found more consecutive annotators who have higher scores on racist beliefs are more
likely to label African American English as toxic rather than
label anti-Black language as toxic (Sap et al. 2022). In these
cases, the aggregated singular labels can bring bias by using
less inclusive and societal-representative labels to accommodate everyone’s voices in subjective studies.
This paper assumes that annotators’ disagreement potentially comes from the limited representations of the annotator group assigned or controversy of the text in nature. This
study focuses on exploring the relationship between the annotator group and natural controversy in text by developing
a disagreement predictor with and without the information
about the annotator group, as depicted in Figure 1. In particular, we analyze annotators’ disagreement from five subjective task datasets to answer the following research questions:

Introduction
Supervised AI systems are trained on annotated datasets
with labels determined by consensus among multiple annotators. The subjective opinions of different annotators often
bring annotation disagreement in the decision of the final
labels. Most commonly, this disagreement is addressed by
ignoring highly-disagreed cases and only including those
whose opinions were voted on by the majority as the final label. When the labeling tasks become more subjective
and require the annotator’s own interpretation and judgment,
such as detecting offensiveness and judging social dilemmas
(Reidsma and op den Akker 2008), this majority-based aggregation often fails to learn the true distribution of annotators’ voices. The increasing subjectivity of NLP problems
* This work was done while RW and JK were at the Minnesota
NLP lab.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. Is it possible to predict the level of annotators’ disagreement with text using language models? Does knowing
annotators’ identities, like demographic information in
14523

