The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

High-Resolution GAN Inversion for Degraded Images in Large Diverse Datasets
Yanbo Wang1 * , Chuming Lin2 , Donghao Luo2 , Ying Tai2 , Zhizhong Zhang1† , Yuan Xie1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
2
Tencent Youtu Lab
51205901021@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {chuminglin, michaelluo, yingtai}@tencent.com, {zzzhang, yxie}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

et al. 2022). For a given degraded function D(·) and degraded image Id , the latent vector wre is iterated through
back-propagation by minimizing the reconstruction loss of
Id and the degraded synthesis image D(ϕSynthesis (wre )),
where ϕSynthesis is the synthesis layers of GAN. For example, PTI (Roich et al. 2021) inverts high-quality face images to the latent space and uses the result for image attributes manipulation. Nevertheless, PTI cannot be generalized to degraded input images from natural scenes. On the
other hand, DGP (Pan et al. 2021) provides compelling results to generate missing semantics, e.g., color, patch, resolution, for various images. But the scheme is limited to
vanilla GAN models (i.e., BigGAN (Brock, Donahue, and
Simonyan 2019)) which only generate results with relatively
low resolution (e.g., 1282 , 2562 ).
In this paper, we present an effective framework to generate high-resolution natural images from degraded inputs.
We utilize the powerful capability of StyleGAN-XL (Sauer,
Schwarz, and Geiger 2022), the state-of-the-art model for
large-scale image synthesis, to generate high-quality images from degraded images. However, simply applying existing inversion methods (Pan et al. 2021; Roich et al. 2021;
Menon et al. 2020) on StyleGAN-XL pre-trained on ImageNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) obtains unsatisfactory results and faces two challenges:
(1) The latent space of StyleGAN-XL pre-trained on ImageNet is much larger and more complex compared to other
popular GAN models like BigGAN and StyleGAN (Karras,
Laine, and Aila 2019). Due to the diversity of data, the scale
of the generator increases. For instance, for face images (i.e.,
FFHQ (Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019)) StyleGAN2 (Karras
et al. 2020) at resolution 10242 only uses 18 latent vectors,
while StyleGAN-XL trained on ImageNet at resolution 5122
needs 37 latent vectors since the data domain is more complicated. In the meantime, StyleGAN-XL employs an intermediate latent space compared to BigGAN which is the
essence of its flexible editability but also adds to the inversion difficulty. For such a complex latent space, finding a
good initialization of latent vector is quite important.
(2) The visual quality of the result is not explicitly imposed by the existing inversion methods. For example, images Ire and It generated by wre and wt in Figure 1(a) result in the same degraded images (D(Ire ) and D(It )). Minimizing the traditional pixel or feature loss as existing meth-

Abstract
The last decades are marked by massive and diverse image
data, which shows increasingly high resolution and quality.
However, some images we obtained may be corrupted, affecting the perception and the application of downstream tasks. A
generic method for generating a high-quality image from the
degraded one is in demand. In this paper, we present a novel
GAN inversion framework that utilizes the powerful generative ability of StyleGAN-XL for this problem. To ease the inversion challenge with StyleGAN-XL, Clustering & Regularize Inversion (CRI) is proposed. Specifically, the latent space
is firstly divided into finer-grained sub-spaces by clustering.
Instead of initializing the inversion with the average latent
vector, we approximate a centroid latent vector from the clusters, which generates an image close to the input image. Then,
an offset with a regularization term is introduced to keep
the inverted latent vector within a certain range. We validate
our CRI scheme on multiple restoration tasks (i.e., inpainting, colorization, and super-resolution) of complex natural
images, and show preferable quantitative and qualitative results. We further demonstrate our technique is robust in terms
of data and different GAN models. To our best knowledge,
we are the first to adopt StyleGAN-XL for generating highquality natural images from diverse degraded inputs. Code is
available at https://github.com/Booooooooooo/CRI.

Introduction
With the mushroom development of imaging devices, images are now characterized by increasingly high resolution
and diverse scenes. However, the quality of images on the Internet is uneven. For example, we may get images with lowresolution, images with missing parts, or gray-scale images.
Therefore we hope to generate high-quality images directly
from the degraded raw natural images.
One feasible approach is to leverage the generative ability
of generative adversarial networks (GAN) and conduct GAN
inversion. The main idea is to “invert” the corrupted image
back to the latent space of the pre-trained GAN and then
reconstruct a restored image from the optimal latent (Xia
* This work was done when Yanbo Wang was an intern at Ten-

cent Youtu Lab.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2716

