The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Handling Missing Data via Max-Entropy Regularized Graph Autoencoder
Ziqi Gao2 , Yifan Niu1 , Jiashun Cheng2 , Jianheng Tang2 , Lanqing Li3 * ,
Tingyang Xu3 , Peilin Zhao3 , Fugee Tsung1,2 , Jia Li1,2∗
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
AI Lab, Tencent
zgaoat@connect.ust.hk, yniu669@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn,
{jchengak, jtangbf}@connect.ust.hk, {tingyangxu, masonzhao, lanqingli}@tencent.com,
{season, jialee}@ust.hk
Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are popular weapons for modeling relational data. Existing GNNs are not specified for
attribute-incomplete graphs, making missing attribute imputation a burning issue. Until recently, many works notice that
GNNs are coupled with spectral concentration, which means
the spectrum obtained by GNNs concentrates on a local part
in spectral domain, e.g., low-frequency due to oversmoothing
issue. As a consequence, GNNs may be seriously flawed for
reconstructing graph attributes as graph spectral concentration
tends to cause a low imputation precision. In this work, we
present a regularized graph autoencoder for graph attribute
imputation, named MEGAE, which aims at mitigating spectral concentration problem by maximizing the graph spectral entropy. Notably, we first present the method for estimating graph spectral entropy without the eigen-decomposition
of Laplacian matrix and provide the theoretical upper error
bound. A maximum entropy regularization then acts in the
latent space, which directly increases the graph spectral entropy. Extensive experiments show that MEGAE outperforms
all the other state-of-the-art imputation methods on a variety
of benchmark datasets.

1

Figure 1: Spectral visualization of GAE. Red histograms
show the graph spectra. After GAE encoder (GCN), spectral
concentration appears in the latent space. Upon MLP decoder,
the spectral concentration is not alleviated.

2017) applies a recursive aggregation mechanism for updating node representations, leading to the low-frequency concentration from a spectral view (Wu et al. 2019; Donnat et al.
2018; Tang et al. 2022). The mechanism makes GCN effective for numerous real-world applications as low-frequency
concentration promotes the convergence of representations
of adjacent nodes (Nt and Maehara 2019; Xu et al. 2020).
However, this spectral concentration diminishes partial eigenvalues, i.e., spectral values. As a consequence, it causes serious performance degradation on the standard graph attribute
imputation models such as graph autoencoders (GAEs) (Li
et al. 2020; Park et al. 2019; Li et al. 2021). In Figure 1,
we visualize the graph spectra of the input, latent and output based on GAE (Kipf and Welling 2016), which is the
backbone of most GAEs. As the figure makes clear, existing
GAEs leave sufficient room for improvement to combat the
loss of spectral components. Delving into graph attribute reconstruction, a natural question arises: how can GAEs impute
with alleviated spectral concentration?
In this work, inspired by the maximum entropy principle (Narayan and Nityananda 1986; Burch, Gull, and Skilling
1983; Frieden 1972) that is capable to alleviate concentrated
data distributions, we propose to maximize the graph spectral
entropy for mitigating spectral concentration while imputa-

Introduction

Graph attribute missing is ubiquitous due to messy collection and recording process (Yoon, Davtyan, and van der
Schaar 2016; Roth 1994). In a biochemical scenario, for
instance, data is missed due to the difficulties in measuring
or calculating quantitative molecular properties (e.g., HOMO
and LUMO orbital energy) at the atomic level (Yomogida
et al. 2012; Salomon et al. 2003), attenuating the graph or
node representations when we introduce a graph model for
molecules. For graph learning tasks, even a small fraction
of missing attributes will potentially interfere with the performance, leading to biased inferences (Sterne et al. 2009;
Wooldridge 2007).
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have demonstrated powerful ability on various graph-related tasks. Most GNNs consist
of two parts: feature propagation and transformation. The former is the key to the success of GNNs as it can yield suitable
spectral responses for graph desires (Li et al. 2022). For example, graph convolutional networks (GCN) (Kipf and Welling
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7651

