The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning-Assisted Algorithm Unrolling for Online Optimization
with Budget Constraints
Jianyi Yang and Shaolei Ren
University of California, Riverside
{jyang239, shaolei}@ucr.edu

Abstract

present substantial algorithmic challenges — the optimal solution relies on complete offline context information, but in
the online setting, only the online contexts are revealed and
the exact future contexts are unavailable for decision making
(Lin et al. 2019, 2022).
A relevant but different problem is online optimization
with (long-term) constraints (Balseiro, Lu, and Mirrokni
2020; Feldman et al. 2010; Neely 2010; Azar et al. 2016).
In the literature, a common approach is to relax the longterm capacity constraints and include them as additional
weighted costs into the original optimization objective, i.e.,
Lagrangian relaxation (Devanur et al. 2019; Zinkevich 2003;
Balseiro, Lu, and Mirrokni 2020; Neely 2010). The Lagrangian multiplier can be interpreted as the resource price
(Palomar and Chiang 2007), and is updated at each time
step by a manually-designed algorithm such as Dual Mirror Descent (DMD) (Balseiro, Lu, and Mirrokni 2020; Wei,
Yu, and Neely 2020; Jiang, Li, and Zhang 2020). These algorithms require a sufficiently long time horizon for convergence, which hence may not provide satisfactory performance for short-term budget constraints, especially when
contexts in an episode are not identically independently distributed (i.i.d.). Additionally, some studies consider constraints on average (i.e., equivalently, long-term constraints)
(Qiu et al. 2018; He et al. 2013) or bound the violation of
the constraints (Neely 2010; Yu and Neely 2020; Sun et al.
2016). Thus, they do not apply to strict budget constraints
over a short time horizon.
The challenges of OOBC with short-term and strict budget constraints can be further highlighted by that competitive
online algorithms have only been proposed very recently under settings with linear constraints (Lin et al. 2019, 2022).
Concretely, CR-Pursuit algorithms are proposed to make actions by following a pseudo-optimal algorithm based on the
competitive ratio pursuit framework. Nonetheless, to make
sure the solution exists for each OOBC episode, the guaranteed competitive ratio (ratio between the algorithm cost and
the offline-optimal cost) can be large. Also, they treat each
OOBC problem instance as a completely new one and focus on the worst-case competitive ratio without considering
the available historical data obtained when solving previous
OOBC episodes. Thus, their conservative nature does not result in a satisfactory average performance, which may limit
the practicability of these algorithms.

Online optimization with multiple budget constraints is challenging since the online decisions over a short time horizon are coupled together by strict inventory constraints. The
existing manually-designed algorithms cannot achieve satisfactory average performance for this setting because they
often need a large number of time steps for convergence
and/or may violate the inventory constraints. In this paper,
we propose a new machine learning (ML) assisted unrolling
approach, called LAAU (Learning-Assisted Algorithm Unrolling), which unrolls the agent’s online decision pipeline
and leverages an ML model for updating the Lagrangian multiplier online. For efficient training via backpropagation, we
derive gradients of the decision pipeline over time. We also
provide the average cost bounds for two cases when training
data is available offline and collected online, respectively. Finally, we present numerical results to highlight that LAAU can
outperform the existing baselines.

Introduction
Online optimization with budget (or inventory) constraints,
also referred to as OOBC, is an important problem modeling a wide range of sequential decision-making applications
with limited resources, such as online virtual machine resource allocation (Joe-Wong et al. 2013; Palomar and Chiang 2007), one-way trading in economics (El-Yaniv et al.
2001), resource management in wireless networks (Neely
2010; Lan et al. 2010), and data center server provisioning (Ghodsi et al. 2011). More specifically, when virtualizing a physical server into a small number of virtual machines (VMs) to satisfy the demand of multiple sequentiallyarriving jobs, the agent must make sure that the total VM resource consumption is no more than what the physical server
can provide (VMware 2022).
In an OOBC problem, online actions are selected sequentially to maximize the total utility over a short time horizon while the resource consumption over the time horizon is
strictly constrained by a fixed amount of budgets (i.e., violating the budget constraint is naturally prohibited due to physical constraints). Consequently, the short time horizon (e.g.,
24 hourly decisions in a day) and the strict budget constraint
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10771

