The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Boosting Point Clouds Rendering via Radiance Mapping
Xiaoyang Huang1 * , Yi Zhang1 * , Bingbing Ni1† , Teng Li2 , Kai Chen3 , Wenjun Zhang1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
Anhui University
3
Shanghai AI Lab
{huangxiaoyang, yizhangphd, nibingbing}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

point clouds, which is so far insufficiently explored. In this
work, we introduce a point clouds rendering method which
achieves comparable rendering performance to NeRF.

Recent years we have witnessed rapid development in NeRFbased image rendering due to its high quality. However, point
clouds rendering is somehow less explored. Compared to
NeRF-based rendering which suffers from dense spatial sampling, point clouds rendering is naturally less computation
intensive, which enables its deployment in mobile computing device. In this work, we focus on boosting the image
quality of point clouds rendering with a compact model design. We first analyze the adaption of the volume rendering formulation on point clouds. Based on the analysis, we
simplify the NeRF representation to a spatial mapping function which only requires single evaluation per pixel. Further, motivated by ray marching, we rectify the the noisy
raw point clouds to the estimated intersection between rays
and surfaces as queried coordinates, which could avoid spatial frequency collapse and neighbor point disturbance. Composed of rasterization, spatial mapping and the refinement
stages, our method achieves the state-of-the-art performance
on point clouds rendering, outperforming prior works by
notable margins, with a smaller model size. We obtain a
PSNR of 31.74 on NeRF-Synthetic, 25.88 on ScanNet and
30.81 on DTU. Code and data are publicly available in
https://github.com/seanywang0408/RadianceMapping.

The main difference between NeRF-based rendering and
point clouds rendering is that the latter is designed upon the
noisy surface of objects. On the bright side, it is a beneficial
geometric prior which could greatly reduce the query times
in 3D space. On the bad side, this prior is noisy and sparse,
since the point clouds are generally reconstructed by MVS
algorithms or collected by depth sensors. It needs additional
approaches to alleviate the artifact brought by the noise and
sparsity. Therefore, most of the current point clouds rendering methods require two steps. One is the spatial feature
mapping, and the other is image-level refinement. The spatial feature mapping step is similar to the NeRF representation, which maps a 3D coordinate to its color, density or
latent feature. The refinement step is usually implemented
as a convolutional neural network. In this work, we mainly
focus on the spatial feature mapping step. Previous works
use point clouds voxelization (Dai et al.), learnable parameters (Rückert, Franke, and Stamminger; Kopanas et al.) or
linear combination of sphere basis (Rakhimov et al.) as mapping functions. However, these methods suffer either from
high computation cost, large storage requirements, or unsatisfactory rendering performance. To this end, we introduce
a much simpler but surprisingly effective mapping function.
Motivated by the volume rendering formulation in NeRF, we
analyze its adaptation on point clouds rendering scenarios.
It is concluded that in a point cloud scene, the volumetric
rendering could be simplified to the modeling of the viewdependent color of the first-time intersection between the
estimated surface and the ray. In other words, we augment
each 3D point (i.e., most probably a surface point) with a
learnable feature indicating first-hit color. Thereby the point
clouds rendering task could be re-cast within the high fidelity NeRF framework, without consuming redundant computation on internal ray samples. We name it radiance mapping. Moreover, based on radiance mapping, we rectify the
raw point cloud coordinates that are fed into the mapping
function using the z-buffer in rasterization to obtain a query
point which lies exactly on the camera ray. This approach
allows us to obtain a more accurate geometry and avoid spatial frequency collapse. The radiance mapping function consisted of a 5-layer MLP is only 0.75M large, which is much

Introduction
The rising trend of AR/VR application calls for better image quality and higher computation efficiency in rendering technology. Recent works mainly focus on NeRF-based
(Mildenhall et al.) rendering due to its photo-realistic effect.
Nevertheless, NeRF-based rendering suffers from heavy
computation cost, since its representation assumes no explicit geometry is known, and requires burdensome spatial
sampling. This drawback severely hampers its application
in mobile computing devices, such as smart phones or AR
headsets. On the other hand, point clouds (Huang et al.),
which have explicit geometry, are easy to obtained as the
depth sensors become prevalent and MVS algorithms (Yao
et al.; Wang et al.) get powerful. It deserves more attention
to develop high-performance rendering methods based on
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

953

