The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Complement Sparsification: Low-Overhead Model Pruning
for Federated Learning
Xiaopeng Jiang, Cristian Borcea
Department of Computer Science, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ, USA
xj8@njit.edu, borcea@njit.edu

Abstract

devices (Lane et al. 2015), a major target for FL, which need
to perform not only inference but also training. Therefore,
reducing the computation and communication overhead in
FL, while maintaining good model performance, is essential to ensure widespread FL deployment on mobile and IoT
devices.
One potential solution to this problem is model pruning/sparsification, which aims to produce sparse neural networks
without sacrificing model performance (Mozer and Smolensky 1989). Sparse models result in significantly reduced
memory and computation costs compared to their dense
counterparts, while performing better than small dense models of the same size (Han, Mao, and Dally 2015). Sparse
models lead to a better generalization of the networks (Bartoldson et al. 2020) and are more robust against adversarial
attacks (Rakin et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2020). Pruning/sparsification can be used in FL, where the server and the clients can
collaboratively optimize sparse neural networks to reduce
the computation and communication overhead of training.
Despite the benefits of sparse models, it is challenging to design a communication-computation efficient model
pruning for FL. A typical pruning mechanism has three
stages: training (a dense model), removing weights, and
fine-tuning (Liu et al. 2018). Since a model with some of
the weights removed has to recover the performance loss
through additional fine-tuning in the back-propagation, the
fine-tuning together with weights removal represents the
computation overhead of the mechanism. In FL, this overhead cannot be placed only on the server because the server
does not have access to the raw training data for fine-tuning.
Therefore, pruning has to be done collaboratively between
the server and the clients, and a significant computation
overhead will be placed on the clients. Since FL exchanges
model updates between the clients and the server every training round, smaller pruned models will lead to lower communication overhead. However, low communication overhead
comes at the expense of computation overhead for pruning.
To design a communication-computation efficient model
pruning mechanism for FL, four requirements must be satisfied: (R1) reduce the size of the local updates from the
clients to the server; (R2) reduce the size of the global
model transferred from the server to the clients; (R3) reduce the pruning computation overhead at the clients; (R4)
achieve comparable model performance with dense models

Federated Learning (FL) is a privacy-preserving distributed
deep learning paradigm that involves substantial communication and computation effort, which is a problem for resourceconstrained mobile and IoT devices. Model pruning/sparsification develops sparse models that could solve this problem, but existing sparsification solutions cannot satisfy at the
same time the requirements for low bidirectional communication overhead between the server and the clients, low computation overhead at the clients, and good model accuracy,
under the FL assumption that the server does not have access to raw data to fine-tune the pruned models. We propose
Complement Sparsification (CS), a pruning mechanism that
satisfies all these requirements through a complementary and
collaborative pruning done at the server and the clients. At
each round, CS creates a global sparse model that contains
the weights that capture the general data distribution of all
clients, while the clients create local sparse models with the
weights pruned from the global model to capture the local
trends. For improved model performance, these two types of
complementary sparse models are aggregated into a dense
model in each round, which is subsequently pruned in an iterative process. CS requires little computation overhead on
the top of vanilla FL for both the server and the clients. We
demonstrate that CS is an approximation of vanilla FL and,
thus, its models perform well. We evaluate CS experimentally with two popular FL benchmark datasets. CS achieves
substantial reduction in bidirectional communication, while
achieving performance comparable with vanilla FL. In addition, CS outperforms baseline pruning mechanisms for FL.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) is a collaborative deep learning
paradigm that preserves user privacy. The clients send only
locally-trained gradients to an aggregation server, without
sharing their privacy-sensitive raw data. Traditionally, FL
uses dense and over-parameterized deep learning (DL) models. Empirical evidence suggests that such models are easier to train with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) than
more compact representations (Kaplan et al. 2020). However, the over-parameterization comes at the cost of significant memory, computation, and communication overhead.
This is a problem for resource-constrained mobile and IoT
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8087

