The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Crowd-AI Collaborative Duo Relational Graph Learning Framework towards
Social Impact Aware Photo Classification
Yang Zhang1 , Ziyi Kou2 , Lanyu Shang1 , Huimin Zeng1 , Zhenrui Yue1 , Dong Wang1
1

2

School of Information Sciences, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL, USA
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA
yzhangnd@illinois.edu, zkou@nd.edu, {lshang3, huiminz3, zhenrui3, dwang24}@illinois.edu

Abstract

NSI (e.g., strong public criticism) because it wrongly classified a photo of a black man in a video as content about
“Primates” and recommended the photo to users as an advertisement (Wehrli et al. 2021). Formally, we define NSI as
negative or undesirable effects on society as a result of misclassifying a given photo by an AI-based photo classification
model (e.g., deep convolutional network). Such NSI usually
contradicts the mainstream society value or humanity (Chen
and Bu 2019). This paper focuses on an NSI-aware photo
classification problem where the goal is to design a novel
crowd-AI collaborative photo classification framework that
effectively minimizes NSI of misclassified photos.
Several initial efforts have been made to study the NSIrelated problem caused by photo misclassification in AI and
computer vision communities (Sengupta et al. 2018; Olmo,
Sengupta, and Kambhampati 2020; Sengupta 2020). In particular, Sengupta et al. modeled the negative impact of misclassified photos as the semantic differences between the
true photo labels and misclassified labels (Sengupta et al.
2018). For example, they expect an autonomous car to pose
a lower negative impact if it misclassifies a photo of a “Dog”
as a “Cat” than as a “Plastic Bag”. The reason is that the
“Dog” and “Cat” sub-categories both belong to the “Animal”
category that requires the vehicle to stop while the “Plastic
Bag” does not. However, the above semantic relations are insufficient to estimate the NSI of misclassified online photos
because such semantic relations are generated without explicit considerations of social ethics and values (Friedman
and Kahn Jr 2007). For example, online users feel more offensive if human-related photos are misclassified as specific
animals (e.g., “Gorillas”, “Pigs”) than objects (e.g., “Desk”,
“Vase”) even if the labels of animals share more semantic
relation with “Human” as they are all living creatures.
Figure 1 further demonstrates our NSI-aware photo classification problem. We show four misclassified photos with
their true and misclassified photo labels in Figure 1. From
the perspective of online users who have seen these misclassified photos, we analyze the potential NSI made by each
misclassified photo and observe that the misclassification results can lead to different levels of NSI. For example, misclassifying a “Person” as a “Giraffe” (Figure 1a) could make
a high NSI because many people feel offended by misclassifying their personal photos as specific animals. In contrast,
the NSI of misclassifying a “Poodle Dog” as a “Rabbit”

In artificial intelligence (AI), negative social impact
(NSI) represents the negative effect on the society as
a result of mistakes conducted by AI agents. While the
photo classification problem has been widely studied in
the AI community, the NSI made by photo misclassification is largely ignored due to the lack of quantitative measurements of the NSI and effective approaches
to reduce it. In this paper, we focus on an NSI-aware
photo classification problem where the goal is to develop a novel crowd-AI collaborative learning framework that leverages online crowd workers to quantitatively estimate and effectively reduce the NSI of misclassified photos. Our problem is motivated by the limitations of current NSI-aware photo classification approaches that either 1) cannot accurately estimate NSI
because they simply model NSI as the semantic difference between true and misclassified categories or 2)
require costly human annotations to estimate NSI of
pairwise class categories. To address such limitations,
we develop SocialCrowd, a crowdsourcing-based NSIaware photo classification framework that explicitly reduces the NSI of photo misclassification by designing a
duo relational NSI-aware graph with the NSI estimated
by online crowd workers. The evaluation results on two
large-scale image datasets show that SocialCrowd not
only reduces the NSI of photo misclassification but also
improves the classification accuracy on both datasets.

Introduction
Photo classification is a prevalent image classification application that classifies online photos into semantic categories
(Hu et al. 2018). The classified photos are leveraged in various downstream online applications, such as hashtag recommendation for photo sharing services (Zhang et al. 2019),
automatic photo organization (Lonn, Radeva, and Dimiccoli 2019), and keyword-based social media image retrieval
(Chen et al. 2022). However, such applications often suffer
from the misclassification issue where the photos are classified into incorrect categories, and such misclassifications
cause severe negative social impact (NSI) on the society. For
example, an AI model developed by Facebook made a high
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14637

