The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Participatory Budgeting Designs for the Real World
Roy Fairstein1 , Gerdus Benadè2 , Kobi Gal1,3
1

Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel
2
Boston University, USA
3
University of Edinburgh, UK
royfa@post.bgu.ac.il, benade@bu.edu, kobig@bgu.ac.il

Abstract

PB design is a complex task that requires carefully balancing many factors. From the perspective of preference elicitation, voters should be allowed to express complex preferences over projects. For example, a voter may greatly prefer
exactly one library being built rather than zero or two libraries, while being indifferent between the two proposed
locations. At the same time, voting should be accessible to
everyone in the community no matter their educational or
socio-economic background, and there is a real risk that requiring too much information from voters may deter participation. Very simple voting formats come with their own
problems and can lead to frustration and disillusionment. In
practice, participation rates in PB are often low (in extreme
cases as low as 0.1% in Germany (Zepic, Dapp, and Krcmar
2017) and 1-3% in Chicago in 2012 and 2014 (Stewart et al.
2014; Carroll et al. 2016)). Organising bodies may also have
secondary objectives, for example, designing an input format which exposes voters to budgetary constraints similar to
what the city council faces.
The vast majority of real-world PB elections use kapproval voting (Aziz and Shah 2021), in which a voter approves their most preferred k projects, though we are we
aware of little formal justification for this choice. Other formats that have been proposed in the literature or used in
practice include knapsack voting (voters approve their most
preferred budget-feasible set) (Goel et al. 2019), ranking
projects by value or value-for-money (Aziz and Lee 2020;
Benade et al. 2021) and reporting utilities (Peters, Pierczyński, and Skowron 2021).
When it comes to aggregation, the funded projects should
be justifiable given the observed votes and represent the
preferences of as large a part of the population as possible. Real-world elections almost exclusively use some form
of greedy aggregation in which projects are selected in decreasing order of the number of approvals received. Alternatives including the Method of Equal Shares (ES) (Peters,
Pierczyński, and Skowron 2021) , Cumulative Single Transferable Vote (Skowron et al. 2020) and variations on the
greedy approach (Talmon and Faliszewski 2019) have been
proposed but are yet to be of practical significance.
This paper performs a comprehensive study of the effect
of PB design on both user experience and the outcome of the
election towards answering the fundamental design question
of what input format and aggregation method should be used

Participatory budgeting engages the public in the process of
allocating public money to different types of projects. PB designs differ in how voters are asked to express their preferences over candidate projects and how these preferences are
aggregated to determine which projects to fund. This paper
studies two fundamental questions in PB design. Which voting format and aggregation method to use, and how to evaluate the outcomes of these design decisions? We conduct an
extensive empirical study in which 1 800 participants vote in
four participatory budgeting elections in a controlled setting
to evaluate the practical effects of the choice of voting format
and aggregation rule. We find that k-approval leads to the best
user experience. With respect to the aggregation rule, greedy
aggregation leads to outcomes that are highly sensitive to the
input format used and the fraction of the population that participates. The method of equal shares, in contrast, leads to
outcomes that are not sensitive to the type of voting format
used, and these outcomes are remarkably stable even when
the majority of the population does not participate in the election. These results carry valuable insights for PB practitioners
and social choice researchers.

Introduction
Participatory budgeting (PB) is a type of direct democracy
that allows a community to take part in deciding how to allocate a budget among different projects. It is growing in
popularity and has been used around the world including in
Madrid, Rome, Paris (Sintomer, Herzberg, and Röcke 2008)
and New York (Su 2017). PB allows voters to affect local
policies that matter to them, and can increase community
satisfaction when better sets of projects are funded.
Participatory budgeting elections consist of several
phases. First, organizers elicit proposals for projects. These
proposals are developed further (expanded, merged, costed,
etc.) and finally filtered to a set of candidate projects. Citizens are then asked to cast a vote, and the votes are aggregated to determine which projects are funded. This paper assumes that a shortlist of candidate projects has already
been fixed and studies the latter two components of PB design: preference elicitation, or how citizens vote for their
preferred projects, and how votes are aggregated to determine the funded projects (aggregation).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5633

