The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Symmetry-Aware Transformer-Based Mirror Detection
Tianyu Huang1,2 , Bowen Dong1 , Jiaying Lin2 , Xiaohui Liu1 , Rynson W.H. Lau2 , Wangmeng
Zuo1, 3 *
1

Harbin Institute of Technology
City University of Hong Kong
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{tyhuang0428,cndongsky,lxh720199}@gmail.com, jiayinlin5-c@my.cityu.edu.hk,
rynson.lau@cityu.edu.hk, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Mirror detection aims to identify the mirror regions in the
given input image. Existing works mainly focus on integrating the semantic features and structural features to mine specific relations between mirror and non-mirror regions, or introducing mirror properties like depth or chirality to help
analyze the existence of mirrors. In this work, we observe
that a real object typically forms a loose symmetry relationship with its corresponding reflection in the mirror, which
is beneficial in distinguishing mirrors from real objects.
Based on this observation, we propose a dual-path SymmetryAware Transformer-based mirror detection Network (SATNet), which includes two novel modules: Symmetry-Aware
Attention Module (SAAM) and Contrast and Fusion Decoder
Module (CFDM). Specifically, we first adopt a transformer
backbone to model global information aggregation in images,
extracting multi-scale features in two paths. We then feed the
high-level dual-path features to SAAMs to capture the symmetry relations. Finally, we fuse the dual-path features and refine our prediction maps progressively with CFDMs to obtain
the final mirror mask. Experimental results show that SATNet
outperforms both RGB and RGB-D mirror detection methods
on all available mirror detection datasets.

Image MirrorNet PMDNet SANet

Ours

GT

Figure 1: Comparison of mirror detection among state-ofthe-art methods. MirrorNet (Yang et al. 2019) cannot handle scenes with vague mirror boundaries. Although PMDNet (Lin, Wang, and Lau 2020) considers similarity semantics, it can hardly detect the symmetry pair (1st row), and
can easily count part of the similar non-mirror regions into
mirrors (2nd row). SANet (Guan, Lin, and Lau 2022) only
detects the mirror region above the sink (1st row), and it
has worse predictions when semantic associations are lacking (2nd row). By modeling a loose symmetry relationship,
SATNet succeeds in both cases.

mirrors, which may easily fail when similarities come from
non-mirror regions. Guan, Lin, and Lau propose to learn
semantic associations in mirror scenes, while such relation
quite relies on the environments nearby mirrors. It can only
adapt to a few mirror cases, e.g., a mirror above a sink.
Considering mirror properties, Mei et al. and Tan et al. regard depth and chirality as additional information for the detection, respectively. However, these property aggregations
only focus on mirror regions, dismissing the environmental
semantics related to mirrors.
For a general solution, we need to fully leverage the
relationship between mirror and non-mirror regions based
on mirror properties. Considering mirror reflection, symmetry relationships between mirror and non-mirror regions
are supposed to be an essential cue for mirror detection. In
Fig. 1(1st row), the right half of the mirror would not be
missed if the mirror detection model could detect the mirror
symmetry relationship of the two paintings. In Fig. 1(2nd
row), if the model recognizes the left power bank as the
mirror region, it can then classify the corresponding real
power bank on the right as a non-mirror region. However,
this symmetry relationship is not a strict mirror symmetry
and is highly dependent on the camera viewpoint. The paint-

Introduction
Mirrors are common objects in the human world, and their
presence can affect the performance of a range of vision
tasks. For example, Zendel et al. propose a list of potential
hazards within the CV domain, and the existence of mirrors
is one of them. However, mirror detection can be challenging by using some general detection methods from related
tasks, such as salient object detection and semantic segmentation. As such, it is necessary to treat mirror detection as an
independent vision task, and previous works have managed
to tackle this issue from either relation-based frameworks or
property-based paradigms.
Relations between mirror and non-mirror regions are
counted in most mirror detection methods. Yang et al. propose to extract contextual discontinuities among regions, but
it can only be effective when mirror boundaries are clear
against backgrounds. Lin, Wang, and Lau propose to perceive similarity relationships for contents inside and outside
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

935

