The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Explaining Model Confidence Using Counterfactuals
Thao Le, Tim Miller, Ronal Singh, Liz Sonenberg
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
thaol4@student.unimelb.edu.au, {tmiller, rr.singh, l.sonenberg}@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract

science (Miller 2019; Byrne 2019) and that the evaluation
process of explanation should involve human-subject studies (Miller, Howe, and Sonenberg 2017; Förster et al. 2021;
Kenny et al. 2021; van der Waa et al. 2021). We therefore
evaluate our explanation to know whether counterfactual explanations can improve understanding, trust, and user satisfaction in two user studies using existing methods for assessing understanding, trust and satisfaction. We present the CF
explanation using two designs: (1) providing counterfactual
examples (example-based counterfactuals); and (2) visualising the counterfactual space for each feature and its effect
on model confidence (visualisation-based counterfactuals).
Our contributions are:

Displaying confidence scores in human-AI interaction has
been shown to help build trust between humans and AI systems. However, most existing research uses only the confidence score as a form of communication. As confidence
scores are just another model output, users may want to understand why the algorithm is confident to determine whether
to accept the confidence score. In this paper, we show that
counterfactual explanations of confidence scores help study
participants to better understand and better trust a machine
learning model’s prediction. We present two methods for understanding model confidence using counterfactual explanation: (1) based on counterfactual examples; and (2) based on
visualisation of the counterfactual space. Both increase understanding and trust for study participants over a baseline of
no explanation, but qualitative results show that they are used
quite differently, leading to recommendations of when to use
each one and directions of designing better explanations.

• We formalise two approaches for the counterfactual explanation of confidence score: one using counterfactual
examples and one visualising the counterfactual space.
• Through two user studies we demonstrate that showing counterfactual explanations of confidence scores can
help users better understand and trust the model.
• Using qualitative analysis, we observe limits of the two
explainability approaches and suggest directions for improving presentations of counterfactual explanations.

Introduction
Explaining why an AI model gives a certain prediction can
promote trust and understanding for users, especially for
non-expert users. While recent research (Zhang, Liao, and
Bellamy 2020; Wang, Zhang, and Lim 2021) has used confidence (or uncertainty) measures as a way to improve AI
model understanding and trust, the area of explaining why
the AI model is confident (or not confident) in its prediction
is still underexplored (Tomsett et al. 2020).
In Machine Learning (ML), the confidence score indicates
the chances that the ML model’s prediction is correct. In
other words, it shows how certain the model is in its prediction, which can be defined as the predicted probability
for the best outcome (Zhang, Liao, and Bellamy 2020). Another way to define the confidence score is based on uncertainty measures, which can be calculated using entropy
(Bhatt et al. 2021) or using uncertainty sampling (Lewis and
Gale 1994), (Monarch 2021, p93).
In this paper, we complement prior research by applying
a counterfactual (CF) explanation method to generate explanations of the confidence of a predicted output. It is increasingly accepted that explainability techniques should be
built on research in philosophy, psychology and cognitive

Background and Related Work
In this section, we review related work on counterfactual explanations and confidence (or uncertainty) measures.

Counterfactual Explanations
Counterfactual explanation is described as the possible
smallest changes in input values in order to change the
model prediction to a desired output (Wachter, Mittelstadt,
and Russell 2017). It has been increasingly used in explainable AI (XAI) to facilitate human interaction with the AI
model (Miller 2019, 2021; Byrne 2019; Förster et al. 2021).
Counterfactual explanations can be expressed in the following example: “You were denied a loan because your annual
income was $30,000. If your income had been $45,000, you
would have been offered a loan”. To generate counterfactuals, (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2017) suggest finding
solutions of the following loss function.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

arg min max λ(f (x′ ) − y ′ )2 + d(x, x′ )
x′

11856

λ

(1)

