The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Explicit Credit Assignment for Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning via Polarization Policy Gradient
Wubing Chen1 , Wenbin Li1 * , Xiao Liu1 , Shangdong Yang2, 1 , Yang Gao1 ∗
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210023, China
wuzbingchen@gmail.com, liwenbin@nju.edu.cn, liuxiao730@outlook.com, sdyang@njupt.edu.cn, gaoy@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

tributing a global environmental reward to the individual agents’ actions (Zhou et al. 2020). Multiple independent agents can learn effective collaboration policies to accomplish challenging tasks with the proper credit assignment. MARL algorithms can be divided into value-based
and policy-based. Cooperative multi-agent policy gradient
(MAPG) algorithms can handle both discrete and continuous action spaces, which is the focus of our study. Different MAPG algorithms adopt different credit assignment
paradigms, which can be divided into implicit and explicit
credit assignment (Zhou et al. 2020). Solving the credit assignment problem implicitly needs to represent the joint action value as a function of individual policies (Lowe et al.
2017; Zhou et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021b; Zhang et al.
2021; Peng et al. 2021). Current state-of-the-art MAPG algorithms (Wang et al. 2021b; Zhang et al. 2021; Peng et al.
2021) impose a monotonic constraint between the joint action value and individual policies. While some algorithms
allow more expressive value function classes, the capacity
of the value mixing network is still limited by the monotonic
constraints (Son et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2021a). The other
algorithms that achieve explicit credit assignment mainly
provide a shaped reward for each individual agent’s action
(Proper and Tumer 2012; Foerster et al. 2018; Su, Adams,
and Beling 2021). However, there is a large discrepancy between the performance of algorithms with explicit credit assignment and algorithms with implicit credit assignment.
In this paper, we analyze this discrepancy and pinpoint that the centralized-decentralized mismatch hinders
the performance of MAPG algorithms with explicit credit
assignment. The centralized-decentralized mismatch can
arise when the sub-optimal policies of agents could negatively affect the assessment of other agents’ actions, which
leads to catastrophic miscoordination. Note that the issue
of centralized-decentralized mismatch was raised by DOP
(Wang et al. 2021b). However, the linearly decomposed
critic adopted by DOP (Wang et al. 2021b) limits their representation expressiveness for the value function.
Inspired by Polarized-VAE (Balasubramanian et al. 2021)
and Weighted QMIX (Rashid et al. 2020), we propose
a policy-based algorithm called Multi-Agent Polarization
Policy Gradient (MAPPG) for learning explicit credit assignment to address the centralized-decentralized mismatch.
MAPPG encourages increasing the distance between the

Cooperative multi-agent policy gradient (MAPG) algorithms
have recently attracted wide attention and are regarded as
a general scheme for the multi-agent system. Credit assignment plays an important role in MAPG and can induce cooperation among multiple agents. However, most
MAPG algorithms cannot achieve good credit assignment because of the game-theoretic pathology known as centralizeddecentralized mismatch. To address this issue, this paper
presents a novel method, Multi-Agent Polarization Policy
Gradient (MAPPG). MAPPG takes a simple but efficient polarization function to transform the optimal consistency of
joint and individual actions into easily realized constraints,
thus enabling efficient credit assignment in MAPG. Theoretically, we prove that individual policies of MAPPG can
converge to the global optimum. Empirically, we evaluate
MAPPG on the well-known matrix game and differential
game, and verify that MAPPG can converge to the global
optimum for both discrete and continuous action spaces. We
also evaluate MAPPG on a set of StarCraft II micromanagement tasks and demonstrate that MAPPG outperforms the
state-of-the-art MAPG algorithms.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is a critical
learning technology to solve sequential decision problems
with multiple agents. Recent developments in MARL have
heightened the need for fully cooperative MARL that maximizes a reward shared by all agents. Cooperative MARL
has made remarkable advances in many domains, including autonomous driving (Cao et al. 2021) and cooperative
transport (Shibata, Jimbo, and Matsubara 2021). To mitigate
the combinatorial nature (Hernandez-Leal, Kartal, and Taylor 2019) and partial observability (Omidshafiei et al. 2017)
in MARL, centralized training with decentralized execution
(CTDE) (Oliehoek, Spaan, and Vlassis 2008; Kraemer and
Banerjee 2016) has become one of the mainstream settings
for MARL, where global information is provided to promote
collaboration in the training phase and learned policies are
executed only based on local observations.
Multi-agent credit assignment is a crucial challenge in
the MARL under the CTDE setting, which refers to at* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11542

