The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improving Training and Inference of Face Recognition Models via Random
Temperature Scaling
Lei Shang1, * , Mouxiao Huang2,3, * , Wu Shi2,† , Yuchen Liu1 ,
Yang Liu1 , Wang Steven1 , Baigui Sun1,‡ , Xuansong Xie1 , Yu Qiao2,4
2

1
Alibaba Group
The Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology,
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{sl172005, yuchen.lyc, ly261666, steven.wf, baigui.sbg, xingtong.xxs}@alibaba-inc.com
{mx.huang, wu.shi, yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
Data uncertainty is commonly observed in the images for face
recognition (FR). However, deep learning algorithms often
make predictions with high confidence even for uncertain or
irrelevant inputs. Intuitively, FR algorithms can benefit from
both the estimation of uncertainty and the detection of outof-distribution (OOD) samples. Taking a probabilistic view
of the current classification model, the temperature scalar is
exactly the scale of uncertainty noise implicitly added in the
softmax function. Meanwhile, the uncertainty of images in a
dataset should follow a prior distribution. Based on the observation, a unified framework for uncertainty modeling and
FR, Random Temperature Scaling (RTS), is proposed to learn
a reliable FR algorithm. The benefits of RTS are two-fold.
(1) In the training phase, it can adjust the learning strength
of clean and noisy samples for stability and accuracy. (2) In
the test phase, it can provide a score of confidence to detect uncertain, low-quality and even OOD samples, without
training on extra labels. Extensive experiments on FR benchmarks demonstrate that the magnitude of variance in RTS,
which serves as an OOD detection metric, is closely related
to the uncertainty of the input image. RTS can achieve top
performance on both the FR and OOD detection tasks. Moreover, the model trained with RTS can perform robustly on
datasets with noise. The proposed module is light-weight and
only adds negligible computation cost to the model.

1

Figure 1: Random Temperature Scaling models the data uncertainty via the scale of temperature (top). We find that the
learned scale, v(x), is a good metric for out-of-distribution
detection (bottom).
the learned representation may be unreliable and tend to
cause mistakes.
It is well known that deep learning models can achieve
high accuracy in many classification tasks given a relatively
clean and closed dataset. However, in the real world, the data
are captured in more unconstrained scenarios (Shi, Loy, and
Tang 2016; Wang et al. 2020). Data uncertainty commonly
present in the images for face recognition. For example, in
surveillance videos (Kalka et al. 2018; Maze et al. 2018;
Klare et al. 2015), the image can be corrupted by motion
blur, focus blur, and lighting conditions. When key facial
landmarks are occluded due to pose, hair, or accessories, it is
not confident to extract accurate representations for matching. In the step of face detection, partial face or non-face images can be proposed for recognition. The results for these
data can be unpredictable. It is essential to estimate the uncertainty of data and detect OOD samples for safety-critical
algorithms like face recognition.
Probabilistic face embeddings (PFE) (Shi and Jain 2019)
is the first to consider data uncertainty in face recognition.
Instead of a fixed representation, the face is embedded as a
Gaussian distribution whose mean is the original representa-

Introduction

Recently, deep neural networks have achieved great success
in face recognition. State-of-the-art face recognition methods generally map each face image to an identity-related
representation in the latent space (Wen et al. 2016; Deng
et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2018; Schroff, Kalenichenko, and
Philbin 2015; Liu et al. 2017). Ideally, the representations of
the same person are embedded in a compact cluster. However, when the face image contains uncertainty and noise,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Project lead.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

15082

