The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

High-Dimensional Dueling Optimization with Preference Embedding
Yangwenhui Zhang, Hong Qian* , Xiang Shu, Aimin Zhou
Shanghai Institute of AI for Education and School of Computer Science and Technology,
East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China
{51215901086, 51255901138}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {hqian, amzhou}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
In many scenarios of black-box optimization, evaluating the
objective function values of solutions is expensive, while comparing a pair of solutions is relatively cheap, which yields
the dueling black-box optimization. The side effect of dueling optimization is that it doubles the dimension of solution
space and exacerbates the dimensionality scalability issue of
black-box optimization, e.g., Bayesian optimization. To address this issue, the existing dueling optimization methods
fix one solution when dueling throughout the optimization
process, but it may reduce their efficacy. Fortunately, it has
been observed that, in recommendation systems, the dueling
results are mainly determined by the latent human preferences.
In this paper, we abstract this phenomenon as the preferential
intrinsic dimension and inject it into the dueling Bayesian
optimization, resulting in the preferential embedding dueling Bayesian optimization (PE-DBO). PE-DBO decouples
optimization and pairwise comparison via the preferential embedding matrix. Optimization is performed in the preferential
intrinsic subspace with much lower dimensionality, while pairwise comparison is completed in the original dueling solution
space. Theoretically, we disclose that the preference function
can be approximately preserved in the lower-dimensional preferential intrinsic subspace. Experiment results verify that, on
molecule discovery and web page recommendation dueling
optimization tasks, the preferential intrinsic dimension exists
and PE-DBO is superior in scalability compared with that of
the state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods.

Introduction
Black-box optimization (Conn, Scheinberg, and Vicente
2009; Liu et al. 2022), also termed as derivative-free optimization, is of significance in machine learning (Snoek,
Larochelle, and Adams 2012), reinforcement learning (Qian
and Yu 2021) and scientific computing (Shields et al. 2021).
It regards the objective function as black-box and optimization is performed only with point-wise evaluation. Other
information such as gradient is assumed to be inaccessible.
In many scenarios of black-box optimization, directly evaluating the objective function values of solutions is expensive (Jones, Schonlau, and Welch 1998; Snoek, Larochelle,
* Corresponding Author: hqian@cs.ecnu.edu.cn.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11280

and Adams 2012; Shields et al. 2021). Thus, the function evaluation budget is strictly limited and sample-efficient methods,
e.g., Bayesian optimization (Shahriari et al. 2016; Song et al.
2022), are leveraged.
In contrast to direct evaluating the objective function value
on a given solution, comparing a pair of solutions and assessing which one is better is relatively cheap. Kahneman and
Tversky (1979) have pointed out that it is easier and cheaper
for humans to give their preference on two items compared
with directly rating two items, e.g., ranking all the dishes
according to one’s taste. This result leads to the K-armed
dueling bandit (Yue et al. 2012; Sui et al. 2018) in discrete domains and the dueling or preferential optimization (González
et al. 2017; Sui et al. 2017) in continuous domains.
Problem. In dueling optimization, the side effect of pairwise comparison is that it doubles the dimension of solution
space and exacerbates the dimensionality scalability issue of
black-box optimization methods, e.g., Bayesian optimization.
Related Work. González et al. (2017) propose the preferential Bayesian optimization (PBO) that makes the two solutions flexible when comparing them. PBO uses the dueling
results to fit a Gaussian process (GP) over the preference function space. Based on GP, PBO introduces dueling-Thompson
sampling (DTS) that respectively determines the potential
best and uncertain solutions for dueling in the next round.
Then, these two solutions are concatenated to update GP.
Restricted by the dimensionality scalability issue, PBO is
qualified only for the low-dimensional dueling solution space
(≤ 6). Benavoli, Azzimonti, and Piga (2021) improve the optimization performance of PBO by using SkewGP model to
fit the preference function but still face the scalability issue.
Sui et al. (2017) and Xu et al. (2020) propose to fix one
solution when dueling throughout the optimization process,
i.e., kernel-self-sparring (KSS) and comp-GP-UCB. In (Sui
et al. 2017), KSS substitutes the preference function in PBO
with the function whose value is the probability of one solution beating the optimal solution. The optimal solution is
obviously fixed. This function is modeled via GP and the
dueling results are used to fit GP. KSS acquires a batch of
potential best solutions for dueling in the next round. Then,
these solutions are used to sequentially update GP. In (Xu
et al. 2020), comp-GP-UCB substitutes the preference function in PBO with the Borda function which is inspired by
the Borda score (Sui et al. 2018) in the dueling bandit. The

