The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Siamese-Discriminant Deep Reinforcement Learning for Solving Jigsaw Puzzles
with Large Eroded Gaps
Xingke Song1 , Jiahuan Jin1 , Chenglin Yao1 , Shihe Wang1 , Jianfeng Ren12 * , Ruibin Bai12
1

School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham Ningbo China, China
Nottingham Ningbo China Beacons of Excellence Research and Innovation Institute,
University of Nottingham Ningbo China, China
{Xingke.Song, Jiahuan.Jin, Chenglin.Yao, Shihe.Wang, Jianfeng.Ren, Ruibin.Bai}@nottingham.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Jigsaw puzzle solving has recently become an emerging research area. The developed techniques have been widely used
in applications beyond puzzle solving. This paper focuses on
solving Jigsaw Puzzles with Large Eroded Gaps (JPwLEG).
We formulate the puzzle reassembly as a combinatorial optimization problem and propose a Siamese-Discriminant Deep
Reinforcement Learning (SD2 RL) to solve it. A Deep Qnetwork (DQN) is designed to visually understand the puzzles, which consists of two sets of Siamese Discriminant Networks, one set to perceive the pairwise relations between vertical neighbors and another set for horizontal neighbors. The
proposed DQN considers not only the evidence from the incumbent fragment but also the support from its four neighbors. The DQN is trained using replay experience with carefully designed rewards to guide the search for a sequence
of fragment swaps to reach the correct puzzle solution. Two
JPwLEG datasets are constructed to evaluate the proposed
method, and the experimental results show that the proposed
SD2 RL significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Proposed Siamese-Discriminant Deep Reinforcement Learning for puzzle solving. The agent aims to learn a
Deep Q-learning Network combining visual understanding
and puzzle reassembly based on the observed sequences of
states, rewards, actions, and the past reassembly experience.

formulated the puzzle reassembly as the shortest-path problem and solved it using Dijkstra’s algorithm with branchcut. Bridger, Danon, and Tal (2020) designed a GAN-based
method to find neighbors of each fragment by filling gaps in
between and a greedy algorithm to reassemble the puzzles.
Solving puzzles often consists of two steps: 1) Image understanding through either handcrafted features (Gur and
Ben-Shahar 2017; Li et al. 2022), or deep convolutional
neural networks (Paumard, Picard, and Tabia 2020; Noroozi
and Favaro 2016; Bridger, Danon, and Tal 2020; Li et al.
2022). 2) Puzzle reassembly by utilizing various strategies
such as shortest-path optimization (Paumard, Picard, and
Tabia 2020), genetic algorithm (Mirjalili 2019), greedy algorithm (Bridger, Danon, and Tal 2020) and nonconvex
quadratic programming (Yan et al. 2021). A well-designed
reassembly strategy could utilize all the perceived visual
information to derive a globally optimal solution to puzzle solving. Previous methods often over-emphasize visual
understanding, while neglecting the importance of the reassembly strategy. For example, Deepzzle utilizes a relatively simple Dijkstra’s algorithm with branch-cut as the
assembly strategy (Paumard, Picard, and Tabia 2020). For
a small-scale puzzle, people could resort to the bruteforce method (Paumard, Picard, and Tabia 2018a) or greedy
method (Bridger, Danon, and Tal 2020) for reassembly. But
for a large-scale puzzle, the number of puzzle permutations
grows exponentially and a reassembly strategy is crucial to

Introduction
Jigsaw is a puzzle game of reassembling interlocking and
inlaid fragments of irregular shapes. Automatic puzzle reassembly has been widely studied (Paumard, Picard, and
Tabia 2020; Bridger, Danon, and Tal 2020). The developed
techniques have been used beyond puzzle reassembly, e.g.,
self-supervised learning of visual representations (Noroozi
and Favaro 2016; Ma et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2022).
Traditionally, puzzle solving often relies on the shape
(Zhang and Li 2014; Gur and Ben-Shahar 2017; Zhang et al.
2015), contour (Huang et al. 2013) or color (Son, Hays,
and Cooper 2014) of fragments, while only very few focus
on the image content (Paikin and Tal 2015). Recently, Jigsaw puzzles are solved by utilizing deep learning techniques
for image understanding and puzzle reassembly (Paumard,
Picard, and Tabia 2020; Doersch, Gupta, and Efros 2015;
Bridger, Danon, and Tal 2020; Li et al. 2022). In Deepzzle,
Paumard, Picard, and Tabia (2020) designed a pair of VGG
networks to predict the relative positions between fragments,
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2303

