The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Revisiting Classifier: Transferring Vision-Language Models for Video Recognition
Wenhao Wu1 , Zhun Sun2 , Wanli Ouyang3 *
1

The University of Sydney, NSW, Australia
2
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
whwu.ucas@gmail.com, sunzhun@baidu.com, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Transferring knowledge from task-agnostic pre-trained deep
models for downstream tasks is an important topic in computer vision research. Along with the growth of computational capacity, we now have open-source vision-language
pre-trained models in large scales of the model architecture and amount of data. In this study, we focus on transferring knowledge for video classification tasks. Conventional methods randomly initialize the linear classifier head
for vision classification, but they leave the usage of the text
encoder for downstream visual recognition tasks undiscovered. In this paper, we revise the role of the linear classifier
and replace the classifier with different knowledge from the
pre-trained model. We utilize the well-pre-trained language
model to generate a good semantic target for efficient transferring learning. The empirical study shows that our method
improves both the performance and the training speed of
video classification, with a negligible change in the model.
Our simple yet effective tuning paradigm achieves state-ofthe-art performance and efficient training on various video
recognition scenarios, i.e., zero-shot, few-shot, and general
recognition. In particular, our paradigm achieves the state-ofthe-art accuracy of 87.8% on Kinetics-400, and also surpasses
previous methods by 20∼50% absolute top-1 accuracy under
zero-shot, few-shot settings on five video datasets. Code and
models are available at https://github.com/whwu95/Text4Vis.

1

Figure 1: Inter-class correlation maps of “embeddings of
class labels” for 20 categories on Kinetics-400. Left: The
extracted textual vectors of class labels. Right: The “embeddings” from learned classifier. The color thresholds are adjusted for a better view. Please zoom in for the best view.

proving downstream tasks performance such as classification (Radford et al. 2021), captioning (Mokady, Hertz, and
Bermano 2021), image generation (Ramesh et al. 2021), to
name a few. These models are powerful for two reasons:
i) the employed large-scale weakly-related datasets provide
rich semantics and diverse representations of concepts; ii)
the representation vectors of images and texts are roughly
aligned in the semantic embedding space. However, the most
common approach to using these models is fine-tuning the
visual encoder on specific tasks. Although the rich semantics
and diverse representations of concepts benefit the downstream tasks, the usage of the textual encoder is still left
overlooked.
In this study, we aim to improve the transferability of such
vision-language pre-training models for downstream classification tasks, with the help of their textual encoders. Our
motivation comes from the semantic similarity among the
ground-truth labels. To demonstrate this, we employ the Kinetics video recognition dataset (Kay et al. 2017) for the
analysis. We extract the embedded textual vectors of class
labels using the textual encoder of CLIP. We then calculate
the correlation between the embedded textual vectors. The
plot is shown on the left of Figure 1. Not surprisingly, the
extracted textual vectors of class labels exhibit certain interclass correlations since part of them include the same verbs
in their labels, e.g., playing <something>. Meanwhile, the
labels with different verbs show a negligible inter-class cor-

Introduction

Pre-training a task-agnostic model using large-scale general datasets and then transferring its learning feature representations to downstream tasks is a paradigm in many
computer vision applications. While in the last decade,
the convolutional-based models that are optimized on the
ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) dataset with a supervised
style dominated this field. Owing to the dramatically increasing computational capacity, now we can train models
that have several magnitude more model parameters and
FLOPs on various image and even video datasets in either supervised (Sun et al. 2017) or self-supervised (He
et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2021; Fang et al. 2022) style. Recently, contrastive-based vision-language pre-training (Radford et al. 2021) manifest their superior capabilities in im* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2847

