The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Sustaining Fairness via Incremental Learning
Somnath Basu Roy Chowdhury, Snigdha Chaturvedi
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{somnath, snigdha}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract

Task 1

Machine learning systems are often deployed for making critical decisions like credit lending, hiring, etc. While making
decisions, such systems can encode the user’s demographic
information (like gender, age) in their intermediate representations. This can lead to decisions that are biased towards specific demographics. Prior work has focused on debiasing intermediate representations to ensure fair decisions. However,
these approaches fail to remain fair with changes in the task
or demographic distribution. To ensure fairness in the wild,
it is important for a system to adapt to such changes as it
accesses new tasks in an incremental fashion. In this work,
we propose to address this issue by introducing the problem of learning fair representations in an incremental learning
setting. To this end, we present Fairness-aware Incremental
Representation Learning (FaIRL), a representation learning
system that can sustain fairness while incrementally learning
new tasks. FaIRL is able to achieve fairness and learn new
tasks by controlling the rate-distortion function of the learned
representations. Our empirical evaluations show that FaIRL
is able to make fair decisions while achieving high performance on the target task, outperforming several baselines.

Task 2

Task 3
Incremental
Learning System

Test

Task 1

Test

Task 1
Task 2

Task 1

Test

Task 2
Task 3

Fair decisions

Figure 1: Illustration of a fair representation learning system
in an incremental setting. The system is expected to make
fair decisions while incrementally learning new tasks.
roles. The system may not remain fair while screening for
roles like sales or marketing, where the gender demographic
distribution may be different. Similarly, a fair system also
needs to be robust to shifts in data distribution (e.g. new applicants may report scores on specific tests that didn’t appear
in the training data) and task changes (e.g. resumes being
screened for new roles like social media manager). In such
cases, it is not always practical to retrain the system from
scratch every time new data comes in because of the resources and environmental impact associated with training
modern machine learning systems.
Previous works focused on improving the robustness of
fair learning models by considering shifts in data distribution. These involve learning fair models under covariate shift
(Rezaei et al. 2021; Singh et al. 2021) or for streaming data
(Zhang et al. 2021; Zhang and Ntoutsi 2019), but these systems do not incrementally learn new tasks. In this work, we
introduce the problem of learning fair representations in an
incremental learning setting. In this setting, data from new
tasks, with different underlying demographic distributions,
pour in at consecutive training stages and the system has
to perform well on all tasks seen so far while making fair
decisions (see Figure 1). This setup is quite similar to incremental learning (Rebuffi et al. 2017). However, most works
in incremental learning literature focus on target task performance without considering the fairness of their predictions.
To address this problem, we propose a representation learning system – Fairness-aware Incremental

Introduction
An increasing number of organizations are leveraging machine learning solutions for making decisions in critical
applications like hiring (Dastin 2018), criminal recidivism
(Larson et al. 2016), etc. Machine learning systems can often
rely on a user’s demographic information, like gender, race,
and age (protected attributes), encoded in their representations (Elazar and Goldberg 2018) to make decisions, resulting in biased outcomes against certain demographic groups
(Mehrabi et al. 2021; Shah, Schwartz, and Hovy 2020). Numerous works try to achieve fairness through unawareness
(Apfelbaum et al. 2010) by debiasing model representations
from protected attributes (Blodgett, Green, and O’Connor
2016; Elazar and Goldberg 2018; Elazar et al. 2021; Chowdhury and Chaturvedi 2022). However, these techniques are
only able to remove in-domain spurious correlations and fail
to generalize to new data distributions (Barrett et al. 2019).
For example, let us consider a fair resume screening system
that was trained only on resumes of software engineering
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6797

