The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Real-World Deep Local Motion Deblurring
Haoying Li1,2 , Ziran Zhang1 * , Tingting Jiang2 * ,
Peng Luo1 * , Huajun Feng1† , Zhihai Xu1
1
College of Optical Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University
Research Center for Intelligent Sensing Systems, Zhejiang Laboratory
{lhaoying, naturezhanghn, luop, fenghj, xuzh}@zju.edu.cn, eagerjtt@zhejianglab.com
2

Abstract

pay too much attention to the background. This data imbalance issue is contrary to the goal of local deblurring.
To tackle the local motion blur problems, data is the foundation. Existing deblurring datasets (Nayar and Ben-Ezra
2004; Köhler et al. 2012; Hu et al. 2016; Nah, Hyun Kim,
and Mu Lee 2017) are mainly constructed for global deblurring with camera motion. Among them, a widely used
approach is synthesizing blurred images by convolving either uniform or non-uniform blur kernels with sharp images
(Boracchi and Foi 2012; Schuler et al. 2015; Chakrabarti
2016). However, this approach cannot assure the fidelity of
blurred images. Another kind of approach shakes the camera to mimic blur caused by camera trembling, and averages consecutive short-exposure frames to synthesize global
blurred images (Nah, Hyun Kim, and Mu Lee 2017; Nah
et al. 2019). However, this kind of averaging approach cannot simulate real overexposure outliers due to the dynamic
range of each frame (Chang et al. 2021). In this paper, we
establish a real local motion blur dataset, ReLoBlur, captured by a static synchronized beam-splitting photographing system, which can capture local blurred and sharp images simultaneously. ReLoBlur only contains blur caused
by moving objects, without camera motion blur. Moreover,
we propose a novel paired image post-processing pipeline to
address color cast and misalignment problems occurred in
common beam-splitting systems (Tai et al. 2008; Rim et al.
2020). To the best of our acknowledgment, ReLoBlur is the
first real local motion blur dataset captured in nature.
Since deep learning is proven to be successful in the
global deblurring task, a direct way to remove local blur is
to borrow ideas from deep global deblurring models. However, unlike global motion blur, local motion blur changes
abruptly rather than smoothly at object boundaries, and
the sharp background remains clear (Schelten and Roth
2014). Therefore, global deblurring networks fail to handle local motion blur and may raise image artifacts in
sharp backgrounds. Enlightened by MIMO-Unet (Cho et al.
2021), we propose a Local Blur-Aware Gated deblurring
method (LBAG) which localizes blurred regions and predicts sharp images simultaneously with novel local bluraware deblurring techniques. To localize blurred regions,
LBAG is trained to predict local blur masks under the supervision of local blur mask ground-truths, which are generated
by a blur detection approach based on background subtrac-

Most existing deblurring methods focus on removing global
blur caused by camera shake, while they cannot well handle local blur caused by object movements. To fill the vacancy of local deblurring in real scenes, we establish the
first real local motion blur dataset (ReLoBlur), which is captured by a synchronized beam-splitting photographing system and corrected by a post-progressing pipeline. Based on
ReLoBlur, we propose a Local Blur-Aware Gated network
(LBAG) and several local blur-aware techniques to bridge the
gap between global and local deblurring: 1) a blur detection
approach based on background subtraction to localize blurred
regions; 2) a gate mechanism to guide our network to focus on
blurred regions; and 3) a blur-aware patch cropping strategy
to address data imbalance problem. Extensive experiments
prove the reliability of ReLoBlur dataset, and demonstrate
that LBAG achieves better performance than state-of-the-art
global deblurring methods and our proposed local blur-aware
techniques are effective.

Introduction
Single image deblurring has been persistently analyzed
(Wang, Li, and Wang 2017; Zhou et al. 2019; Jin et al. 2021;
Zhou, Li, and Change Loy 2022) and motion blur can be categorized into two kinds: global motion blur and local motion blur. In a global motion blurred image, blur exists in
all regions of the image, and is usually caused by camera
shake (Schelten and Roth 2014; Zhang et al. 2018). Fantastic progress has been made in global motion deburring (Nah,
Hyun Kim, and Mu Lee 2017; Kupyn et al. 2019; Chen et al.
2021). However, local motion deblurring is under few explorations, where blurs only exist in some of the regions of the
image, and are mostly caused by object movements captured
by a static camera.
Deep local motion deblurring in real scenes is a vital task
with many challenges. Firstly, there is no public real local
motion blur dataset for deep learning. Secondly, local motion deblurring is a complicated inverse problem due to the
random localization of local blurs and the unknown blur extents. Besides, the blurred regions occupy only a small proportion of the full image, causing a deep neural network to
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1314

