The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Mitigating Artifacts in Real-World Video Super-resolution Models
Liangbin Xie* 1,2,3 , Xintao Wang3 , Shuwei Shi1,4 , Jinjin Gu5,6 , Chao Dong†1,6 , Ying Shan3
1

The Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology,
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Macau
3
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
4
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
5
The University of Sydney
6
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{lb.xie, chao.dong}@siat.ac.cn, ssw20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jinjin.gu@sydney.edu.au
{xintaowang, yingsshan}@tencent.com
9

Abstract

# Params

8

The recurrent structure is a prevalent framework for the task
of video super-resolution, which models the temporal dependency between frames via hidden states. When applied to
real-world scenarios with unknown and complex degradations, hidden states tend to contain unpleasant artifacts and
propagate them to restored frames. In this circumstance, our
analyses show that such artifacts can be largely alleviated
when the hidden state is replaced with a cleaner counterpart.
Based on the observations, we propose a Hidden State Attention (HSA) module to mitigate artifacts in real-world video
super-resolution. Specifically, we first adopt various cheap filters to produce a hidden state pool. For example, Gaussian
blur filters are for smoothing artifacts while sharpening filters
are for enhancing details. To aggregate a new hidden state that
contains fewer artifacts from the hidden state pool, we devise
a Selective Cross Attention (SCA) module, in which the attention between input features and each hidden state is calculated. Equipped with HSA, our proposed method, namely
FastRealVSR, is able to achieve 2× speedup while obtaining better performance than Real-BasicVSR. Codes will be
available at https://github.com/TencentARC/FastRealVSR.

DAN

7

DBVSR

5M

10M

20M

15M

NIQE

6
5 BSRGAN

RealBasicVSR

4

Real-ESRGAN

3

FastRealVSR

better

2
1
0
0

5

better

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

FPS

Figure 1: Our proposed FastRealVSR can ahieve the best
trade-off between NIQE, speed and parameters in the realworld VideoLQ dataset.

model long-term dependencies with hidden states, and have
won several championships in video restoration competitions (Yang 2021; Yang et al. 2022a).
When applied to real-world low-quality videos, existing
recurrent methods (e.g., BasicVSR (Chan et al. 2021)) tend
to produce unpleasant artifacts, which will be amplified
through propagation (Chan et al. 2022b). This problem becomes more severe when the degradations are more complicated with unknown blur, noise and compression.
Recent work Real-BasicVSR (Chan et al. 2022b) makes
the first attempt to alleviate those artifacts. It adopts a separate image pre-cleaning module before the video recurrent
restoration model to explicitly remove degradations for each
video frame. However, while mitigating unpleasant artifacts,
such a strategy can also lead to detail loss, due to the explicit
denoising operation in the image level. Besides, the separate
module brings extra computation cost, which slows down
the inference speed and is not friendly to practical usages.
In this work, we carefully investigate the cause of the
unpleasant artifacts in VSR. We draw two observations. 1)
Once the output of the previous frame produces artifacts, the

Introduction
Video Super-Resolution (VSR) aims to recover highresolution (HR) frame sequences from their low-resolution
(LR) counterparts, where the utilization of complementary
information across adjacent frames is the key factor to improve performance. VSR can be roughly classified into two
categories – sliding-window-based methods (Caballero et al.
2017; Huang, Wang, and Wang 2017; Wang et al. 2019;
Tian et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Isobe et al. 2020a) and recurrent methods (Chan et al. 2021, 2022a; Huang, Wang,
and Wang 2015; Sajjadi, Vemulapalli, and Brown 2018;
Haris, Shakhnarovich, and Ukita 2019; Xiang et al. 2020;
Isobe et al. 2020a,b; Lin, Huang, and Wang 2021). Recurrent methods are the prevalent approaches since they can
* Liangbin Xie is an intern in ARC Lab, Tencent PCG.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2956

