The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PeCo: Perceptual Codebook for BERT Pre-training of Vision Transformers
Xiaoyi Dong1 * † , Jianmin Bao2∗ , Ting Zhang2 , Dongdong Chen3,† , Weiming Zhang1
Lu Yuan3 , Dong Chen2 , Fang Wen2 , Nenghai Yu1 , Baining Guo2
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Microsoft Cloud + AI
{dlight@mail., zhangwm@, ynh@}.ustc.edu.cn cddlyf@gmail.com
{jianbao, ting.zhang, luyuan, doch, fangwen, bainguo }@microsoft.com
Reference

Abstract
This paper explores a better prediction target for BERT pretraining of vision transformers. We observe that current prediction targets disagree with human perception judgment.
This contradiction motivates us to learn a perceptual prediction target. We argue that perceptually similar images should
stay close to each other in the prediction target space. We surprisingly find one simple yet effective idea: enforcing perceptual similarity during the dVAE training. Moreover, we adopt
a self-supervised transformer model for deep feature extraction and show that it works well for calculating perceptual
similarity. We demonstrate that such learned visual tokens indeed exhibit better semantic meanings, and help pre-training
achieve superior transfer performance in various downstream
tasks. For example, we achieve 84.5% Top-1 accuracy on
ImageNet-1K with ViT-B backbone, outperforming the competitive method BEiT by +1.3% under the same pre-training
epochs. Our approach also gets significant improvement on
object detection and segmentation on COCO and semantic
segmentation on ADE20K. Equipped with a larger backbone
ViT-H, we achieve the state-of-the-art ImageNet accuracy
(88.3%) among methods using only ImageNet-1K data.

Human
L2
DALL-E
PeCo (Ours)

View1

(36.35)
(7.04)
(3.61)

View2

(22.37)
(5.55)
(4.44)

Reference

View1

(19.12)
(4.79)
(3.95)

View2

(48.80)
(5.54)
(1.75)

Figure 1: Several examples illustrating the results of different prediction targets on the question that which image
(View1 or View2) is “closer” to the Reference image. The
number denotes the distance between View1 or View2 and
the Reference image. The images with smaller distances are
considered more similar. We observe that the proposed PeCo
agrees with human judgments while L2 or DALL-E disagree.

We point out that current prediction targets disagree with
human judgment when evaluating the similarity between
two different images. There are two representative prediction targets in current MIM methods: per-pixel regression
and discrete token prediction. Figure 1 illustrates the results
of different prediction targets on the question that which image (View1 or View2) is “closer” to the “Reference” for
these examples. The reason for such disagreement of current prediction targets may come from the per-pixel loss.
Note that the discrete tokens are obtained by a VQ-VAE
trained under the objective of reconstruction loss, i.e. , perpixel loss. The per-pixel measure assuming pixel-wise independence is insufficient for assessing structured outputs. For
example, blurring causes large perceptual change but small
pixel error, while shifting incurs small perceptual change but
large pixel error (Zhang et al. 2018). Such disagreement with
human visual perception indicates that perceptually similar
patches may have divergent prediction targets. This undermines the capability of MIM as it, in principle, is based on
context prediction.
We propose that a good prediction target for MIM should
coincide with human judgment. In other words, perceptually
similar images should be close to each other in the prediction
target space. Inspired from the observation in (Zhang et al.
2018) that deep features model low-level perceptual similarity surprisingly well, we introduce this so-called percep-

Introduction
Current state-of-the-art self-supervised pre-training methods (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Bao, Dong, and Wei 2021;
He et al. 2021; Xie et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022; Wei
et al. 2021) for vision transformers focus on masked image
modeling (MIM), a task of making predictions for masked
patches from the visible patches. The input is usually an
image consisting of visible patches and randomly masked
patches and each patch is associated with corresponding
positional embedding. The prediction target for masked
patches varies for different methods, ranging from pixellevel prediction (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; He et al. 2021; Xie
et al. 2021) to feature-level prediction (Bao, Dong, and Wei
2021; Chen et al. 2022; Wei et al. 2021). In this paper, we
study the prediction targets and introduce a better prediction
target for MIM.
* Equal contribution, † Corresponding Author
†

Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

552

