The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AUC Maximization for Low-Resource Named Entity Recognition
Ngoc Dang Nguyen 1 , Wei Tan 1 ,
Lan Du 1 * , Wray Buntine 2 , Richard Beare 1 , Changyou Chen 3
1

Department of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Monash University
2
College of Engineering and Computer Science, VinUniversity
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo

Abstract
Current work in named entity recognition (NER) uses either
cross entropy (CE) or conditional random fields (CRF) as
the objective/loss functions to optimize the underlying NER
model. Both of these traditional objective functions for the
NER problem generally produce adequate performance when
the data distribution is balanced and there are sufficient annotated training examples. But since NER is inherently an
imbalanced tagging problem, the model performance under
the low-resource settings could suffer using these standard
objective functions. Based on recent advances in area under
the ROC curve (AUC) maximization, we propose to optimize
the NER model by maximizing the AUC score. We give evidence that by simply combining two binary-classifiers that
maximize the AUC score, significant performance improvement over traditional loss functions is achieved under lowresource NER settings. We also conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the advantages of our method under
the low-resource and highly-imbalanced data distribution settings. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that
brings AUC maximization to the NER setting. Furthermore,
we show that our method is agnostic to different types of NER
embeddings, models and domains. The code of this work is
available at https://github.com/dngu0061/NER-AUC-2T.

Figure 1: Reformulating the traditional multi-class NERtagging problem as a two-task learning problem. The first
task is to detect if a word is inside an NE, while the second
task is to detect if a word is at the beginning of an NE.

Since manually annotating a large amount of data in each
domain or language is expensive, time-consuming, and often
infeasible without domain expertise (e.g., biomedical NER)
(Tan, Du, and Buntine 2021; Nguyen et al. 2022), machine
learning practitioners have focused on other alternative approaches to produce effective solution to overcome this data
scarcity issue. These approaches include data augmentation
(Etzioni et al. 2005; Chen et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2022),
domain adaptation (Li, Shang, and Shao 2020), and multilingual transfers (Rahimi, Li, and Cohn 2019). Although
these approaches have shown promising results, they ignore
the highly imbalanced data distribution that is inherent to
NER corpora. Table 1 summarizes this issue. While the imbalanced data distribution issue exists in both CoNLL 2003
(Tjong Kim Sang and De Meulder 2003) and OntoNotes5
(Weischedel et al. 2014) where the majority of tag is “O”,
this imbalance issue amplifies given the context of biomedical NER (bioNER). For instance, LINNAEUS (Gerner, Nenadic, and Bergman 2010), one of the hardest bioNER tasks,
has nearly 99 percent of its tokens tagged as “O”. Given adequate annotated training examples, the NER model could
overcome this issue and learn to classify the tokens correctly. Nonetheless, many corpora, especially those from the
biomedical domain, can be scarcely labeled.
Since NER corpora can be both scarcely labeled and
highly imbalanced, we argue that the standard cross entropy
objective function, though capable of producing the optimal
token classifier asymptotically under the maximum likelihood principle, would fail to achieve the desirable performance under the low-resource and imbalanced settings.
With the above desiderata, this paper considers optimizing the NER model under a different objective/loss function.

Introduction
Named Entity Recognition (NER) is a fundamental NLP
task which aims to locate named entity (NE) mentions and
classify them into predefined categories such as location,
organization, or person. NER usually serves as an important sub-task for information extraction (Ritter, Etzioni, and
Clark 2012), information retrieval (Banerjee et al. 2019),
task oriented dialogues (Peng et al. 2021), knowledge base
construction (Etzioni et al. 2005) and other language applications. Recently, NER has gained significant performance
improvements with the advances of pre-trained language
models (PLMs) (Devlin et al. 2019). Unfortunately, a large
amount of training data is often essential for these PLMs to
excel and except for a few high-resource domains, the majority of domains (e.g., biomedical domain) are scarce and have
limited amount of labeled data (Giorgi and Bader 2019).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13389

