The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Help Me Heal: A Reinforced Polite and Empathetic Mental Health and Legal
Counseling Dialogue System for Crime Victims
Kshitij Mishra* , Priyanshu Priya* , Asif Ekbal
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Patna, Bihta, India
{kshitij 1921cs23, priyanshu 2021cs26, asif}@iitp.ac.in

Abstract

(White and Dorman 2001) cause millions of individuals who
need emotional and mental health-related support (Eysenbach et al. 2004) to resort to text-based peer support forums
such as TalkLife, Psychcentral2 , etc. Although the peer supporters on such forums are intended to help support seekers
positively, they are usually untrained and unacquainted of
the best practices in counseling, hence, are unable to deliver
good and mutually engaging replies (Gage-Bouchard et al.
2018). Consequently, it becomes imperative to build intelligent conversational agents that can offer potential solutions
to support seekers.
A polite behaviour of a dialogue agent facilitates natural, smooth, and engaging conversations (Coppock 2005)
and can foster the interaction between the agent and users
(Golchha et al. 2019). Politeness has been identified and
evaluated as an essential component of support messages
(Brown, Levinson, and Levinson 1987; Feng, Li, and Li
2016). Incorporation of politeness in a counseling agent’s
replies may create a warm atmosphere and enhance the user
experience. Furthermore, to administer successful counseling and elicit positive-outcomes in support-based conversations, empathy is vital (Norcross 2002; Elliott et al. 2018)
and has been substantially investigated.
The World Health Organization (WHO) states that approximately one-third (33.3%) of women worldwide have
experienced physical and/or sexual violence at least once in
their lifetime, and approximately one billion children aged
2 to 17 have experienced physical, sexual, or emotional violence. This affects their physical, emotional, and mental
well-being. Further, owing to the lack of knowledge about
their legal and human rights or their privacy, most people are
less likely to disclose an assault or abuse. An immediately
available secure mental health and legal counseling dialogue
system may able to help these people (victims hereafter).
Though a few dialogue systems for mental health assistance (WoeBot (Fitzpatrick, Darcy, and Vierhile 2017), Tess
(Fulmer et al. 2018)) and legal assistance (DoNotPay, Convey Law3 ) have been reported in the literature, none of these
is designated to provide both mental health and legal counseling to the victims. Neither do they induce politeness in
the responses while showcasing empathy. Thus, we propose

The potential for conversational agents offering mental health
and legal counseling in an autonomous, interactive, and vitally accessible environment is getting highlighted due to
the increased access to information through the internet and
mobile devices. A counseling conversational agent should
be able to offer higher engagement mimicking the real-time
counseling sessions. The ability to empathize or comprehend and feel another person’s emotions and experiences is
a crucial quality that promotes effective therapeutic bonding and rapport-building. Further, the use of polite encoded
language in the counseling reflects the nobility and creates a
familiar, warm, and comfortable atmosphere to resolve human issues. Therefore, focusing on these two aspects, we
propose a Polite and Empathetic Mental Health and Legal
Counseling Dialogue System (Po-Em-MHLCDS) for the
victims of crimes. To build Po-Em-MHLCDS, we first create
a Mental Health and Legal Counseling Dataset (MHLCD)
by recruiting six employees who are asked to converse with
each other, acting as a victim and the agent interchangeably
following a fixed stated guidelines. Second, the MHLCD
dataset is annotated with three informative labels, viz. counseling strategies, politeness, and empathy. Lastly, we train
the Po-Em-MHLCDS in a reinforcement learning framework by designing an efficient and effective reward function to reinforce correct counseling strategy, politeness and
empathy while maintaining contextual-coherence and nonrepetitiveness in the generated responses. Our extensive automatic and human evaluation demonstrate the strength of
the proposed system. Codes and Data can be accessed at
https://www.iitp.ac.in/ ai-nlp-ml/resources.html#MHLCD or
https://github.com/Mishrakshitij/Po-Em-MHLCDS

Introduction
With approximately 20% of the global population suffering
from mental health issues (Holmes et al. 2018), availability of its immediate treatment has become the primary concern worldwide. However, according to the WHO’s Mental Health ATLAS 20201 , there is a global paucity of mental health professionals. Limited access to in-person treatment and other obstacles like social stigma and prejudice
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240036703

2
3

14408

https://www.talklife.co/, https://psychcentral.com/
https://donotpay.com/, https://www.conveylaw.com/

