The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MetaTPTrans: A Meta Learning Approach for Multilingual Code
Representation Learning
Weiguo Pian1 , Hanyu Peng2 , Xunzhu Tang1 , Tiezhu Sun1 , Haoye Tian1 * ,
Andrew Habib1 , Jacques Klein1 , Tegawendé F. Bissyandé1,3
1

SnT, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
2
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
3
CITADEL, Université Virtuelle du Burkina Faso
weiguo.pian@uni.lu, penghanyu@baidu.com, {xunzhu.tang, tiezhu.sun, haoye.tian}@uni.lu
andrew.a.habib@gmail.com, {jacques.klein, tegawende.bissyande}@uni.lu
Abstract

information, e.g., ASTs, and data- and control-flow information. Therefore, a straightforward adoption of NLP models to
source code struggles to capture structural information from
the source code context (sequence of tokens).
To alleviate the problem above, Alon et al. (2019a,b) proposed to incorporate the structural information by encoding
pairwise paths on AST via LSTMs (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) to represent the source code. Inspired by the
success of Graph Neural Networks (GNN) (Kipf and Welling
2017; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Velickovic et al.
2018; Gasteiger, Groß, and Günnemann 2020) in modeling structural data, several works leverage GNNs on ASTs
to capture the program structure. For instance, Allamanis,
Brockschmidt, and Khademi (2018) used Gated Graph Neural Networks (GGNN) to learn program representation over
ASTs and data flow graphs. Based on GGNN and programs
graphs, Fernandes, Allamanis, and Brockschmidt (2019) proposed Sequence GNN for code summarization and Zhou et al.
(2019) proposed a GNN-based approach to detect software
vulnerabilities. However, GNN-based methods struggle to extract global structural information since GNNs focus on local
message passing when aggregating information across nodes.
Besides, the aforementioned approaches focus on structural
information and ignore the contextual information when extracting features from source code. To model both structural and contextual information, Hellendoorn et al. (2020)
combined the two kinds of information through Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) by biasing the self-attention process
with relation information extracted from graph edge types.
Zügner et al. (2021) proposed to bias the computation of selfattention with multiple kinds of pairwise distances between
AST nodes and integrate them into the XLNet model (Yang
et al. 2019). Lastly, Peng et al. (2021) introduced TPTrans,
which biases the attention processes in Transformers with the
encoding of relative and absolute AST paths.
In a different direction, Zügner et al. (2021) introduced
their novel insight that multilingual training improves the performance of the model compared to training models on singlelanguage datasets separately, since training the model with
multilingual source code data enhances the model’s ability
to learn language-agnostic information (Zügner et al. 2021).
The language-agnostic information is introduced in (Zügner
et al. 2021), which means that the information can be di-

Representation learning of source code is essential for applying machine learning to software engineering tasks. Learning
code representation from a multilingual source code dataset
has been shown to be more effective than learning from singlelanguage datasets separately, since more training data from
multilingual dataset improves the model’s ability to extract
language-agnostic information from source code. However,
existing multilingual training overlooks the language-specific
information which is crucial for modeling source code across
different programming languages, while only focusing on
learning a unified model with shared parameters among different languages for language-agnostic information modeling. To
address this problem, we propose MetaTPTrans, a meta learning approach for multilingual code representation learning.
MetaTPTrans generates different parameters for the feature
extractor according to the specific programming language type
of the input code snippet, enabling the model to learn both
language-agnostic and language-specific information with dynamic parameters in the feature extractor. We conduct experiments on the code summarization and code completion
tasks to verify the effectiveness of our approach. The results
demonstrate the superiority of our approach with significant
improvements on state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
Modeling source code aims at capturing both its syntax and
semantics to enable applying machine learning to software
engineering tasks such as code summarization (Zügner et al.
2021; Peng et al. 2021), code completion (Liu et al. 2020a,b),
bug finding (Wang et al. 2016; Pradel and Sen 2018), patch
correctness assessment (Tian et al. 2022a,b), etc. Inspired
by the success of deep learning in the field of natural language processing (NLP) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997;
Vaswani et al. 2017), modeling source code with deep learning techniques has attracted increasing attention from researchers in recent years (Alon et al. 2019a,b; Hellendoorn
et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2021). Although programs are more
repetitive and predictable (i.e. "natural" (Hindle et al. 2012)),
unlike natural language text, they also contain rich structural
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5239

