The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Wasserstein Graph Distance Based on L1 -Approximated Tree Edit Distance
between Weisfeiler-Lehman Subtrees
Zhongxi Fang1 , Jianming Huang1 , Xun Su1 , Hiroyuki Kasai1,2
1

Department of Computer Science and Communications Engineering, FSE Graduate School, Waseda University
2
Department of Communications and Computer Engineering, FSE School, Waseda University
fzx@akane.waseda.jp, koukenmei@toki.waseda.jp, suxun opt@asagi.waseda.jp, hiroyuki.kasai@waseda.jp

Abstract

neural networks to estimate the similarity between graphs.
However, these methods require an accurate similarity
score as a label, which limits their application scope.
Additionally, it has been pointed out that GNNs cannot
fully exploit the structural information of graphs (Errica
et al. 2020). Random-walk-based graph embeddings, such
as DeepWalk (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014) and
Node2Vec (Grover and Leskovec 2016), provide another
way of describing structural information. Although they can
capture the regularity of node connections, they cannot handle previously unseen nodes due to their use of transductive learning. Furthermore, finding appropriate parameters
for random walks can be costly.
In contrast, graph kernels (Nikolentzos, Siglidis, and
Vazirgiannis 2021) are a class of methods that specialize in
measuring the similarities of graph structures. Most of them
are based on R-convolutional theory (Haussler 1999), which
computes graph similarity by decomposing a graph into subgraphs, measuring the similarities between subgraphs, and
aggregating them. Some well-known graph kernels produce
more stable and competitive classification results compared
to GNNs. We aim to measure even slight differences in the
entire graph structures by correctly measuring the differences between subgraphs. To this end, we delve into one
of the most influential graph kernels, the Weisfeiler-Lehman
(WL) subtree kernel (Shervashidze and Borgwardt 2009).
The WL subtree kernel, also known as the WL kernel, is
a pioneering graph kernel that uses a neighborhood aggregation scheme. It was inspired by the WL test (Weisfeiler and
Leman 1968), which provides an approximate solution to
the graph isomorphism problem. Due to its stable and high
performance in graph classification tasks and its similarity to
the message-passing algorithm of GNNs, the WL kernel is
often used as a baseline for GNNs (Morris et al. 2019; Bodnar et al. 2021; Wijesinghe and Wang 2022). Furthermore,
previous studies have shown that the WL framework can
provide high accuracy (Nikolentzos, Siglidis, and Vazirgiannis 2021). However, we argue that the WL kernel’s measure
of graph similarity is coarse, and there are two main reasons
for this. The first problem is that the ability to describe structural information is weak. This problem stems from the fact
that WL test focuses only on the consistency of the graph,
in particular the consistency of the subgraphs composed of
a node and its neighborhood; the WL test projects different

The Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) test is a widely used algorithm
in graph machine learning, including graph kernels, graph
metrics, and graph neural networks. However, it focuses only
on the consistency of the graph, which means that it is unable to detect slight structural differences. Consequently, this
limits its ability to capture structural information, which also
limits the performance of existing models that rely on the WL
test. This limitation is particularly severe for traditional metrics defined by the WL test, which cannot precisely capture
slight structural differences. In this paper, we propose a novel
graph metric called the Wasserstein WL Subtree (WWLS)
distance to address this problem. Our approach leverages the
WL subtree as structural information for node neighborhoods
and defines node metrics using the L1 -approximated tree edit
distance (L1 -TED) between WL subtrees of nodes. Subsequently, we combine the Wasserstein distance and the L1 TED to define the WWLS distance, which can capture slight
structural differences that may be difficult to detect using conventional metrics. We demonstrate that the proposed WWLS
distance outperforms baselines in both metric validation and
graph classification experiments.

Introduction
In recent years, the remarkable performance improvements
of graph neural networks (GNNs) have triggered a surge of
research on their applications in various domains, such as
recommendation systems (Gao et al. 2022) and drug and
material discovery (Gaudelet et al. 2021; Takamoto et al.
2022). At the same time, a critical need has arisen for accurate tools that can measure graph similarity and distance to
enable effective graph sorting and analysis. However, comparing graph structures is a difficult problem that has been
studied for decades (Bunke and Shearer 1998; Gao et al.
2010; Titouan et al. 2019).
Graph edit distance (GED) is a classical approach to
this problem. However, GED is NP-hard and still requires high time complexity, even with its well-known
approximation algorithms. For instance, the popular A*Beamsearch (Neuhaus, Riesen, and Bunke 2006) has subexponential time complexity. Learning-based methods such
as SimGNN (Bai et al. 2019) combine GNNs and other
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7539

