The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Stroke Extraction of Chinese Character Based on Deep
Structure Deformable Image Registration
Meng Li1 , Yahan Yu1,2 , Yi Yang1 , Guanghao Ren1 , Jian Wang1 *
1

2

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{meng li, yuyahan2020, yangyi, guanghao.ren, jian.wang}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract

clude the following three aspects. First, there are more than
7000 Chinese characters commonly used. Most of them have
a complex structure. Second, the shapes of character strokes
are simple and only have structural differences. These indistinguishable features make recognition directly of stroke
hard for cross strokes within character. Third, the unfixed
number of strokes in different Chinese characters makes it
difficult to build a stroke extraction model.
Existing research on stroke extraction of Chinese characters, including some deep learning-based methods, mostly
focus on image morphological features of strokes and radicals (Kim et al. 2018; Tseng and Chuang 1992; Wang, Jiang,
and Liu 2022). Although these methods can realize remarkable results, their cores are only morphological analysis,
which exists two drawbacks or constraints: (1) the prior information of the character stroke is rarely used, and (2) the
semantic analysis of the stroke is lacking. Rarely using prior
information and stroke semantics can lead to errors in the
separation of cross strokes and the matching of strokes with
the template in the stroke extraction of complex characters.
Inspired by the stroke extraction process of humans, we
propose an efficient stroke extraction method of Chinese
characters which not only separates strokes but also establishes the matching with the reference template. This method
takes semantic features and prior information of strokes into
consideration and mainly includes three steps: (1) stroke registration based on the Structure Deformable Image Registration Network (SDNet); (2) stroke segmentation based on the
Image Semantic Segmentation Network (SegNet); (3) single
stroke high-precision extraction based on the Single Stroke
Extraction Network (ExtractNet).
For human cognition, the prior information of Chinese
character images refers to the basic knowledge of the position and shape of the strokes. To obtain the prior information, we use the image registration to establish a rough mapping relationship between the reference character strokes
and the target character. The transformed reference strokes
based on the mapping relationship are used as prior information of the target stroke positions and shapes. The semantic features of the strokes need to be stable during the
registration-based transformation for effective prior information. However, the existing image registration methods
(Wang, Jiang, and Liu 2022; Haskins, Kruger, and Yan 2020;
Sotiras, Davatzikos, and Paragios 2013) usually cause the

Stroke extraction of Chinese characters plays an important
role in the field of character recognition and generation. The
most existing character stroke extraction methods focus on
image morphological features. These methods usually lead
to errors of cross strokes extraction and stroke matching due
to rarely using stroke semantics and prior information. In
this paper, we propose a deep learning-based character stroke
extraction method that takes semantic features and prior information of strokes into consideration. This method consists of three parts: image registration-based stroke registration that establishes the rough registration of the reference
strokes and the target as prior information; image semantic segmentation-based stroke segmentation that preliminarily separates target strokes into seven categories; and highprecision extraction of single strokes. In the stroke registration, we propose a structure deformable image registration network to achieve structure-deformable transformation
while maintaining the stable morphology of single strokes
for character images with complex structures. In order to
verify the effectiveness of the method, we construct two
datasets respectively for calligraphy characters and regular
handwriting characters. The experimental results show that
our method strongly outperforms the baselines. Code is available at https://github.com/MengLi-l1/StrokeExtraction.

Introduction
Stroke extraction of Chinese characters refers to extracting
every single stroke of the characters based on the matching
with the templates consisting of standard ordered strokes.
Stroke extraction is important for certain research on Chinese characters. In the field of character recognition, the experiments in (Xiao et al. 2017; Zhang, Du, and Dai 2020)
show that further disassembly of the stroke structure of characters can significantly improve the accuracy of character
recognition. In other search fields such as evaluation of calligraphy the important part of traditional Chinese culture
(Wang et al. 2016), and character generation (Liu and Lian
2021), the stroke extraction is also of great significance to
them.
By analyzing the characteristics of Chinese characters, the
difficulties of Chinese character stroke extraction mainly in* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1360

