The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

What Do You MEME? Generating Explanations
for Visual Semantic Role Labelling in Memes
Shivam Sharma 1,4 , Siddhant Agarwal 1 , Tharun Suresh 1 ,
Preslav Nakov 2 , Md. Shad Akhtar 1 , Tanmoy Chakraborty3
1

Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology Delhi, India
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
3
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India
4
Wipro AI Labs (Lab45), India
{shivams, siddhant20247, tharun20119, shad.akhtar}@iiitd.ac.in, preslav.nakov@mbzuai.ac.ae, tanchak@iitd.ac.in
2

Entity: democratic party
Role: victim

Abstract
Memes are powerful means for effective communication on
social media. Their effortless amalgamation of viral visuals and compelling messages can have far-reaching implications with proper marketing. Previous research on memes has
primarily focused on characterizing their affective spectrum
and detecting whether the meme’s message insinuates any
intended harm, such as hate, offense, racism, etc. However,
memes often use abstraction, which can be elusive. Here, we
introduce a novel task – EXCLAIM, generating explanations
for visual semantic role labeling in memes. To this end, we
curate ExHVV, a novel dataset that offers natural language
explanations of connotative roles for three types of entities
– heroes, villains, and victims, encompassing 4,680 entities
present in 3K memes. We also benchmark ExHVV with several strong unimodal and multimodal baselines. Moreover,
we posit LUMEN, a novel multimodal, multi-task learning
framework that endeavors to address EXCLAIM optimally
by jointly learning to predict the correct semantic roles and
correspondingly to generate suitable natural language explanations. LUMEN distinctly outperforms the best baseline
across 18 standard natural language generation evaluation
metrics. Our systematic evaluation and analyses demonstrate
that characteristic multimodal cues required for adjudicating
semantic roles are also helpful for generating suitable explanations.

democratic party is depicted
as being unfairly criticized
The democratic party is
portrayed as a victim of
false allegations
the democratic party is
portrayed as being falsely
accused of a hoax

Figure 1: A novel task of EXCLAIM. Given a meme, a referred entity and its semantic role, generate a natural language explanation that emulates human-like reasoning.

For example, it is challenging to detect the multimodal
narrative framing of social entities in memes (Sharma et al.
2022a,c), and to model the inherent contextual reasoning.
We attempt to leverage the features learned while detecting semantic role labels: hero, villain, and victim for memes
towards generating plausible natural language explanations.
In doing so, we aim to contextualize memes towards critical
social-media based use-cases like content moderation and
digital marketing. Generated explanations can help contextualize role labeling and assist in the retrospective deduction
for strategic insights.
Memes often implicitly ply sarcasm, satire, humor, and
irony while vilifying, victimizing, or glorifying target entities. Generating explanations for such aspects is challenging
due to the need for abstract reasoning and multimodal contextualization, as role labels and corresponding explanations
are complementary to each other. As an illustration, Figure 1 depicts a meme in which Donald Trump is portrayed as
falsely implicating the Democratic Party for concocting the
ruse of ‘Coronavirus’, without explicitly stating it. Therefore, Donald Trump needs to be adjudicated as a villain,
based on the meme’s semiotics involving his ironic stance
reversal in the depicted scenario. Consequently, Democratic
Party’s role as a victim needs to be ascertained based upon
the sarcasm implied. EXCLAIM asks for an explaining agent
to factor in such intricacies while generating a suitable explanation for the aforementioned semantic roles.
The textual modality is well known to be instrumental to-

Introduction
In recent years, memes have become essential for communicating complex ideas and discussing societal issues. Besides
being a developing phenomenon on the Internet, memetic
visual recipes constantly mutate by adapting to the everevolving disparate social outlook, rendering them abstruse.
Due to their design accessibility, memes are being increasingly disseminated to cause various kinds of harm (Pramanick et al. 2021a), including hate (Kiela et al. 2020a), offense
(Shang et al. 2021), trolling (Suryawanshi and Chakravarthi
2021), etc. Recently, there have been developments towards
automatically detecting such memes (Sharma et al. 2022b).
However, the limitations start materializing while contemplating aspects like multimodality and contextual dependency.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9763

