The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Exploration via Epistemic Value Estimation
Simon Schmitt1,2 , John Shawe-Taylor2 , Hado van Hasselt1
1

2

DeepMind
University College London, UK
suschmitt@google.com

Abstract

EVE equips the agent with a tractable posterior over all
its agent parameters, from which epistemic value uncertainty
can be computed efficiently. Considering all agent parameters
distinguishes it from prior approaches that are Bayesian only
on the final network layer. The recipe reinterprets value prediction as density estimation of returns. Drawing on insights
from parametric statistics it then approximates the posterior
over agent parameters using a specifically structured Gaussian distribution. Besides being motivated in statistical theory
this approximation is efficient to sample from and convenient
to estimate using automatic differentiation frameworks. As a
result it obtains favourable computational performance compared to ensemble methods that need to store and update
multiple models concurrently.
When applied to Q-Learning, it matches the exploration
performance of Bootstrapped DQN on the Deep Sea benchmark – providing encouraging evidence for our recipe.

How to efficiently explore in reinforcement learning is an open
problem. Many exploration algorithms employ the epistemic
uncertainty of their own value predictions – for instance to
compute an exploration bonus or upper confidence bound.
Unfortunately the required uncertainty is difficult to estimate
in general with function approximation.
We propose epistemic value estimation (EVE): a recipe that
is compatible with sequential decision making and with neural network function approximators. It equips agents with a
tractable posterior over all their parameters from which epistemic value uncertainty can be computed efficiently.
We use the recipe to derive an epistemic Q-Learning agent and
observe competitive performance on a series of benchmarks.
Experiments confirm that the EVE recipe facilitates efficient
exploration in hard exploration tasks.

1

Introduction

What are Epistemic Values? As we are uncertain about
the true value (i.e. the expected return) we can treat it as a
random variable given the agents experience. We will call
the corresponding random variable the epistemic value to
emphasize that the value distribution differs from the return
distribution. On average the epistemic value uncertainty decreases with more observed data while the return uncertainty
is by definition invariant to it.

Reinforcement learning agents strive to maximize return in
sequential decision making problems. To learn about the
problem structure they take potentially costly exploratory actions. Ideally the price of exploration will be outweighed by
future gains afforded by the gained information. Balancing
those two conflicting objectives is called the exploration versus exploitation trade-off. It is at the heart of reinforcement
research and has been studied extensively (Bellman 1957;
Martin 1967; Duff 2002; Guez, Silver, and Dayan 2012).
Many proposed exploration algorithms are uncertainty based:
To explore efficiently the uncertainty of the value prediction
is used – for instance as an exploration bonus or upper confidence interval (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002), or
for Thomson Sampling (Thompson 1933).

p(V |s, D)
| {z }

̸=

Posterior of mean returns V
captures epistemic uncertainty.

p(Z|s, D)
| {z }

Density of Monte−Carlo returns Z
captures aleatoric uncertainty.

For example the near-optimal UCB algorithm for bandits
upper-bounds the uncertainty of the epistemic value V . If it
were to instead upper-bound the uncertainty of return Z it
would continually keep selecting the action with the noisiest
return and cease to be optimal. The EVE recipe provides
epistemic value estimates for sequential decision making
problems with function approximation.

A Recipe for Uncertainty Estimation How to measure
value uncertainty in deep reinforcement learning is actively
researched and so far no consensus has been reached. We
propose epistemic value estimation (EVE), a principled and
computationally efficient recipe for uncertainty estimation
with function approximation. It is compatible with neural
networks and specifically supports off-policy learning and
value-bootstrapping – key concepts distinguishing reinforcement learning from supervised learning.

2

Background

We investigate exploration in Markov Decision Processes (Bellman 1957). We largely follow the notation
from Sutton and Barto (1998) denoting actions At taken at
states St yielding new states St+1 and rewards Rt+1 . When

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9742

