The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Policy-Independent Behavioral Metric-Based Representation for Deep
Reinforcement Learning
Weijian Liao1 , Zongzhang Zhang1 * , Yang Yu1,2
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518055, China
liaowj@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {zzzhang, yuy}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

Bisimulation metrics (Ferns, Panangaden, and Precup
2004, 2011; Ferns and Precup 2014) are representative of
such metrics.However, computing them exactly needs the
knowledge of ground truth dynamics and the computation
complexity prevents their direct use in large-scale problems.
The π-bisimulation metric (Castro 2020) and the MICo distance (Castro et al. 2021) overcome the disadvantages by
considering state similarity under the dynamics induced by
a specific policy. Such modification allows them to be estimated from sampled transitions, leading to tractable approximation. They have successful application to representation
learning in large-scale RL tasks (Zhang et al. 2021; Castro
et al. 2021). Despite this, they are still problematic due to
their dependence on an RL policy. When the RL policy is
fixed, e.g., in policy evaluation settings, these two metrics
are good enough. However, when the RL policy is learned
online, the metrics may provide uninstructive or even erroneous learning signal on shaping the embedding space due
to the policy’s sub-optimality and consequently only have
limited power to help policy learning. In light of this, it is
desired to minimize the impact of policy changes on metric
estimation as much as possible, while ensuring scalability.
To this end, we propose a new behavioral metric, named
the conservative state-action discrepancy, to compute the
similarity not only between state pairs but also between
state-action pairs. We quantify the similarity by evaluating
the maximum difference of the reward sequences that two
states can achieve upon taking the same action sequence. It
is a policy-independent behavioral metric from the definition
and we give formal reasons on its advantages. We show theoretically that the conservative state-action discrepancy can
be exactly derived in the dynamic programming setting and
unbiasedly estimated in the sampling setting due to its equivalence to Q-value function in a certain constructed MDP.
We also compare the conservative state-action discrepancy
with the MICo distance in detail and reveal a new persective on the latter one. The corresponding learning algorithm
is originated from Q-learning (Watkins 1989) and computes
the relationship between two state-action pairs, so it is called
Q2 -learning. Taking advantage of the equivalence relationship further, we propose to utilize the deterministic policy
gradient algorithm (Silver et al. 2014) to address computation difficulties when faced with continuous action spaces.
The approach enables to scale to large tasks as an auxiliary

Behavioral metrics can calculate the distance between states
or state-action pairs from the rewards and transitions difference. By virtue of their capability to filter out task-irrelevant
information in theory, using them to shape a state embedding space becomes a new trend of representation learning for
deep reinforcement learning (RL), especially when there are
explicit distracting factors in observation backgrounds. However, due to the tight coupling between the metric and the
RL policy, such metric-based methods may result in less informative embedding spaces which can weaken their aid to
the baseline RL algorithm and even consume more samples
to learn. We resolve this by proposing a new behavioral metric. It decouples the learning of RL policy and metric owing
to its independence on RL policy. We theoretically justify its
scalability to continuous state and action spaces and design
a practical way to incorporate it into an RL procedure as a
representation learning target. We evaluate our approach on
DeepMind control tasks with default and distracting backgrounds. By statistically reliable evaluation protocols, our
experiments demonstrate our approach is superior to previous metric-based methods in terms of sample efficiency and
asymptotic performance in both backgrounds.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has made a series of major breakthroughs in recent years (Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2018; Vinyals et al. 2019). The quality of the
state representation (Lesort et al. 2018) is crucial for the
performance of RL algorithms, especially faced with highdimensional observations, like images. An ideal representation is expected to contain non-redundant information that is
sufficient for decision-making.
One way to obtain such representation is to define a behavioral metric between states and then use the state similarity quantified by this metric to shape the embedding
space via an auxiliary representation learning objective built
upon it. Essentially, such metric-based representation learning methods use specific reward sequences as a supervised
signal for representation learning, so they are expected to
help ignore task-irrelevant information in raw observations.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8746

