The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Scalable Edge Blocking Algorithms for Defending Active Directory Style Attack
Graphs
Mingyu Guo1 , Max Ward2,3 , Aneta Neumann1 , Frank Neumann1 , Hung Nguyen1
1

2

School of Computer and Mathematical Sciences, University of Adelaide, Australia
School of Physics, Maths and Computing, Computer Science and Software Engineering, University of Western Australia
3
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
{mingyu.guo, aneta.neumann, frank.neumann, hung.nguyen}@adelaide.edu.au, max.ward@uwa.edu.au
Abstract

to node B represents that an attacker can gain access from A
to B via an existing access or a known exploit. Unlike many
attack graph models that are of theoretical interest only,2 AD
attack graphs are actively being used by real attackers and IT
admins. Several software tools (including both open source
and commercial software) have been developed for scanning, visualizing and analyzing AD graphs. Among them,
one prominent tool is called B LOOD H OUND, which models
the identity snowball attack. In such an attack, the attacker
starts from a low-privilege account, which is called the attacker’s entry node (i.e., obtained via phishing emails). The
attacker then travels from one node to another, where the
end goal is to reach the highest-privilege account called the
D OMAIN A DMIN (DA).
Given an entry node, B LOOD H OUND generates a shortest attack path to DA, where a path’s distance is equal
to the number of hops (fewer hops implies less chance of
failure/being detected). Before the invention of B LOOD H OUND, attackers used personal experience and heuristics
to explore the attack graph, hoping to reach DA by chance.
B LOOD H OUND makes it easier to attack Active Directory.
Besides the attackers, defenders also study Active Directory attack graphs. The original paper that motivated
B LOOD H OUND (Dunagan, Zheng, and Simon 2009) proposed a heuristic for blocking edges of Active Directory attack graphs. The goal is to cut the attack graph into multiple disconnected regions, which would prevent the attacker
from reaching DA. In an AD environment, edge blocking
is achieved by revoking accesses or introducing monitoring.
Not all edges are blockable. Some accesses are required for
the organisation’s normal operations. Blocking is also costly
(i.e., auditing may be needed before blocking an edge).
We study how to optimally block a limited number of
edges in order to minimize a strategic attacker’s success rate
(chance of success) for reaching DA. In our model, we assume that different edges have different failure rates. The
defender can block a blockable edge to increase the failure
rate of that edge (from its original failure rate) to 100%. The
defender can block at most b edges, where b is the defensive
budget. For example, if it takes 1 hour for an IT admin to
block an edge (auditing, reporting, implementation) and one

Active Directory (AD) is the default security management
system for Windows domain networks. An AD environment
naturally describes an attack graph where nodes represent
computers/accounts/security groups, and edges represent existing accesses/known exploits that allow the attacker to gain
access from one node to another. Motivated by practical AD
use cases, we study a Stackelberg game between one attacker
and one defender. There are multiple entry nodes for the attacker to choose from and there is a single target (Domain Admin). Every edge has a failure rate. The attacker chooses the
attack path with the maximum success rate. The defender can
block a limited number of edges (i.e., revoke accesses) from
a set of blockable edges, limited by budget. The defender’s
aim is to minimize the attacker’s success rate.
We exploit the tree-likeness of practical AD graphs to design
scalable algorithms. We propose two novel methods that combine theoretical fixed parameter analysis and practical optimisation techniques.
For graphs with small tree widths, we propose a tree decomposition based dynamic program. We then propose a general method for converting tree decomposition based dynamic
programs to reinforcement learning environments, which
leads to an anytime algorithm that scales better, but loses the
optimality guarantee.
For graphs with small numbers of non-splitting paths (a parameter we invent specifically for AD graphs), we propose
a kernelization technique that significantly downsizes the
model, which is then solved via mixed-integer programming.
Experimentally, our algorithms scale to handle synthetic AD
graphs with tens of thousands of nodes.

Introduction
Active Directory (AD) is the default system for managing
access and security in Windows domain networks. Given its
prevalence among large and small organisations worldwide,
Active Directory has become a major target by cyber attackers.1 An AD environment naturally describes a cyber attack
graph — a conceptual model for describing the causal relationship of cyber events. In an AD graph, the nodes are computers/user accounts/security groups. An edge from node A
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Enterprise Management Associates (2021) found that 50% of
organizations surveyed had experienced an AD attack since 2019.

2
(Lallie, Debattista, and Bal 2020) surveyed over 180 attack
graphs/trees from academic literatures on cyber security.

5649

