The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Supervised Logic Induction for Explainable Fuzzy Temporal Commonsense
Reasoning
Bibo Cai1 , Xiao Ding1 * , Zhouhao Sun1 , Bing Qin1 , Ting Liu1 , Baojun Wang2 , Lifeng Shang2
1

Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval
Harbin Institute of Technology, China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{bbcai, xding, zhsun, bqin, tliu}@ir.hit.edu.cn
{puking.w, Shang.Lifeng}@huawei.com

Abstract
Understanding temporal commonsense concepts, such as
times of occurrence and durations, is crucial for event-centric
language understanding. Reasoning about such temporal concepts in a complex context requires reasoning over both the
stated context and the world knowledge that underlines it. A
recent study shows massive pre-trained LM still struggle with
such temporal reasoning under complex contexts (e.g., dialog) because they only implicitly encode the relevant contexts
and fail to explicitly uncover the underlying logical compositions for complex inference, thus may not be robust enough.
In this work, we propose to augment LMs with the temporal logic induction ability, which frames temporal reasoning
by defining three modular components: temporal dependency
inducer and temporal concept defuzzifier, and logic validator. The former two components disentangle the explicit/implicit dependency between temporal concepts across context
(before, after, ...) and the specific meaning of fuzzy temporal concepts, respectively, while the validator combines the
intermediate reasoning clues for robust contextual reasoning about the temporal concepts. Extensive experimental results on TIMEDIAL, a challenging dataset for temporal reasoning over dialog, show that our method, Logic Induction
Enhanced Contextualized TEmporal Reasoning (LECTER),
can yield great improvements over the traditional language
model for temporal reasoning.

Figure 1: Fuzzy Reasoning. Temporal reasoning should resolve the dependency among global temporal concepts and
figure out the specific meaning of the fuzzy temporal concepts.

NLP system’s TCS reasoning ability with cheap supervision: the typical approach is to identify the temporal mentions in the free-form text, which is utilized to augment the
traditional language model objective function with temporal
signals. We note that, however, there are significant limitations with such a pretraining-only approach.
As shown in Figure 1 (a), to fill the correct answer in the
blank, one should be able to reason about the global context to derive the latent inter-dependencies among the temporal concepts in the context (the target answer should be
earlier than the temporal expression appears in the position
of “three o’clock”).
Moreover, different from the traditional tasks that also require such a relation induction ability, it also presents additional practical challenges. For example, for the QA problem
in Figure 1 (b), the right answer can be derived once the correct computation logic is obtained (i.e., 2008 − 2007 = 1).
While in the example shown in Figure 1 (a), we should not
only understand the latent dependencies (i.e., “earlier”)
among the temporal concepts, but also infer that the fuzzy
expression “three o’clock” in the example denotes a time

Introduction
Understanding time in natural language text is crucial for understanding the evolving world. Humans can reason about
temporal concepts in a language such as the times of occurrence and durations of events based on their rich temporal commonsense knowledge. Many event-centric NLP
systems, such as timeline construction (Leeuwenberg and
Moens 2018), clinical analysis (Bethard et al. 2015), dialogue assistants (Rong et al. 2017), etc, also rely on the ability of temporal commonsense reasoning to achieve satisfactory performance.
As manually annotating the Temporal CommonSense
(TCS) knowledge required for temporal reasoning is time
and labor-consuming, recent studies attempt to improve the
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12580

