The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Provable Detection of Propagating Sampling Bias in Prediction Models
Pavan Ravishankar 1 , Qingyu Mo 1 , Edward McFowland III 2 , Daniel B. Neill 1
1

Machine Learning for Good Laboratory, New York University
2
Harvard Business School
pr2248@nyu.edu, qm348@nyu.edu, emcfowland@hbs.edu, daniel.neill@nyu.edu

Abstract

what extent the data bias would affect the predictions, and
when the resulting prediction biases would be detectable
by some auditing approach. Such biases, once detected and
precisely characterized, could then be corrected, e.g., by resampling to de-bias the data.
In this paper, we analyze the propagation of differential
sampling bias from the data stage to the prediction stage.
Differential sampling bias is a form of sample selection bias
in which some subpopulation S is sampled non-uniformly,
such that the distribution of an outcome variable Y given
predictor variables X in the sampled data for S differs from
the true (population) distribution of Y given X for S. 1
This bias can arise in many different circumstances. For
example, in criminal justice, both the organizational biases
of police departments (e.g., a policy of conducting large numbers of pedestrian stops in predominantly minority neighborhoods) and the perceptual biases of individual police officers
(e.g., higher likelihood of stopping and frisking Black individuals) led to much higher proportions of Black individuals
being arrested for marijuana possession, despite similar rates
of use in the population as a whole (Edwards et al. 2020). In
our analysis of NYPD stop and frisk data, we consider the
race of the stopped individual as our outcome variable, and
observe that Pr(race = “Black”) is significantly increased as
compared to a “less biased” alternative policing strategy.
Differential sampling bias can also result from concept
shift: a model meant for prediction of outcome variable Y
in one setting is learned using data from a different setting
where the relationship between Y and the predictor variables
X differs. For example, if criminal justice data from one jurisdiction is used to predict a defendant’s risk of reoffending
in a different jurisdiction, or if historical data is used and
reoffending patterns have changed over time, the training
data will exhibit differential sampling bias: the proportion
of reoffenders for certain demographics may be higher or
lower in the training data as compared to the true probabilities for the jurisdiction and time period of interest. In our
experimental analysis of the COMPAS dataset, we inject simulated differential sampling bias (assuming concept shift) by
weighted resampling of the training data.

With an increased focus on incorporating fairness in machine
learning models, it becomes imperative not only to assess and
mitigate bias at each stage of the machine learning pipeline
but also to understand the downstream impacts of bias across
stages. Here we consider a general, but realistic, scenario in
which a predictive model is learned from (potentially biased)
training data, and model predictions are assessed post-hoc
for fairness by some auditing method. We provide a theoretical analysis of how a specific form of data bias, differential
sampling bias, propagates from the data stage to the prediction stage. Unlike prior work, we evaluate the downstream
impacts of data biases quantitatively rather than qualitatively
and prove theoretical guarantees for detection. Under reasonable assumptions, we quantify how the amount of bias in
the model predictions varies as a function of the amount of
differential sampling bias in the data, and at what point this
bias becomes provably detectable by the auditor. Through experiments on two criminal justice datasets– the well-known
COMPAS dataset and historical data from NYPD’s stop and
frisk policy– we demonstrate that the theoretical results hold
in practice even when our assumptions are relaxed.

Introduction
Machine learning models are being used in numerous applications such as healthcare (De Fauw et al. 2018), online advertising (Perlich et al. 2014), and finance (Malekipirbazari and
Aksakalli 2015). Due to its increased proliferation, there is a
rising concern in the machine learning community to deploy
fair machine learning models (Barocas, Hardt, and Narayanan
2017; Mehrabi et al. 2021). Since decision-making in machine learning comprises of various stages such as the data
stage, modeling stage, and prediction stage (Suresh and Guttag 2019), it becomes imperative to look at the fairness problem across stages, rather than limiting the discussion to a
single stage. For instance, the data stage could be biased
due to members of a subgroup being systematically selected
with a higher or a lower probability than others (MedicalDictionary 2016), also known as sample selection bias. Such
biases could propagate to the prediction stage, and the resulting biases in prediction could be compounded by other
sources such as model misspecification (Gajane and Pechenizkiy 2017). However, it is unclear precisely how and to

1
Note that differential sampling bias would not be present if
subpopulation S was under- or over-sampled but the distribution
of Y given X for S remained unchanged. We do not address other
forms of sample selection bias here.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9562

