The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improving Crowded Object Detection via Copy-Paste
Jiangfan Deng, Dewen Fan, Xiaosong Qiu, Feng Zhou
Algorithm Research, Aibee Inc.
jfdeng100@foxmail.com, {dwfan,xsqiu,fzhou}@aibee.com

Abstract
Crowdedness caused by overlapping among similar objects
is a ubiquitous challenge in the field of 2D visual object detection. In this paper, we first underline two main effects of
the crowdedness issue: 1) IoU-confidence correlation disturbances (ICD) and 2) confused de-duplication (CDD). Then
we explore a pathway of cracking these nuts from the perspective of data augmentation. Primarily, a particular copypaste scheme is proposed towards making crowded scenes.
Based on this operation, we first design a “consensus learning” strategy to further resist the ICD problem and then find
out the pasting process naturally reveals a pseudo “depth” of
object in the scene, which can be potentially used for alleviating CDD dilemma. Both methods are derived from magical using of the copy-pasting without extra cost for handlabeling. Experiments show that our approach can easily improve the state-of-the-art detector in typical crowded detection task by more than 2% without any bells and whistles.
Moreover, this work can outperform existing data augmentation strategies in crowded scenario.

3D

2D
Pixel ambiguity
in the 2D space

Box ambiguity (overlap)
in the 2D space

Figure 1: Semantic ambiguities in the 2D space. We exhibit
the same scenario in the real 3D world (left) and the 2D
space after photographing (right) respectively. The colored
boxes represent two distinct objects (pucksters) while the
green points denote a voxel in 3D space and its corresponding pixel in the 2D image. It is clearly illustrated that the
3D voxel lies on the body of a unique puckster while the 2D
pixel lies on both of them. After evolving from a point to a
bounding-box, the ambiguity arises in the form of overlap.
each associated with a confidence score. For an ideallyperformed detector, the score value should convey how
well the predicted box is overlapped with the ground-truth.
In other words, the Intersection-over-Union (IoU) between
these two boxes should be positively correlated with the confidence score. After visualizing the mean and standard deviation of scores with respect to IoU in Fig. 2, it turns out
that even for the off-the-shelf detectors like (He et al. 2017),
this positive correlation would be gradually disturbed by the
increase of crowdedness degree1 . This experimental study
clearly indicates the struggle of current detection algorithms
in facing the super-heavy overlaps. We embody this effect
as IoU-confidence Correlation Disturbances (ICD). On the
other hand, a typical detection pipeline often ends with a deduplication module, for example, the widely adopted NonMaximum Suppression (NMS). Due to the 2D semantical
ambiguity mentioned previously, these modules are often
confused by heavily overlapped predictions, which leads to
severe missing in a crowd. We cast this type of effect as Confused De-Duplication (CDD).
To overcome these two obstacles, we explore a pathway

Introduction
The task of object detection has been meticulously studied
for quite a long time. In the deep learning era, in recent
years, many well-designed methods (Liu et al. 2020a) have
been proposed and raised the detection performance to a surprisingly high level. Nevertheless, there still exist many intrinsic problems that are not fundamentally solved. One of
them is the “crowdedness issue”, which usually denotes the
phenomenon that objects belonging to the same category are
highly overlapped together. In a geometrical manner, the basic difficulty stems from the semantical ambiguities of the
2D space. As shown in Fig. 1, in our 3D world, each voxel
has its “unique semantics” and lies on a “certain object”.
However, after projecting to 2D plane, one pixel might fall
on several collided objects. After evolving the concept from
a “pixel” to a “box”, the semantical ambiguity in crowded
scenes leads to the notion of overlap.
To probe the effects of this problem, we now dive into the
essence of the detection paradigm. Generally, an object detector reads in an image and outputs a set of bounding-boxes

1

The crowdedness degree is indicated in terms of “occlusion
ratio”, i.e., 1 − sv /sf , where the sv and sf represent size of the
visible box and full box of an object.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

497

