The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

S LI Q: Quantum Image Similarity Networks on Noisy Quantum Computers
Daniel Silver, Tirthak Patel, Aditya Ranjan, Harshitta Gandhi, William Cutler, Devesh Tiwari
Northeastern University
{silver.da, patel.ti, ranjan.ad, gandhi.ha, cutler.wi, d.tiwari}@northeastern.edu

Abstract

tional quantum circuit (VQC)(Cerezo et al. 2021) to minimize the loss function. While straightforward, this design is
resource-inefficient and does not fully leverage the unique
properties of quantum computing. To address this gap in unsupervised QML, we propose S LI Q, which mitigates these
challenges with multiple novel key design elements.
First, S LI Q addresses resource inefficiency by training
both images in the pair at once via a superimposed state.
This provides multiple advantages: (1) it reduces the overall quantum resource requirements by reducing the number
of runs, and (2) it allows the VQC to learn more effectively
since the superposition provides explicit hints about the similarity between the data. Next, to take advantage of entanglement in quantum computing systems, S LI Q interweaves the
features of both inputs and explicitly entangles them at each
layer in the VQC, decreasing the distance of corresponding features in Hilbert space. S LI Q’s design ensures that interwoven features from different inputs are embedded into
all physical qubits of the learning circuit so that the entanglement effects are captured in the measurement qubits. To
ensure that S LI Q is practical and effective on current errorprone quantum computers, S LI Q keeps the number of parameters in the learning circuit minimal to mitigate the compounding noise effects on real quantum computers.
Unfortunately, incorporating superposition and entanglement properties creates new challenges. The identities of individual inputs in a pair (e.g., Anchor input in the AnchorPositive pair) are indistinguishable due to entanglement, and
the projection of the same input on the classical space is
inconsistent across different runs. S LI Q introduces a new
training “loss” estimation and improves quantum embedding methods to reduce projection variance, resulting in
more robust training and a network that is resilient to hardware errors on real quantum systems. Overall, S LI Q demonstrates that the combination of training on entangled pairs
and utilizing a projection variance-aware loss estimation
yields effective similarity detection, even on current noisy
quantum computers.
Contributions of S LI Q.
I. To the best of our knowledge, S LI Q is the first method
to build a practical and effective quantum learning
circuit for similarity detection on NISQ-era quantum
computers. S LI Q is available as open-source framework at
https://github.com/SilverEngineered/SliQ.

Exploration into quantum machine learning has grown
tremendously in recent years due to the ability of quantum
computers to speed up classical programs. However, these efforts have yet to solve unsupervised similarity detection tasks
due to the challenge of porting them to run on quantum computers. To overcome this challenge, we propose S LI Q, the
first open-sourced work for resource-efficient quantum similarity detection networks, built with practical and effective
quantum learning and variance-reducing algorithms.

Introduction
Brief Overview and Motivation. Rapid advancements in
quantum machine learning (QML) have increasingly allowed researchers to leverage the benefits of quantum computing in solving ML problems. Although the degree of advantage for different ML tasks is being explored, the recent
advances suggest that classification and solving high energy
physics problems are among the most promising candidates
(Huang et al. 2021b; Guan et al. 2021). In particular, recent efforts have focused on developing high-quality classification circuits for quantum computers. While the resulting
classifiers have been highly effective, they are restricted because classification, like all other supervised learning methods, requires labeled data. In many real-world scenarios, labeled data is either not readily available (e.g., diagnosing
complex diseases based on medical images without quantifiable ground truth (Utkin et al. 2019)) or not feasible (e.g.,
a visual sketch of a suspect) (Wan, Gao, and Lee 2019). In
such scenarios, comparison across unlabeled inputs is critical for learning, prediction, and ground truth generation –
hence the popularity of similarity detection for various tasks
including recommendation systems (Wei et al. 2019). However, there is no QML circuit designed to predict similarity
on unlabeled data currently available.
S LI Q: Solution and Approach. To bridge this gap, a naı̈ve
design for similarity detection might create pairs of similar and dissimilar inputs from the training dataset, much
like classical Siamese and Triplet networks (Chicco 2021;
Li, Kan, and He 2020) (e.g., Anchor-Positive and AnchorNegative pairs), and pass them sequentially over a variaCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9846

