The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Accurate Fairness: Improving Individual Fairness without Trading Accuracy
Xuran Li, Peng Wu* , Jing Su
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{lixr, wp, sujing}@ios.ac.cn

Abstract

on the fairness of the decisions or predictions made by these
systems.
Accuracy and fairness are both crucial for trustworthy machine learning (Huang et al. 2022b,a; Zhang et al. 2021; Su
et al. 2022; Makhlouf, Zhioua, and Palamidessi 2021), but
these two aspects may be incompatible fundamentally from
their own unilateral perspectives, that is, enhancing one aspect may sacrifice the other inevitably with unacceptable
consequences (Dutta et al. 2020; Kim, Chen, and Talwalkar
2020; Pinzón et al. 2022). For instance, more accurate predictions on loan applicants’ incomes can benefit banks with
less lending risks, but the underlying ground truth distribution may tend to prefer applicants with the majority or privileged backgrounds, due to historical practices. Thus, accurate predictions would reflect, even exaggerate such discrimination against minority or unprivileged applicants. In
contrast, enhancing just fairness, e.g., by blindly enforcing
all the applicants to have the same access to loans, would
result in trivially fair but unsound predictions for actually
non-qualified applicants. Therefore, accurate but biased, and
fair but faulty predictions do not yield a mutually beneficial
trade-off between accuracy and fairness. Such incompatibility has recently been shown in (Pinzón et al. 2022) specifically between non-trivial accuracy and equal opportunity, a
group fairness criterion.
In this paper, we propose a new fairness criterion, accurate fairness, to align individual fairness (Dwork et al. 2012;
Galhotra, Brun, and Meliou 2017) with accuracy by uniformly bounding both the accuracy difference and the fairness difference for similar sub-populations. Any two individuals are similar if both differ only on their sensitive attributes, e.g., genders, races, and ages. Then, an individual
is treated by a machine learning model in an accurately fair
way, if its prediction results for both the individual and the
individual’s similar counterparts conform to the ground truth
of the individual; otherwise, the prediction result for this individual is either faulty or biased. Thus, under the notion of
accurate fairness, an individual and the individual’s similar
counterparts shall be treated similarly in conformance with
a uniform target (i.e., the ground truth of the individual),
without acknowledging their differences in the sensitive attributes.
As an individual-level fairness criterion, accurate fairness refines the general definition of individual fairness

Accuracy and individual fairness are both crucial for trustworthy machine learning, but these two aspects are often incompatible with each other so that enhancing one aspect may
sacrifice the other inevitably with side effects of true bias or
false fairness. We propose in this paper a new fairness criterion, accurate fairness, to align individual fairness with accuracy. Informally, it requires the treatments of an individual and the individual’s similar counterparts to conform to
a uniform target, i.e., the ground truth of the individual. We
prove that accurate fairness also implies typical group fairness criteria over a union of similar sub-populations. We then
present a Siamese fairness in-processing approach to minimize the accuracy and fairness losses of a machine learning
model under the accurate fairness constraints. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first time that a Siamese approach
is adapted for bias mitigation. We also propose fairness confusion matrix-based metrics, fair-precision, fair-recall, and
fair-F1 score, to quantify a trade-off between accuracy and
individual fairness. Comparative case studies with popular
fairness datasets show that our Siamese fairness approach can
achieve on average 1.02%-8.78% higher individual fairness
(in terms of fairness through awareness) and 8.38%-13.69%
higher accuracy, as well as 10.09%-20.57% higher true fair
rate, and 5.43%-10.01% higher fair-F1 score, than the stateof-the-art bias mitigation techniques. This demonstrates that
our Siamese fairness approach can indeed improve individual fairness without trading accuracy. Finally, the accurate
fairness criterion and Siamese fairness approach are applied
to mitigate the possible service discrimination with a real
Ctrip dataset, by on average fairly serving 112.33% more customers (specifically, 81.29% more customers in an accurately
fair way) than baseline models.

Introduction
Machine learning aided intelligent systems have exhibited
competitive performances in decision-making tasks such as
loan granting (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016), criminal justice risk assessment (Berk et al. 2021), and online recommendations (Lambrecht and Tucker 2019). However, the
widespread deployments of such machine-learning systems
have also spawned social and political concerns, particularly
* Corresponding author: Peng Wu
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14312

