The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Expressive Optimal Temporal Planning via Optimization Modulo Theory
Stefan Panjkovic1, 2 , Andrea Micheli1
1

Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
2
University of Trento, Trento, Italy
{spanjkovic, amicheli}@fbk.eu

Abstract

dense, EXPSPACE-complete when time is considered discrete and PSPACE-complete when action self-overlapping
is disallowed (Gigante et al. 2022).
The literature in classical and numeric planning (i.e. the
untimed cases) recognizes different kinds of objective functions of interest to be optimized while planning: minimizing
the cumulative action costs, minimizing or maximizing the
final value of a fluent, maximizing the number of optional
goals (so-called ”oversubscription” planning) or optimizing
trajectory preferences. In temporal planning, the only optimization metric that has been studied in depth is the minimization of the ”makespan”, that is finding a plan achieving
the goal in the minimum possible time.
In this paper, we exploit the Optimization Modulo Theory (OMT) framework (Sebastiani and Tomasi 2015), a
very general and powerful technique for mixed continuous/discrete optimization. We present the first OMT encoding of optimal temporal planning, capable of optimizing either the makespan or the sum of action costs of plans. Our
approach greatly generalizes the work by Leofante et al.
(2020), where the authors propose an OMT encoding for
the numeric planning case, to temporal planning. Our technique is based on a bounded planning problem formulation
in OMT with a concrete part (essentially a SAT-Plan encoding) and a single abstract step that over-approximates the
reachable states after the end of the plan. In this way, we
can conclude at a certain step that no plans with a better cost
are possible even with the addition of more action instances,
and thus we achieve optimality. More precisely, this paper
makes three major contributions. First, we devise the first
encoding in OMT for optimal temporal planning, that is capable of finding plans that are optimal with respect to either
the makespan or the sum of action costs. Second, we theoretically prove the soundness and completeness of our approach for temporal planning under the assumption of nonself-overlapping. We also derive theoretical bounds for termination. Third, we empirically evaluate the merits of this
approach on a novel set of benchmarks.

Temporal Planning is the problem of synthesizing a course
of actions given a predictive model of a system subject to
temporal constraints. This kind of planning finds natural applications in the automation of industrial processes and in
robotics when the timing and deadlines are important. Finding any plan in temporal planning is often not enough as it
is sometimes needed to optimize a certain objective function:
particularly interesting are the minimization of the makespan
and the optimization of the costs of actions. Despite the importance of the problem, only few works in the literature tackled the problem of optimal temporal planning because of the
complicated intermix of planning and scheduling.
In this paper, we address the problem of optimal temporal
planning for a very expressive class of problems using a reduction of the bounded planning problem to Optimization
Modulo Theory (OMT) a powerful discrete/continuous optimization framework. We theoretically and empirically show
the expressive power of this approach and we set a baseline
for future research in this area.

Introduction
Temporal planning is the problem of automatically synthesizing a course of actions to achieve a goal objective given
a model of the system being controlled subject to temporal constraints. This AI problem is of both theoretical and
practical interest as it can be used to frame interesting applications ranging from flexible manufacturing (Ruml, Do,
and Fromherz 2005) to robotics (Ingrand and Ghallab 2017).
Having synchronization constraints or deadlines is commonplace, naturally yielding temporal planning problems.
Over the years, several approaches and algorithms for
dealing with temporal planning have been proposed – e.g.
(Shin and Davis 2005; Coles et al. 2008, 2010; Valentini,
Micheli, and Cimatti 2020). However, most of the papers
focus on the problem of satisficing temporal planning, that
is finding a plan as good as possible without giving optimality guarantees. Very few papers tackle the problem of
finding temporal plans that are optimal with respect to an
objective function. This landscape is due to the high computational complexity of temporal planning that, even without
optimization criteria, is undecidable when time is considered

Background
SMT and OMT. Given a first-order formula ψ in a background theory T , the Satisfiability Modulo Theory (SMT)
problem consists in deciding whether there exists a model

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12095

