The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Novel Ordering-Based Approaches for Causal Structure Learning in the Presence
of Unobserved Variables
Ehsan Mokhtarian1 , Mohammadsadegh Khorasani1 , Jalal Etesami1 , Negar Kiyavash1,2
1

School of Computer and Communication Sciences EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
2
College of Management of Technology EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
{ehsan.mokhtarian, sadegh.khorasani, seyed.etesami, negar.kiyavash}@epfl.ch

Abstract

Π(V)
Πc(𝒢2)

We propose ordering-based approaches for learning the maximal ancestral graph (MAG) of a structural equation model
(SEM) up to its Markov equivalence class (MEC) in the presence of unobserved variables. Existing ordering-based methods in the literature recover a graph through learning a causal
order (c-order). We advocate for a novel order called removable order (r-order) as they are advantageous over c-orders
for structure learning. This is because r-orders are the minimizers of an appropriately defined optimization problem that
could be either solved exactly (using a reinforcement learning
approach) or approximately (using a hill-climbing search).
Moreover, the r-orders (unlike c-orders) are invariant among
all the graphs in a MEC and include c-orders as a subset.
Given that set of r-orders is often significantly larger than the
set of c-orders, it is easier for the optimization problem to find
an r-order instead of a c-order. We evaluate the performance
and the scalability of our proposed approaches on both realworld and randomly generated networks.

Πc(𝒢1)

Πc(𝒢k)

Πr(𝒢1)=Πr(𝒢2)=…=Πr(𝒢𝑘)

Figure 1: In this figure, {G1 , · · · , Gk } denotes a set of
Markov equivalent DAGs. Π(V) denotes the set of orders
over V, which is the search space of ordering-based methods. Πc (Gi ) denotes the set of c-orders of Gi , the target space
of existing ordering-based methods in the literature. Πr (Gi )
denotes the set of r-orders of Gi , which is the target space of
the proposed methods in this paper.

tion or Bayesian information criterion (BIC)) over the space
of graphs and search for a structure that maximizes the
score function. Hybrid methods combine the strength of both
constraint-based and score-based methods to improve scorebased algorithms by applying constraint-based techniques.
Under causal sufficiency assumption, the search space of
most of the score-based algorithms is the space of DAGs,
2
which contain 2Ω(n ) members when there are n variables
in the system. In score-based methods, a variety of search
strategies are proposed to solve the maximization problem.
Teyssier and Koller (2005) introduced the first orderingbased search strategy to solve the score-based optimization. The search space of such ordering-based methods is
the space of orders over the vertices of the DAG, which
includes 2O(n log(n)) orders. Note that the space of orders
is significantly smaller than the space of DAGs. Orderingbased methods divide the learning task into two stages. In
the first stage, they use the available data to find a causal order (c-order) over the set vertices of G. They use the learned
order in the second stage to identify the MEC of G (Zhu, Ng,
and Chen 2020; Larranaga et al. 1996; Teyssier and Koller
2005; Friedman and Koller 2003).
All the aforementioned ordering-based approaches for
causal discovery require causal sufficiency. In practice, presence of unobserved variables is more the norm rather than
the exception. In such cases, instead of a DAG, graphical
models such as maximal ancestral graph (MAG) and induc-

Introduction
A causal graph is a probabilistic graphical model that represents conditional independencies (CIs) among a set of observed variables V with a joint distribution PV . When all
the variables in the system are observed (i.e., causal sufficiency holds), a causal graph is commonly modeled with a
directed acyclic graph (DAG), G. It is well-known that from
mere observational distribution PV , graph G can only be
learned up to its Markov equivalence class (MEC) (Spirtes
et al. 2000; Pearl 2009). Therefore, the problem of causal
structure learning (aka causal discovery) from observational
distribution in the absence of latent variables refers to identifying the MEC of G using a finite set of samples from PV
and has important applications in many areas such as biology (Sachs et al. 2005), advertisements (Bottou et al. 2013),
social science (Russo 2010), etc.
There are three main classes of algorithms for causal
structure learning: constraint-based, score-based, and hybrid methods. Constraint-based methods use the available
data from PV to test for CI relations in the distribution,
from which they learn the MEC of G. Score-based methods define a score function (e.g., regularized likelihood funcCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12260

