The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fundamentals of Task-Agnostic Data Valuation
Mohammad Mohammadi Amiri1 , Frédéric Berdoz2 , Ramesh Raskar1
1

MIT, Media Lab, 75 Amherst St, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
2
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
mamiri@mit.edu, frederic.berdoz@epfl.ch, raskar@mit.edu

Abstract

arises in various applications such as collaborative machine
learning (Sim et al.; Tay et al.), federated learning (Song
et al.; Richardson et al.), data marketing (Schomm et al.;
Muschalle et al.), advertisement (Bergemann et al.; Zheng
et al.), recommendation systems (Immorlica et al.; Che et
al.), and data sharing (Rasouli et al.; Gradwohl et al.).
Data valuation is carried out either based on “intrinsic”
or “extrinsic” factors; intrinsic data valuation is data-driven
and based on the quality of dataset (Niu et al.; Raskar et al.),
while extrinsic data valuation considers demand-supply and
game-theoretic mechanisms (Luong et al.; Zhang et al.). It
is a common practice to couple intrinsic data valuation with
a utility metric for validation (Ghorbani et al.; Jia et al.), or
with a specific machine learning (ML) task (Agarwal et al.;
Chen et al.). In particular, for ML applications, data is often valued assuming existence of a validation set using validation accuracy as a metric (Wang et al.; Yan et al.). Also,
ML models trained with a target task are used to estimate
the value of the data used for training the models (Pei; Liu
et al.). On the other hand, extrinsic data valuation techniques
consider external factors such as competition and demands
(Agarwal et al.; Bimpikis et al.), which requires estimating
costumers’ demands for products and competitors price levels to price a product (Toni et al.; Cong et al.).
Enforcing a close coupling between intrinsic data valuation and existence of a validation set may not be practical since a validation set that all the parties agree on may
not exist, and a particular validation set may not sufficiently
represent the data distribution for a learning task (Xu et al.).
Furthermore, having a validation set may provide the chance
to malicious sellers to modify their datasets to overfit on the
validation set. Also, considering a specific ML model/task
for data valuation may not be aligned with the interests of
all the parties. We instead take a step back and consider
an intrinsic data valuation without any validation requirements and before performing any tasks such as training a ML
model. We take a step towards addressing the challenge of
formulating a model- and task-agnostic intrinsic valuation of
data at a seller for a buyer. The authors in (Xu et al.) develop
a technique independent of validation based solely on the
diversity of seller’s data, which captures the variation/dissimilarity across data samples; this provides the same value
of data at a seller for all the buyers. However, we believe
that diversity of data alone may not be sufficient for data

We study valuing the data of a data owner/seller for a data
seeker/buyer. Data valuation is often carried out for a specific
task assuming a particular utility metric, such as test accuracy on a validation set, that may not exist in practice. In this
work, we focus on task-agnostic data valuation without any
validation requirements. The data buyer has access to a limited amount of data (which could be publicly available) and
seeks more data samples from a data seller. We formulate the
problem as estimating the differences in the statistical properties of the data at the seller with respect to the baseline data
available at the buyer. We capture these statistical differences
through second moment by measuring diversity and relevance
of the seller’s data for the buyer; we estimate these measures
through queries to the seller without requesting the raw data.
We design the queries with the proposed approach so that the
seller is blind to the buyer’s raw data and has no knowledge to
fabricate responses to the queries to obtain a desired outcome
of the diversity and relevance trade-off. We will show through
extensive experiments on real tabular and image datasets that
the proposed estimates capture the diversity and relevance of
the seller’s data for the buyer.

Introduction
Data is the main fuel of the modern world enabling artificial intelligence and driving innovation and technological
growth. The demand for data has grown substantially, and
it is extremely valuable for sectors to acquire high quality
data to discover knowledge and improve their products and
services. As the demands for data have grown substantially,
data products have become valuable assets to purchase and
sale. This calls for establishing a data marketplace that connects different parties and facilitates trading data.
A data marketplace mainly includes three components,
data sellers, broker, and data buyers; data sellers own the
data and share it with the broker in exchange for rewards;
data buyers want to acquire data, and broker facilitates trading data. As a valuable resource, it is important to establish a principled method to quantify the worth of the sellers’
data and its value for the buyers. This is addressed via data
valuation which is the essential component for realization
of a fair marketplace for sellers and buyers. Data valuation
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9226

