The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Contrastive Multi-Task Dense Prediction
Siwei Yang1,2 , Hanrong Ye2 , Dan Xu2
1

Key Laboratory of Embedded System and Service Computing, Tongji University
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
swyang.ac@gmail.com, hyeae@cse.ust.hk, danxu@cse.ust.hk

Positive
Negative
Positive Mean
Negative Mean

Pixel Number

Abstract
This paper targets the problem of multi-task dense prediction
which aims to achieve simultaneous learning and inference on
a bunch of multiple dense prediction tasks in a single framework. A core objective in design is how to effectively model
cross-task interactions to achieve a comprehensive improvement on different tasks based on their inherent complementarity and consistency. Existing works typically design extra
expensive distillation modules to perform explicit interaction
computations among different task-specific features in both
training and inference, bringing difficulty in adaptation for
different task sets, and reducing efficiency due to clearly increased size of multi-task models. In contrast, we introduce
feature-wise contrastive consistency into modeling the crosstask interactions for multi-task dense prediction. We propose
a novel multi-task contrastive regularization method based on
the consistency to effectively boost the representation learning of the different sub-tasks, which can also be easily generalized to different multi-task dense prediction frameworks,
and costs no additional computation in the inference. Extensive experiments on two challenging datasets (i.e. NYUD-v2
and Pascal-Context) clearly demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed multi-task contrastive learning approach for dense
predictions, establishing new state-of-the-art performances.

0.0

0.4

0.8

1.0

(b) Distance between SemSeg
features w/ SemSeg labels
Positive
Negative
Positive Mean
Negative Mean

0.0

(c) Triplet definiton w/ Depth
labels

0.6

Distance

Pixel Number

(a) Triplet definiton w/ SemSeg
labels

0.2

0.2

0.4

0.6

Distance

0.8

1.0

(d) Distance between SemSeg
features w/ Depth labels

Figure 1: The feature distance distributions of positive/negative pairs show high cross-task consistency, which can be
utilized to boost multi-task pixel-wise learning and predictions. In (a) and (c), anchor pixels are denoted with ◻, positive pixels with ○, and negative pixels with ×. (b) and (d)
illustrates the feature distributions of the positive/negative
pixel pairs in the projection feature space.

Introduction
Dense prediction tasks such as semantic segmentation, depth
estimation, and saliency detection empowered with deep
learning techniques are moving very rapidly in the recent years, and methods with convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have demonstrated great improvement on these different tasks. However, most of the methods usually address
these dense prediction tasks separately which results in low
efficiency in real-life applications utilizing large-capacity
CNNs. More importantly, simultaneous modeling of multiple different tasks allows us to capture the interior relationships and interactions among the different tasks, being able
to realize a more powerful and higher-level perception system.
Multi-task dense prediction (Kanakis et al. 2020; Vandenhende et al. 2020; Brüggemann et al. 2021) offers an
effective solution to this problem by jointly learning both

task-sharing and task-specific representations. As the tasksharing representations can be obtained from a common
backbone, it greatly facilitates the reduction of memory and
computation overhead in both training and testing. However, simply using a shared backbone and several individual decoding heads for different tasks often causes a clear
performance drop compared to a single-task dense prediction framework (Xu et al. 2018). Therefore, how to design a
deep network structure that can effectively model cross-task
interactions based on the complementarity of different tasks
is critical for multi-task dense prediction.
To achieve the above-mentioned objective, recent works
on multi-task dense prediction mainly employ two
paradigms. One is to refine final task-specific features with
a multi-modal distillation module via carefully designed attention mechanisms to improve the final prediction (Xu et al.
2018; Vandenhende et al. 2020; Brüggemann et al. 2021).

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3190

