The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Provably Efficient Causal Model-Based Reinforcement Learning for
Systematic Generalization
Mirco Mutti* 1 2 , Riccardo De Santi* 3 , Emanuele Rossi4 5 , Juan Felipe Calderon1 ,
Michael Bronstein5 6 , Marcello Restelli1
1

Politecnico di Milano
Università di Bologna
3
ETH Zurich
4
Imperial College London
5
Twitter
6
University of Oxford
mirco.mutti@polimi.it, rdesanti@ethz.ch
2

the aforementioned correlations are oftentimes specific to
the task at hand, and they are unlikely to be of any use for
addressing different tasks or environments. Instead, some
universal causal relations generalize over the environments,
and once learned they can be exploited for solving any task.
Let us consider as an illustrative example an agent interacting with a large set of physical environments. While each
of these environments can have its specific dynamics, we
expect the basic laws of motion to hold across the environments, as they encode general causal relations. Once they
are learned, there is no need to discover them again from
scratch when facing a new task, or an unseen environment.
Even if the dynamics over these relations can change, such
as moving underwater is different than moving in the air, or
the gravity can change from planet to planet, the underlying
causal structure still holds. This knowledge alone often allows the agent to solve new tasks in unseen environments by
taking a few, or even zero, interactions.

Abstract
In the sequential decision making setting, an agent aims to
achieve systematic generalization over a large, possibly infinite, set of environments. Such environments are modeled
as discrete Markov decision processes with both states and
actions represented through a feature vector. The underlying
structure of the environments allows the transition dynamics
to be factored into two components: one that is environmentspecific and another that is shared. Consider a set of environments that share the laws of motion as an example. In this setting, the agent can take a finite amount of reward-free interactions from a subset of these environments. The agent then
must be able to approximately solve any planning task defined over any environment in the original set, relying on the
above interactions only. Can we design a provably efficient
algorithm that achieves this ambitious goal of systematic generalization? In this paper, we give a partially positive answer
to this question. First, we provide a tractable formulation of
systematic generalization by employing a causal viewpoint.
Then, under specific structural assumptions, we provide a
simple learning algorithm that guarantees any desired planning error up to an unavoidable sub-optimality term, while
showcasing a polynomial sample complexity.

1

We argue that we should pursue this kind of generalization in RL, which we call systematic generalization, where
learning universal causal relations from interactions with a
few environments allows us to approximately solve any task
in any other environment without further interactions. Although this problem setting might seem overly ambitious or
even far-fetched, in this paper we provide the first tractable
formulation of systematic generalization, thanks to a set
of structural assumptions that are motivated by a causal
viewpoint. The problem formulation is partially inspired by
reward-free RL (Jin et al. 2020a), in which the agent can
take unlabelled interactions with an environment to learn
a model that allows approximate planning for any reward
function. Here, we extend this formulation to a large, potentially infinite, set of reward-free environments, or a universe,
the agent can freely interact with. We consider discrete environments, such that both their states and actions can be described through vectors of discrete features. Crucially, these
environments share a common causal structure that explains
a significant portion, but not all, of their transition dynamics.
Can we design a provably efficient algorithm that guarantees an arbitrarily small planning error for any possible task

Introduction

Whereas recent breakthroughs have established Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton and Barto 2018) as a powerful
tool to address a wide range of sequential decision making
problems, the curse of generalization (Kirk et al. 2021) is
still a main limitation of commonly used techniques. RL
algorithms deployed on a given task are usually effective
in discovering the correlation between an agent’s behavior
and the resulting performance from large amounts of labeled
samples (Jaksch, Ortner, and Auer 2010; Lange, Gabel, and
Riedmiller 2012). However, those algorithms are usually
unable to discover basic cause-effect relations between the
agent’s behavior and the environment dynamics. Crucially,
* These authors contributed equally.
The appendix of this paper can be found at https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.06545.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9251

