The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

D IFF MD: A Geometric Diffusion Model for Molecular Dynamics Simulations
Fang Wu1,2 , Stan Z. Li1 *
1

AI Research and Innovation Laboratory, School of Engineering, Westlake University
2
Institute of AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University
fw2359@columbia.edu, stan.zq.li@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract

as ligand binding (Shan et al. 2011), ligand- or voltageinduced conformational change (Dror et al. 2011), protein
folding (Lindorff-Larsen et al. 2011), or membrane transport (Suomivuori et al. 2017).
Nevertheless, the computational cost of MD generally
scales cubically with respect to the number of electronic
degrees of freedom. Besides, important biomolecular processes like conformational change often take place on
timescales longer than those accessible by classical allatom MD simulations. Although a wide variety of enhanced
sampling techniques have been proposed to capture longertimescale events (Schwantes, McGibbon, and Pande 2014),
none of them is a panacea for timescale limitations and
might additionally cause decreased accuracy. Thus, it is an
urgent demand to fundamentally boost the efficiency of MD
while keeping accuracy.
Recently, deep learning-based MD (DLMD) models provide a new paradigm to meet the pressing demand. The
accuracy of those models stems from not only the distinctive ability of neural networks to approximate highdimensional functions but the proper treatment of physical requirements like symmetry constraints and the concurrent learning scheme that generates a compact training dataset (Jia et al. 2020). Despite their success, current
DLMD models primarily suffer from the following three issues. First, most DLMD models still rely on intermediate
variables (e.g., the potential energy) and multiple stages to
generate subsequent biomolecular conformations. This substantially raises the computational expenditure and hinders
the inference efficiency, since the inverse Hessian scales
as cubically with the number of atom coordinates (Cranmer et al. 2020). Second, existing DLMD models regard
the DL module as a black-box to predict atomic attributes
and never inosculate the neural architecture with the theory
of thermodynamics. Last but not least, the majority of prevailing geometric methods (Gilmer et al. 2017; Schütt et al.
2018; Klicpera, Groß, and Günnemann 2020) are designed
for immobile molecules and not suitable for dynamic systems where the directions and velocities of atomic motions
count.
This paper proposes D IFF MD that aims to address the
above-mentioned issues. First, D IFF MD is a one-stage procedure and forecasts the simulation trajectories without any
dependency on the potential energy or forces. For the sec-

Molecular dynamics (MD) has long been the de facto choice
for simulating complex atomistic systems from first principles. Recently deep learning models become a popular way to
accelerate MD. Notwithstanding, existing models depend on
intermediate variables such as the potential energy or force
fields to update atomic positions, which requires additional
computations to perform back-propagation. To waive this requirement, we propose a novel model called D IFF MD by directly estimating the gradient of the log density of molecular
conformations. D IFF MD relies on a score-based denoising
diffusion generative model that perturbs the molecular structure with a conditional noise depending on atomic accelerations and treats conformations at previous timeframes as the
prior distribution for sampling. Another challenge of modeling such a conformation generation process is that a molecule
is kinetic instead of static, which no prior works have strictly
studied. To solve this challenge, we propose an equivariant
geometric Transformer as the score function in the diffusion
process to calculate corresponding gradients. It incorporates
the directions and velocities of atomic motions via 3D spherical Fourier-Bessel representations. With multiple architectural improvements, we outperform state-of-the-art baselines
on MD17 and isomers of C7 O2 H10 datasets. This work contributes to accelerating material and drug discovery.

Introductions
Molecular dynamics (MD), an in silico tool that simulates
complex atomic systems based on first principles, has exerted dramatic impacts in scientific research. Instead of
yielding an average structure by experimental approaches
including X-ray crystallography and cryo-EM, MD simulations can capture the sequential behavior of molecules in
full atomic details at the very fine temporal resolution, and
thus allow researchers to quantify how much various regions of the molecule move at equilibrium and what types of
structural fluctuations they undergo. In the areas of molecular biology and drug discovery, the most basic and intuitive application of MD is to assess the mobility or flexibility of various regions of a molecule. MD substantially accelerates the studies to observe the biomolecular processes
in action, particularly important functional processes such
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5321

