The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Information-Theoretic Causal Discovery and Intervention Detection
over Multiple Environments
Osman Mian1 , Michael Kamp2 , Jilles Vreeken1
1

2

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security.
Institute for AI in medicine IKIM, Ruhr-University Bochum, and Monash University
osman.mian@cispa.de, michael.kamp@uk-essen.de, vreeken@cispa.de

Abstract

While there exist approaches capable of discovering causal
networks (Spirtes et al. 2000; Chickering 2002; Shimizu et al.
2006; Huang et al. 2018; Peters et al. 2014), they are designed
to work only on a single dataset. Approaches that do take
the multiple datasets into account work on strict assumptions
such as having prior knowledge of intervention targets (Yang,
Katcoff, and Uhler 2018; Hauser and Bühlmann 2012), can
not match interventions on environments (Zhang et al. 2017)
or impose strict assumptions on the underlying causal mechanisms that are unlikely to hold in practice (Shimizu 2012;
Ghassami et al. 2017).
To discover causal networks using data over multiple environments, we build our approach on the algorithmic model
of causality. We use the postulate of Algorithmic Markov
Condition (AMC) (Janzing and Schölkopf 2010) stating that
the true causal factorization of the joint distribution has the
lowest Kolmogorov complexity, which allows us to uniquely
identify a fully directed overall causal networks and local
interventions. Kolmogorov complexity is not computable itself, but can be instantiated in a statistically well-founded
manner using the Minimum Description Length (MDL) principle (Marx and Vreeken 2021).
We define a theoretically sound MDL score for jointly discovering the causal model and local interventions, and provide a practical greedy-algorithm to optimize our proposed
score. We explicitly do not assume any prior knowledge of
which datasets are observational or interventional and neither assume anything about the functional form of causal
relationships between the variables. Our contributions are:

Given multiple datasets over a fixed set of random variables,
each collected from a different environment, we are interested
in discovering the shared underlying causal network and the
local interventions per environment, without assuming prior
knowledge on which datasets are observational or interventional, and without assuming the shape of the causal dependencies. We formalize this problem using the Algorithmic
Model of Causation, instantiate a consistent score via the Minimum Description Length principle, and show under which
conditions the network and interventions are identifiable. To
efficiently discover causal networks and intervention targets
in practice, we introduce the O RION algorithm, which through
extensive experiments we show outperforms the state of the
art in causal inference over multiple environments.

1

Introduction

We consider the setting where we have multiple datasets
generated by a shared underlying causal mechanism, but
where each dataset is collected over a different environment.
That is, each dataset obtains observations over the same set
of variables, but with a different source distribution, or, may
be generated through an intervention upon the underlying
mechanism. Our goal is to jointly discover the overall causal
network as well as the local interventions without knowing
which datasets are observational and which are interventional.
As a motivating example, suppose we are interested in
learning the underlying causal process of some rare disease.
A single hospital typically sees too few such patients as to
collect sufficient data for drawing causal conclusions, and
hence we will have to consider data collected at multiple
hospitals. It is at best cumbersome to centralize the data due
to privacy regulations. Even if we could centrally collect
the data, by their location, every hospital could have a different distribution of patients, and because of difference in
machinery, etc., the parameters of the local data generating
mechanisms will not all be exactly the same. If, for example,
one hospital has a diagnostic device with an (undiscovered)
internal anomaly, the data collected there will be from an
interventional distribution, and pooling all data together in
such cases can introduce bias in estimation (Lee and Tsui
1982; Tillman 2009).

1. We build an approach to discover the overall causal network, the intervention targets within each environment, as
well as the local causal networks for data collected over
different environments.
2. We instantiate a consistent MDL-based score for nonlinear causal models and show under which assumptions it
identifies fully directed causal networks and interventions.
3. To discover causal networks and interventions in practice,
we propose an efficient greedy DAG search algorithm,
called O RION. Through an extensive set of experiments
we verify that it performs well in practice, outperforming the state of the art exact approaches in both causal
discovery and identifying interventions over multiple environments.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9171

