The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Incremental Reinforcement Learning with
Dual-Adaptive ϵ-Greedy Exploration
Wei Ding* , Siyang Jiang* , Hsi-Wen Chen* , Ming-Syan Chen
Graduate Institute of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
{wding, syjiang, hwchen}@arbor.ee.ntu.edu.tw, mschen@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract

Conventional RL

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved impressive performance in various domains. However, most RL frameworks
oversimplify the problem by assuming a fixed-yet-known
environment and often have difficulty being generalized to
real-world scenarios. In this paper, we address a new challenge with a more realistic setting, Incremental Reinforcement Learning, where the search space of the Markov Decision Process continually expands. While previous methods
usually suffer from the lack of efficiency in exploring the unseen transitions, especially with increasing search space, we
present a new exploration framework named Dual-Adaptive
ϵ-greedy Exploration (DAE) to address the challenge of Incremental RL. Specifically, DAE employs a Meta Policy and
an Explorer to avoid redundant computation on those sufficiently learned samples. Furthermore, we release a testbed
based on a synthetic environment and the Atari benchmark to
validate the effectiveness of any exploration algorithms under Incremental RL. Experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed framework can efficiently learn the unseen transitions in new environments, leading to notable performance
improvement, i.e., an average of more than 80%, over eight
baselines examined.

upgrade

Figure 1: Illustration of Incremental RL. Conventional RL
(left) has fixed state and action spaces. Whereas in Incremental RL, state and action spaces can be upgraded into
larger ones whenever the task of interest is updated.

to new scenarios. In contrast, the sets of states and actions
would usually be enlarged by means that we cannot foresee in the future since real-world applications update from
time to time (Wang et al. 2019). One straightforward idea is
to retrain the agents as the environments vary, which is undesirable due to the computational overhead of the training
process (Kaiser et al. 2019). For example, an autonomous
vehicle company (Kiran et al. 2021) may first train an agent
to drive the car following the lanes. In the next version, they
may want to launch a new desirable feature on this agent
to recognize traffic lights and intersections. Under the conventional RL setting, the training process has to start over
again when developing new states and actions. Note, however, that humans can effectively learn a task from their previous experience and inference the strategies to unseen situations (Wang et al. 2020).
Based on these observations, we formulate a new RL
problem, named Incremental Reinforcement Learning (Incremental RL), where the agents can adapt their behavior incrementally as the environment changes, utilizing previous
knowledge to benefit the future decision-making process. A
close topic, i.e., lifelong reinforcement learning (Brunskill
and Li 2014; Abel et al. 2018), trains an agent for a sequence of similar tasks and encourages the agent to transfer the experience from previous tasks to the new one faster.
However, the works mentioned above learn the policy from
the environment with fixed-yet-known state and action sets.
Thus, it is nontrivial to solve Incremental RL because the
search space of the solution would grow exponentially, corresponding to the size of the state and action spaces. While
one can initialize the parameters of a function approximation

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) methods mainly aim at training agents to conduct continuous control and decisionmaking tasks and have demonstrated encouraging performance improvement in various domains, including game
playing (Baker et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2021), autonomous
driving (Kiran et al. 2021), and robot controlling (Won,
Gopinath, and Hodgins 2021). Despite the recent progress
in RL, it remains challenging to train the RL agents through
extensive interactions with the environments. Thus, several early efforts focus on improving the sample efficiency (Schulman et al. 2017; Van Hasselt, Hessel, and
Aslanides 2019; Kaiser et al. 2019), exploration strategies (Burda et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2021; Ermolov and
Sebe 2020) and value estimation (Hessel et al. 2018; Badia et al. 2020) to strengthen the capability of RL agents.
However, most prior works assume that the environment remains unchanged, hence having difficulty being generalized
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7387

