The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

H-TSP: Hierarchically Solving the Large-Scale Traveling Salesman Problem
Xuanhao Pan1 , Yan Jin1 * , Yuandong Ding1 , Mingxiao Feng2 , Li Zhao3 , Lei Song3 , Jiang Bian3
1

School of Computer Science, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China,
2
University of Science and Technology of China,
3
Microsoft Research Asia
jinyan@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

stances. This limits their applications in scenarios that are
time sensitive, e.g. on-call routing (Ghiani et al. 2003) and
ride hailing service (Xu et al. 2018).
To deal with such time sensitive applications, learningbased approaches for TSP are expected to be used as they are
very efficient during inference. They can learn useful patterns from massive data during training which can generalize
to unseen instances. Moreover, they do not rely on problem
specific knowledge, hence can be extended to handle similar
problems. Because of these advantages, there have been a
soaring number of studies to solve TSP in recent years, for
instance (Vinyals, Fortunato, and Jaitly 2015; Nowak et al.
2017; Kool, Van Hoof, and Welling 2019; Kwon et al. 2020;
Fu, Qiu, and Zha 2021).
Depending on how solutions are constructed, learning
based approaches can be classified into two categories: iterative and constructive. For iterative approaches, a feasible
solution shall be constructed at the beginning, either randomly or using some heuristic methods. The main step is
to learn a model that knows how to improve a feasible solution. Finally, the model will be applied to keep improving the current solution until a termination condition is met.
On the other hand, constructive approaches start from the
initial city and learn which city to go at each step. While
these approaches have achieved competitive performance in
relatively small TSP instances (less than 1000 cities), they
cannot be extended to deal with large-scale TSP easily. One
exception is (Fu, Qiu, and Zha 2021) which can achieve solutions close enough to LKH3 solutions (gap < 5%) but in
relatively shorter time. However, in (Fu, Qiu, and Zha 2021)
a Monte Carlo tree search procedure is required to improve
solutions constantly, which is still time-consuming. According to the experiment results in (Fu, Qiu, and Zha 2021),
for one TSP instance with 10,000 cities, it costs around 11
minutes until it finds a solution comparable with LKH3.
We noticed that the iterative approaches are timeconsuming on training and inference of large-scale TSPs,
since they require to constantly improve feasible solutions
to obtain solutions of high quality by learning a proper operator from some domain-specific heuristic operators. And the
constructive approaches are efficient on inference, but due
to their action spaces grow linearly in the number of cities,
their training procedures would easily run out of memory or
time before converging to some near-optimal solutions.

We propose an end-to-end learning framework based on hierarchical reinforcement learning, called H-TSP, for addressing
the large-scale Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP). The proposed H-TSP constructs a solution of a TSP instance starting
from the scratch relying on two components: the upper-level
policy chooses a small subset of nodes (up to 200 in our experiment) from all nodes that are to be traversed, while the
lower-level policy takes the chosen nodes as input and outputs
a tour connecting them to the existing partial route (initially
only containing the depot). After jointly training the upperlevel and lower-level policies, our approach can directly generate solutions for the given TSP instances without relying
on any time-consuming search procedures. To demonstrate
effectiveness of the proposed approach, we have conducted
extensive experiments on randomly generated TSP instances
with different numbers of nodes. We show that H-TSP can
achieve comparable results (gap 3.42% vs. 7.32%) as SOTA
search-based approaches, and more importantly, we reduce
the time consumption up to two orders of magnitude (3.32s
vs. 395.85s). To the best of our knowledge, H-TSP is the
first end-to-end deep reinforcement learning approach that
can scale to TSP instances of up to 10,000 nodes. Although
there are still gaps to SOTA results with respect to solution
quality, we believe that H-TSP will be useful for practical applications, particularly those that are time-sensitive e.g., oncall routing and ride hailing service.

Introduction
Traveling salesman problem (TSP) is a well-known combinatorial optimization problem. It has been studied in operation research community for many years. The best exact solver Concorde (Applegate et al. 2009) requires 136
CPU years to find the optimal solution for an instance with
85,900 cities. Such computation time is unacceptable, so
many heuristics have been proposed to obtain near-optimal
solutions for problems arising in practice. For instance, one
of the leading heuristics algorithms LKH3 (Helsgaun 2017)
can handle TSP instances with millions of cities. However, these algorithms consist of hand-crafted rules that are
specific to TSP. More importantly, heuristics rely on iterative search and are also time-consuming for large-scale in* Yan Jin is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9345

