The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CoP: Factual Inconsistency Detection by Controlling the Preference
Shuaijie She, Xiang Geng, Shujian Huang* , Jiajun Chen
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
{shesj, gx}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {huangsj,chenjj}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

2021). But, since the generation model (Lewis et al. 2020) is
usually pre-trained on large-scale corpora, the model would
also have a preference for language or knowledge prior. To
solve the problem, Xie et al. (2021) introduces an extra inference with a partially masked document as input and uses
the probability difference as the indicator for inconsistency.
However, since the masked document is inherently against
the language prior, due to its nonfluency, the evaluation is
still entangled by the preference of the model. Besides, it is
also difficult to decide which word to mask in the document.
In this paper, we propose an unsupervised framework to
elaborately control the preferences with the help of prompt,
namely CoP. CoP employs a fluent text prompt, i.e. the summary itself, as the additional input for the extra inference
step, which is easily to obtain and less relevant to the preference of the model. The resulting generation probability is
conditioned on both the document and the prompt. So that
we can use the differential probability between the two inference processes to detect factual inconsistency.
One advantage of the proposed framework is that the preference could be easily controlled by varying the prompt.
With proper designed prompts, CoP could evaluate the specific preference and serve as measurements for fine-grained
categories of inconsistencies, such as the entity-related inconsistency, the coreference-related inconsistency (Pagnoni,
Balachandran, and Tsvetkov 2021), etc.
Our framework not only works well in the unsupervised
manner; its performance could be further improved by supervised training with prompt learning techniques (Li and
Liang 2021; Liu et al. 2021b). Compared with previous
work (Zhou et al. 2020; Goyal and Durrett 2021) which finetune a large model, we could fine-tune a prompt vector with
limited labeled data, which enjoys advantages in both effectiveness and efficiency.
Experiments are conducted on token-level and summarylevel inconsistency detection and inconsistency category detection, where CoP achieves remarkable improvements over
several strong baselines in the unsupervised settings. For detecting inconsistency categories, using specifically designed
prompts brings further improvements without any additional
training, revealing the flexibility of the prompt design and
the great potential of our approach. With supervised training
of the prompt, large improvements are achieved with only
0.02% of the total parameters updated, showing an efficient

Abstractive summarization is the process of generating a
summary given a document as input. Although significant
progress has been made, the factual inconsistency between
the document and the generated summary still limits its practical applications. Previous work found that the probabilities
assigned by the generation model reflect its preferences for
the generated summary, including the preference for factual
consistency, and the preference for the language or knowledge prior as well. To separate the preference for factual consistency, we propose an unsupervised framework named CoP
by controlling the preference of the generation model with the
help of prompt. More specifically, the framework performs
an extra inference step in which a text prompt is introduced
as an additional input. In this way, another preference is described by the generation probability of this extra inference
process. The difference between the above two preferences,
i.e. the difference between the probabilities, could be used
as measurements for detecting factual inconsistencies. Interestingly, we found that with the properly designed prompt,
our framework could evaluate specific preferences and serve
as measurements for fine-grained categories of inconsistency,
such as entity-related inconsistency, coreference-related inconsistency, etc. Moreover, our framework could also be extended to the supervised setting to learn better prompt from
the labeled data as well. Experiments show that our framework achieves new SOTA results on three factual inconsistency detection tasks.

Introduction
Current abstractive summarization models (Lewis et al.
2020) can generate fluent summaries which are rich in information. However, over 70% of the summaries generated by
existing models contain factual inconsistency, which greatly
damages the quality of the summary and limits the practical
applications (Maynez et al. 2020; Pagnoni, Balachandran,
and Tsvetkov 2021). The first step to solve this problem is
to evaluate the factual consistency of the summary, in other
words, to detect inconsistency (Goodrich et al. 2019).
Some research directly uses the preference of the probabilistic generation model, i.e. the generation probability, as
an indicator for factor inconsistency (Yuan, Neubig, and Liu
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13556

