The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multi-Scale Control Signal-Aware Transformer for
Motion Synthesis without Phase
Lintao Wang1 , Kun Hu1, * , Lei Bai2 , Yu Ding3 , Wanli Ouyang1 , Zhiyong Wang1
1

School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Australia
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory, China
3
Netease Fuxi AI Lab, China
lwan3720@uni.sydney.edu.au, kun.hu@sydney.edu.au, baisanshi@gmail.com, dingyu01@corp.netease.com,
wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au, zhiyong.wang@sydney.edu.au
Abstract
Synthesizing controllable motion for a character using deep
learning has been a promising approach due to its potential to
learn a compact model without laborious feature engineering.
To produce dynamic motion from weak control signals such
as desired paths, existing methods often require auxiliary information such as phases for alleviating motion ambiguity,
which limits their generalisation capability. As past poses often contain useful auxiliary hints, in this paper, we propose
a task-agnostic deep learning method, namely Multi-scale
Control Signal-aware Transformer (MCS-T), with an attention based encoder-decoder architecture to discover the auxiliary information implicitly for synthesizing controllable motion without explicitly requiring auxiliary information such as
phase. Specifically, an encoder is devised to adaptively formulate the motion patterns of a character’s past poses with
multi-scale skeletons, and a decoder driven by control signals to further synthesize and predict the character’s state
by paying context-specialised attention to the encoded past
motion patterns. As a result, it helps alleviate the issues of
low responsiveness and slow transition which often happen in
conventional methods not using auxiliary information. Both
qualitative and quantitative experimental results on an existing biped locomotion dataset, which involves diverse types
of motion transitions, demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method. In particular, MCS-T is able to successfully generate motions comparable to those generated by the methods
using auxiliary information.

Figure 1: Illustration of the motion manifold of a running
motion sequence. Joint positions and velocities of individual
poses are projected into a 2D space by t-SNE and colored in
line with their phases. It is noticed that auxiliary phases are
continuously distributed on the manifold, which suggests the
potential of inferring the phases from motion attributes.
as multilayer perceptron (MLP) networks (Holden, Komura,
and Saito 2017), recurrent neural networks (Lee, Lee, and
Lee 2018), generative networks (Henter, Alexanderson, and
Beskow 2020) and deep reinforcement learning architectures (Peng et al. 2018). Particularly, due to the potentials of
delivering fast, responsive yet high-quality controllers, MLP
networks have been devised for biped locomotion (Holden,
Komura, and Saito 2017), quadruped locomotion (Zhang
et al. 2018), daily interaction (Starke et al. 2019), basketball
play (Starke et al. 2020) and stylised motion prediction (Mason, Starke, and Komura 2022). Since a weak control signal,
which is commonly used in graphics, often corresponds to a
large variation of possible motions, these studies have to rely
on auxiliary phase variables in line with the character’s contact states for disambiguation purposes. However, the contact states may not be available for all kinds of motions and
may require manual correction during data acquisition. By
contrast, recurrent neural networks, e.g. (Lee, Lee, and Lee
2018), aim to constrain the next pose prediction subject to
the past motions, which can be task-agnostic in terms of motion category and demonstrate better generalisation capability. The key limitation of RNN based methods is that they
often suffer from slow responsiveness issues due to the large
variation of the hidden memory (Starke et al. 2019).
We believe that auxiliary information can be inferred from
a character’s past motions. As shown in Figure 1, a walking
motion sequence is represented in 2D manifolds by using

Introduction
Interactively controlling a character has been increasingly
demanded by various applications such as gaming, virtual reality and robotics. This task remains challenging to
achieve realistic and natural poses with complex motions
and environments, even with large amount of high quality
motion capture (MoCap) data for modelling (Holden, Komura, and Saito 2017; Peng et al. 2018). Recently, deep
learning techniques have been studied for controllable motion synthesis given their strong learning capability yet efficient parallel structures for fast runtime. Many encouraging results have been achieved using deep architectures such
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6092

