The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Policy-Adaptive Estimator Selection for Off-Policy Evaluation
Takuma Udagawa1 , Haruka Kiyohara2 * , Yusuke Narita3 , Yuta Saito4 , Kei Tateno1
1

Sony Group Corporation
Tokyo Institute of Technology
3
Yale University
4
Cornell University
Takuma.Udagawa@sony.com, kiyohara.h.aa@m.titech.ac.jp, yusuke.narita@yale.edu,
ys552@cornell.edu, Kei.Tateno@sony.com
2

Abstract

to the distribution shift between the behavior and evaluation
policies (Levine et al. 2020).
To deal with the difficult statistical estimation involving
counterfactuals and distributional shift, there has been a
range of estimators with good theoretical properties – some
estimators ensure unbiasedness under the identification assumptions (Strehl et al. 2010; Precup, Sutton, and Singh
2000; Dudı́k et al. 2014; Jiang and Li 2016; Thomas and
Brunskill 2016), some reduce the variance while being consistent (Swaminathan and Joachims 2015b; Kallus and Uehara 2019), some minimize an upper bound of the meansquared-error (MSE) (Wang, Agarwal, and Dudik 2017; Su
et al. 2020; Metelli, Russo, and Restelli 2021). Intuitively,
having more estimators makes it easier to achieve an accurate OPE. However, this also implies that practitioners now
have to carefully solve the estimator selection problem to
pick the most accurate estimator for their particular task. If
we fail to identify an appropriate estimator, OPE may favor a poor-performing policy that should not be deployed in
the field. Indeed, empirical studies have shown that the estimators’ MSE and the most accurate estimator can change
greatly depending on task-specific configurations such as the
evaluation policy (Voloshin et al. 2019), the size of logged
data (Saito et al. 2021b), and the number of actions (Saito
and Joachims 2022). Moreover, Saito et al. (2021b) indicate
that advanced estimators such as DRos (Su et al. 2020) may
still produce an inaccurate OPE compared to the typical estimators such as IPS in certain scenarios. These empirical
observations suggest the need of an accurate estimator selection for OPE. However, this estimator selection problem
has remained completely unaddressed in the existing literature despite its practical relevance.
This paper explores the crucial problem of Estimator Selection for OPE for the first time. Specifically, our goal is
to select the most accurate estimator among several candidates adaptive to a given OPE task. One possible approach
to conduct an estimator selection is to first estimate the estimators’ MSE using only the logged data and then choose
the most accurate. However, estimating the MSE is quite
challenging, because it depends on the ground-truth performance of the evaluation policy, which is unavailable to us.
To overcome this issue, we propose a novel estimator selection procedure called Policy-Adaptive Estimator Selection
via Importance Fitting (PAS-IF). A key trick lies in PAS-IF

Off-policy evaluation (OPE) aims to accurately evaluate the
performance of counterfactual policies using only offline
logged data. Although many estimators have been developed,
there is no single estimator that dominates the others, because the estimators’ accuracy can vary greatly depending
on a given OPE task such as the evaluation policy, number
of actions, and noise level. Thus, the data-driven estimator
selection problem is becoming increasingly important and
can have a significant impact on the accuracy of OPE. However, identifying the most accurate estimator using only the
logged data is quite challenging because the ground-truth estimation accuracy of estimators is generally unavailable. This
paper thus studies this challenging problem of estimator selection for OPE for the first time. In particular, we enable
an estimator selection that is adaptive to a given OPE task,
by appropriately subsampling available logged data and constructing pseudo policies useful for the underlying estimator selection task. Comprehensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world company data demonstrate that the proposed procedure substantially improves the estimator selection compared to a non-adaptive heuristic. Note that complete version with technical appendix is available on arXiv:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2211.13904.

1

Introduction

Off-Policy Evaluation (OPE) has widely been acknowledged
as a crucial technique in search and recommender systems (Gilotte et al. 2018). This is because OPE accurately
evaluates the performance of counterfactual policies without
performing costly A/B tests (Saito and Joachims 2021). This
is made possible by leveraging the logged data naturally collected by some logging or behavior policies. For example, a
music recommender system usually records which songs it
presented and how the users responded as feedback valuable for estimating the performance of counterfactual policies (Gruson et al. 2019; Kiyohara et al. 2022). Exploiting
logged data is, however, often challenging, as the reward is
only observed for the chosen action, but not for all the other
actions that the system could have taken (Swaminathan and
Joachims 2015a). Moreover, the logged data is biased due
* This work was done at Hanjuku-Kaso Co., Ltd.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10025

