The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Probabilistic Generalization of Backdoor Trees with Application to SAT
Alexander Semenov, Daniil Chivilikhin, Stepan Kochemazov, Ibragim Dzhiblavi
ITMO University, St. Petersburg, Russia
alex.a.semenov@itmo.ru, chivdan@gmail.com, stepan.kochemazov@itmo.ru, dzhiblavi@gmail.com

Abstract

as input a variant of the original problem weakened by substitution of values of variables from some subset B, B ⊆ X
(here, X is the set of variables occurring in the considered set of constraints). If for each assignment of variables
the algorithm A determines satisfiability/unsatisfiability (or
consistency/inconsistency) of the corresponding set of constraints, then B is an SBS w.r.t. A.
Hereinafter, we will work with the Boolean Satisfiability
Problem (SAT). It can be viewed as a special case of a CSP,
where each variable from X has a domain of cardinality 2.
Let C be a Boolean formula (usually, in Conjunctive Normal
Form, CNF) over a set of variables X. Assume that we want
to determine the satisfiability of C. It is clear that in this case
the knowledge of some SBS B gives an upper bound on the
hardness of C in the form of p(|C|)·2|B| , where p(·) is some
polynomial, and |C| is the length of the binary description of
C. However, the problem of finding an SBS with small cardinality is very hard (Dilkina, Gomes, and Sabharwal 2007;
Hemaspaandra and Narváez 2017). Nevertheless, it is possible to formulate the problem of finding an SBS of minimum
cardinality as the problem of minimization of a special function, which for an arbitrary B ∈ 2X checks whether this B
is indeed an SBS, and if the answer is yes outputs the cardinality of B. Unfortunately, even computing the value of
such a function on a particular input B is a very hard problem, since for each possible assignment of variables from B
one has to evaluate whether substituting the corresponding
values to the original formula results in a formula decidable
by a sub-solver A.
One possible way to tackle this obstacle was described
in (Semenov et al. 2022): it was proposed to search for such
subsets B, for which not all formulas resulting from assigning values to variables from B in C are polynomially decidable, but their vast majority. In practice, one can use a
complete SAT solver to solve the small fraction of simplified
subproblems that cannot be solved by sub-solver A. The estimation of the fraction of polynomially decidable subproblems for a particular B can be done efficiently. As a result,
one can consider the problem of finding such a probabilistic generalization of an SBS with relatively small cardinality and with a fraction of polynomially decidable subproblems close to 1. This problem can be viewed as an optimization problem for some pseudo-Boolean function which is not
specified analytically (i.e. a black-box function).

The concept of Strong Backdoor Sets (SBS) for Constraint
Satisfaction Problems is well known as one of the attempts
to exploit structural peculiarities in hard instances. However,
in practice, finding an SBS for a particular instance is often harder than solving it. Recently, a probabilistic weakened
variant of the SBS was introduced: in the SBS, all subproblems must be polynomially solvable, whereas in the probabilistic SBS only a large fraction ρ of them should have this
property. This new variant of backdoors called ρ-backdoors
makes it possible to use the Monte Carlo method and metaheuristic optimization to find ρ-backdoors with ρ very close
to 1, and relatively fast. Despite the fact that in a ρ-backdoorbased decomposition a portion of hard subproblems remain,
in practice the narrowing of the search space often allows
solving the problem faster with such a backdoor than without
it. In this paper, we significantly improve on the concept of ρbackdoors by extending this concept to backdoor trees: we introduce ρ-backdoor trees, show the interconnections between
SBS, ρ-backdoors, and the corresponding backdoor trees, and
establish some new theoretical properties of backdoor trees.
In the experimental part of the paper, we show that moving
from the metaheuristic search for ρ-backdoors to that of ρbackdoor trees allows drastically reducing the time required
to construct the required decompositions without compromising their quality.

Introduction
The concept of Backdoor sets to Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSP) was introduced in the seminal paper (Williams, Gomes, and Selman 2003). Later, backdoors
were actively researched in many papers, which studied both
their theoretical properties, mainly from the point of view of
structural and parameterized complexity (Kilby et al. 2005;
Hemaspaandra and Narváez 2017, 2021; Fichte and Szeider 2011; Gaspers and Szeider 2012a,c,b; Misra et al. 2013;
Gaspers and Kaploun 2022), and practical applications of
backdoors for speeding up the solving of hard instances of
combinatorial problems (Dilkina et al. 2009; Ferber et al.
2022; Khalil, Vaezipoor, and Dilkina 2022).
Here, the main practical interest is posed by Strong Backdoor Sets (SBS). The key element for defining an SBS is the
notion of a sub-solver: a polynomial algorithm A that takes
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4095

