The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

OpenMapFlow: A Library for Rapid Map Creation with Machine Learning and
Remote Sensing Data
Ivan Zvonkov1 , Gabriel Tseng2 , Catherine Nakalembe1 , Hannah Kerner3
1

University of Maryland, College Park
McGill University and Mila – Quebec AI Institute
3
Arizona State University
izvonkov@umd.edu, gabriel.tseng@mail.mcgill.ca, cnakalem@umd.edu, hkerner@asu.edu
2

Abstract

growing interest in ML research for remote sensing data is
also driven by the challenges presented by its unique characteristics compared to other data modalities. Remote sensing
datasets are very high-dimensional and often have spatial,
temporal, and spectral dimensions more complex than traditional RGB images or videos. The diversity of instruments
used for observing the Earth at different wavelengths, temporal cadences, and spatial resolutions has driven active research in domain adaptation (Tuia, Persello, and Bruzzone
2016; Song et al. 2019), data fusion (Babaeian et al. 2021),
and other topic areas. Evidence for the growing popularity of
remote sensing as a new data modality for ML research can
be seen in the growing number of workshops, journals, and
initiatives related to ML and remote sensing (e.g., Climate
Change AI (Rolnick et al. 2022)).
Traditional ML prediction tasks, such as those using image data or text data, are trained and evaluated on datasets
containing samples that are assumed to be independently
and identically distributed (i.i.d.). However, for most prediction tasks using remote sensing datasets, the desired output
is a set of dense predictions that form a predicted map of
a geographic region (Figure 1). The input samples used for
generating the dense predictions are geographically contiguous and violate the i.i.d. assumption. For example, consider
the task of crop type classification in which the goal is to
predict locations where a specific crop is growing based on
satellite observations of a given focus region—e.g., predicting where maize is growing in Kenya (Tseng et al. 2021). To
accomplish this task, a model would be trained using a set of
samples from different locations that are sparsely distributed
throughout the focus region, then evaluated on a similarly
sparsely-distributed test set. The majority of research studies
conclude after this evaluation, even though the practical goal
of remote sensing prediction tasks is to use the trained model
to make dense predictions at every pixel location to form a
complete map of the study region. Neglecting dense predictions has several consequences: it 1) makes model adoption
significantly more difficult for the larger scientific community and downstream applications, 2) obfuscates potential
model failure modes, and 3) precludes the investigation of
related foundational research challenges.
In this paper, we introduce OpenMapFlow
(https://github.com/nasaharvest/openmapflow), an opensource python library for rapid map creation with ML and

The desired output for most real-world tasks using machine
learning (ML) and remote sensing data is a set of dense predictions that form a predicted map for a geographic region.
However, most prior work involving ML and remote sensing
follows the traditional practice of reporting metrics on a set
of independent, geographically-sparse samples and does not
perform dense predictions. To reduce the labor of producing
dense prediction maps, we present OpenMapFlow—an opensource python library for rapid map creation with ML and
remote sensing data. OpenMapFlow provides 1) a data processing pipeline for users to create labeled datasets for any region, 2) code to train state-of-the-art deep learning models on
custom or existing datasets, and 3) a cloud-based architecture
to deploy models for efficient map prediction. We demonstrate the benefits of OpenMapFlow through experiments on
three binary classification tasks: cropland, crop type (maize),
and building mapping. We show that OpenMapFlow drastically reduces the time required for dense prediction compared
to traditional workflows. We hope this library will stimulate
novel research in areas such as domain shift, unsupervised
learning, and societally-relevant applications and lessen the
barrier to adopting research methods for real-world tasks.

Introduction
Remote sensing data (also referred to as Earth observation or
satellite data) has become an increasingly popular modality
for artificial intelligence research. This interest has largely
been driven by the opportunities that remote sensing data
present for contributing to challenges urgently important to
society, such as climate change (Pradhan et al. 2018; Rolnick et al. 2022; Rasp, Pritchard, and Gentine 2018), food
security (Wang, Azzari, and Lobell 2019; Kerner et al. 2020;
Tseng et al. 2020), disasters (Bonafilia et al. 2020), and
poverty (Xie et al. 2016). In recent years, many new datasets
have been made available to facilitate research in ML methods for remote sensing data spanning diverse tasks such
as image classification (Sumbul et al. 2019), segmentation
(Bonafilia et al. 2020), object detection (Christie et al. 2018)
and diverse application areas such as agriculture (Tseng
et al. 2021), disasters (Bonafilia et al. 2020), and land cover
(Sumbul et al. 2019; Alemohammad and Booth 2020). The
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14655

