The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

RWEN-TTS: Relation-Aware Word Encoding Network for Natural Text-to-Speech
Synthesis
Shinhyeok Oh* , HyeongRae Noh* , Yoonseok Hong, and Insoo Oh
Netmarble AI Center
{kai, hr noh, yhong, ioh}@netmarble.com

[root]
⑧ eat

Abstract
With the advent of deep learning, a huge number of text-tospeech (TTS) models which produce human-like speech have
emerged. Recently, by introducing syntactic and semantic information w.r.t the input text, various approaches have been
proposed to enrich the naturalness and expressiveness of TTS
models. Although these strategies showed impressive results,
they still have some limitations in utilizing language information. First, most approaches only use graph networks to
utilize syntactic and semantic information without considering linguistic features. Second, most previous works do not
explicitly consider adjacent words when encoding syntactic
and semantic information, even though it is obvious that adjacent words are usually meaningful when encoding the current
word. To address these issues, we propose Relation-aware
Word Encoding Network (RWEN), which effectively allows
syntactic and semantic information based on two modules
(i.e., Semantic-level Relation Encoding and Adjacent Word
Relation Encoding). Experimental results show substantial
improvements compared to previous works.

nsubj
aux
③ shark

⑦ can

obj

punct
advmod

⑨ fish

⑩ quickly

⑪.

amod
det
① The

nmod
② blue
case
④ with

⑥ teeth

amod

Edge of dependency relation
Relation tag
Word

⑤ sharp

Figure 1: An example of a dependency tree to illustrate for
“The blue shark with sharp teeth can eat fish quickly.” The
description of each element is described in the bottom right
corner. For example, “det” is the relation tag between “The”
and “shark”.

Introduction
Text-to-Speech (TTS), which aims at synthesizing naturalsounding speech from text, has extensive applications in
various industries such as entertainment, education, and so
on (Tan et al. 2021). Recently, deep learning-based TTS
models have drawn attention, showing unprecedented results. Most existing works have adopted a two-stage generation scheme, which produces an intermediate speech representation (e.g., Mel-spectrogram) from the input text and
then generates a raw waveform. In this work, we focus on the
model used in the first stage, called an acoustic model. Generally, the acoustic model is categorized into the autoregressive (AR) model and the non-autoregressive (NAR) model,
according to the generation method. Early studies usually
focused on the AR model (van den Oord et al. 2016; SkerryRyan et al. 2018; Shen et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019). However,
they have a slow inference speed caused by sequential generation. Moreover, they are quite sensitive to the alignment
resulting in low robustness (e.g., long pause, word repeating,
and word skipping). To overcome these limitations, many

NAR models (Łańcucki 2021; Ren et al. 2019, 2021) have
been proposed. Compared to AR models, they showed faster
inference speed by generating speech in parallel and alleviated robustness issues. Nevertheless, their quality of expressiveness is unsatisfactory because they predict prosodic
features that contain pitch, duration, and energy without introducing dependency between time steps (Kharitonov et al.
2022). Thus, various approaches to improve the quality of
NAR-TTS have been proposed. Min et al. (2021) successfully achieved expressive speech synthesis by introducing a
reference encoder that models desired prosody because the
same sentence can be uttered in diverse styles. Hwang et al.
(2021); Song et al. (2022); Lajszczak et al. (2022) claimed
that the performance of NAR-TTS is poor when the training data is insufficient, devising effective data augmentation
methods. Kim, Kong, and Son (2021) combined powerful
generative models (i.e., variational autoencoder, normalizing flow, and generative adversarial network) to improve
expressiveness. They reported that proposed model close
to human-level speech. Meanwhile, Kenter, Sharma, and

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13428

