The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Model-Based Reinforcement Learning with Multinomial Logistic Function
Approximation
Taehyun Hwang, Min-hwan Oh*
Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
th.hwang@snu.ac.kr, minoh@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

Abbasi-Yadkori, Pál, and Szepesvári 2011; Agrawal and
Goyal 2013; Abeille and Lazaric 2017; Kveton et al. 2020a).
While new methods are still being proposed under the linearity assumption and performance guarantees have been
improved, the linear model assumption on the transition
model of Markov decision processes (MDPs) faces a simple
yet fundamental challenge. A transition model in MDPs is
a probability distribution over states. A linear function approximating the transition model needs to satisfy that the
function output is within r0, 1s and, furthermore, the probabilities over all possible next states sum to 1 exactly. Note
that such requirements are not just imposed approximately,
but rather exactly, since almost all existing works in linear
function approximation assume realizability, i.e., the true
transition model is assumed to be linear (Yang and Wang
2020; Jin et al. 2020; Zanette et al. 2020; Zhou, Gu, and
Szepesvari 2021; Ishfaq et al. 2021).
The linear model assumption also limits the set of feature representations of states or state-action pairs that are admissible for the transition model. In function approximation
settings, the transition models are typically functions of feature representations. However, for a given linear transition
model, an arbitrary feature may not induce a proper probability distribution. Put differently, nature can reveal a set of
feature representations such that no linear model can properly construct a probability distribution over states. Hence,
the fundamental condition required for the true transition
model can easily be violated for the linear model. This issue becomes even more challenging for a estimated model.1
Furthermore, when there is model misspecification, sublinear guarantees on the regret performances that the existing
methods enjoy become not valid, hence potentially leading
to serious deterioration of the performances.
In supervised learning paradigm, a distribution over multiple possible outcomes is rarely learned using a separate linear model for each outcome. For example, consider a learning problem with a binary outcome. One of the most obvious
choices of a model to use in such a learning problem is a logistic model. Acknowledging that the state transition model
of MDPs with a finite number of next states (the total num-

We study model-based reinforcement learning (RL) for
episodic Markov decision processes (MDP) whose transition probability is parametrized by an unknown transition
core with features of state and action. Despite much recent
progress in analyzing algorithms in the linear MDP setting,
the understanding of more general transition models is very
restrictive. In this paper, we propose a provably efficient RL
algorithm for the MDP whose state transition is given by
a multinomial logistic model. We show that our proposed
algorithm
based on the upper confidence bounds achieves
?
r
H 3 T q regret bound where d is the dimension of the
Opd
transition core, H is the horizon, and T is the total number
of steps. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first modelbased RL algorithm with multinomial logistic function approximation with provable guarantees. We also comprehensively evaluate our proposed algorithm numerically and show
that it consistently outperforms the existing methods, hence
achieving both provable efficiency and practical superior performance.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) with function approximation
has made significant advances in empirical studies (Mnih
et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2017, 2018). However, the theoretical understanding of these methods is still limited. Recently, function approximation with provable efficiency has
been gaining significant attention in the research community, trying to close the gap between theory and empirical
findings. Most of the existing theoretical works in RL with
function approximation consider linear function approximation (Jiang et al. 2017; Yang and Wang 2019, 2020; Jin
et al. 2020; Zanette et al. 2020; Modi et al. 2020; Du et al.
2020; Cai et al. 2020; Ayoub et al. 2020; Wang, Salakhutdinov, and Yang 2020; Weisz, Amortila, and Szepesvári 2021;
He, Zhou, and Gu 2021; Zhou, Gu, and Szepesvari 2021;
Zhou, He, and Gu 2021; Ishfaq et al. 2021). Many of these
linear model-based methods and their analyses rely on the
classical upper confidence bound (UCB) or randomized exploration methods such as Thompson sampling extending
the analysis of linear contextual bandits (Chu et al. 2011;

1

That is, even if the true model is truly linear and satisfies the
basic conditions for a probability distribution, the estimated model
can still violate them.

* Corresponding Author

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7971

