The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multi-Source Survival Domain Adaptation
Ammar Shaker, Carolin Lawrence
NEC Laboratories Europe GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany
{Ammar.Shaker,Carolin.Lawrence}@neclab.eu

Abstract

on all patients. Simply discarding this data would lead to
losing all the partial information carried by the censored
cases, which would be particularly harmful when censoring is prevalent. This, for example, occurs in the messenger RNA data for breast adenocarcinoma, where censoring
exceeds 87%1 .
While censoring makes the direct application of machine learning methods unfeasible, active research tries to
tackle this challenge. One essential line of work to tackle
this challenge adopts the proportional hazards assumption
(PH) (Cox 1972), instead of attempting to fully model the
survival function. More recently, traditional survival analysis methods (Cox 1972) have been complemented and then
superseded by machine learning approaches; for a survey,
see Wang, Li, and Reddy (2019). For example, with the increasing success of deep learning methods, DeepSurv (Katzman et al. 2018) has reported a significant increase in performance by employing a neural network with a loss function
adapted to hold the assumed proportionality of hazards.
An additional challenge arises when there is insufficient
data for a particular problem of interest. This scenario is
quite relevant in the medical field, where some diseases are
more common than others, such as the varying incidence
rates of cancer types confirmed by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data. The issue is also present for new illnesses
that arise, such as a significantly changed variant of a previous disease. In such a setup, a fitting machine learning technique would be multi-source domain adaptation (Mansour,
Mohri, and Rostamizadeh 2008), which tries to exploit the
knowledge-transfer from multiple source domains into the
target domain. To the best of our knowledge, there has not
been yet any work that tackles domain or multi-source domain adaptation for survival domains.
In this work, we introduce a first attempt to transfer
knowledge from multiple source survival domains to a target
survival domain. Our main contributions are summarized as
follows:

Survival analysis is the branch of statistics that studies the relation between the characteristics of living entities and their
respective survival times, taking into account the partial information held by censored cases. A good analysis can, for example, determine whether one medical treatment for a group
of patients is better than another. With the rise of machine
learning, survival analysis can be modeled as learning a function that maps studied patients to their survival times. To succeed with that, there are three crucial issues to be tackled.
First, some patient data is censored: we do not know the true
survival times for all patients. Second, data is scarce, which
led past research to treat different illness types as domains in a
multi-task setup. Third, there is the need for adaptation to new
or extremely rare illness types, where little or no labels are
available. In contrast to previous multi-task setups, we want
to investigate how to efficiently adapt to a new survival target
domain from multiple survival source domains. For this, we
introduce a new survival metric and the corresponding discrepancy measure between survival distributions. These allow us to define domain adaptation for survival analysis while
incorporating censored data, which would otherwise have to
be dropped. Our experiments on two cancer data sets reveal
a superb performance on target domains, a better treatment
recommendation, and a weight matrix with a plausible explanation.

1

Introduction

The abundance of health records has massively increased
in the last few decades, mainly due to the advancement of
data collection methods and the increasing financial support
for medical trials and research. To determine the effects of
a specific environment or the success of a treatment, survival analysis can be used to study the relation between the
characteristics of living entities and their respective survival
times. This induced relation is often described by the survival function or the hazard function, which models the conditional propensity for the event of death to happen.
A crucial challenging characteristic of learning with
health records is censoring, which is the case when only partial information about the patient’s survival is known. This
could happen either due to losing track of the patient or the
termination of the study before observing the intended event

• We construct the symmetric discordance index (SDI) to
measure the distance between risk functions. We show
the utility of SDI in the survival domain adaptation
in which multiple survival source tasks are observed
1
https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/ccg/research/
structural-genomics/tcga

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9752

