The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multi-Relational Contrastive Learning Graph Neural Network for Drug-Drug
Interaction Event Prediction
Zhankun Xiong1 * , Shichao Liu1 * , Feng Huang1 * , Ziyan Wang1 , Xuan Liu1 , Zhongfei Zhang2 , Wen
Zhang1†
1

College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University
2
Computer Science Department, Binghamton University
xiongzk@webmail.hzau.edu.cn, scliu@mail.hzau.edu.cn, {fhuang233, wangziyan, lx666}@webmail.hzau.edu.cn,
zzhang@binghamton.edu, zhangwen@mail.hzau.edu.cn
Abstract

drugs or not (Kastrin, Ferk, and Leskošek 2018; Zhang et al.
2019). In reality, DDIs lead to different types of biological
consequences, so-called DDI events. Compared to the binary DDI prediction, predicting the event types of DDIs (we
called predicting DDI events in following text for simplicity) is more helpful for investigating the mechanism hidden behind the consequences of polypharmacy. However,
the binary prediction methods can hardly be generalized
to multi-type DDI event prediction without a loss of accuracy. Recently, researchers have paid more attention to DDI
event prediction and developed a number of specialized deep
learning-based prediction methods. For example, Ryu, Kim,
and Lee (2018) and Deng et al. (2020) utilized one or multiple drug biochemical features to build DNN models; Jin
et al. (2017) formulated the DDI event data as tensors, and
built the tensor factorization-based model; Lin et al. (2021)
integrated multi-source data and drug features to build the
transformer-based model.
Recent years have witnessed the strong power of graph
neural networks (GNNs) in graph representation learning.
GNNs have also been utilized for DDI event prediction
in two implementation ways. Some works applied GNNs
to learn drug structural information from drug molecular
graphs with atoms as nodes and bonds as edges (Nyamabo, Yu, and Shi 2021; Nyamabo et al. 2021), and others
are devoted to learning drug interactive information from
drug association graphs that represent relationships among
biological entities including drugs (Ma et al. 2018; Zitnik,
Agrawal, and Leskovec 2018; Yu et al. 2021; Lyu et al.
2021). Although these methods have achieved satisfactory
results, most of them consider either structural information
or interactive information. Moreover, there exist some DDI
events with a extremely low occurrence, called rare events.
Since rare events involve exceedingly inadequate labeled instances that fail to provide sufficient supervisory signals, it
remains challenging for most models to predict rare DDI
events.
To alleviate the above limitations, we propose a novel
DDI event prediction method, named MRCGNN (MultiRelational Contrastive learning Graph Neural Network). In
order to integrate drug structural information and drug interactive information, we apply R-GCN (Schlichtkrull et al.
2018) on the multi-relational DDI event graph attributed

Drug-drug interactions (DDIs) could lead to various unexpected adverse consequences, so-called DDI events. Predicting DDI events can reduce the potential risk of combinatorial therapy and improve the safety of medication use, and
has attracted much attention in the deep learning community.
Recently, graph neural network (GNN)-based models have
aroused broad interest and achieved satisfactory results in the
DDI event prediction. Most existing GNN-based models ignore either drug structural information or drug interactive information, but both aspects of information are important for
DDI event prediction. Furthermore, accurately predicting rare
DDI events is hindered by their inadequate labeled instances.
In this paper, we propose a new method, Multi-Relational
Contrastive learning Graph Neural Network, MRCGNN for
brevity, to predict DDI events. Specifically, MRCGNN integrates the two aspects of information by deploying a GNN on
the multi-relational DDI event graph attributed with the drug
features extracted from drug molecular graphs. Moreover, we
implement a multi-relational contrastive learning with a designed dual-view negative counterpart augmentation strategy,
to capture implicit information about rare DDI events. Extensive experiments on two datasets show that MRCGNN outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. Besides, we observe
that MRCGNN achieves satisfactory performance when predicting rare DDI events.

Introduction
The combinatorial therapy with a concurrent use of multiple drugs is a promising strategy to treat patients with complicated diseases (Bansal et al. 2014). However, drug-drug
interactions (DDIs) could bring about unexpected adverse
consequences such as the reduction in efficacy or the increased toxicity of the drugs, and thus incur injuries and
huge medical costs (Vilar et al. 2014; Lyu et al. 2021). Identifying DDIs has been deeply concerned in public health security and medicine safety surveillance.
In the past decade, plenty of computational prediction
methods have been widely developed for a binary prediction
task that determines whether interactions exist in pairwise
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5339

