The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Clustering What Matters: Optimal Approximation for Clustering with Outliers *
Akanksha Agrawal1 , Tanmay Inamdar2 , Saket Saurabh2, 3 , Jie Xue4
1

Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, India.
2
University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
3
The Institute of Mathematical Sciences, HBNI, Chennai, India
4
New York University Shanghai, China
akanksha@cse.iitm.ac.in, Tanmay.Inamdar@uib.no, saket@imsc.res.in, jiexue@nyu.edu

to find a set C ∗ ⊆ X of at most k centers, such that the following cost function is minimized over all subsets C of size
at most k.
X
cost(X, C) :=
min d(p, c)

Abstract
Clustering with outliers is one of the most fundamental problems in Computer Science. Given a set X of n points and
two integers k and m, the clustering with outliers aims to exclude m points from X, and partition the remaining points
into k clusters that minimizes a certain cost function. In this
paper, we give a general approach for solving clustering with
outliers, which results in a fixed-parameter tractable (FPT) algorithm in k and m (i.e., an algorithm with running time of
the form f (k, m) · nO(1) for some function f ), that almost
matches the approximation ratio for its outlier-free counterpart.
As a corollary, we obtain FPT approximation algorithms with
optimal approximation ratios for k-M EDIAN and k-M EANS
with outliers in general metrics. We also exhibit more applications of our approach to other variants of the problem that
impose additional constraints on the clustering, such as fairness or matroid constraints.

p∈X

c∈C

In k-M EANS, the objective function instead contains the
sum of squares of distances.
Often real world data are contaminated with a small
amount of noise and these noises can substantially change
the clusters that we obtain using the underlying algorithm.
To circumvent the issue created by such noises, there are
several studies of clustering problems with outliers, see
for instance, (Chen 2008; Krishnaswamy, Li, and Sandeep
2018; Goyal, Jaiswal, and Kumar 2020; Feng et al. 2019;
Friggstad et al. 2019; Almanza et al. 2022).
In outlier extension of the k-M EDIAN problem, which we
call k-M EDIAN O UT, we are also given an additional integer m ≥ 0 that denotes the number of outliers that we are
allowed to drop. We want to find a set C of at most k centers, and a set Y ⊆PX of at most m outliers, such that
cost(X \ Y, C) :=
p∈X\Y minc∈C d(p, c) is minimized
over all (Y, C) satisfying the requirements. Observe that the
cost of clustering for k-M EDIAN O UT equals the sum of distances of each point to its nearest center, after excluding a set
of m points from consideration 1 . We remark that in a similar spirit we can define the outlier version of the k-M EANS
problem, which we call k-M EANS O UT.
In this paper, we will focus on approximation algorithms.
An algorithm is said to have an approximation ratio of α, if
it is guaranteed to return a solution of cost no greater than α
times the optimal cost, while satisfying all other conditions.
That is, the solution must contain at most k centers, and drop
m outliers. If the algorithm is randomized, then it must return such a solution with high probability, i.e., probability at
least 1 − n−c for some c ≥ 1.
For a fixed set C of centers, the set of m outliers is automatically defined, namely the set of m points that are farthest from C (breaking ties arbitrarily). Thus, an optimal

Introduction
Clustering is a family of problems that aims to group a given
set of objects in a meaningful way—the exact “meaning”
may vary based on the application. These are fundamental problems in Computer Science with applications ranging across multiple fields like pattern recognition, machine
learning, computational biology, bioinformatics and social
science. Thus, these problems have been a subject of extensive studies in the field of Algorithm Design (and its subfields), see for instance, the surveys on this topic (and references therein) (Xu and Tian 2015; Rokach 2009; Blömer
et al. 2016).
Two of the central clustering problems are k-M EDIAN
and k-M EANS. In the standard k-M EDIAN problem, we are
given a set X of n points, and an integer k, and the goal is
* The authors are listed in the alphabetical order of the last
names.
A full version of the paper containing missing proofs and other details can be found is available on arXiv:2212.00696 (Agrawal et al.
2022).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

In the technical section, we consider a more general formulation of k-M EDIAN, where the set of candidate centers may be
different from the set X of points to be clustered.

6666

