The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robust Representation Learning by Clustering with Bisimulation Metrics
for Visual Reinforcement Learning with Distractions
Qiyuan Liu1 , Qi Zhou1 , Rui Yang1 , Jie Wang1,2 *
1

CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{qiyuanliu,zhouqida,yr0013}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

by task-irrelevant distractions, such as variations in background or viewpoint (Stone et al. 2021; Fu et al. 2021). A
fundamental challenge is to learn robust representations that
effectively capture task-relevant information and are invariant to the task-irrelevant distractions (Zhang et al. 2021).
In order to learn robust representations, many recent approaches remedy the overfitting of the encoder by applying
strong data augmentation, such as color-jitter (Laskin et al.
2020) or random convolution (Lee et al. 2019). However,
they require prior knowledge of the distraction to choose
semantic-preserving image transformations in RL settings
(Fan et al. 2021). Moreover, many of these methods require
access to the environments without distractions for sampleefficient policy optimization. (Hansen, Su, and Wang 2021;
Hansen and Wang 2020). Another line of work proposes a
series of auxiliary tasks. One of the most popular schemes
is to introduce contrastive objectives, which can encourage representations to preserve dynamics of the latent space
(Okada and Taniguchi 2021; Nguyen et al. 2021) or behavioral similarity between states (Zhang et al. 2021; Agarwal
et al. 2021). However, these contrastive-based methods usually rely on carefully constructed positive-negative pairs or
a large batch size (Caron et al. 2020).
In this paper, we propose a novel clustering-based
approach, namely clustering with bisimulation metrics
(CBM), which learns robust representations by discriminating between groups of visual observations with similar behavior. Specifically, at each training step, CBM first computes predicted cluster assignments via the geometric similarity between representations and a set of prototypes. Then,
CBM calculates target cluster assignments by measuring the
bisimulation distances between visual observations and prototypes. Finally, CBM optimizes the encoder and prototypical representations by enforcing the consistency between the
predicted and target assignments. An appealing feature of
CBM is that it can improve the robustness against distractions without domain knowledge or carefully constructed
pairwise comparison. Moreover, compared with previous
clustering-based methods, CBM exploits the properties of
RL tasks and achieves task-specific clustering, which enables CBM to extract task-relevant information effectively.
The proposed method CBM is compatible with most visual RL algorithms. In our experiments, we combine CBM
with two popular baselines, DrQ (Yarats, Kostrikov, and Fer-

Recent work has shown that representation learning plays a
critical role in sample-efficient reinforcement learning (RL)
from pixels. Unfortunately, in real-world scenarios, representation learning is usually fragile to task-irrelevant distractions such as variations in background or viewpoint. To tackle
this problem, we propose a novel clustering-based approach,
namely Clustering with Bisimulation Metrics (CBM), which
learns robust representations by grouping visual observations in the latent space. Specifically, CBM alternates between two steps: (1) grouping observations by measuring
their bisimulation distances to the learned prototypes; (2)
learning a set of prototypes according to the current cluster
assignments. Computing cluster assignments with bisimulation metrics enables CBM to capture task-relevant information, as bisimulation metrics quantify the behavioral similarity between observations. Moreover, CBM encourages the
consistency of representations within each group, which facilitates filtering out task-irrelevant information and thus induces robust representations against distractions. An appealing feature is that CBM can achieve sample-efficient representation learning even if multiple distractions exist simultaneously. Experiments demonstrate that CBM significantly improves the sample efficiency of popular visual RL
algorithms and achieves state-of-the-art performance on both
multiple and single distraction settings. The code is available
at https://github.com/MIRALab-USTC/RL-CBM.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) from visual observations has
achieved remarkable success in various domains ranging
from video games (Mnih et al. 2015; Lample and Chaplot
2017) to robotics manipulation (Levine et al. 2016; Kalashnikov et al. 2018). Recently, representation learning that embeds image inputs into low-dimensional vectors has drawn
great attention in visual RL. Popular approaches include
learning sequential autoencoders (Yarats et al. 2021c; Lee
et al. 2020a), applying data augmentation (Yarats, Kostrikov,
and Fergus 2020; Raileanu et al. 2020) or constructing auxiliary tasks (Jaderberg et al. 2016; Srinivas, Laskin, and
Abbeel 2020; Stooke et al. 2021). However, recent work has
shown that many of these methods can be easily distracted
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8843

