The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Online Reinforcement Learning with Uncertain Episode Lengths
Debmalya Mandal1 , Goran Radanović1 , Jiarui Gan2 , Adish Singla1 , and Rupak Majumdar1
1

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
2
University of Oxford
dmandal@mpi-sws.org, gradanovic@mpi-sws.org, jiarui.gan@cs.ox.ac.uk, adishs@mpi-sws.org, rupak@mpi-sws.org

Abstract

episode is drawn from a distribution. This situation often
arises in online platforms where the length of an episode
(i.e., the duration of a visit by a user) is not fixed a priori,
but follows a predictable distribution (Onah, Sinclair, and
Boyatt 2014). Additionally, various econometric and psychological evidence suggest that humans learn by maintaining a risk/hazard distribution over the future (Sozou 1998),
which can be interpreted as a distribution over the horizon
length. Despite a large and growing literature on episodic reinforcement learning, except for (Fedus et al. 2019), uncertain epsiodic lengths or settings with general survival rates
of agents have not been studied before.
Our Contributions: In this paper, we describe reinforcement learning algorithms for general distributions over
episode lengths. Our main contribution is a general learning algorithm which can be adapted to a given distribution
over episode lengths to obtain sub-linear regret over time. In
particular, our contributions are the following.

Existing episodic reinforcement algorithms assume that the
length of an episode is fixed across time and known a priori.
In this paper, we consider a general framework of episodic
reinforcement learning when the length of each episode is
drawn from a distribution. We first establish that this problem is equivalent to online reinforcement learning with general discounting where the learner is trying to optimize the
expected discounted sum of rewards over an infinite horizon,
but where the discounting function is not necessarily geometric. We show that minimizing regret with this new general
discounting is equivalent to minimizing regret with uncertain episode lengths. We then design a reinforcement learning algorithm that minimizes regret with general discounting but acts for the setting with uncertain episode lengths.
We instantiate our general bound for different types of discounting, including geometric and polynomial discounting.
We also show that we can obtain similar regret bounds even
when the uncertainty over the episode lengths is unknown,
by estimating the unknown distribution over time. Finally, we
compare our learning algorithms with existing value-iteration
based episodic RL algorithms on a grid-world environment.

• We first establish an equivalence between maximization
of expected total reward with uncertain episode lengths
and maximization of expected (general) discounted sum
of rewards over an infinite horizon. In particular, we show
that minimization of regret is equivalent in these two environments.
• Next we design a learning algorithm for the setting with
arbitrary distribution over the episode lengths. Our algorithm generalizes the value-iteration based learning algorithm of Azar, Osband, and Munos (2017) by carefully
choosing an effective horizon length and then updating
the backward induction step based on the distribution
over episode lengths. In order to analyze its regret, we
use the equivalence result above, and bound its regret for
a setting with general discounting.
• We instantiate our general regret bound for different
types of discounting (or equivalently episode distributions), including geometric and polynomial discounting, and obtain sub-linear regret bounds. For geometric √
discounting with parameter γ, we bound regret by
e
O( SAT /(1 − γ)1.5 ) which matches the recently established minimax optimal regret for the non-episodic
setting (He, Zhou, and Gu 2021). For the polynomial
discounting of the form h−p we upper bound regret by
√
1
e SAT 2−1/p
O(
).

Introduction
We consider the problem of episodic reinforcement learning, where a learning agent interacts with the environment
over a number of episodes (Sutton and Barto 2018). The
framework of episodic reinforcement learning usually considers two types of episode lengths: either each episode has
a fixed and invariant length H, or each episode may have
a varying length controlled by the learner. The fixed-length
assumption is relevant for recommender systems (Aggarwal
et al. 2016) where the platform interacts with a user for a
fixed number of rounds. Variable length episodes arise naturally in robotics (Kober, Bagnell, and Peters 2013), where
each episode is associated with a learning agent completing a task, and so the length of the episode is entirely controlled by the learner. Fixed horizon lengths make the design
of learning algorithms easier, and is the usual assumption
in most papers on theoretical reinforcement learning (Azar,
Osband, and Munos 2017; Jin et al. 2018).
In this paper, we take a different perspective on episodic
reinforcement learning and assume that the length of each
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9064

