The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Adaptive Mixing of Auxiliary Losses in Supervised Learning
Durga Sivasubramanian1, 2 * , Ayush Maheshwari1 , Prathosh AP3 ,
Pradeep Shenoy2 , Ganesh Ramakrishnan1
1

Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
2
Google Research, India
3
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru
{durgas, ayusham, ganesh}@cse.iitb.ac.in, prathosh@iisc.ac.in, shenoypradeep@google.com
Abstract

labels from labeling functions. A challenge here is how to
optimally combine these complementary objectives.
Equally, cardinal labels do not capture the richness of information contained in the input data–e.g., object category
labels for images of natural scenes. Some of this imprecision can be mitigated by using more nuanced ‘soft labels’, or
distributions over labels, as the target for supervision instead
of the cardinal labels. Knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015)) proposes using the inherent uncertainty of a supervised model trained on cardinal labels (the
‘teacher model’) to generate these soft labels for training,
in combination with the conventional supervision loss. Indeed, recent work (Menon et al. 2021) formalizes this process from a Bayesian perspective, showing that when onehot labels are an imperfect representation of the true probability distribution, KD reduces the variance associated with
probability estimates in a student model. Other work examines, from an empirical perspective, when and how distillation may improve upon training from scratch on the labels alone. For instance, an overtrained teacher will likely
achieve low/zero error rates w.r.t. the (incomplete) label loss
simply by overfitting on random noise in the dataset; in these
circumstances, the probabilities output by the teacher do not
accurately represent the underlying uncertainty, and students
may be led astray.
We propose A MAL, an adaptive loss mixing technique for
addressing the challenge of optimally combining supervised
learning objectives with these varied auxiliary objectives.
Our proposal is driven by the following key insight: the mixing of primary and auxiliary objectives greatly benefits by
being regulated on a sample-by-sample basis. This draws
from substantial literature showing the promise of instancereweighting, for example in handling noisy labels or outliers (Castells, Weinzaepfel, and Revaud 2020; Ren et al.
2018). We therefore propose to learn instance-specific mixing parameters that combine complementary learning objectives. We devise a meta-learning algorithm, based on a separate validation metric, to estimate these instance-specific
parameters in an unbiased manner. We demonstrate how
our method yields more accurate models when rule-based
losses are mixed with limited supervision losses (Maheshwari et al. 2021) as well as in a knowledge distillation setting
(KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015).
Motivation for our work: We present motivation for our

In several supervised learning scenarios, auxiliary losses are
used in order to introduce additional information or constraints into the supervised learning objective. For instance,
knowledge distillation aims to mimic outputs of a powerful
teacher model; similarly, in rule-based approaches, weak labeling information is provided by labeling functions which
may be noisy rule-based approximations to true labels. We
tackle the problem of learning to combine these losses in a
principled manner. Our proposal, A MAL, uses a bi-level optimization criterion on validation data to learn optimal mixing weights, at an instance-level, over the training data. We
describe a meta-learning approach towards solving this bilevel objective and show how it can be applied to different
scenarios in supervised learning. Experiments in a number
of knowledge distillation and rule denoising domains show
that A MAL provides noticeable gains over competitive baselines in those domains. We empirically analyze our method
and share insights into the mechanisms through which it provides performance gains. The code for A MAL is at: https:
//github.com/durgas16/AMAL.git.

1

Introduction

Deep learning techniques have shown significant impact
in a wide range of machine learning applications, driven
primarily by the availability of large amounts of reliable
labeled data (Sun et al. 2017). Despite this progress, supervised learning faces certain challenges: first, the time
and effort needed to obtain large, reliable labeled datasets,
and second, the limited information contained in humanannotated labels. Several approaches aim to improve generalization and sample efficiency of supervised learning by
incorporating additional sources of information, or learning
constraints, into the supervised learning paradigm. For instance, rule-denoising techniques (Ratner et al. 2016) use
simple, approximate labeling rules (labeling functions) that
provide weak supervision and reduce dependence on data
annotation. Other work has combined learning from labeling functions with supervised learning from limited humanannotated data (Maheshwari et al. 2021)–these approaches
leverage the supervised learning objective to offset the noisy
* Work partially done while at Google Research
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9855

