The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Anonymization for Skeleton Action Recognition
Saemi Moon1 * , Myeonghyeon Kim3 * , Zhenyue Qin4,5 , Yang Liu4 , Dongwoo Kim1,2
1

Computer Science and Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, Pohang University of Science and Technology
3
Scatter Lab
4
Australian National University
5
Tencent
{saemi, dongwookim}@postech.ac.kr, nessunkim@gmail.com, {zhenyue.qin, yang.liu3}@anu.edu.au
2

Abstract

Before Anonymized

General Information
Action
Classifier

Skeleton-based action recognition attracts practitioners and
researchers due to the lightweight, compact nature of
datasets. Compared with RGB-video-based action recognition, skeleton-based action recognition is a safer way to protect the privacy of subjects while having competitive recognition performance. However, due to improvements in skeleton recognition algorithms as well as motion and depth sensors, more details of motion characteristics can be preserved
in the skeleton dataset, leading to potential privacy leakage. We first train classifiers to categorize private information from skeleton trajectories to investigate the potential privacy leakage from skeleton datasets. Our preliminary experiments show that the gender classifier achieves 87% accuracy on average, and the re-identification classifier achieves
80% accuracy on average with three baseline models: ShiftGCN, MS-G3D, and 2s-AGCN. We propose an anonymization framework based on adversarial learning to protect potential privacy leakage from the skeleton dataset. Experimental results show that an anonymized dataset can reduce the
risk of privacy leakage while having marginal effects on action recognition performance even with simple anonymizer
architectures. The code used in our experiments is available
at https://github.com/ml-postech/Skeleton-anonymization/

Wiping face
with a towel
(0.9787)

Privacy Information
T1

T2

T3

Anonymizer

Gender
Classifier

Female(0.0007)
Male(0.9993)

General Information
Action
Classifier

Wiping face
with a towel
(0.9037)

Privacy Information
T1

T2

T3

After Anonymized

Gender
Classifier

Female(0.5253)
Male(0.4747)

Figure 1: One example of privacy leakage from the ETRIactivity3D dataset. A gender classifier is employed to identify the gender from a skeleton sequence, exposing the private gender information with high accuracy. After being
anonymized, the action classifier can still recognize the action accurately while the privacy classifier hides the original
gender information.

Introduction

videos, the skeleton dataset seems to expose fewer details
on participants. It is often challenging to identify sensitive
information such as gender or age from a skeleton to compare with the RGB video to the naked eye.
We raise a question about the privacy-safeness of skeleton datasets. To check potential privacy leakage from skeletons, we conduct experiments on identifying gender or identity with Shift-GCN (Cheng et al. 2020), MS-G3D (Liu
et al. 2020), and 2s-AGCN (Shi et al. 2019). Based on our
analysis, a properly trained classifier can predict private information accurately. Therefore, the skeletons are not safe
from the privacy leakage problem. A previous study (Sinha,
Chakravarty, and Bhowmick 2013) confirms the possibility of identifying a person from skeletons extracted from
Kinect. Also, prior work (Wang and Wang 2018) suggests
an end-to-end framework to predict both action and identity
recognition tasks.
This work aims to develop a framework that can
anonymize skeleton datasets while preserving critical action

Action recognition has been widely studied in many applications such as sports analysis (Tran et al. 2018), human-robot
interaction (Fanello et al. 2013), and intelligent healthcare
services (Saggese et al. 2019). Due to the success of convolutional neural networks, many recognition approaches
are proposed based on a sequence of video frames. Action
recognition can further be used for the public good. For
example, with surveillance cameras in a public area or a
school, we can detect violent actions.
To employ the recognition system appropriately, one must
ensure that private information is not abused before and after
analysis. Skeleton-based action recognition can be alternative to video-based recognition. Due to the advance in depth
and motion sensors, details of motion characteristics can
be preserved in the skeleton dataset. Compared with RGB
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15028

