The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Hierarchical Contrast for Unsupervised Skeleton-Based Action
Representation Learning
Jianfeng Dong1,2 , Shengkai Sun1 , Zhonglin Liu1 , Shujie Chen1,2 * , Baolong Liu1,2 , Xun Wang1,2
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Gongshang University, China
2
Zhejiang Key Lab of E-Commerce, China

Abstract

DA

This paper targets unsupervised skeleton-based action representation learning and proposes a new Hierarchical Contrast
(HiCo) framework. Different from the existing contrastivebased solutions that typically represent an input skeleton
sequence into instance-level features and perform contrast
holistically, our proposed HiCo represents the input into
multiple-level features and performs contrast in a hierarchical
manner. Specifically, given a human skeleton sequence, we
represent it into multiple feature vectors of different granularities from both temporal and spatial domains via sequenceto-sequence (S2S) encoders and unified downsampling modules. Besides, the hierarchical contrast is conducted in terms
of four levels: instance level, domain level, clip level, and
part level. Moreover, HiCo is orthogonal to the S2S encoder,
which allows us to flexibly embrace state-of-the-art S2S encoders. Extensive experiments on four datasets, i.e., NTU60, NTU-120, PKU-I and PKU-II, show that HiCo achieves
a new state-of-the-art for unsupervised skeleton-based action representation learning in two downstream tasks including action recognition and retrieval, and its learned action
representation is of good transferability. Besides, we also
show that our framework is effective for semi-supervised
skeleton-based action recognition. Our code is available at
https://github.com/HuiGuanLab/HiCo.

1

Query Encoder
Contrast

...

DA

Key Encoder

(a) A typical contrastive learning framework
Q uery Encoder

Temporal Branch

DA
Spatial Branch

Fusion
Fusion
Fusion

Hierarchical

...
Key Encoder

Temporal Branch

DA
Spatial Branch

Contrast

Fusion
Fusion
Fusion

(b) Our proposed HiCo framework

Figure 1: Frameworks for unsupervised SARL. (a) A typical contrastive learning framework that represents skeleton
instances at instance-level features, and performs contrast
holistically. (b) Our proposed HiCo represents them at multilevel features, and performs contrast hierarchically. DA indicates data augmentation.

Introduction

Human action recognition has a broad application in fields of
human-computer interaction, intelligent surveillance, video
content analysis, game control, etc (Gao, Zhang, and Xu
2019; Li et al. 2019; Dong et al. 2022; Zheng et al. 2023). In
recent years, 3D skeleton-based action recognition has made
remarkable progress with deep learning networks (Zhang
2012; Liu et al. 2019; Wang, Ni, and Yang 2020). However,
how to learn a more discriminative representation of skeletons is still an open question for skeleton-based action recognition. To conquer this question, the majority of early works
(Ni, Wang, and Moulin 2011; Wang et al. 2012; Vemulapalli and Chellapa 2016; Zhang et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2019;
Cheng et al. 2020) trained a network in a fully-supervised
manner, which required massive annotated 3D skeleton data
and hence is expensive and time-consuming. Recently, we

observe a new trend of proposing unsupervised Skeletonbased Action Representation Learning (SARL) method to
liberate the workload of annotation (Zheng et al. 2018; Su,
Liu, and Shlizerman 2020; Lin et al. 2020). In this paper, we
also focus on unsupervised SARL.
Existing efforts on unsupervised SARL can be roughly
categorized into three groups: encoder-decoder methods (Zheng et al. 2018; Nie, Liu, and Liu 2020), contrastivelearning methods (Rao et al. 2021; Thoker, Doughty, and
Snoek 2021; Guo et al. 2022), and hybrid methods (Su, Lin,
and Wu 2021; Chen et al. 2022). The encoder-decoder methods first encode the input skeleton sequence into latent features, then decode the latent features under the guidance
of various hand-crafted pretext tasks, such as skeleton reconstruction (Zheng et al. 2018), skeleton colorization prediction (Yang et al. 2021), and skeleton displacement pre-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

525

