The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

HVTSurv: Hierarchical Vision Transformer for Patient-Level Survival Prediction
from Whole Slide Image
Zhuchen Shao1 , Yang Chen1 , Hao Bian1 , Jian Zhang2 , Guojun Liu3 , Yongbing Zhang4 *
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
3
Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
4
Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
shaozc0412@gmail.com, ybzhang08@hit.edu.cn
Abstract
Survival prediction based on whole slide images (WSIs) is a
challenging task for patient-level multiple instance learning
(MIL). Due to the vast amount of data for a patient (one or
multiple gigapixels WSIs) and the irregularly shaped property of WSI, it is difficult to fully explore spatial, contextual,
and hierarchical interaction in the patient-level bag. Many
studies adopt random sampling pre-processing strategy and
WSI-level aggregation models, which inevitably lose critical prognostic information in the patient-level bag. In this
work, we propose a hierarchical vision Transformer framework named HVTSurv, which can encode the local-level relative spatial information, strengthen WSI-level context-aware
communication, and establish patient-level hierarchical interaction. Firstly, we design a feature pre-processing strategy, including feature rearrangement and random window
masking. Then, we devise three layers to progressively obtain patient-level representation, including a local-level interaction layer adopting Manhattan distance, a WSI-level
interaction layer employing spatial shuffle, and a patientlevel interaction layer using attention pooling. Moreover,
the design of hierarchical network helps the model become
more computationally efficient. Finally, we validate HVTSurv with 3,104 patients and 3,752 WSIs across 6 cancer types from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). The
average C-Index is 2.50-11.30% higher than all the prior
weakly supervised methods over 6 TCGA datasets. Ablation
study and attention visualization further verify the superiority of the proposed HVTSurv. Implementation is available at:
https://github.com/szc19990412/HVTSurv.

Figure 1: Application of MIL in WSIs-based tasks. There is
only one WSI-level bag for the WSI-level MIL, where the
WSI-level label is known, and the patch-level label is unknown. For the patient-level MIL, there are one or more than
one WSI-level bags where the patient-level label is known,
but neither the WSI-level nor patch-level label is unknown.

Different from natural images, WSIs have the property of
high-resolution and wide field of view (Srinidhi, Ciga, and
Martel 2021), so the aggregation of bag-level representation
will impose a great demand on computational complexity.
In addition, different from the WSI-level MIL problem, as
shown in Fig. 1, survival prediction based on WSIs is a
patient-level MIL problem (Fan et al. 2021). Since the tumor may have a composite tissue structure, multiple WSIs
are usually collected for patient diagnosis. Therefore, in survival prediction, we have to face two dilemmas: 1) multiple WSIs inevitably lead to linearly multiplied data volume;
2) the aggregation of multiple WSI-level bags for a patient.
For the aggregation of the WSI-level bag, the risk information in survival prediction is often reflected in a series
of histological patterns corresponding to disease progression. For example, the local-level co-localization of tumors
and lymphocytes (Shaban et al. 2019) and the WSI-level
metastatic distribution of sentinel lymph nodes (Kim et al.
2020) have been shown to correlate with prognosis. Therefore, the spatial and contextual information must be fully
considered in a WSI-level bag. Moreover, for the patientlevel bag, intratumoral heterogeneity will inevitably lead to
diverse tumor microenvironments in different WSIs (Vitale
et al. 2021). So the patient-level contextual information between instances in different WSI-level bags must be considered, and these three-level interactions further constitute
hierarchical information in a patient-level bag.

Introduction
In computational pathology, survival prediction based on gigapixels whole slide images (WSIs) is a weakly supervised
learning (WSL) task involving local-level tumor microenvironment interactions (Chen et al. 2021b), WSI-level tumorrelated tissue interactions (Abbet et al. 2020) and patientlevel heterogeneous tumor interactions (Carmichael et al.
2022). Multiple instance learning (MIL) is usually adopted
to tackle such a WSL problem (Shao et al. 2021b,a). However, bag-based representation learning in MIL still remains
an open and challenging problem.
* Corresponding author: Yongbing Zhang.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2209

