The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Dual Mutual Information Constraints for Discriminative Clustering
Hongyu Li1 , Lefei Zhang 1,2 , Kehua Su 1 *
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, P. R. China
2
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China
{hongyuli, zhanglefei, skh}@whu.edu.cn

Feature Matrix

Feature Matrix

Max Instance-MI

Min Feature-MI

…

…

…
…

…

…

Deep clustering is a fundamental task in machine learning
and data mining that aims at learning clustering-oriented feature representations. In previous studies, most of deep clustering methods follow the idea of self-supervised representation
learning by maximizing the consistency of all similar instance
pairs while ignoring the effect of feature redundancy on clustering performance. In this paper, to address the above issue,
we design a dual mutual information constrained clustering
method named DMICC which is based on deep contrastive
clustering architecture, in which the dual mutual information constraints are particularly employed with solid theoretical guarantees and experimental validations. Specifically, at
the feature level, we reduce the redundancy among features
by minimizing the mutual information across all the dimensionalities to encourage the neural network to extract more
discriminative features. At the instance level, we maximize
the mutual information of the similar instance pairs to obtain
more unbiased and robust representations. The dual mutual
information constraints happen simultaneously and thus complement each other to jointly optimize better features that are
suitable for the clustering task. We also prove that our adopted
mutual information constraints are superior in feature extraction, and the proposed dual mutual information constraints
are clearly bounded and thus solvable. Extensive experiments
on five benchmark datasets show that our proposed approach
outperforms most other clustering algorithms. The code is
available at https://github.com/Li-Hyn/DMICC.

…
…
…
…

…

Abstract

…

1

…

Min Feature-MI

Figure 1: Dual mutual information (MI) constraints. We perform MI constraints at the instance and feature levels to obtain better clustering efficacy.

stances. Deep neural networks (DNNs) can be used to transform the data into more clustering-friendly representations
due to their inherent property of highly nonlinear transformation (Wen et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021a; Dizaji et al.
2017; Huang et al. 2021; Ma et al. 2019). Conversely, as
an alternative form of self-supervised feature learning, contrastive learning has been recently applied to the field of
clustering (Li et al. 2021).
Although these existing data clustering algorithms have
achieved promising progress, we believe that the following essential factors should be crucial for clustering performance (i.e., the minimization of redundancy among features
and maximization of similarities among instances). Previous works (Chang et al. 2017; Ji, Vedaldi, and Henriques
2019; Wang et al. 2021b; Do, Tran, and Venkatesh 2021;
Ji et al. 2021, 2022) have focused more on the learning of
inter-instance similarities while ignoring the redundancy of
correlation among instance features. Although this point has
been noted in some recent studies (Tao, Takagi, and Nakata
2021), the approach they attempt to address redundancy issues fails to reach the feature information level. Therefore,
advanced strategies can be explored for better feature deredundancy to improve clustering effectiveness.
In this paper, we explore the essence of the issue and propose a deep comparative learning clustering technique to
obtain clustering-friendly features by performing two mutual information (MI) constraints. We then apply a simple
k-means strategy to achieve better clustering performance.
Specifically, we add the corresponding MI constraints at the

Introduction
As a fundamental task in unsupervised learning, data clustering plays an important role in various artificial intelligence
applications. The objective of clustering is to assign the instances into certain groups, such that similar samples belong to the same cluster, whereas the dissimilar ones are distributed in different clusters. Although some data clustering
techniques have achieved promising results (Nie et al. 2011,
2016; Chen et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2022), conventional clustering methods usually result in poor performance on complex and high-dimensional data (e.g., image clustering) due
to the weak capability of feature representations and the subsequent inefficiency similarity measurement among the in* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8571

