The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Augmenting Affective Dependency Graph via Iterative Incongruity Graph
Learning for Sarcasm Detection
Xiaobao Wang1 , Yiqi Dong2 , Di Jin1 , Yawen Li3 * , Longbiao Wang1,4 , Jianwu Dang5,1
1

Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cognitive Computing and Application, College of Intelligence and Computing,
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China,
2
School of New Media and Communication, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China,
3
School of Economics and Management, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
4
Huiyan Technology (Tianjin) Co., Ltd, Tianjin, China,
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China,
{wangxiaobao, dongyiqi, jindi}@tju.edu.cn, warmly0716@bupt.edu.cn, longbiao wang@tju.edu.cn, jdang@jaist.ac.jp
Abstract

nsubj

Recently, progress has been made towards improving automatic sarcasm detection in computer science. Among existing
models, manually constructing static graphs for texts and then
using graph neural networks (GNNs) is one of the most effective approaches for drawing long-range incongruity patterns.
However, the manually constructed graph structure might be
prone to errors (e.g., noisy or incomplete) and not optimal
for the sarcasm detection task. Errors produced during the
graph construction step cannot be remedied and may accrue to the following stages, resulting in poor performance.
To surmount the above limitations, we explore a novel Iterative Augmenting Affective Graph and Dependency Graph
(IAAD) framework to jointly and iteratively learn the incongruity graph structure. IAAD can alternatively update the incongruity graph structure and node representation until the
learning graph structure is optimal for the metrics of sarcasm
detection. More concretely, we begin with deriving an affective and a dependency graph for each instance, then an iterative incongruity graph learning module is employed to augment affective and dependency graphs for obtaining the optimal inconsistent semantic graph with the goal of optimizing
the graph for the sarcasm detection task. Extensive experiments on three datasets demonstrate that the proposed model
outperforms state-of-the-art baselines for sarcasm detection
with significant margins.

xcomp
mark
nuxpass

advmod

obl
case

xcomp dep

Sarcasm: I absolutely love to be ignored Non: Love you more than this
conj

obj
nsubj

Non: It

has

det

a

cc

amod

bad

det

memory

but

a

amod

great

compound

battery

life

Figure 1: Three examples of sarcasm and non-sarcasm expression. The words with incongruity are colored. Dependency relationships derived from the parsing tree are represented as directed edges.

pact on the performance of sentiment analysis (Bakshi et al.
2016). Hence sarcasm detection has gained increasing attention over the past decade, it provides a more realistic picture
of social media users’ intentions.
Early works attempt to extract incongruity expressions in
sarcasm detection by exploring a collection of positive verbs
and negative contexts or employing lexical features (Bamman and Smith 2015). Modern methods employing deep
neural networks have significantly improved sarcasm detection by capturing incongruity (Babanejad et al. 2020; Hazarika et al. 2018). Deep neural networks augmented by attention mechanisms are widely utilized in recent methods for
explicitly exploring the contrast and incongruity on wordlevel or snippet-level (Xiong et al. 2019; Pan et al. 2020),
which yielded promising results at the time.
Although these attention-based models are adept at capturing semantic incongruity patterns, they inevitably result
in misjudgment since the attention module may highlight extraneous words due to the absence of syntactic context. Considering the blow example in Figure 1, the attention module may still assign a large weight to the terms “bad” and
“great”, which are similar to the upper sarcastic example
and have a strong contrast. If simply taking such semantic inconsistent information into account, we might wrongly
categorize it as a sarcastic expression.
Inspired by existing graph-based models (Tang et al.
2020), (Lou et al. 2021) manually build an affective graph

Introduction
With the rapid growth of social media, Internet users employ
a variety of rhetorical strategies to convey their thoughts and
emotions, such as sarcastic expressions. Sarcasm is the form
of language to convey implicit information/intention that has
the opposite connotation of what is said or written (Joshi,
Bhattacharyya, and Carman 2017). As illustrated in the upper examples of Figure 1, both sentences contain the decisive sentiment word “love”. In contrast, the word “ignore”
leads to a contradiction expression in the sarcastic example.
That is, there are some incongruity expressions in a sarcastic context. Such intentional ambiguity has a significant im* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4702

