The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning to Select Pivotal Samples for Meta Re-weighting
Yinjun Wu, Adam Stein, Jacob Gardner, Mayur Naik
University of Pennsylvania
wuyinjun@seas.upenn.edu, steinad@seas.upenn.edu, jacobrg@seas.upenn.edu, mhnaik@cis.upenn.edu

Abstract

optimization problem (Shu et al. 2019; Ren et al. 2018;
Hu et al. 2019). In this approach, the weights of training
samples are learned so that the performance of the models
learned on the re-weighted training samples is maximized
on a small set of perfect samples—referred to as meta samples. Existing works mainly focus on designing computationally efficient algorithms for solving this bi-level optimization problem. For example, (Shu et al. 2019) propose
a meta re-weighting algorithm which alternates between updates to the model parameters and the sample weights. These
algorithms, however, rely on the assumption that the meta
sample set is given, and they construct this set by random
sampling in their empirical studies. However, as the toy example in Figure 1 shows, randomly selected meta samples
may perform worse than carefully selected ones by using
our methods (62.9% vs. 87.1% on test accuracy), which we
further verify in Section “Experiments”.

Sample re-weighting strategies provide a promising mechanism to deal with imperfect training data in machine learning,
such as noisily labeled or class-imbalanced data. One such
strategy involves formulating a bi-level optimization problem
called the meta re-weighting problem, whose goal is to optimize performance on a small set of perfect pivotal samples,
called meta samples. Many approaches have been proposed
to efficiently solve this problem. However, all of them assume
that a perfect meta sample set is already provided while we
observe that the selections of meta sample set is performancecritical. In this paper, we study how to learn to identify such
a meta sample set from a large, imperfect training set, that
is subsequently cleaned and used to optimize performance in
the meta re-weighting setting. We propose a learning framework which reduces the meta samples selection problem to
a weighted K-means clustering problem through rigorously
theoretical analysis. We propose two clustering methods
within our learning framework, Representation-based clustering method (RBC) and Gradient-based clustering method
(GBC), for balancing performance and computational efficiency. Empirical studies demonstrate the performance advantage of our methods over various baseline methods.

In this paper, we study how to learn to identify a set of
meta samples from a large, imperfect training set such that
the meta re-weighting performance is optimized. Specifically, we propose a framework which reduces the problem
of selecting such meta samples to a weighted K-means clustering problem through rigorous theoretical analysis. This
derivation basically transforms the formula for iteratively
updating sample weights from the meta re-weighting algorithm into a weighted K-means clustering objective function. We can show that optimizing this objective function can
aid in effectively distinguishing high-quality training samples from low-quality ones by giving them more confident
sample weights (i.e. weights close to 0 or 1). This objective function, however, requires the gradients of each individual training sample as input, which is computationally
expensive. To facilitate efficient evaluation of this objective function, we propose two methods, i.e. Representationbased clustering method (RBC) and Gradient-based clustering method (GBC), which balance performance with computational efficiency. Specifically, by assuming that the gradients of the bottom layers of the neural nets are insignificant, RBC only utilizes the gradient of the last layer, which
is efficiently calculated through feed-forward passes. In contrast, GBC samples model parameters such that the estimation of the objective function in the above K-means problem
is unbiased. Due to the necessity of explicitly (but partially)
computing sample-wise gradients, GBC is slower than RBC,

Introduction
Recently, with the advent of the data-centric AI era (Miranda 2021; Polyzotis and Zaharia 2021; Hajij et al. 2021),
there is an increasing concern about the quality of data for
training neural network models. How to construct and maintain a high-quality data set is extremely challenging due to
the existence of various defects in real-life data, e.g., imperfect labels or imbalanced distributions across classes. To
tackle these issues, various techniques have been explored.
One such example is the sample re-weighting strategy (Shu
et al. 2019; Ren et al. 2018; Hu et al. 2019; Jiang et al. 2018;
Chang, Learned-Miller, and McCallum 2017), which targets
jointly learning to obtain re-weighted training samples and
training neural nets upon them.
One promising strategy for learning to re-weight training samples is to leverage the framework of meta learning
(Hospedales et al. 2021; Andrychowicz et al. 2016; Thrun
and Pratt 2012) by formulating this problem as a bi-level
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6128

