The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Disentangling Reafferent Effects by Doing Nothing
Benedict Wilkins, Kostas Stathis
Department of Computer Science, Royal Holloway University of London
benrjw@gmail.com, kostas.stathis@rhul.ac.uk

Abstract
An agent’s ability to distinguish between sensory effects that
are self-caused, and those that are not, is instrumental in the
achievement of its goals. This ability is thought to be central
to a variety of functions in biological organisms, from perceptual stabilisation and accurate motor control, to higher level
cognitive functions such as planning, mirroring and the sense
of agency. Although many of these functions are well studied in AI, this important distinction is rarely made explicit
and the focus tends to be on the associational relationship between action and sensory effect or success. Toward the development of more general agents, we develop a framework
that enables agents to disentangle self-caused and externally
caused sensory effects. Informed by relevant models and experiments in robotics, and in the biological and cognitive sciences, we demonstrate the general applicability of this framework through an extensive experimental evaluation over three
different environments.

Figure 1: Comparative view of reafference. The forward
model estimates reafferent effects from the efference copy
and the agent’s observation. Reafference is compared with
subsequent observations to determine exafference.

sensory signals. If a fly is placed inside a vertically striped
rotating cylinder, in an attempt to stabilise itself the fly will
rotate its body to compensate for the perceived motion. This
optomotor-reflex, is not observed when the fly moves of its
own accord in a stationary cylinder, even though the sensory consequences are essentially equivalent. If the head of
the fly is rotated 180 degrees, effectively switching the position of its eyes, and the cylinder is again rotated, as one
might expect the fly will rotate itself in the opposite direction. However when again moving of its own accord it
will overcompensate and begin to spin. The inversion of the
modulating reafferent signal leads the optomotor-reflex to
correct in the wrong direction. The mechanism that underpins these observations was made more precise in subsequent work (Miall and Wolpert 1996) in which a comparative theory of reafference was introduced, see Fig. 1. The efference copy (or corollary discharge (Sperry 1950)), a copy
of an internal outward motor signal or action, along with
a forward model (Kawato 1999; Wolpert, Ghahramani, and
Jordan 1995; Wolpert and Flanagan 2001) estimates the reafferent sensory consequences. The estimate is compared with
subsequent sensory data, and any error is attributed to exafference. For the fly, the exafferent passing of stripes across
its optical field is a signal to correct its motion if knocked
off course or blown by the wind.
Although there is substantial experimental evidence for
the theory (Straka, Simmers, and Chagnaud 2018), it does

Introduction
An agent’s ability to distinguish between sensory effects that
are self-caused, and those that are not, is instrumental in the
achievement of its goals. A seminal work (von Holst 1954)
on this distinction in biological agents coined the terms reafference and exafference to mean: the parts of an observation
that are caused by the agent’s own action, and the parts of an
observation that are caused by external conditions or events
respectively. The subtlety of the distinction is highlighted by
Von Holst:
If I shake the branch of a tree, various receptors of my
skin and joints produce a reafference, but if I place my
hand on a branch shaken by the wind, the stimuli of
the same receptors produce an exafference.
The distinction has played a central role in developing theories to explain a broad range of physiological phenomena (von Holst 1954; Blakemore, Wolpert, and Frith 2000;
Wolpert and Flanagan 2001; Medendorp 2011; Fukutomi
and Carlson 2020).
In some of the earliest experiments performed by MittelStaedt and Von Holst (von Holst 1954) it was demonstrated
that reafference plays an important role in the modulation of
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

128

