The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MAPS-KB: A Million-Scale Probabilistic Simile Knowledge Base
Qianyu He1 , Xintao Wang1 , Jiaqing Liang2 * , Yanghua Xiao1,3 *
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
School of Data Science, Fudan University
3
Fudan-Aishu Cognitive Intelligence Joint Research Center, Shanghai, China
{qyhe21, xtwang21}@m.fudan.edu.cn, liangjiaqing@fudan.edu.cn, shawyh@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

PLMs still lag behind human cognition. For example, while
PLMs exhibit a certain ability to interpret similes after finetuning (Chakrabarty, Choi, and Shwartz 2022; He et al.
2022), they can hardly understand similes that require
common-sense knowledge (Liu et al. 2022). Although PLMs
can do polish writing by generating coherent similes (Zhang
et al. 2021; Chakrabarty, Muresan, and Peng 2020), the generated similes are far less diverse than human-written ones,
since statistical models tend to favor high-frequency similes.
A large-scale symbolic knowledge base of similes in general is needed to further improve the simile understanding ability of PLMs. Symbolic knowledge bases have been
widely introduced to bridge the gap between machines and
human intelligence (Liu et al. 2020). Firstly, PLMs and other
statistical models themselves suffer from a lack of knowledge that rarely appears in the corpora. Besides, explicit
structured knowledge is indispensable for many applications
that require explanation and interpretability, while PLMs
only contain implicit statistical knowledge that is hard to
understand. Furthermore, a structured knowledge base can
provide additional analytical conveniences compared with
purely statistical models, such as taxonomy-based reasoning and path-based reasoning. Hence, a large-scale simile
knowledge base can help machines understand the diverse
yet rarely expressed similes.
Many efforts have been devoted to the construction of
large-scale symbolic knowledge bases, (KBs, or knowledge graphs) such as entity-oriented KBs (Vrandečić and
Krötzsch 2014), concept-oriented KBs (Wu et al. 2012),
and word-oriented KBs (Miller 1998). Recently, there has
also been an increasing number of simile knowledge resources (Roncero and de Almeida 2015; Liu et al. 2022; Li,
Zhu, and Wang 2013). However, they are still unsatisfactory, concerning both their coverage and expressiveness. On
one hand, most of them are only thousand-scale (Roncero
and de Almeida 2015; Liu et al. 2022), while million-scale
knowledge bases are needed in a wide range of downstream
applications, such as online recommendation systems (Wang
et al. 2019) and open-domain question answering (Cui et al.
2017). On the other hand, existing simile knowledge bases
skip acquisition of property (Li, Zhu, and Wang 2013), an
important component of similes, since properties are usually
implicit and can not be extracted from texts directly, such as
the implicit property “soft” in “Her hair felt like silk.”. How-

The ability to understand and generate similes is an imperative step to realize human-level AI. However, there is still
a considerable gap between machine intelligence and human
cognition in similes, since deep models based on statistical
distribution tend to favour high-frequency similes. Hence, a
large-scale symbolic knowledge base of similes is required,
as it contributes to the modeling of diverse yet unpopular
similes while facilitating additional evaluation and reasoning. To bridge the gap, we propose a novel framework for
large-scale simile knowledge base construction, as well as
two probabilistic metrics which enable an improved understanding of simile phenomena in natural language. Overall,
we construct MAPS-KB, a million-scale probabilistic simile
knowledge base, covering 4.3 million triplets over 0.4 million terms from 70 GB corpora. We conduct sufficient experiments to justify the effectiveness of methods of our framework. We also apply MAPS-KB on three downstream tasks
to achieve state-of-the-art performance, further demonstrating the value of MAPS-KB. Resources of MAPS-KB are publicly available at https://github.com/Abbey4799/MAPS-KB.

Introduction
As a figurative language, metaphors allow people to understand abstract concepts through concrete and familiar
ones (Lakoff 1993; Lakoff and Johnson 2008). Metaphor understanding has become one of the most fundamental tasks
to evaluate cognition intelligence (Liu et al. 2022; Chen et al.
2022). A simile is a special type of metaphor, which compares two fundamentally different terms via shared properties (Paul 1970; Tversky 1977). For example, in simile
“Her hair felt like silk.”, “hair” (a.k.a, topic) is compared
with “silk” (a.k.a., vehicle) with the implicit property “soft”,
where topic, vehicle and property are three main components of similes (Hanks 2013). Since similes can make the
literal expression more imaginative and graspable, they have
been widely used in literature (Fishelov 2007) and daily conversations (Niculae and Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil 2014).
Nowadays, large pre-trained language models (PLMs)
have become an important foundation of human-level machine intelligence. PLMs have achieved state-of-the-art performance in various language processing tasks. However,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6398

