The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

What Does Your Face Sound Like? 3D Face Shape towards Voice
Zhihan Yang1 , Zhiyong Wu1∗ , Ying Shan2 , Jia Jia3 *
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, China
2
Applied Research Center (ARC), Tencent PCG, Shenzhen 518054, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
zhihan-y21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zywu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, jjia@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

FaceVC (Lu et al. 2021) introduces a three-stage training
strategy to fit face embedding to speaker embedding in voice
conversion systems. However, all of their works only consider 2D face images involving the face pose, expression,
lighting, and other factors irrelevant to voice characteristics.
Besides, since face images are hardly editable, it is also difficult to modify them to get different voices and explain how
and to what extent voice is influenced by face.
In this paper, we aim to exploit face-voice inference by introducing 3D face shapes to explain the face-voice correlation and predict and manipulate the voice afterward, because
face shape always figures personality and matters to dubbing
work (Mirza and Osindero 2014). For example, a superman
with a large chin and prominent brow ridges usually has a
powerful and deep voice. 3D face-voice inference is innovative, reasonable and meaningful. Anatomically, it is the skull
shape, but not the 2D face image, that influences the voice.
Because “bone conduction” is an important factor of timbre production, such as cheekbones and chins (Maurer and
Landis 1990). The bones also influence the growth of vocal
organs. Technically, the 3D approach (Deng et al. 2019) disentangles the speaker’s identity from irrelevant factors, such
as lighting, pose, and expression. The entangling problem is
not discussed and addressed in existing papers. By introducing the 3D approach, unrelated factors are excluded.
To fully explore cause of formation of human voice, we
also consider more factors influencing voice characteristics
besides face shape. For example, wheatish skin is related
to good health and loose skin is related to aging; goldframed glasses and beards also make different impressions.
Although these factors are not necessarily associated with
voice characteristics in real life, voice actors are required
to balance all appearance factors to choose a proper voice
type for a character (Smith et al. 2016). Therefore, besides
the 3D face shape, we supplement three additional voicerelated factors: face texture, facial features, and demographics. The face texture represents soft tissues from the aspect
of anatomy; the facial features, such as glasses and beards,
are related to personality and speaking habits; demographics, including gender and age, also matter in voice characteristics.
We propose a multi-modal framework to address this task,
taking these factors as input, outputting the corresponding
voice characteristics, and synthesizing the speech at the end.

Face-based speech synthesis provides a practical solution to
generate voices from human faces. However, directly using
2D face images leads to the problems of uninterpretability
and entanglement. In this paper, to address the issues, we
introduce 3D face shape which (1) has an anatomical relationship between voice characteristics, partaking in the “bone
conduction” of human timbre production, and (2) is naturally independent of irrelevant factors by excluding the blending process. We devise a three-stage framework to generate
speech from 3D face shapes. Fully considering timbre production in anatomical and acquired terms, our framework incorporates three additional relevant attributes including face
texture, facial features, and demographics. Experiments and
subjective tests demonstrate our method can generate utterances matching faces well, with good audio quality and
voice diversity. We also explore and visualize how the voice
changes with the face. Case studies show that our method upgrades the face-voice inference to personalized custom-made
voice creating, revealing a promising prospect in virtual human and dubbing applications.

Introduction
With the development of talking head techniques, virtual humans have shown tremendous potential in virtual anchors,
virtual idols, and other fields. TTS (text-to-speech) systems
are usually employed to produce a voice for a virtual human.
Current methods of TTS can generate a natural voice comparable to the voice of a real person. However, it is required
to record a large-scale real human voice corpus and train
the model for days to generate a proper voice matching the
virtual character. If it is possible to automatically infer the
voice characteristic of a virtual human and then synthesize
the speech with it, it will be easy to adapt TTS models without time-consuming training to produce personalized voices.
Therefore, it is necessary to explore the prospect of
speech synthesis with faces. Though lots of previous works
pay attention to face-voice correlations, only a few of
them spend effort on face-voice generation. Among them,
Face2Speech (Goto et al. 2020) replaces the speaker embedding with the face embedding in multi-speaker TTS.
* Corresponding authors: Z. Wu , J. Jia
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13905

