The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Point-to-Region Co-learning for Poverty Mapping at High Resolution
Using Satellite Imagery
Zhili Li1 , Yiqun Xie1 * , Xiaowei Jia2 , Kara Stuart3 , Caroline Delaire3 , Sergii Skakun1
1

University of Maryland
University of Pittsburgh
3
The Aquaya Institute
{lizhili, xie}@umd.edu, xiaowei@pitt.edu, {kara, caroline}@aquaya.org skakun@umd.edu
2

Abstract

lection and can be quickly outdated as slums grow, densify,
gentrify, or appear in new locations. As a result, when crises
hit, the response is delayed because decision-makers lack information on where services may be needed most. The ability to accurately map impoverished settlements at a low-cost
will provide substantial help to WASH implementers as they
design, customize, and budget programs. For example, such
maps can better inform subsidy distribution, which recent
findings have shown to often benefit high-income households, failing to reach the very poor (Andres et al. 2019).
We aim to develop a learning-based solution to generate
fine-scale maps of low-income areas (LIAs) in fast-growing
urban areas. The inputs leverage publicly available information for cost-effectiveness purposes, including Sentinel-2
multi-spectral satellite imagery at 10m resolution, and autotracked internet and cellular connection data. The use of free
sources is critical for sustainable real-world deployment.
The problem poses two major challenges. First, groundtruth maps of LIAs at fine-scale are expensive and timeconsuming to collect due to the need of household level field
surveys. As a result, such maps only exist in a limited number of cities and no label is available for most cities. Second,
the functional relationship between features X and label y
is often nonstationary over space due to intrinsic spatial heterogeneity (Xie et al. 2021; Goodchild and Li 2021), making
the classification criteria for LIAs vary across cities.
Earlier AI-based poverty maps (Xie et al. 2016; Jean et al.
2016) are often generated using low-resolution data (e.g.,
NOAA nighttime light intensity), which are ideal for continental analysis but not informative for detailed local action
and implementation (e.g., WASH programmers). Recent developments suggested correlations between the count of objects (e.g., buildings) and poverty level and deep object detectors were used to help estimate poverty scores (AyushBurak Uzkent et al. 2021). However, the analysis is designed
for rural areas and are not well-suitable for urban areas with
dense and highly dynamic landscapes, which is the focus of
this work. In addition, the detection task requires very highresolution imagery (e.g., 0.3m), which is often not freely
available and not sustainable for implementers. The study
also points out the critical issue on spatial heterogeneity,
which substantially limits the accuracy of the model in new
cities (AyushBurak Uzkent et al. 2021). Domain adaptation
mitigates domain shifts by homogenizing distributions be-

Despite improvements in safe water and sanitation services in
low-income countries, a substantial proportion of the population in Africa still does not have access to these essential services. Up-to-date fine-scale maps of low-income settlements
are urgently needed by authorities to improve service provision. We aim to develop a cost-effective solution to generate fine-scale maps of these vulnerable populations using
multi-source public information. The problem is challenging
as ground-truth maps are available at only a limited number
of cities, and the patterns are heterogeneous across cities. Recent attempts tackling the spatial heterogeneity issue focus
on scenarios where true labels partially exist for each input
region, which are unavailable for the present problem. We
propose a dynamic point-to-region co-learning framework to
learn heterogeneity patterns that cannot be reflected by pointlevel information and generalize deep learners to new areas
with no labels. We also propose an attention-based correction layer to remove spurious signatures, and a region-gate
to capture both region-invariant and variant patterns. Experiment results on real-world fine-scale data in three cities of
Kenya show that the proposed approach can largely improve
model performance on various base network architectures.

Introduction
While access to safe water and sanitation services in lowincome countries has increased substantially over the past
twenty years, governments struggle to ensure that poor and
vulnerable households equally benefit from these services.
Today, 70% of the population in Africa does not have access
to safe drinking water, and 50% does not have access to an
adequate toilet (Organization et al. 2019). The imperative set
by the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (UN
2022) to “leave no one behind” requires dedicated strategies to improve water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) access amongst the most vulnerable and hard-to-reach populations. Local governments however lack critical information
that they need to plan sanitation interventions targeted at the
most vulnerable. For example, there is currently no publicly
available, high-resolution poverty map for the majority of
African cities to support poverty-targeted programs. Moreover, existing maps of urban slums rely on field data col* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14321

