The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

BEVDepth: Acquisition of Reliable Depth for Multi-View 3D Object Detection
Yinhao Li1, 2 , Zheng Ge3 , Guanyi Yu3 , Jinrong Yang4
Zengran Wang3 , Yukang Shi5 , Jianjian Sun3 , Zeming Li3
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
MEGVII Technology
4
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
5
Xi’an Jiaotong University
liyinhao20@mails.ucas.edu.cn,
{gezheng, yuguanyi, yangjinrong, wangzengran, shiyukang, sunjianjian, lizeming}@megvii.com
Abstract

detector. Even though the detector achieves 30 mAP on
nuScenes (Caesar et al. 2020) benchmark, its depth are surprisingly poor. Only a few region of features predict reasonable depth and contribute to subsequent tasks (see dashed
boxes in Fig. 1), while most other regions do not. Based on
this observation, we point out that the depth learning mechanism in existing Lift-splat brings three deficiencies:

In this research, we propose a new 3D object detector
with a trustworthy depth estimation, dubbed BEVDepth, for
camera-based Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) 3D object detection.
Our work is based on a key observation – depth estimation in recent approaches is surprisingly inadequate given
the fact that depth is essential to camera 3D detection. Our
BEVDepth resolves this by leveraging explicit depth supervision. A camera-awareness depth estimation module is
also introduced to facilitate the depth predicting capability.
Besides, we design a novel Depth Refinement Module to
counter the side effects carried by imprecise feature unprojection. Aided by customized Efficient Voxel Pooling and multiframe mechanism, BEVDepth achieves the new state-of-theart 60.9% NDS on the challenging nuScenes test set while
maintaining high efficiency. For the first time, the NDS score
of a camera model reaches 60%. Codes have been released1 .

• Inaccurate Depth Since the depth prediction module is
indirectly supervised by the final detection loss, the absolute depth quality is far from satisfying;
• Depth Module Over-fitting Most pixels can not predict reasonable depth, meaning that they are not properly
trained during the learning stage. It makes us doubt about
depth module’s generalizing ability.
• Imprecise BEV Semantics The learned depth in Liftsplat unprojects image features into 3D frustum features,
which will be further pooled into BEV features. With a
poor depth like in Lift-splat, only part of features are unprojected to correct BEV positions, resulting in imprecise
BEV semantics.

Introduction
LiDAR and camera are the two main sensors used by the
current autonomous systems to detect 3D objects and perceive the environment. While LiDAR-based methods have
demonstrated their ability to deliver trustworthy 3D detection results, multi-view camera-based methods have recently
attracted increasing attention because of their lower cost.
The feasibility of using multi-view cameras for 3D perception has been well addressed in LSS (Philion and Fidler
2020). They first “lift” multi-view features to 3D frustums
using estimated depth, then “splat” frustums onto a reference
plane, usually being a plane in Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV). The
BEV representation is non-trivial since it not only enables an
end-to-end training scheme of a multiple input cameras system but also provides a unified space for various downstream
tasks such as BEV segmentation, object detection (Huang
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022b) and motion planning. However,
despite the success of LSS-based perception algorithms, the
learned depth within this pipeline is barely studied. We ask
– does the quality of learned depth within these detectors
really meet the requirement for precise 3D object detection?
We attempt to answer this question qualitatively first by
visualizing the estimated depth (Fig. 1) in a Lift-splat based
1

We will dive deep into these three deficiencies in Section
Three.
Moreover, we reveal the great potential of improving
depth by replacing the learned depth in Lift-splat with its
ground-truth generated from point cloud data. As a result,
mAP and NDS are both boosted by nearly 20%. The translation error (mATE) decreases as well, from 0.768 to 0.393.
Such a phenomenon clearly reveals that enhancing depth is
the key to high-performance camera 3D detection.
Therefore, in this work, we introduce BEVDepth, a new
multi-view 3D detector that leverages depth supervision derives from point clouds to guide depth learning. We are the
first team that presents a thorough analysis of how the depth
quality affects the overall system. Meanwhile, we innovatively propose to encode camera intrinsics and extrinsics into
a depth learning module so that the detector is robust to various camera settings. In the end, a Depth Refinement Module
is further introduced to refine the learned depth.
To validate the power of BEVDepth, we test it on
nuScenes (Caesar et al. 2020) dataset – a well-known benchmark in the field of 3D detection. Aided by our customized
Efficient Voxel Pooling and Multi-frame Fusion technique,

https://github.com/Megvii-BaseDetection/BEVDepth

1477

