The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Smoothed Online Combinatorial Optimization Using Imperfect Predictions
Kai Wang1 * , Zhao Song2 , Georgios Theocharous2 , Sridhar Mahadevan2
1

Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
2
Adobe Research, San Jose, CA
kaiwang@g.harvard.edu, {zsong, theochar, smahadev}@adobe.com

Abstract

2017), distributed streaming system with bipartite data-toserver assignment (Garg 2013; Thein 2014), and A-B testing in advertisement (Bhat et al. 2020). All these examples incur a potential switching cost when the decisions are
changed, e.g., reassigning drivers or data to different locations or servers is costly, and changing advertisement campaign requires additional human resources. The challenge
of online combinatorial decision-making and the presence
of hidden switching cost motivate the study of smoothed online combinatorial optimization.
In this paper, we study the smoothed online combinatorial optimization where an imperfect predictive model is
available. We assume that the predictive model can forecast
the future cost parameters with uncertainties, and the uncertainties can evolve over time. We measure the performance
of online algorithms by dynamic regret, which assumes a
dynamic offline benchmark, i.e., the optimal performance
when the cost function parameters are given a priori and the
sequential decisions are allowed to change. The same use of
predictions and dynamic regret are also studied in receding
horizon control (Mattingley, Wang, and Boyd 2011; Camacho and Alba 2013) in smoothed online convex optimization
under different assumptions on the predictions (Chen et al.
2015; Badiei, Li, and Wierman 2015; Chen et al. 2016; Li
and Li 2020; Li, Qu, and Li 2020). In our case, the challenges of bounding dynamic regret inherit from smoothed
online convex optimization, while the additional combinatorial structure further complicates the analysis.

Smoothed online combinatorial optimization considers a
learner who repeatedly chooses a combinatorial decision to
minimize an unknown changing cost function with a penalty
on switching decisions in consecutive rounds. We study
smoothed online combinatorial optimization problems when
an imperfect predictive model is available, where the model
can forecast the future cost functions with uncertainty. We
show that using predictions to plan for a finite time horizon
leads to regret dependent on the total predictive uncertainty
and an additional switching cost. This observation suggests
choosing a suitable planning window to balance between uncertainty and switching cost, which leads to an online algorithm with guarantees on the upper and lower bounds of the
cumulative regret. Empirically, our algorithm shows a significant improvement in cumulative regret compared to other
baselines in synthetic online distributed streaming problems.

Introduction
We consider the smoothed online combinatorial optimization problem, which is an extension of online convex optimization (Hazan 2019; Shalev-Shwartz et al. 2011; Zinkevich 2003; Hazan, Agarwal, and Kale 2007) and smoothed
online convex optimization (Lin et al. 2012a,b). In the
smoothed online combinatorial optimization problem, an
online learner is repeatedly optimizing a cost function with
unknown changing parameter. In every time step, the learner
chooses a feasible decision from a combinatorial feasible region before observing the parameter of the cost function. After the learner chooses the decision, the learner receives (i)
the cost function parameter and the associated cost (ii) an
additional known switching cost function dependent on the
chosen decision and the previous decision. The goal of the
learner is to minimize the cumulative cost in T time steps,
including cost produced by the cost function and the switching cost.
Smoothed online combinatorial optimization is commonly seen in applications with online combinatorial decisions and switching penalty, including ride sharing with
combinatorial driver-customer assignment (Jia, Xu, and Liu

Main Contribution
Our main contribution is an online algorithm that plans
ahead using the imperfect predictions within a dynamic
planning window determined based on the predictive uncertainty of the predictive model. We summarize our contributions as follows:
• Given imperfect predictions with uncertainties, we show
that planning based on predictions within a finite time
horizon leads to a regret bound that is a function of the
total predictive uncertainty with an additional potential
switching cost. This bound quantifies one source of regret corresponding to the imperfectness of the predictions, while the other source comes from the additional
switching cost (Theorem 0.5).

* Work done during an internship at Adobe Research.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12130

