The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multi-Domain Generalized Graph Meta Learning
Mingkai Lin, Wenzhong Li ∗ , Ding Li, Yizhou Chen, Guohao Li, Sanglu Lu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
Nanjing, China
mingkai@smail.nju.edu.cn, lwz@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2022). In recent years, graph meta learning (Huang and
Zitnik 2020; Zhang et al. 2022) has been proposed to address
this issue. Graph meta learning leverages a distribution of
similar GNN based tasks to accumulate transferable knowledge from prior learning experience, which can be used as
a strong inductive basics for fast adaptation to down-stream
tasks. Based on the learning tasks, related works on graph
meta learning can be divided into three categories: nodelevel (Yao et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021), edge-level (Bose et al.
2019; Huang and Zitnik 2020), and graph-level (Wang et al.
2021; Guo et al. 2021) meta learning.
The effectiveness of graph meta learning is established on
a strong assumption that the learning tasks in meta-training
and meta-testing phases are from the same domain and the
same distribution (e.g., coming from the similar networks
and sharing the same node feature space). Such an assumption is hard to hold in real-world applications, and there is an
urgent need to train GNNs with transferable knowledge into
unseen domains. For example, we may want to train a GNN
model based on diverse open graph datasets (such as citation
networks and social networks), and then applied the model
for product recommendation (such as a co-purchasing network) where the information available on the target graph is
limited due to privacy protection. We refer to such a problem
as multi-domain generalized graph meta learning problem,
which aims to learn prior experiences that can be generalized from multi-source domain graphs and fast adapted to
the tasks on unseen target domain with only a small number
of labeled samples. To the best of our knowledge, the multidomain generalized graph meta learning problem has not yet
been studied in the literature.
In computer vision (CV), domain generalization techniques have been studied to improve the generalization capability of a model in different domains, and the typical
strategies include data augmentation (Honarvar Nazari and
Kovashka 2020; Zhou et al. 2020b), domain-invariant representation learning (Li et al. 2018a; Zhou et al. 2020a),
and exploiting learning strategies (Dou et al. 2019; Li et al.
2019). Despite the progress, domain generalization for graph
meta learning encounters several challenges. First, graph
meta learning deals with non-Euclidean graph data consisting of nodes and edges from heterogeneous domains, which
is completely different from the regular image data and cannot be processed by the CV’s domain generalization meth-

Graph meta learning aims to learn historical knowledge from
training graph neural networks (GNNs) models and adapt it
to down-stream learning tasks in a target graph, which has
drawn increasing attention due to its ability of knowledge
transfer and fast adaptation. While existing graph meta learning approaches assume the learning tasks are from the same
graph domain but lack the solution for multi-domain adaptation. In this paper, we address the multi-domain generalized graph meta learning problem, which is challenging due
to non-Euclidean data, inequivalent feature spaces, and heterogeneous distributions. To this end, we propose a novel solution called MD-Gram for multi-domain graph generalization. It introduces an empirical graph generalization method
that uses empirical vectors to form a unified expression of
non-Euclidean graph data. Then it proposes a multi-domain
graphs transformation approach to transform the learning
tasks from multiple source-domain graphs with inequivalent
feature spaces into a common domain, where graph meta
learning is conducted to learn generalized knowledge. It further adopts a domain-specific GNN enhancement method to
learn a customized GNN model to achieve fast adaptation in
the unseen target domain. Extensive experiments based on
four real-world graph domain datasets show that the proposed
method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art in multidomain graph meta learning tasks.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Wu et al. 2019; Klicpera, Bojchevski, and Günnemann
2019) are powerful models for learning representation of
graphs and have achieved great success in dealing with
graph-related applications with data containing rich relational information. They are widely applied in social networks, knowledge graphs, recommendation systems, etc. A
large number of GNN models and applications were proposed in the past years (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017;
Luo, Yan, and Ji 2021; Cheng et al. 2022).
Despite their great success, the existing GNN models are
typically designed for specific tasks and they are lack of the
ability of quick adaptation to new graph tasks with only a
small number of labeled instances (Zhou et al. 2019; Zhang
∗

The corresponding author is Wenzhong Li (lwz@nju.edu.cn).
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4479

