The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

S UM REN: Summarizing Reported Speech about Events in News
Revanth Gangi Reddy1 * , Heba Elfardy2 , Hou Pong Chan3 , Kevin Small2 , Heng Ji2
1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
2
Amazon Alexa
3
University of Macau
revanth3@illinois.edu, {helfardy,smakevin,jihj}@amazon.com, hpchan@um.edu.mo

Abstract

Event: Power Outage in Texas

A primary objective of news articles is to establish the factual
record for an event, frequently achieved by conveying both
the details of the specified event (i.e., the 5 Ws; Who, What,
Where, When and Why regarding the event) and how people reacted to it (i.e., reported statements). However, existing
work on news summarization almost exclusively focuses on
the event details. In this work, we propose the novel task of
summarizing the reactions of different speakers, as expressed
by their reported statements, to a given event. To this end,
we create a new multi-document summarization benchmark,
S UM REN, comprising 745 summaries of reported statements
from various public figures obtained from 633 news articles discussing 132 events. We propose an automatic silvertraining data generation approach for our task, which helps
smaller models like BART achieve GPT-3 level performance
on this task. Finally, we introduce a pipeline-based framework for summarizing reported speech, which we empirically
show to generate summaries that are more abstractive and factual than baseline query-focused summarization approaches.

1

Speaker: Nateghi

Reported Statements
An issue facing all power grid operators, Nateghi of Purdue
said, is adequately preparing for changes in climate.
They’re also not taking into account inter-dependencies in the
system: You need water to generate electricity, and you need
electricity to transport water, and so on, Nateghi said.
And when the system is really stressed from an extreme event
like it is in Texas, then we’re seeing natural gas shortages which
exacerbate the whole impact, she said.
Nateghi, who researches sustainability and resilience of infrastructure, said other solutions such as upgraded equipment and
infrastructure may not be as cost-effective, but are still crucial.
“If we continue down the paradigm of what we’ve done before
we will see more extremes,” Nateghi said. “These stories are
going to just keep playing, and perhaps more frequently.”
Summary: Nateghi said that interdependencies in the system
are not being considered, and the problem of gas shortages
could be seen in the power outage in Texas. Solutions such
as upgraded equipment and infrastructure maybe less costeffective but crucial. She also said that power grid operators needed to make changes before extreme situations became
more frequent.

Introduction

In news, attribution occurs when the journalist reports the
statements of a third party either by directly quoting them
(i.e., direct quotation) or paraphrasing what they said (i.e.
indirect quotation). Reported speech serves as a central resource for tracking public figures’ stance, opinions, and
worldviews, making it of general interest to news readers.
For example, readers are likely to be interested in knowing President Biden’s view on the 2022 Ukraine crisis or
the latest guidance from the Center for Disease Control and
Prevention regarding a new COVID-19 variant. In addition,
reported statements cover a significant portion of the information presented in news articles – as part of our annotation exercise (described later in section 3.1), we found that
45% of the overall article content corresponds to reported
statements. However, current news summarization datasets
such as CNN-DM (Hermann et al. 2015), Multi-News (Fabbri et al. 2019), and Timeline100 (Li et al. 2021) largely disregard summarizing these reported statements.
To bridge this gap, we introduce the new task of
Summarizing Reported speech about Events in News and

Table 1: An example from S UM REN showing reported
statements from the speaker “Nateghi” about the “Power
outage in Texas” along with the corresponding summary.
create a new benchmark, S UM REN, for this task. Formally,
given a set of news articles related to a specified event, the
task is to summarize the statements made by a given speaker
about this event (e.g., “What did Chuck Schumer say about
passing the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022?”). The aim of
the task is to provide news readers with the reactions of various public figures towards different events. Table 1 shows an
example from S UM REN, along with the reported statements
and the corresponding reference summary.
Summarizing reported speech in news brings a set of
unique challenges. As opposed to traditional news summarization datasets where the most salient information about
the event is normally discussed in the first few sentences of
a given article, generally referred to as “lead bias” (Jung

* Work primarily done during an internship at Amazon Alexa.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12808

