The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Flow to Control: Offline Reinforcement Learning with Lossless Primitive
Discovery
Yiqin Yang1 * , Hao Hu2 * , Wenzhe Li2 * , Siyuan Li3
Jun Yang1 , Qianchuan Zhao1† , Chongjie Zhang2†
2

1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
3
Harbin Institute of Technology
{yangyiqi19,huh22,lwz21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Leveraging the temporally extended and recurring structure has long been an effective paradigm to solve complex
and diverse tasks (Dietterich et al. 1998; Sutton, Precup,
and Singh 1999; Kulkarni et al. 2016) by facilitating exploration (Pertsch, Lee, and Lim 2020). For example, a kitchen
robot may need to finish many sub-tasks to cook a dish: slide
cabinet door, move kettle, and open microwave (Gupta et al.
2019). However, such structure in the agent’s logged behavior is less appreciated in the offline setting. Especially, there
is little theoretical justification for extracting low-level skills
and learning a high-level policy with offline datasets, and it
is unclear how offline-learned skills affect the overall performance. This naturally leads to the following question:

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) enables the agent to
effectively learn from logged data, which significantly extends the applicability of RL algorithms in real-world scenarios where exploration can be expensive or unsafe. Previous
works have shown that extracting primitive skills from the recurring and temporally extended structures in the logged data
yields better learning. However, these methods suffer greatly
when the primitives have limited representation ability to recover the original policy space, especially in offline settings.
In this paper, we give a quantitative characterization of the
performance of offline hierarchical learning and highlight the
importance of learning lossless primitives. To this end, we
propose to use a flow-based structure as the representation for
low-level policies. This allows us to represent the behaviors
in the dataset faithfully while keeping the expression ability
to recover the whole policy space. We show that such lossless
primitives can drastically improve the performance of hierarchical policies. The experimental results and extensive ablation studies on the standard D4RL benchmark show that
our method has a good representation ability for policies and
achieves superior performance in most tasks.

Is there provable benefit from extracting temporally
extended primitive skills in the offline setting, and how to
extract useful skills to maximize such benefit?
In this paper, we give an affirmative answer to the first
question by analyzing the performance of hierarchical offline learning in linear MDPs. We show that there are provable benefits in learning a hierarchical structure when the
low-level skills are well-learned, in the sense that such skills
can faithfully represent the logged behavior and be expressive to recover the original policy space. As for the second
question, we find that current skill-based offline RL methods
are significantly compromised by the limited representation
ability of the learned low-level skills to recover the original policy space. Such loss of representation capacity can
greatly harm some powerful offline algorithms’ optimization, rendering skill-based methods less impractical in general usage. To recover the policy space in a lossless way and
learn more effective skills, we propose to learn an invertible
function to map latent embeddings to temporally extended
actions. Since the mapping is invertible, the RL agent retains full control over the original policy space while faithfully representing the original dataset’s behavior. We name
our method offline Lossless Primitive Discovery (LPD) and
evaluate LPD on the standard D4RL benchmark. Experimental results indicate that LPD achieves superior performance on challenging tasks. Extensive ablation studies
demonstrate the strong representation ability of the LPD. To
the best of our knowledge, our work is the first study analyzing the representation error in offline hierarchical RL.

Introduction
Online reinforcement learning has succeeded dramatically in various domains, including strategy games (Ye
et al. 2020), recommendation systems (Swaminathan and
Joachims 2015), and continuous control (Lillicrap et al.
2015). However, it requires extensive interaction with the
environment to learn through trial and error. In many realworld problems, like robot learning and autonomous driving, access to an interactive environment can be severely
limited due to safety concerns or huge costs (ShalevShwartz, Shammah, and Shashua 2016; Singh et al. 2020b).
However, in these applications, a large amount of precollected data is usually available, including human demonstrations and data from hand-engineered policies. This
makes offline RL (Levine et al. 2020; Fu et al. 2020) an
appealing approach for effectively learning from such previously logged data.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Equal advising.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10843

