The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Knowledge Graph Embedding by Normalizing Flows
Changyi Xiao1 , Xiangnan He1 * , Yixin Cao2
1

2

School of Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
School of Computing and Information System, Singapore Management University
changyi@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {xiangnanhe, caoyixin2011}@gmail.com

Abstract

freedom of rotation than complex space (Zhang et al. 2019).
Besides, hyperbolic space is used to capture hierarchical logical rules (Chami et al. 2020). Motivated by the group theory,
non-Abelian group is exploited to find the hidden group algebraic structure of relations (Yang, Sha, and Hong 2020).
However, the above works hardly consider the uncertainty
information of embedding, which limit the expressiveness.
To reflect uncertainty, a common method is to embed entities/relations as random variables (He et al. 2015). However, it has two drawbacks. First, it is difficult to parameterize a complex random variable directly due to the difficulty of computing the partition function (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016). Second, it is intractable to compute the probability density function (PDF) of the sum of
two random variables due to the difficulty of computing the
convolution of two PDFs (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis 2008).
In this paper, we propose a unified perspective of embedding and introduce uncertainty into KGE from the view of
group theory. Our model makes the embedding more general and ensures the computation is tractable. We embed entities/relations as elements of a symmetric group, i.e., permutations of a set. (A permutation of a set X is an invertible
function from X to X.) On one hand, since point vectors
can be seen as elements of a symmetric group, our proposed
embedding is a generalization of point vectors. Moreover,
Cayley’s theorem (Hungerford 2012), every group is isomorphic to a subgroup of a symmetric group, also shows the
generality of our proposed embedding. On the other hand,
the group operation of symmetric groups, the composition
of functions, is easy to compute. We can embed entities/relations as permutations of different sets to reflect different
properties of embedding. For example, if the set is a vector
space (or a random variable space), then the permutations of
that set reflect the certainty (or uncertainty) property.
In specific, to reflect uncertainty, we embed entities/relations as permutations of a set of random variables. The
permutation or invertible function can transform a simple
random variable into a complex random variable for greater
expressiveness, which is called a normalizing flow (Papamakarios et al. 2021; Kobyzev, Prince, and Brubaker 2020).
We can easily parameterize a complex invertible function
(instead of a complex random variable), and compute the
PDF of a random variable obtained by an invertible function acting on a simple random variable (Papamakarios et al.

A key to knowledge graph embedding (KGE) is to choose a
proper representation space, e.g., point-wise Euclidean space
and complex vector space. In this paper, we propose a unified perspective of embedding and introduce uncertainty into
KGE from the view of group theory. Our model can incorporate existing models (i.e., generality), ensure the computation
is tractable (i.e., efficiency) and enjoy the expressive power
of complex random variables (i.e., expressiveness). The core
idea is that we embed entities/relations as elements of a symmetric group, i.e., permutations of a set. Permutations of different sets can reflect different properties of embedding. And
the group operation of symmetric groups is easy to compute.
In specific, we show that the embedding of many existing
models, point vectors, can be seen as elements of a symmetric
group. To reflect uncertainty, we first embed entities/relations
as permutations of a set of random variables. A permutation
can transform a simple random variable into a complex random variable for greater expressiveness, called a normalizing
flow. We then define scoring functions by measuring the similarity of two normalizing flows, namely NFE. We construct
several instantiating models and prove that they are able to
learn logical rules. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of introducing uncertainty and our model. The
code is available at https://github.com/changyi7231/NFE.

Introduction
A knowledge graph (KG) contains a large number of triplets
with form (h, r, t), where h is a head entity, r is a relation
and t is a tail entity. Existing KGs often suffer from the incompleteness problem. To complement the KGs, knowledge
graph embedding (KGE) models map entities and relations
into low-dimensional distributed representations and define
scoring functions to measure the likelihood of the triplets.
A key to KGE is to choose a proper representation space
such that the embedding can make good use of the properties of the space (Ji et al. 2021). For example, point-wise Euclidean space is widely applied for representing entities/relations due to its simplicity yet effectiveness(Yang et al. 2014).
Complex vector space is then proposed to learn sophisticated
logical rules (Sun et al. 2018; Toutanova et al. 2015). Moreover, the usage of quaternion space brings more degree of
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4756

