The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Enhanced Multi-Relationships Integration Graph Convolutional Network for
Inferring Substitutable and Complementary Items
Huajie Chen1 * , Jiyuan He1 * , Weisheng Xu1,2 , Tao Feng1 , Ming Liu1 , Tianyu Song2 , Runfeng Yao2 ,
Yuanyuan Qiao2†
2

1
Meituan Group, Beijing, China
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
{chenhuajie02, hejiyuan, fengtao02, liuming04}@meituan.com
{xuweisheng, songtianyu, yaorunfeng, yyqiao}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

g
sin

w
bro
ng
uri

Understanding the relationships between items can improve
the accuracy and interpretability of recommender systems.
Among these relationships, the substitute and complement
relationships attract the most attention in e-commerce platforms. The substitutable items are interchangeable and might
be compared with each other before purchasing, while the
complementary items are used in conjunction and are usually
bought together with the query item. In this paper, we focus
on two issues of inferring the substitutable and complementary items: 1) how to model their mutual influence to improve
the performance of downstream tasks, 2) how to further discriminate them by considering the strength of relationship for
different item pairs. We propose a novel multi-task learning
framework named Enhanced Multi-Relationships Integration
Graph Convolutional Network (EMRIGCN). We regard the
relationship inference task as a link prediction task in heterogeneous graph with different types of edges between nodes
(items). To model the mutual influence between substitute
and complement, EMRIGCN adopts a two-level integration
module, i.e., feature and structure integration, based on experts sharing mechanism during message passing. To obtain
the strength of relationship for item pairs, we build an auxiliary loss function to further increase or decrease the distances
between embeddings of items with weak or strong relation
in latent space. Extensive experiments on both public and industrial datasets prove that EMRIGCN significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art solutions. We also conducted A/B
tests on real world recommender systems of Meituan Maicai,
an online supermarket platform in China, and obtained 15.3%
improvement on VBR and 15.34% improvement on RPM.

D

Toast (Plain
taste)
Af
sho ter a
pp ddi
ing ng
car to
t

Toast (Purple
sweet potato)

Toast (Raw
coconut Latte)

Toast (Whole
wheat)

Fresh milk
750g

Cheese slices
(Plain taste)

Luncheon
meat

Figure 1: An example of item recommendation on Meituan
Maicai. Given a query item, plain taste toast for example, its
substitutable items are recommended during browsing, and
its complementary items are recommended after adding it to
shopping cart.

Hao et al. 2020). There are various relationships between
items, among them, substitute and complement are most
popular and valuable, especially in e-commerce platforms
(e.g. Amazon, Taobao) (McAuley, Pandey, and Leskovec
2015). Substitutable items have similar attributes which are
often viewed and compared by users. Complementary items
are used in conjunction which are usually bought together
with the query item. These different relationships should
be considered while generating candidates for recommender
system. Figure 1 illustrates a toy example on our online supermarket platform. When a user is browsing bread, in order
to offer more choices, it is reasonable to recommend other
breads belonged to different brands or flavors (substitutable
items). After the user has added bread to shopping cart, in
order to explore new needs, it is more appropriate to recommend milk or cheese (complementary items). Understanding
the relationships between items can improve the accuracy
and interpretability of recommender systems.
In early stage, most studies extract features of items from
reviews and follow logistic regression (McAuley, Pandey,
and Leskovec 2015) or full Bayesian (Rakesh et al. 2019) to
predict substitute and complement relationships. Recently,
Graph Neural Network (GNN) has shown superior performance on graph analysis and is widely applied in many ap-

Introduction
Recommender systems play an increasingly crucial role in
modern online applications. It helps users to find the items
that they may be interested in from a huge collection set. Besides modeling the interaction between users and items, understanding the relationships between items also boosts the
development of recommender systems for it can bring better
user experience and trigger more revenue (Yang et al. 2022;
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author is Yuanyuan Qiao.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4157

