The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Controllable Image Captioning via Prompting
Ning Wang, Jiahao Xie, Jihao Wu, Mingbo Jia, Linlin Li
Huawei Inc.
wn6149@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jh xie@tongji.edu.cn, {wujihao, jiamingbo, lynn.lilinlin}@huawei.com

Abstract
Despite the remarkable progress of image captioning, existing captioners typically lack the controllable capability to
generate desired image captions, e.g., describing the image
in a rough or detailed manner, in a factual or emotional view,
etc. In this paper, we show that a unified model is qualified
to perform well in diverse domains and freely switch among
multiple styles. Such a controllable capability is achieved by
embedding the prompt learning into the image captioning
framework. To be specific, we design a set of prompts to finetune the pre-trained image captioner. These prompts allow the
model to absorb stylized data from different domains for joint
training, without performance degradation in each domain.
Furthermore, we optimize the prompts with learnable vectors in the continuous word embedding space, avoiding the
heuristic prompt engineering and meanwhile exhibiting superior performance. In the inference stage, our model is able
to generate desired stylized captions by choosing the corresponding prompts. Extensive experiments verify the controllable capability of the proposed method. Notably, we achieve
outstanding performance on two diverse image captioning
benchmarks including COCO Karpathy split and TextCaps
using a unified model.

1

COCO-style Caption

Short-length Caption

A black and white photo
of a street sign

A street sign on a pole on
a street

TextCap-style Caption

Medium-length Caption

A black and white sign
that says zone on it

A black and white photo
of a street sign in a city

Positive Caption

High-length Caption

A very pretty street sign
in a big city

A black and white photo
of a street sign with a
picture of a man holding
a woman's hand

Negative Caption
A black and white photo of
a lonely street sign

Figure 1: Leveraging a unified model, the proposed method
is able to generate diverse captions such as COCO-style [],
TexCap-style [], Positive [], Negative [], and different
caption lengths including Short-length [], Medium-length
[], and High-length []. Best view in color.

caption length and description style. (1) Length controllable
capability. Sometimes, a brief description is required to get
an overview of the image, while in other circumstances, a
detailed caption is preferred to acquire more information.
This can be roughly reflected by the controllable capability of the caption length, which is a basic demand in practical applications, but has been largely overlooked in existing methods. (2) Style controllable capability. An image can
be described in quite different views. For example, given an
image with textual contents (e.g., a poster or sign), some
people care about the objects, but some may pay more attention to the textual words. Besides, people may generate
non-factual captions, e.g., emotional descriptions that contain positive or negative expressions. It is of vital importance
to insert different styles in the captioning model to enhance
its expressibility. How to simultaneously maintain multiple
styles and freely switch among them is an open problem.
Existing captioning approaches typically separately handle
each scenario, e.g., train a captioner on the COCO dataset
(Lin et al. 2014) and train another model on the TextCaps
dataset (Sidorov et al. 2020). As a result, these captioners
are domain-specific, without style controllability.
In this paper, we show that a unified model is able to generate captions with different lengths and styles. As shown
in Figure 1, our approach describes an image semantically

Introduction

Image captioning is one of the fundamental tasks in computer vision, which aims to automatically generate natural
and readable sentences to describe the image contents. The
last decade has witnessed the rapid progress of image captioning, thanks to the development of sophisticated visual
representation learning (Zhang et al. 2021; Fang et al. 2021),
cross-modal fusion (Pan et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2019; Li
et al. 2020), vision-language pre-training (Hu et al. 2021;
Li et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2021b), etc. Image captioning is
a challenging task that requires the captioners to recognize
the objects and attributes, understand their relationships, and
properly organize them in the sentence.
Despite the remarkable advances, current image captioning algorithms generally lack the controllable capability to
generate desired captions. In other words, once the captioning model is trained, the caption generation process can
hardly be influenced. Typical cases include the control of
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2617

