The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Aesthetically Relevant Image Captioning
Zhipeng Zhong1, 3, 4, 5 , Fei Zhou1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and Guoping Qiu1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
1

College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
2
Peng Cheng National Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen, China
4
Shenzhen Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society, China
5
Guangdong-Hong Kong Joint Laboratory for Big Data Imaging and Communication, Shenzhen, China
6
School of Computer Science, The University of Nottingham, UK
guoping.qiu@nottingham.ac.uk
Abstract

ity of researchers have focused on image captions about objects and their relations and interactions, the more abstract
and arguably more challenging problem of image aesthetic
captioning (IAC) (Chang, Lu, and Chen 2017), which aims
to generate comments about the aesthetic aspects of images,
has received much less attention.
In the existing literature, image AQA and IAC are studied independent from each other. However, these are closely
related areas of aesthetic visual computing, we therefore believe that jointly study them is beneficial. For example, currently IAC performances are evaluated either subjectively
or based on metrics such as SPICE (Anderson et al. 2016)
and BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002) which evaluate the similarity between the generated and reference (ground truth)
sentences rather than the aesthetic relevance of the texts. It
will be very useful if we can directly measure the aesthetic
relevance of the IAC results, for example, how accurate the
generated caption can predict the images aesthetic scores.
In this paper, we first contribute a large research database
called DPC2022 which contains 510K images, over 5 million comments and 350K aesthetic ratings. We then present a
new IAC method called Aesthetically Relevant Image Captioning (ARIC). Based on the observation that most image
comments are general descriptions of image contents and
not about their aesthetics, we first introduce the concept of
Aesthetic Relevance Score (ARS) of a sentence. ARS consists of 5 components including scores related to aesthetic
words, the length of the sentence, words describing objects,
the sentiments of the sentence, and term frequency-inverse
document frequency (tf-idf). A list of aesthetic and object
words has been manually constructed from DPC2022. After (automatically) labelling the comments in DPC2022 with
the ARS scores, we then construct an ARS predictor based
on the Bidirectional Encoder Representations (BERT) language representation model (Devlin et al. 2018).
The introduction of ARS and its predictor have enabled
the design of the ARIC model which includes an ARS
weighted IAC loss function and an ARS based diverse aesthetic caption selector (DACS). Unlike methods in the literature that simply learned a direct mapping between the
images and their comments in the database, regardless of
the aesthetic relevance of the comments (in fact many of the
texts have nothing to do with aesthetics), the ARIC model
is constructed based on ARS weighted loss function which

Image aesthetic quality assessment (AQA) aims to assign numerical aesthetic ratings to images whilst image aesthetic
captioning (IAC) aims to generate textual descriptions of the
aesthetic aspects of images. In this paper, we study image
AQA and IAC together and present a new IAC method termed
Aesthetically Relevant Image Captioning (ARIC). Based on
the observation that most textual comments of an image are
about objects and their interactions rather than aspects of aesthetics, we first introduce the concept of Aesthetic Relevance
Score (ARS) of a sentence and have developed a model to
automatically label a sentence with its ARS. We then use
the ARS to design the ARIC model which includes an ARS
weighted IAC loss function and an ARS based diverse aesthetic caption selector (DACS). We present extensive experimental results to show the soundness of the ARS concept
and the effectiveness of the ARIC model by demonstrating
that texts with higher ARS’s can predict the aesthetic ratings
more accurately and that the new ARIC model can generate
more accurate, aesthetically more relevant and more diverse
image captions. Furthermore, a large new research database
containing 510K images with over 5 million comments and
350K aesthetic scores, and code for implementing ARIC are
available at https://github.com/PengZai/ARIC.

Introduction
Image aesthetic quality assessment (AQA) aims to automatically score the aesthetic values of images. This is very challenging because aesthetics is a highly subjective concept.
AQA models are either regressors or classifiers that extract
image features and output the aesthetic scores or classes
(Zhao et al. 2021). Many images, especially those on photography competition websites contain both aesthetic scores
and textual comments. It has been shown that including both
the visual and textual information can improve AQA performances (Zhou et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2021).
Unlike visual contents which are rather abstract, texts are
much easier for human to comprehend. Image captioning,
which aims to automatically generate textual descriptions of
images has been extensively researched, and much progress
has been achieved in recent years with the help of deep learning technology (Hossain et al. 2019). Whilst the vast majorCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3733

