The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

RSPT: Reconstruct Surroundings and Predict Trajectories
for Generalizable Active Object Tracking
Fangwei Zhong* 1, 2 , Xiao Bi* 3 , Yudi Zhang 4 , Wei Zhang 4 , Yizhou Wang 3, 5
1

Sch’l of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
Nat’l Key Lab. of GAI, Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI)
3
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Sch’l of Computer Science
Inst. for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
Sch’l of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University
5
Sch’l of Info. Eng., Zhengzhou University
{zfw, bixiao, yizhou,wang}@pku.edu.cn, reed zyd@mail.sdu.edu.cn, davidzhang@sdu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Obstacles

Active Object Tracking (AOT) aims to maintain a specific
relation between the tracker and object(s) by autonomously
controlling the motion system of a tracker given observations.
AOT has wide-ranging applications, such as in mobile robots
and autonomous driving. However, building a generalizable
active tracker that works robustly across different scenarios remains a challenge, especially in unstructured environments with cluttered obstacles and diverse layouts. We argue
that constructing a state representation capable of modeling
the geometry structure of the surroundings and the dynamics of the target is crucial for achieving this goal. To address
this challenge, we present RSPT, a framework that forms a
structure-aware motion representation by Reconstructing the
Surroundings and Predicting the target Trajectory. Additionally, we enhance the generalization of the policy network by
training in an asymmetric dueling mechanism. We evaluate
RSPT on various simulated scenarios and show that it outperforms existing methods in unseen environments, particularly
those with complex obstacles and layouts. We also demonstrate the successful transfer of RSPT to real-world settings.
.

Active Tracker
Target

The Third-Person View

The First-Person View

Figure 1: This exemplar case highlights the challenges of active object tracking, particularly in environments with cluttered obstacles. In this scenario, the target (a human) is occluded by obstacles, and the tracker (a robot) must find a
way to follow the target without encountering occlusions.

these environments, obstacles are usually cluttered and arranged in a variety of ways. For example, in a family scene,
different families have different room layouts, different furniture placements, and different appearances. The outdoor
environment is more complex, e.g., unpredictable obstacles
may be encountered at any time. As shown in Figure 1, the
tracker (robot) is required to find a path to follow the target
(human) while avoiding occlusion and collision. In these environments, the performance of existing models, especially
end-to-end networks (Luo et al. 2018; Zhong et al. 2019b),
are dropped significantly.
The inadequate generalization of these models can be attributed to two primary factors: visual perception and physical movement. The diversity in appearances and layouts of
obstacles results in various unseen situations for the tracker.
Additionally, target occlusion by obstacles makes it invisible to the tracker, hindering data-driven methods. In terms
of physical movement, obstacles may impede the tracker’s
path, necessitating route planning to bypass obstacles and
re-localize the target.
To develop a generalizable tracker, it is essential to construct a structure-aware motion representation that meets
three requirements: 1) abstraction of the scene’s geometric
structure to identify target objects, obstacles, and free space;
2) prediction of the target’s future movement based on geo-

Introduction
Active object tracking (AOT) aims to follow a target object by autonomously controlling the motion system of an
embodied agent. Specifically, the agent must perceive the
movement of the target and its surroundings and subsequently adjust its posture to continuously position the target at the center of its view with an appropriate size. AOT
has a vast array of applications, including drones (Ci et al.
2023), mobile robots (Wang et al. 2018), and autonomous
driving (Jin and Han 2022).
Although recent years have witnessed remarkable
progress in embodied AI (Chrisley 2003), it remains challenging for an agent to actively track a moving object in
complex unstructured scenarios (Zhong et al. 2019a). In
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Project Website: https://sites.google.com/view/aot-rspt

3705

