The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Understanding Representation Learnability of Nonlinear Self-Supervised Learning
Ruofeng Yang1 , Xiangyuan Li1 , Bo Jiang1 , Shuai Li1 *
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
wanshuiyin@sjtu.edu.cn, lixiangyuan19@sjtu.edu.cn, bjiang@sjtu.edu.cn, shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has empirically shown its data
representation learnability in many downstream tasks. There
are only a few theoretical works on data representation learnability, and many of those focus on final data representation,
treating the nonlinear neural network as a “black box”. However, the accurate learning results of neural networks are crucial for describing the data distribution features learned by
SSL models. Our paper is the first to analyze the learning
results of the nonlinear SSL model accurately. We consider
a toy data distribution that contains two features: the labelrelated feature and the hidden feature. Unlike previous linear
setting work that depends on closed-form solutions, we use
the gradient descent algorithm to train a 1-layer nonlinear SSL
model with a certain initialization region and prove that the
model converges to a local minimum. Furthermore, different
from the complex iterative analysis, we propose a new analysis
process which uses the exact version of Inverse Function
Theorem to accurately describe the features learned by the
local minimum. With this local minimum, we prove that the
nonlinear SSL model can capture the label-related feature and
hidden feature at the same time. In contrast, the nonlinear supervised learning (SL) model can only learn the label-related
feature. We also present the learning processes and results of
the nonlinear SSL and SL model via simulation experiments.

1

Introduction

In recent years, self-supervised learning has become an important paradigm in machine learning because it can use
datasets without expensive target labels to learn useful data
representations for many downstream tasks (Devlin et al.
2018; Radford et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2020).
At present, contrastive learning, a common self-supervised
learning method, has shown superior performance in learning
data representations and outperformed supervised learning in
some downstream tasks (He et al. 2020; Chen and He 2021;
Grill et al. 2020; Caron et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022). Contrastive learning methods usually form a dual pair of siamese
networks (Bromley et al. 1993) and use data augmentations
for each datapoint. They treat two augmented datapoints of
the same datapoint as positive pairs and maximize the similarity between positive pairs to learn data representations.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10807

However, the siamese networks often collapse to a trivial
solution during the training process, rendering the learned
representation meaningless.
To avoid the above problem, earlier contrastive learning methods such as MoCo (He et al. 2020) and SimCLR
(Chen et al. 2020) treat augmented datapoints from different datapoints as negative pairs and prevent model collapse
by the trade-off between positive and negative pairs. However, obtaining high-quality negative pairs is difficult (Khosla
et al. 2020), which in turn requires additional changes to the
model. Recently, other classes of the SSL model, such as
BYOL (Grill et al. 2020) and SimSiam (Chen and He 2021),
which do not use negative pairs, have been studied. These
models will not collapse to a trivial solution because they
construct subtle asymmetry in the structure of the siamese
network and create a dynamic buffer area (Tian, Chen, and
Ganguli 2021). SimSiam further simplifies the structure of
BYOL and only retains the core asymmetry. The simplified
model makes training and analysis more convenient while
obtaining competitive and meaningful data representations.
Despite the empirical success of SSL (He et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2020; Chen and He 2021; Zhong et al. 2022), there are
only a few works that focus on data representation learnability (Arora et al. 2019; Tosh, Krishnamurthy, and Hsu 2021;
Lee et al. 2021; HaoChen et al. 2021, 2022; Tian 2022a,b;
Wen and Li 2021; Liu et al. 2021). However, studying the
learnability is helpful in understanding why SSL models can
obtain meaningful data representations. Many of the above
works used final data representation to study the data representation learnability. Arora et al. (2019) obtained the data
representation function by minimizing the empirical SSL loss
in a special data representation function class. HaoChen et al.
(2021) and HaoChen et al. (2022) studied final data representation by closed-form solutions. They viewed the nonlinear
neural network as a “black box” and ignored the learning
result of the nonlinear neural network. Thus their results do
not describe the features accurately captured by SSL models
and explain the encoding process of neural networks.
Wen and Li (2021) and Tian et al. (2020) tried to understand the learning results of nonlinear SSL models by analyzing a relatively overparameterized neural network. However,
their results do not provide an accurate answer to whether
SSL models could exactly capture the important features of
data distribution or just capture a mixture of features.

