The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MTDiag: An Effective Multi-Task Framework for Automatic Diagnosis
Zhenyu Hou1 , Yukuo Cen1 , Ziding Liu2 , Dongxue Wu2 , Baoyan Wang2 , Xuanhe Li2 , Lei Hong2 ,
Jie Tang1
1

Tsinghua University,
2
Meituan
{houzy21, cyk20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jietang@tsinghua.edu.cn,
{liuziding, wudongxue03, wangbaoyan, lixuanhe, honglei}@meituan.com
Abstract

P: I have a runny nose and expectoration.
R: Do you have a fever, cough, or sneeze?

Automatic diagnosis systems aim to probe for symptoms (i.e.,
symptom checking) and diagnose disease through multi-turn
conversations with patients. Most previous works formulate it
as a sequential decision process and use reinforcement learning (RL) to decide whether to inquire about symptoms or
make a diagnosis. However, these RL-based methods heavily rely on the elaborate reward function and usually suffer
from an unstable training process and low data efficiency.
In this work, we propose an effective multi-task framework
for automatic diagnosis called MTDiag. We first reformulate
symptom checking as a multi-label classification task by direct supervision. Each medical dialogue is equivalently converted into multiple samples for classification, which can also
help alleviate data scarcity problem. Furthermore, we design
a multi-task learning strategy to guide the symptom checking
procedure with disease information and further utilize contrastive learning to better distinguish symptoms between diseases. Extensive experimental results show that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on four public datasets
with 1.7%∼ 3.1% improvement in disease diagnosis, demonstrating the superiority of the proposed method. Additionally,
our model is now deployed in an online medical consultant
system as an assistant tool for real-life doctors.

P: No fever, but I am coughing and sneezing.
R: Is there any discomfort in the throat?
P: Yes, I have a sore throat.
R: I suggest you may have rhinitis.

Disease:
Explicit Symptoms:

rhinitis
runny nose: true
expectoration: true

Implicit Symptoms:

fever: false,
sneeze: true,

②Disease Prediction

cough: true
① Symptom
sore throat: true Checking

Figure 1: A medical dialogue can be converted to a standard
user goal for automatic diagnosis, including a disease tag,
explicit symptoms, and implicit symptoms.

Specifically, the automatic diagnosis task usually relies on
interactions between an agent and a patient, where the agent
collects necessary symptoms for the diagnosis. This is consistent with the real-world diagnostic procedure. As the example in Figure 1 shows, the patient first states a self-report.
Then the doctor checks several related symptoms and finally
gives a diagnostic suggestion to the patient. The medical dialogue can be simplified and converted to a corresponding
diagnosis sample (or user goal), consisting of explicit symptoms obtained from the user’s self-report, additional implicit
symptoms from inquiries, and a disease tag to be predicted.
Hence, the problem can be viewed as a multi-step reasoning task (Chen et al. 2022) and targets inquiring about the
implicit symptoms step by step based on explicit symptoms
and then making the final disease diagnosis. Note that in automatic diagnosis, the agent only asks about symptoms, and
the patient answers with Yes/No/Not sure, which is quite different from the natural language used in traditional taskoriented dialogue systems.
Previous works (Wei et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2019; Liao et al.
2020) for automatic diagnosis typically regard the problem
as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Young et al. 2013)
and address it via reinforcement learning (RL) (Cuayáhuitl,
Keizer, and Lemon 2015; Yu et al. 2021). For example,

Introduction
Artificial intelligence is revolutionizing our life in various
aspects and has the potential to bring new vitality to the
healthcare and medical domain. Automatic diagnosis (Li
et al. 2017; Wei et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2019), which aims
to provide convenient medical care and assist diagnosis, is
one of the most promising applications. The rapidly growing
and aging population brings an increasingly heavy workload
for read-life doctors, especially in countries and areas with
high-density populations. And in the Internet era, people are
also seeking more convenient ways to find medical services
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Thus automatic diagnosis
arises at this moment and is gaining increasing attention in
contemporary research. Currently, the main focus has been
on making more effective diagnostic decisions or building a
diagnostic dialogue system (Shivade et al. 2014; Xia et al.
2020; Chen et al. 2022).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14241

