The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Compressed Heterogeneous Graph for Abstractive Multi-Document
Summarization
Miao Li, Jianzhong Qi, Jey Han Lau
School of Computing and Information Systems,
The University of Melbourne
miao4@student.unimelb.edu.au, {jianzhong.qi, laujh}@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Multi-document summarization (MDS) aims to generate a
summary for a number of related documents. We propose
HGS UM — an MDS model that extends an encoder-decoder
architecture to incorporate a heterogeneous graph to represent different semantic units (e.g., words and sentences) of the
documents. This contrasts with existing MDS models which
do not consider different edge types of graphs and as such do
not capture the diversity of relationships in the documents.
To preserve only key information and relationships of the
documents in the heterogeneous graph, HGS UM uses graph
pooling to compress the input graph. And to guide HGS UM
to learn the compression, we introduce an additional objective that maximizes the similarity between the compressed
graph and the graph constructed from the ground-truth summary during training. HGS UM is trained end-to-end with
the graph similarity and standard cross-entropy objectives.
Experimental results over M ULTI -N EWS, WCEP-100, and
A RXIV show that HGS UM outperforms state-of-the-art MDS
models. The code for our model and experiments is available
at: https://github.com/oaimli/HGSum.

Figure 1: The structure of the heterogeneous graph given
three documents in a document cluster: The orange triangles
denote document nodes d, the blue quadrates denote sentence nodes s, the green circles denote word nodes w, and
the line (or curve) segments between nodes denote edges. A
detailed description of the graph is in the Preliminaries.

Introduction
Multi-document summarization (MDS) aims to automatically generate a concise and informative summary for a cluster of topically related source documents (Ma et al. 2020;
Radev, Hovy, and McKeown 2002). It has a wide range
of applications such as creating news digests (Fabbri et al.
2019), product review summaries (Gerani et al. 2014), and
summaries for scientific literature (Moro et al. 2022; Otmakhova et al. 2022). Our work targets abstractive MDS,
which generates summaries with words that do not necessarily come from the source documents, resembling the summarization process of human beings.
State-of-the-art text summarization models use pretrained language models (PLMs) including both generalpurpose PLMs for text generation (Beltagy, Peters, and Cohan 2020; Lewis et al. 2020) and PLMs designed for text
summarization (Zhang et al. 2020a; Xiao et al. 2022). When
applied to the abstractive MDS task, these models take a
flat concatenation of the (multiple) source documents, which
may not capture cross-document relationships such as contradiction, redundancy, or complementary information very

well (Radev 2000). Ma et al. (2020) argue that explicit modeling of cross-document relationships can potentially improve the quality of summaries. Following this, several recent studies (Li et al. 2020; Jin, Wang, and Wan 2020; Cui
and Hu 2021) explore graphs to model source documents to
improve abstractive MDS. However, these graphs are homogeneous in that the nodes or edges are not distinguished for
different semantic units (e.g., words, sentences, and paragraphs) in the encoding process. This means these MDS
models cannot capture the diverse cross-document relationships among different types of semantic units.
In this paper, we propose HGS UM — an MDS model
that extends an encoder-decoder architecture to incorporate
a heterogeneous graph to better capture the interaction between different semantic units in the documents. HGS UM’s
heterogeneous graph has different types of nodes and edges
to model words, sentences, and documents, as shown in Figure 1. To facilitate HGS UM to learn cross-document relationships, we construct edges between sentences across
documents based on the similarity of their sentence embeddings. We also explore compressing the graph with graph

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13085

