The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Efficient End-to-End Video Question Answering
with Pyramidal Multimodal Transformer
Min Peng1,2 * , Chongyang Wang3 * , Yu Shi1 , Xiang-Dong Zhou1
1

Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Tsinghua University
{pengmin, shiyu, zhouxiangdong}@cigit.ac.cn, mvrjustid@gmail.com
Abstract

This paper presents a new method for end-to-end Video Question Answering (VideoQA), aside from the current popularity
of using large-scale pre-training with huge feature extractors.
We achieve this with a pyramidal multimodal transformer
(PMT) model, which simply incorporates a learnable word
embedding layer, a few convolutional and transformer layers. We use the anisotropic pyramid to fulfill video-language
interactions across different spatio-temporal scales. In addition to the canonical pyramid, which includes both bottom-up
and top-down pathways with lateral connections, novel strategies are proposed to decompose the visual feature stream into
spatial and temporal sub-streams at different scales and implement their interactions with the linguistic semantics while
preserving the integrity of local and global semantics. We
demonstrate better or on-par performances with high computational efficiency against state-of-the-art methods on five
VideoQA benchmarks. Our ablation study shows the scalability of our model that achieves competitive results for text-tovideo retrieval by leveraging feature extractors with reusable
pre-trained weights, and also the effectiveness of the pyramid.
Code available at: https://github.com/Trunpm/PMT-AAAI23.

Figure 1: The spatio-temporal multiscale property of
VideoQA. While features of local regions (marked by anchors) contribute to the recognition of objects per frame,
their dynamics described by frames at different temporal
locations (marked by anchors connected with dashed lines)
help sort out their relations or understand the events.

Generally, VideoQA includes the processes of feature extraction from each modality and the Video-Language (V-L)
interaction for output. Many studies (Xu et al. 2017; Jang
et al. 2017; Seo, Nagrani, and Schmid 2021; Yang et al.
2021) isolate these two processes, using fixed Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) (He et al. 2016; Tran et al. 2015;
Hara, Kataoka, and Satoh 2018; Xie et al. 2018) for visual
feature extraction and Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) or BERT (Kenton and
Toutanova 2019) for language embedding before the V-L interaction. We agree with (Lei et al. 2021) that such suboptimal features acquired in an offline manner may not promise
good fitting with the downstream multimodal tasks. For endto-end VideoQA, more recent efforts (Yu et al. 2021; Li et al.
2022; Xue et al. 2022) are paid to pre-training transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) on large-scale datasets comprising vision-language pairs, e.g., COCO Captions (Chen et al.
2015), HowTo100M (Miech et al. 2019), and YT-Temporal180M (Zellers et al. 2021), and transferring knowledge to
specific tasks. Despite their promising results, since powerful computational resources are still costly to access, we ask
if via model engineering accurate end-to-end VideoQA can
be achieved without using large-scale pre-training and huge

Introduction
Vision-language understanding is basic for a machine to
interact with our multimodal reality. The previous success seen in computer vision and natural language processing impacted the ongoing research for a variety of visionlanguage understanding tasks, e.g., Visual Question Answering (VQA) (Antol et al. 2015; Yu et al. 2019) and
text-to-vision retrieval (Yu, Kim, and Kim 2018; Bain et al.
2021). Of our particular interests, Video Question Answering (VideoQA) is quite challenging, which requires accurate semantics reasoning from local-spatio regions to globaltemporal dynamics of the video. This point is continuously
verified in recent studies, where successes are achieved by
methods that are able to capture such a multiscale property
considering spatial regions of a specific frame (Xue et al.
2022) or temporal saliency across different frames (Peng
et al. 2022; Xiao et al. 2022). It is time to build a VideoQA
model that incorporates the learning of multiscale spatial
and temporal features, preferably in an end-to-end manner.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2038

