The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Continuous Depth Representation via Geometric Spatial Aggregator
Xiaohang Wang* , Xuanhong Chen* , Bingbing Ni† , Zhengyan Tong, Hang Wang,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
{xygz2014010003, chen19910528, nibingbing, 418004}@sjtu.edu.cn, francis970625@gmail.com

Abstract
Depth map super-resolution (DSR) has been a fundamental task for 3D computer vision. While arbitrary scale DSR
is a more realistic setting in this scenario, previous approaches predominantly suffer from the issue of inefficient
real-numbered scale upsampling. To explicitly address this
issue, we propose a novel continuous depth representation
for DSR. The heart of this representation is our proposed
Geometric Spatial Aggregator (GSA), which exploits a distance field modulated by arbitrarily upsampled target gridding, through which the geometric information is explicitly
introduced into feature aggregation and target generation.
Furthermore, bricking with GSA, we present a transformerstyle backbone named GeoDSR, which possesses a principled
way to construct the functional mapping between local coordinates and the high-resolution output results, empowering
our model with the advantage of arbitrary shape transformation ready to help diverse zooming demand. Extensive experimental results on standard depth map benchmarks, e.g., NYU
v2, have demonstrated that the proposed framework achieves
significant restoration gain in arbitrary scale depth map superresolution compared with the prior art. Our codes are available at https://github.com/nana01219/GeoDSR.

1

…

GeoDSR

Zoom in

×1.93

× 3.14

× 7.9

Zoom in

(a) Scale-continuous sampling
Sampling Region

Guidance

GeoDSR

Depth Detection

Warped Input

Regular Output

(b) Spatial-continuous sampling

Figure 1: Construct continuous representation for depth
maps with GSA. (a) Our continuous representation can be
sampled with arbitrary sampling ratios/scales while maintaining high fidelity. (b) Sample a specific area or shape
(e.g., scanned maps with LiDAR) in our continuous representation by specifying the query coordinates to achieve the
effect of image warping.

Introduction

Depth maps have been used to assist in solving many complex computer vision problems, such as SLAM (Tateno et al.
2017; Cui and Ma 2020), semantic segmentation (Weder
et al. 2020; Gupta et al. 2014), and 3D reconstruction (Choe
et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2020), etc. However, due to budget and low-power considerations, the resolution of modern
depth sensors on consumer devices is often much lower than
the corresponding RGB images, limiting the application feasibility of the depth modality. Therefore, an emerging research topic is to upsample a low-resolution (LR) depth map
to high-resolution (HR), guided by the corresponding highresolution RGB images.
Most recent CNN-based studies have focused on improving super-resolution results at fixed integer scales (e.g.,
×2/4/8/16). However, it is inconsistent with real-world application requirements, where the wanted scaling factors of

the given scenes are usually variable real numbers or even
unknown. Thus, we argue that scale-continuous upsampling
is more practical for RGB-guided depth super-resolution,
e.g., gradual zooming of the depth map when shooting. Additionally, in some user-specified scenarios, the shape of
the collected depth map may be warped, such as wideangle panoramic scanning (e.g., LiDAR), where the detection region is an arc-shaped curved surface. In these cases,
spatial-continuous upsampling is needed to transform an input depth map to the desired geometry. All these demands a
continuous representation of the depth map, through which
real-numbered scale spatial feature upsampling should be
enabled, and the shape of sampling regions can be arbitrarily
changed.
We need to pay special attention to three key points to
learn such a continuous representation of depth with neural networks. First, scale continuity. The model must be
able to effectively integrate the geometric information of the
depth map and generate a continuous feature space that can

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2698

