The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FiTs: Fine-Grained Two-Stage Training for Knowledge-Aware Question
Answering
Qichen Ye1 * , Bowen Cao1 * , Nuo Chen3,4 , Weiyuan Xu1 , Yuexian Zou1,2†
1

ADSPLAB, School of ECE, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
4
Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology


yeeeqichen, zouyx @pku.edu.cn, cbw2021, xuwy @stu.pku.edu.cn, chennuo26@gmail.com
Abstract
Knowledge-aware question answering (KAQA) requires the
model to answer questions over a knowledge base, which
is essential for both open-domain QA and domain-specific
QA, especially when language models alone cannot provide
all the knowledge needed. Despite the promising result of recent KAQA systems which tend to integrate linguistic knowledge from pre-trained language models (PLM) and factual
knowledge from knowledge graphs (KG) to answer complex
questions, a bottleneck exists in effectively fusing the representations from PLMs and KGs because of (i) the semantic
and distributional gaps between them, and (ii) the difficulties in joint reasoning over the provided knowledge from both
modalities. To address the above two problems, we propose
a Fine-grained Two-stage training framework (FiTs) to boost
the KAQA system performance: The first stage aims at aligning representations from the PLM and the KG, thus bridging the modality gaps between them, named knowledge adaptive post-training. The second stage, called knowledge-aware
fine-tuning, aims to improve the model’s joint reasoning ability based on the aligned representations. In detail, we finetune the post-trained model via two auxiliary self-supervised
tasks in addition to the QA supervision. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves state-of-the-art
performance on three benchmarks in the commonsense reasoning (i.e., CommonsenseQA, OpenbookQA) and medical
question answering (i.e., MedQA-USMILE) domains.

Figure 1: (a) An example of the knowledge-aware QA task
from CommonsenseQA. (b) The Pearson correlation coefficient of representations for the same/different entity from
LM and GNN, which represents the semantic consistency
between the two modalities (+1: positive correlation; -1:
negative correlation; 0: no linear dependency). (c) PCA visualization of the distributions of entity representations from
the untuned GreaseLM (integrating RoBERTa-Large and
GAT), and the corresponding post-trained GreaseLM. The
latter serves as a better starting point for fine-tuning.

on the knowledge-aware question answering (KAQA) task
(cf. Figure 1(a)), which allows access to external knowledge
bases, especially knowledge graphs (KG), because KGs capture a broad coverage of factual knowledge explicitly using
triplets that encode the relationships between entities. Taking advantage of both PLMs and KGs, these systems achieve
remarkable results for tasks requiring open domain knowledge and structured reasoning (Lin et al. 2019; Feng et al.
2020; Yasunaga et al. 2021).
The overwhelming majority of state-of-the-art KAQA
methods can be classified into two categories: semantic
parsing-based (SP-based) methods (Luo et al. 2018; Sun
et al. 2020) and information retrieval-based (IR-based)
methods (Chen et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2022). This paper
mainly focuses on the latter which follows a two-stage procedure: (i) retrieving relevant knowledge from KGs under
the information conveyed in the question; and then (ii) fusing the retrieved knowledge and the contextualized representations captured by PLMs to perform joint reasoning.

Introduction
Recent advances in large pre-trained language models
(PLM) have demonstrated distinguishable applicability in
various tasks. (Chen et al. 2021; Cheng et al. 2022; Jin
et al. 2022; Cao et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023). However, empirical studies show that PLMs may struggle when dealing
with examples that are distributionally different from the
pre-training and fine-tuning corpora (Kassner and Schütze
2020). This shortcoming limits their performance in the
open domain question answering (QA) task that requires
a wide range of factual knowledge. More recently, some
works (Mihaylov and Frank 2018; Feng et al. 2020) focus
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13914

