The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Zero-Knowledge Proofs for Classical Planning Problems
Augusto B. Corrêa, Clemens Büchner, Remo Christen
University of Basel, Switzerland
{augusto.blaascorrea,clemens.buechner,remo.christen}@unibas.ch

Abstract

the verifier is capable of generating random bits, and because a successful outcome of the protocol only gives a high
probability that the prover is not fooling the verifier. Yet, the
protocol guarantees that the verifier does not learn anything,
besides that there exists a plan for the task.
We are interested in a protocol that can be executed efficiently. We want the prover to be able to convince the
verifier using few messages, while also limiting both to
polynomial-time computations. This limits the scope of our
protocol: classical planning is PSPACE-complete (Bylander
1994) and, while every language in PSPACE has a zeroknowledge proof (Ben-Or et al. 1988; Lund et al. 1992;
Shamir 1992), the only known protocols for a PSPACEcomplete language are the ones by Shamir (1992) and by
Shen (1992) for true quantified Boolean formulas (QBF).
Unfortunately, these protocols do not have the desired efficiency, so reducing a planning task to a QBF would not meet
our criteria. It is not known whether languages that are not
in NP have efficient zero-knowledge protocols. Thus, our
protocol is limited to tasks with polynomially-bounded plan
lengths, an NP-complete fragment of classical planning.
Our protocol can be applied to areas where privacy is a
concern. This is also the motivation for privacy-preserving
multi-agent planning (Brafman 2015; Torreño et al. 2017),
but the use-cases for each method are contrasting: privacypreserving planners deal mostly with problems where actions and states should be kept secret; our protocol deals
with problems where the solution should be kept secret.
Moreover, the two approaches have different computational
limitations. Privacy-preserving planners cannot be complete,
strong privacy preserving, and efficient (for a particular notion of efficiency) at the same time (Tožička, Štolba, and
Komenda 2017), while our protocol can only efficiently handle tasks in NP for which the prover already has a plan.
The idea of our protocol is to break up a plan into several
transitions. By making transitions indistinguishable from
each other, the prover guarantees that each individual transition does not reveal anything about the complete plan. At
every execution of the protocol, the verifier checks a single
transition to see if it is valid. The verifier then repeats the
protocol until it is confident that the complete plan is valid.
The presented protocol has a constant number of rounds
(i.e., message exchanges), and only requires polynomialtime computation from the prover and the verifier.

In classical planning, the aim is to find a sequence of deterministic actions leading from the initial to a goal state. In this
work, we consider the scenario where a party who knows
the solution to a planning task, called the prover, wants to
convince a second party, the verifier, that it has the solution
without revealing any information about the solution itself.
This is relevant in domains where privacy is important, for
example when plans contain sensitive information or when
the solution should not be revealed upfront. We achieve this
by introducing a zero-knowledge protocol for plan existence.
By restricting ourselves to tasks with polynomially-bounded
plan length, we are able to construct a protocol that can be
run efficiently by both prover and verifier. The resulting protocol does not rely on any reduction, has a constant number
of rounds, and runs in time polynomial in the size of the task.

Introduction
Alice needs to solve a bunch of “real-world problems” but is
not sure how to deal with them. She remembers her neighbor Bob talking about similar problems and asks if he has
any advice. Upon hearing Bob’s praise of classical planning,
Alice excitedly models all her problems as classical planning tasks. With the models in hand, only the solutions are
missing. Conveniently, Bob is the author of the famous Fast
Bobward planning system (cf. Hoffmann and Nebel 2001;
Helmert 2006), which is allegedly very fast, and he agrees
to solve Alice’s problems. Since Bob does classical planning
for a living, he expects to be compensated. Alice is happy to
pay her neighbor, but wants to be sure that Bob can actually
deliver what he promises. Bob assures Alice that he solved
the tasks already, but refuses to show her the solutions upfront. The two are left with two questions: How can Alice be
sure that Bob really solved her tasks? And how can Bob convince Alice without revealing anything about the solutions?
In this paper, we help Alice and Bob. We show a zeroknowledge protocol (Goldwasser, Micali, and Rackoff 1985)
for proving plan existence. The protocol is interactive and
probabilistic. It is interactive because a prover (Bob) exchanges messages with a verifier (Alice) to prove that it indeed knows a plan for the task; it is probabilistic because
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11955

