The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Soft Target-Enhanced Matching Framework for Deep Entity Matching
Wenzhou Dou1 , Derong Shen1 * , Xiangmin Zhou2 , Tiezheng Nie1 , Yue Kou1 , Hang Cui3 , Ge Yu1
1

Northeastern University, China
2
RMIT University, Australia
3
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
wenzhoudou@gmail.com, {shenderong, nietiezheng, kouyue, yuge}@cse.neu.edu.cn
xiangmin.zhou@rmit.edu.au, hangcui2@illinois.edu
Abstract

2020; Li et al. 2020b; Yao et al. 2022). DL-based approaches
treat the elements of each record as a token sequence or
a graph topology, which are then fed into deep learning
models to predict the matching probability of the record
pair from two given sources. And PLM-based approaches
concatenate the record pair as a sentence in the format of
[cls] record1 [sep] record2 [sep], and feed it into the PLM
to obtain the highly contextualized embeddings which improve the effectiveness of EM models. Although these approaches have good performance on training pairs, both
types of EM models face the common problem of poor performance on unseen testing pairs. Due to the diversity of
record distribution caused by unreliable sampling strategy
(Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016), the information
in training data can be far from that in testing data, causing
the low quality of matching for testing data using the trained
EM model. Thus, there is a requirement for designing an
advanced method to well identify the matches over unseen
record pairs.
To address this challenge, we need to generalize the obtained EM model to fit the unseen record pairs that belong
to the item categories different from those for any training
data. The popular approaches designed for generalizing EM
models include model-oriented and data-oriented. Modeloriented approaches (e.g., model redesigning (Zhang et al.
2020; Fu et al. 2020)) introduce higher parameterized EM
models that have higher capacity to learn universal features.
Data-oriented approaches apply data augmentation (Li et al.
2020b, 2021b) or inject domain knowledge (Li et al. 2020b)
to improve the data efficiency and avoid the model overfitting against the limited training data. However, both ap-

Deep Entity Matching (EM) is one of the core research topics
in data integration. Typical existing works construct EM models by training deep neural networks (DNNs) based on the
training samples with onehot labels. However, these sharp supervision signals of onehot labels harm the generalization of
EM models, causing them to overfit the training samples and
perform badly in unseen datasets. To solve this problem, we
first propose that the challenge of training a well-generalized
EM model lies in achieving the compromise between fitting
the training samples and imposing regularization, i.e., the
bias-variance tradeoff. Then, we propose a novel Soft TargetEnhAnced Matching (S TEAM) framework, which exploits
the automatically generated soft targets as label-wise regularizers to constrain the model training. Specifically, S TEAM
regards the EM model trained in previous iteration as a virtual
teacher and takes its softened output as the extra regularizer to
train the EM model in the current iteration. As such, S TEAM
effectively calibrates the obtained EM model, achieving the
bias-variance tradeoff without any additional computational
cost. We conduct extensive experiments over open datasets
and the results show that our proposed S TEAM outperforms
the state-of-the-art EM approaches in terms of effectiveness
and label efficiency.

Introduction
Entity Matching (EM) aims to identify the matching record
pair that refer to the same real-world entity. As a fundamental research in data cleaning and integration, EM has been
widely applied in many application scenarios including Ecommerce and population census etc. Considering two data
sources in Figure 1, EM determines whether the candidate
record pairs (i.e., a1 and b1, a1 and b2) are matching or
not, such that data integration and management tasks can
be subsequently conducted based on the matching results.
The comprehensive understanding of record semantics has
become increasingly important, which requires deep EM as
solutions in real scenarios.
Existing deep EM can be categorized into two types: deep
learning-based (DL-based) (Mudgal et al. 2018; Fu et al.
2019; Li et al. 2020a; Fu et al. 2020) and pretrained language model-based (PLM-based) (Brunner and Stockinger

ID
a1

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Data source S1
Title
Excel 2016

Manufacture
Microsoft

ID
b1

Data source S2
Title
Microsoft Excel 2016

ID
b2

Title
Professor teaches Excel 2016

√
×

Figure 1: An example of entity matching task.

4259

