The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On the Connection between Invariant Learning and Adversarial Training for
Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Shiji Xin1,4 , Yifei Wang2 , Jingtong Su3 , Yisen Wang1,5 *
1

Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE),
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
3
Center for Data Science, New York University
4
School of EECS, Peking University
5
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
p(z)

Abstract

Domain 1
Domain 2

Despite impressive success in many tasks, deep learning models are shown to rely on spurious features, which will catastrophically fail when generalized to out-of-distribution (OOD)
data. Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM) is proposed to alleviate this issue by extracting domain-invariant features for OOD
generalization. Nevertheless, recent work shows that IRM is
only effective for a certain type of distribution shift (e.g., correlation shift) while it fails for other cases (e.g., diversity shift).
Meanwhile, another thread of method, Adversarial Training
(AT), has shown better domain transfer performance, suggesting that it has the potential to be an effective candidate for extracting domain-invariant features. This paper investigates this
possibility by exploring the similarity between the IRM and AT
objectives. Inspired by this connection, we propose Domainwise Adversarial Training (DAT), an AT-inspired method for
alleviating distribution shift by domain-specific perturbations.
Extensive experiments show that our proposed DAT can effectively remove domain-varying features and improve OOD
generalization under both correlation shift and diversity shift.

z
(a) Diversity Shift

p(y = 0 | z)

p(y = 1 | z)

(b) Correlation Shift

Figure 1: An illustrative example of the two kinds of distribution shifts. The curly brackets enclose the distribution shift
between the environments. Here z stands for the spurious
feature, and y stands for label class.

Introduction
Modern deep learning techniques have achieved remarkable
success in many tasks (He et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2017;
Brown et al. 2020). However, deep models will suffer catastrophic performance degradation under some scenarios, as
they tend to exploit spurious correlations in the training data
(Beery, Van Horn, and Perona 2018). One of those representative scenarios is the Out-of-Distribution (OOD) generalization, where the trained model is expected to perform well at
the test time, even when the training and testing data come
from different distributions (Zhang et al. 2021a). Another
representative scenario in which deep models are unstable is
the adversarial example. Researchers have found that deep
models are quite brittle, as one can inject imperceptible perturbations into the input and cause the model to make wrong
predictions with extremely high confidence (Szegedy et al.
2014).
These two issues have some similarities to each other. They
both arise because deep networks do not learn the essential
* Corresponding Author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

causal associations (or intrinsic features). Nevertheless, in
their corresponding fields, different approaches have been
proposed. A large class of methods called Invariant Causal
Prediction (ICP) (Peters, Bühlmann, and Meinshausen 2016)
is proposed for OOD generalization. Among them, Invariant
Risk Minimization (IRM) (Arjovsky et al. 2019) attracts significant attention, which intends to extract invariant features
across different data distributions and expects the model to
ignore information related to the environment1 . While for
adversarial robustness against adversarial examples, Adversarial Training (AT) (Madry et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019)
is the most effective approach at the current stage (Athalye,
Carlini, and Wagner 2018). It trains a model on adversarial
examples generated by injecting perturbations optimized for
each image into natural examples. Several recent works have
explored the relationship between AT and OOD (Volpi et al.
2018; Shankar et al. 2018; Yi et al. 2021), but rarely focus on
the typical domain generalization setting considered by IRM.
Therefore, the two fields still seem rather independent. In this
paper, we are going to explore their potential relationships.
Although IRM and its variants are promising on certain
tasks, e.g., CMNIST (Arjovsky et al. 2019), recent studies
1
The terminologies of “domain”, “environment”, and “distribution” are often used interchangeably in current literature.

10519

