The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DeepGemini: Verifying Dependency Fairness for Deep Neural Networks
Xuan Xie1 , Fuyuan Zhang2 * , Xinwen Hu3 , Lei Ma1,2,4
1

University of Alberta, Canada
2
Kyushu University, Japan
3
Hunan Normal University, China
4
The University of Tokyo, Japan

Abstract

and critical property of the software system, with urgent industrial demands for rigorous and systematical analysis.
Up to the present, there have been quite a few fairness criteria used in the literature from different perspectives. For
instance, group fairness (Feldman et al. 2015) and equalised
odds (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016) are the two most common probability-based fairness. In this work, we take a special focus on the important dependency fairness (Urban et al.
2020; Galhotra, Brun, and Meliou 2017) of DNNs, which is
considered as a stronger notion of group fairness because it
imposes fairness on every individual sample. In particular, a
DNN satisfies dependency fairness if its output prediction is
not influenced by values of sensitive features. Sensitive features, typically, are the features that are considered sensitive
to bias, e.g., gender of the client in credit approval prediction. We select this fairness notion, over the other notions,
because the found individual discriminatory samples can be
verified on the original network, and it is a stronger notion
of group fairness, which is amenable to verification.
Although various testing and verification techniques have
been designed against dependency fairness, challenges arise
when it comes to formally compute discriminatory samples
and fairness scores, i.e., the fraction of the region in which
no discriminatory samples are contained. For instance, Libra (Urban et al. 2020) is an abstract interpretation based
technique to certify dependency fairness with definite guarantees. Nevertheless, it relies on over-approximation of the
space, and therefore a concrete discriminatory sample is out
of its reach. ADF (Zhang et al. 2020) is a testing technique
to search for discriminatory samples based on gradient information. However, this technique cannot give formal guarantees on the desired fairness.
Towards addressing these challenges, we propose a novel
technique DeepGemini, for formally computing discriminatory samples and fairness scores, which is schematically
shown in Figure 1. It mainly consists of two novel key components, discriminatory sample computation and Counterexample Guided Fairness Analysis (CEGFA). First, to formally
compute discriminatory samples, we propose a simple and
effective reduction to reduce dependency fairness to safety
properties of DNNs. After reduction, discriminatory samples of DNNs can be viewed as violations of safety properties so that we can use existing safety verification techniques, e.g., techniques based on Satisfiability Modulo The-

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely adopted in
many decision-making industrial applications. Their fairness
issues, i.e., whether there exist unintended biases in the DNN,
receive much attention and become critical concerns, which
can directly cause negative impacts in our daily life and potentially undermine the fairness of our society, especially with
their increasing deployment at an unprecedented speed. Recently, some early attempts have been made to provide fairness assurance of DNNs, such as fairness testing, which aims
at finding discriminatory samples empirically, and fairness
certification, which develops sound but not complete analysis
to certify the fairness of DNNs. Nevertheless, how to formally
compute discriminatory samples and fairness scores (i.e., the
percentage of fair input space), is still largely uninvestigated.
In this paper, we propose DeepGemini, a novel fairness formal analysis technique for DNNs, which contains two key
components: discriminatory sample discovery and fairness
score computation. To uncover discriminatory samples, we
encode the fairness of DNNs as safety properties and search
for discriminatory samples by means of state-of-the-art verification techniques for DNNs. This reduction enables us to be
the first to formally compute discriminatory samples. To compute the fairness score, we develop counterexample guided
fairness analysis, which utilizes four heuristics to efficiently
approximate a lower bound of fairness score. Extensive experimental evaluations demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of DeepGemini on commonly-used benchmarks, and
DeepGemini outperforms state-of-the-art DNN fairness certification approaches in terms of both efficiency and scalability.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have become the core components of many social-critical decision-making processes,
e.g., credit classification, income prediction (Dua and Graff
2017), and recidivism risk estimation (Angwin, Larson, and
Mattu 2018), which can directly impact our daily life. Their
continuously rapid growth and widespread deployment also
pose critical fairness concerns, which have received much
attention recently. For example, in image search, when
searching for certain words, such as CEO, there can be a
gender bias (Kay, Matuszek, and Munson 2015). Consequently, DNN fairness has been an important requirement
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15251

