The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CLIPVG: Text-Guided Image Manipulation Using Differentiable Vector Graphics
Yiren Song* 1,2 , Xuning Shao* 2 , Kang Chen2 , Weidong Zhang2 , Zhongliang Jing†1 , Minzhe Li1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China,
2
Netease Games AI Lab, Hangzhou, China,
{songyiren, liminzhe, zljing}@sjtu.edu.cn, {shaoxuning, ckn6763, zhangweidong02}@corp.netease.com

Original

Abstract
Considerable progress has recently been made in leveraging
CLIP (Contrastive Language-Image Pre-Training) models for
text-guided image manipulation. However, all existing works
rely on additional generative models to ensure the quality
of results, because CLIP alone cannot provide enough guidance information for fine-scale pixel-level changes. In this paper, we introduce CLIPVG, a text-guided image manipulation
framework using differentiable vector graphics, which is also
the first CLIP-based general image manipulation framework
that does not require any additional generative models. We
demonstrate that CLIPVG can not only achieve state-of-art
performance in both semantic correctness and synthesis quality, but also is flexible enough to support various applications
far beyond the capability of all existing methods.

CLIPVG

Disco Diffusion CLIPstyler

Groot

A steampunk style building

Introduction
Large-scale vision-language pre-training models like CLIP
(Contrastive Language-Image Pre-Training) significantly facilitate the task of text-guided image manipulation, whose
goal is to automatically modify images based on given text
prompts. In recent years, various studies (Patashnik et al.
2021; Gal et al. 2022; Kim, Kwon, and Ye 2022; Ramesh
et al. 2022; Dis 2022) have been conducted on utilizing a
pre-trained CLIP model for such purposes.
However, all existing CLIP-based works perform the manipulation on pixel-level, and thus share the same intrinsic
limitation of raster image based methods, i.e., easily produce
poor results. This is because CLIP cannot provide enough
guidance for fine-scale pixel-level optimization since CLIP
mainly focuses on high-level semantics of an image. As
pointed out by (Gal et al. 2022; Nichol et al. 2022), the CLIP
guided optimization process may be easily trapped in local
optimum or impaired by adversarial solutions.
To mitigate such an issue, existing works typically incorporate additional generative models to ensure the synthesis quality (Patashnik et al. 2021; Gal et al. 2022; Kim,
Kwon, and Ye 2022; Dis 2022; Ramesh et al. 2022). These
models not only consume extra resources to train, but limit
the domain of the input images and text prompts. Currently,

An angry Peppa Pig

Figure 1: Text-guided manipulation results of CLIPVG and
two baselines, i.e., Disco Diffusion (Dis 2022) and CLIPstyler (Kwon and Ye 2021).

the only solution that does not rely on additional generative
models is CLIPstyler (Kwon and Ye 2021), which handles
fine-scale features by additionally applying CLIP losses to
a set of randomly sampled patches. However, this solution
is only feasible for local texture style transfer, rather than
general semantic manipulation (see Figure 1).
In this paper, we tackle CLIP-based image manipulation
from a new perspective. Specifically, we vectorize the input raster image into vector graphics using a robust multiround vectorization strategy and leverage a differentiable 2D
vector graphics rasterizer (Li et al. 2020b) to optimize the
color and shape of each geometric element (i.e., stroke or
filled curve) so that the CLIP loss between the text prompt(s)
and the corresponding rasterized image can be minimized.
The major difference between this new framework, which
we call CLIPVG, and exiting works is that CLIPVG performs image manipulation in the domain of vector graph-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2312

