The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Post-hoc Uncertainty Learning Using a Dirichlet Meta-Model
Maohao Shen1 , Yuheng Bu2 , Prasanna Sattigeri3 ,
Soumya Ghosh3 , Subhro Das3 , Gregory Wornell1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
University of Florida
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
maohao@mit.edu
Abstract

both desired prediction and UQ performance simultaneously. However, such an approach for UQ suffers from practical limitations because it either requires a specific model
structure or explicitly training the entire model from scratch
to impose the uncertainty quantification ability. A more realistic scenario is to quantify the uncertainty of a pretrained
model in a post-hoc manner due to practical constraints. For
example, (1) compared with prediction accuracy and generalization performance, uncertainty quantification ability
of deep learning models are usually considered with lower
priority, especially for profit-oriented applications, such as
recommendation systems; (2) some applications require the
models to impose other constraints, such as fairness or privacy, which might sacrifice the UQ performance; (3) for
some applications such as transfer learning, the pretrained
models are usually available, and it might be a waste of resources to train a new model from scratch.
Motivated by these practical concerns, we focus on tackling the post-hoc uncertainty learning problem, i.e., given a
pretrained model, how to improve its UQ quality without affecting its predictive performance. Prior works on improving
uncertainty quality in a post-hoc setting have been mainly
targeted towards improving calibration (Guo et al. 2017;
Kull et al. 2019). These approaches typically fail to augment the pre-trained model with the ability to capture different sources of uncertainty, such as epistemic uncertainty,
which is crucial for applications such Out-of-Distribution
(OOD) detection. Several recent works (Chen et al. 2019;
Jain et al. 2021) have adopted the meta-modeling approach,
where a meta-model is trained to predict whether or not the
pretrained model is correct on the validation samples. These
methods still rely on a point estimate of the meta-model parameters, which can be unreliable, especially when the validation set is small.
In this paper, we propose a novel Bayesian meta-modelbased uncertainty learning approach to mitigate the aforementioned issues. Our proposed method requires no additional data other than the training dataset and is flexible
enough to quantify different kinds of uncertainties and easily
adapt to different application settings. Our empirical results
provides crucial insights regarding meta-model training: (1)
The diversity in feature representations across different layers is essential for uncertainty quantification, especially for
out-of-domain (OOD) data detection tasks; (2) Leveraging

It is known that neural networks have the problem of being over-confident when directly using the output label distribution to generate uncertainty measures. Existing methods
mainly resolve this issue by retraining the entire model to
impose the uncertainty quantification capability so that the
learned model can achieve desired performance in accuracy
and uncertainty prediction simultaneously. However, training
the model from scratch is computationally expensive and may
not be feasible in many situations. In this work, we consider
a more practical post-hoc uncertainty learning setting, where
a well-trained base model is given, and we focus on the uncertainty quantification task at the second stage of training.
We propose a novel Bayesian meta-model to augment pretrained models with better uncertainty quantification abilities, which is effective and computationally efficient. Our proposed method requires no additional training data and is flexible enough to quantify different uncertainties and easily adapt
to different application settings, including out-of-domain data
detection, misclassification detection, and trustworthy transfer learning. We demonstrate our proposed meta-model approach’s flexibility and superior empirical performance on
these applications over multiple representative image classification benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Despite the promising performance of deep neural networks
achieved in various practical tasks (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Ren et al. 2015; Hinton et al. 2012; Mikolov et al.
2010; Alipanahi et al. 2015; Litjens et al. 2017), uncertainty
quantification (UQ) has attracted growing attention in recent
years to fulfill the emerging demand for more robust and reliable machine learning models, as UQ aims to measure the
reliability of the model’s prediction quantitatively. Accurate
uncertainty estimation is especially critical for the field that
is highly sensitive to error prediction, such as autonomous
driving (Bojarski et al. 2016) and medical diagnosis (Begoli,
Bhattacharya, and Kusnezov 2019).
Most state-of-the-art approaches (Gal and Ghahramani
2016; Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017; Malinin and Gales 2018; van Amersfoort et al. 2020) focus on
building a deep model equipped with uncertainty quantification capability so that a single deep model can achieve
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9772

