The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Video Audio Domain Generalization via Confounder Disentanglement
Shengyu Zhang1 * , Xusheng Feng2 * , Wenyan Fan1 * , Wenjing Fang3 , Fuli Feng4 , Wei Ji5 , Shuo Li5 ,
Li Wang3 , Shanshan Zhao6 , Zhou Zhao1† , Tat-Seng Chua5 , Fei Wu1,7†
1
Zhejiang University
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Ant Group
4
University of Science and Technology of China
5
National University of Singapore
6
The University of Sydney
7
Shanghai AI Laboratory
{sy zhang, zhaozhou, wufei}@zju.edu.cn {jiwei,dcscts}@nus.edu.sg {engle xs, wenyan.17}@outlook.com
{bean.fwj,raymond.wangl}@antgroup.com {fulifeng93,weiji0523,sshan.zhao00}@gmail.com
2

Abstract

Xd

D-variant Feature

Xc

C-shared Feature

X*

Zd

D-level Confounder

Zc

C-level Confounder

M

(a) Traditional

Existing video-audio understanding models are trained and
evaluated in an intra-domain setting, facing performance degeneration in real-world applications where multiple domains
and distribution shifts naturally exist. The key to videoaudio domain generalization (VADG) lies in alleviating spurious correlations over multi-modal features. To achieve this
goal, we resort to causal theory and attribute such correlation to confounders affecting both video-audio features and
labels. We propose a DeVADG framework that conducts
uni-modal and cross-modal deconfounding through backdoor adjustment. DeVADG performs cross-modal disentanglement and obtains fine-grained confounders at both classlevel and domain-level using half-sibling regression and unpaired domain transformation, which essentially identifies
domain-variant factors and class-shared factors that cause
spurious correlations between features and false labels. To
promote VADG research, we collect a VADG-Action dataset
for video-audio action recognition with over 5,000 video clips
across four domains (e.g., cartoon and game) and ten action
classes (e.g., cooking and riding). We conduct extensive experiments, i.e., multi-source DG, single-source DG, and qualitative analysis, validating the rationality of our causal analysis and the effectiveness of the DeVADG framework.

Z
X

Y
Unblocked
Back-door Path
Blocked
Causal Path

(b) Invariant-Learning

X

Zd

Xd
X*
Xc

M

(c) DeVADG

Zd

Xd
Y

Zc

X

D-invariant
C-specifc Feature
Semantic Feature

X*
Xc

M

Y
Zc

Figure 1: Causal graphs of (a) traditional intra-domain learning; (b) domain-invariant representation learning, which
blocks incoming and outgoing effects of domain-variant features; and (c) the proposed DeVADG, which blocks the
back-door paths through domain-variant and class-shared
features with deconfounding. The transition from a solid line
to a dotted line indicates blocking the direct effect.

Existing video-audio understanding models fail to generalize well across diverse domains, encountering a sharp
performance drop compared to intra-domain settings (c.f.,
Table 1). Inferior generalization limits the application of
video-audio understanding tools in super video platforms,
at the risk of hurting the experience of users with diversified interests beyond major domains. In this paper, we take
video-audio action recognition as an example to investigate
the video-audio domain generalization problem, where the
models are tested in unseen domains.
The open-ended and challenging nature of generic domain generalization has lent itself to diverse models (Li
et al. 2022a; Yuan et al. 2021a,c), including domain alignment (Motiian et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2020a), selfsupervised learning (Mahajan, Tople, and Sharma 2021;
Kim et al. 2021), and meta-learning based techniques (Du
et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2020). Many existing works focus
on mining domain-invariant features and thus blocking the
impact of domain-variant features that hinder the generalization across domains. However, they are vulnerable to

Introduction
Recent AI research (Zhuang et al. 2020) reveals that jointly
exploiting video and built-in audio information can facilitate video understanding (Sun et al. 2020; Wu and Yang
2021; Zhao et al. 2020b; Li et al. 2022c,b; Zhang et al.
2020b; Jiang et al. 2022). Most video-audio understanding
models are evaluated on independent and identically distributed training/testing data samples. However, real-world
platforms (e.g., YouTube) typically have diversified video
domains such as advertisement, cartoon, game, and movies.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15322

