The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Proximal Stochastic Recursive Momentum Methods for Nonconvex Composite
Decentralized Optimization
Gabriel Mancino-Ball1 , Shengnan Miao1 , Yangyang Xu1 , Jie Chen2
1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180
2
MIT IBM-Watson AI Lab, IBM Research, Cambridge, MA 02142
mancig@rpi.edu, snmiao236@gmail.com, xuy21@rpi.edu, chenjie@us.ibm.com

Abstract

or a collective communication protocol. This setting arises
naturally when data is distributed over a large geographic
region or when a centralized communication structure is too
costly (Xin, Khan, and Kar 2021a).
Utilizing the communication topology induced by G, we
reformulate (1) into the following equivalent decentralized
consensus optimization problem:

Consider a network of N decentralized computing agents collaboratively solving a nonconvex stochastic composite problem. In this work, we propose a single-loop algorithm, called
DEEPSTORM, that achieves optimal sample complexity for
this setting. Unlike double-loop algorithms that require a
large batch size to compute the (stochastic) gradient once in a
while, DEEPSTORM uses a small batch size, creating advantages in occasions such as streaming data and online learning.
This is the first method achieving optimal sample complexity
for decentralized nonconvex stochastic composite problems,
requiring O(1) batch size. We conduct convergence analysis
for DEEPSTORM with both constant and diminishing step
sizes. Additionally, under proper initialization and a small
enough desired solution error, we show that DEEPSTORM
with a constant step size achieves a network-independent
sample complexity, with an additional linear speed-up with
respect to N over centralized methods. All codes are made
available at https://github.com/gmancino/DEEPSTORM.

N

1 X
φi (xi ), s.t. xi = xj , ∀(i, j) ∈ E.
x1 ,...,xN N
i=1
min

Problem (2) allows for agents to maintain and update a local
copy of the decision variable by locally computing gradients
and performing neighbor communications.
The existence of a non-smooth regularizer r renders many
decentralized optimization methods for a smooth objective
inappropriate. We assume that r admits an easily computable (e.g. closed form) proximal mapping. Moreover, we
are interested in the case where each local function fi takes
the following expectation form:

Introduction

fi (x) , Eξ∼Di [fi (x; ξ)] ,

Recent years have seen an increase in designing efficient algorithms for solving large-scale machine learning problems,
over a network of N computing agents connected by a communication graph G = (V, E). Agents collaboratively solve
the following composite problem:

x

o
1 Xn
φi (x) , fi (x) + r(x) ,
N i=1

(3)

with a slight abuse of notation for ease of exposition. In such
a case, agents locally compute stochastic gradients of fi . We
adapt ideas from recent advances of stochastic optimization
to the decentralized setting, by combining variance reduction techniques (Johnson and Zhang 2013; Nguyen et al.
2017; Allen-Zhu 2018; Wang et al. 2019; Cutkosky and
Orabona 2019; Tran-Dinh et al. 2022) with gradient tracking (Lorenzo and Scutari 2016; Nedic, Olshevsky, and Shi
2017; Lu et al. 2019; Zhang and You 2020; Koloskova, Lin,
and Stich 2021), to produce an algorithmic framework that
achieves the optimal sample complexity bounds established
in (Arjevani et al. 2022) for nonconvex stochastic methods.
Our framework, coined DEEPSTORM, is a single-loop
algorithm with an attractive property that, besides the initial iteration, each agent only needs O (1) stochastic samples to compute a gradient estimate. Further, when a diminishing step size is used, even the first iteration does not
need a large batch, at the expense of an additional logarithmic factor in the sample complexity result. Intuitively,
DEEPSTORM utilizes a momentum based variance reduction technique (Cutkosky and Orabona 2019; Xu and Xu
2023; Levy, Kavis, and Cevher 2021; Tran-Dinh et al. 2022)

N

min

(2)

(1)

where the decision variable x ∈ R1×p is treated as a row
vector; fi is a smooth, possibly nonconvex function known
only to agent i; and r is a convex, possibly non-smooth regularizer common to all agents. Agents i and j can communicate only if (i, j) ∈ E. Many real-world applications in
machine learning (Vogels et al. 2021; Ying et al. 2021; Yuan
et al. 2021; Chamideh, Tärneberg, and Kihl 2021) and reinforcement learning (Zhang et al. 2018; Qu et al. 2019) fit
the form of (1). Such scenarios differ from the centralized
setting (McMahan et al. 2017; T. Dinh, Tran, and Nguyen
2020), where the agents are assumed to be able to communicate with one another globally via either a parameter server
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9055

