The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AutoNF: Automated Architecture Optimization of Normalizing Flows with
Unconstrained Continuous Relaxation Admitting Optimal Discrete Solution
Yu Wang1 , Ján Drgoňa2 , Jiaxin Zhang3 , Karthik Somayaji Nanjangud Suryanarayana1 , Malachi
Schram4 , Frank Liu5 , Peng Li1
1

University of California, Santa Barbara
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
3
Intuit AI Research
4
Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility
5
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
{yu95, karthi, lip}@ucsb.edu, jan.drgona@pnnl.gov, jxzhangai@gmail.com, schram@jlab.org, liufy@ornl.gov
2

Abstract

trained kernel (Mazoure et al. 2020), the performance-cost
trade-off is even more critical.
Unfortunately, although a variety of bijections have been
proposed to build better flow models, no single bijection is
optimal in both performance and computational cost. Highly
expressive flows come at the cost of increased computational
overhead in either the forward or the inverse pass (Durkan
et al. 2019), or losing analytical invertibility (Behrmann
et al. 2019); flows which are fast to compute are unable to
model rich distributions and hence limited to simple applications (Rezende and Mohamed 2015).
Despite the large design space, presently flow models nowadays are hand-crafted with intensive manual finetuning. Hence, a systematic automated approach for optimizing NF models is highly desirable. While efficient differentiable neural architectural search (D-NAS) (Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2019) has been developed for the optimization of unstructured neural networks, these existing
methods are inapplicable to NF since they have no builtin mechanism to maintain the invertibility of the NF model
under optimization; loss of invertibility in the optimization
process is catastrophic since a model that is not invertible
does not correspond to a properly defined normalizing flow.
Furthermore, in the context of unstructured neural networks,
the optimality of differential NAS may be severely comprised by binarizing the optimized relaxed continuous solution in order to obtain a legal discrete architectural solution.
When unaddressed, the loss of optimality due to binarization
is also expected to emerge as differentiable NAS is adapted
for NF architectural optimization. The aforementioned two
challenges have made efficient automated architectural optimization of NF an open problem.
To this end, we propose AutoNF, the first method that enables differentiable architecture optimization while addressing the above challenges. Our contributions are two folds:

Normalizing flows (NF) build upon invertible neural networks and have wide applications in probabilistic modeling.
Currently, building a powerful yet computationally efficient
flow model relies on empirical fine-tuning over a large design
space. While introducing neural architecture search (NAS)
to NF is desirable, the invertibility constraint of NF brings
new challenges to existing NAS methods whose application is
limited to unstructured neural networks. Developing efficient
NAS methods specifically for NF remains an open problem.
We present AutoNF, the first automated NF architectural optimization framework. First, we present a new mixture distribution formulation that allows efficient differentiable architecture search of flow models without violating the invertibility constraint. Second, under the new formulation, we convert the original NP-hard combinatorial NF architectural optimization problem to an unconstrained continuous relaxation
admitting the discrete optimal architectural solution, circumventing the loss of optimality due to binarization in architectural optimization. We evaluate AutoNF with various density
estimation datasets and show its superior performance-cost
trade-offs over a set of existing hand-crafted baselines.

Introduction
Normalizing flows (NF) are invertible neural networks that
build upon bijections with tractable Jacobians. Flow models are promising tools since they allow for exact density
estimation and sampling from complex distributions. As important kernels, NF have found applications in diverse areas
such as generative models and reinforcement learning.
Utilizing NF requires careful balancing between their
performance and computational cost since the optimal
flow model can vary dramatically in different applications.
In generative models (Dinh, Krueger, and Bengio 2015;
Kingma and Dhariwal 2018), flows with the fast forward
pass are preferable since forward transformations are required for every sample from the base distribution. For density estimation (Papamakarios, Pavlakou, and Murray 2017;
Rippel and Adams 2013), flows with a cheap inverse prevail. For applications where a flow model is utilized as a co-

• We propose a novel mixture distribution formulation to
allow the application of efficient differentiable architectural search to the structural NF optimization while guaranteeing invertibility of the optimized flow model;
• We develop rigorous theoretical results that convert the
original NP-hard combinatorial NF architectural optimization problem to an unconstrained continuous relax-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10244

