The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Transfer Learning Enhanced DeepONet for Long-Time Prediction of Evolution
Equations
Wuzhe Xu1 * , Yulong Lu2 , Li Wang1
1

2

School of Mathematics, University of Minnesota
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Massachusetts Amherst
xu000355@umn.edu, yulonglu@umass.edu, wang8818@umn.edu

Abstract
Deep operator network (DeepONet) has demonstrated great
success in various learning tasks, including learning solution
operators of partial differential equations. In particular, it provides an efficient approach to predict the evolution equations
in a finite time horizon. Nevertheless, the vanilla DeepONet
suffers from the issue of stability degradation in the longtime prediction. This paper proposes a transfer-learning aided
DeepONet to enhance the stability. Our idea is to use transfer
learning to sequentially update the DeepONets as the surrogates for propagators learned in different time frames. The
evolving DeepONets can better track the varying complexities
of the evolution equations, while only need to be updated by
efficient training of a tiny fraction of the operator networks.
Through systematic experiments, we show that the proposed
method not only improves the long-time accuracy of DeepONet while maintaining similar computational cost but also
substantially reduces the sample size of the training set.

Introduction
Solving partial differential equations (PDEs) through deep
learning approach has attracted extensive attention recently.
Thanks to the universal approximation theorem of neural
networks, it is natural to approximate solutions of PDEs
using neural network. Many popular neural network based
methods have been proposed recently, such as Deep Ritz
Method (Yu et al. 2018), Deep Galerkin Method (Sirignano
and Spiliopoulos 2018), Physics Informed Neural Networks
(PINNs) (Raissi, Perdikaris, and Karniadakis 2019) and the
Weak Adversarial Networks (Zang et al. 2020). In spite of the
great success of these methods in solving various PDEs, the
neural networks need to be re-trained if one seeks solutions
corresponding to different initial conditions (ICs), boundary
conditions (BCs) or parameters for the same PDEs. Instead,
the recently proposed parametric operator learning methods,
such as DeepONet (Lu, Jin, and Karniadakis 2019) and FNO
(Li et al. 2020) enable learning of PDEs corresponding to
varying BCs or ICs without re-training the networks. However, there is one important caveat in the aforementioned operator neural networks. Namely they are essentially supervised
learning and often require solving large number of PDEs to
*Wuzhe Xu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10629

form the training data, which can be extremely expansive,
especially when PDEs of interest lie in high dimensional
spaces. To overcome this issue, Wang et al. (Wang, Wang,
and Perdikaris 2021; Wang and Perdikaris 2021) proposed
the physics-informed DeepONet, which uses only the physical information (for instance the governing law of the PDEs)
to construct loss function and thus making DeepONet selfsupervised. Nevertheless, in practice the physics-informed
DeepONets are more difficult to train compared to its vanilla
version since the exact differential operators act on the networks and make the convergence behavior highly depends
on the underlying physics problem.
Recently DeepONet has also been applied to learning the
propagators of evolution equations; see e.g. (Liu and Cai
2022; Wang and Perdikaris 2021). The basic idea is to employ
DeepONets to learn the solution operator of a PDE within
a short time interval subject to a collection of (random) initial conditions. The solution of the PDE at later times can be
computed as recursive actions of the trained network operator
on solutions obtained at the prior steps. However, the approximation accuracy of solutions can deteriorate in the long-run
for at least two reasons. First, due to the approximation error, the trained DeepONet, as a surrogate propagator, may
be expansive even if the exact propagator is non-expansive,
which leads to the accumulation of approximation error in
time and hence makes it difficult to predict the solution in
the long-run. Second, during the time-evolution of PDEs, the
functions that a propagator inputs and outputs can vary in
time, even though the form of the propagator within a fixed
time-slot may remain unchanged (e.g. when the dynamics is
autonomous). Taking diffusion equation as an example, one
observes that the functions in the range space of the propagator or the semigroup are much smoother than those in
the domain, and for this reason, the solutions in later times
become increasingly more regular than those in earlier times.
Furthermore, some evolution equations may develop various
complexities in a long time-horizon, such as turbulence and
scale separations. For those equations, iterating a DeepONet
surrogate that is usually only trained in a single (short) timeframe using a finite collection of initial functions may fail to
capture the correct regularity or complexity of the solutions
in the long time.
Transfer learning (Bozinovski and Fulgosi 1976; Do and
Ng 2005) is an important class of machine learning tech-

