The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Coupling Artificial Neurons in BERT and Biological Neurons in the Human Brain
Xu Liu1 * , Mengyue Zhou1 * , Gaosheng Shi1 * , Yu Du1 , Lin Zhao2 , Zihao Wu2 , David Liu3 , Tianming
Liu2 , Xintao Hu1†
1

School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
School of Computing, University of Georgia
3
Athens Academy
{liu xu, zhou my, 2021202420, dddyyy}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {lin.zhao, zw63397}@uga.edu, {david.weizhong.liu,
tianming.liu}@gmail.com, xhu@nwpu.edu.cn
Abstract

other hand, researchers have also attempted to leverage data
and evidence from neurolinguistics to evaluate and improve
NLP models (Schwartz, Toneva, and Wehbe 2019; Toneva
and Wehbe 2019; Marvin and Linzen 2018).
The relationship between NLP models and neural responses is typically established by building a mapping between the feature space and the brain activity space. The
feature space is spanned by the featural representations in
NLP models, referred to as the responses of artificial neurons (ANs). The brain activity space describes the quantitative brain activities extracted from functional neuroimaging
data, referred to as activations of biological neurons (BNs).
The successful deployment of such a framework leads to
fruitful discoveries in both neurolinguistics and computational NLP modeling. However, two critical problems remain: 1) The feature space is lacking in fine-granularity.
Most existing studies adopt layer-level embeddings as NLP
features. As argued in previous studies, a fine decomposition
of a model’s components and measurement of their internal
representations and operations are among the keys for mapping the elementary units of NLP to their neurobiological
counterparts(Hale et al. 2022); 2) The brain activity space
lacks of information about the integration and interaction
of brain functions. Most existing studies treat each voxel
or brain region as an independent brain activity unit, ignoring the complex regional/systematical interactions (coactivations or activation-deactivation) in the human brain that
have been widely observed in the process of language perception (Xiong and Newman 2021; Saurabh et al. 2019).
We sought to address the following questions:
• How to define the ANs with fine-granularity in
transformed-based NLP models? How can their activations be quantified?
• Do those ANs carry meaningful linguistic/semantic information?
• Do those ANs anchor to their BN signatures that can reveal functional interaction in the brain? Are the BNs they
anchored interpretable in a neurolinguistic perspective?
To this end, we propose a general framework for coupling
the ANs in transformer-based NLP models and the BNs in
the human brain. We adopt the “Narrative” fMRI dataset
(Nastase et al. 2021) which were acquired while human subjects listening to naturalistic spoken stories to implement the

Linking computational natural language processing (NLP)
models and neural responses to language in the human brain
on the one hand facilitates the effort towards disentangling the
neural representations underpinning language perception, on
the other hand provides neurolinguistics evidence to evaluate
and improve NLP models. Mappings of an NLP model’s representations of and the brain activities evoked by linguistic input are typically deployed to reveal this symbiosis. However,
two critical problems limit its advancement: 1) The model’s
representations (artificial neurons, ANs) rely on layer-level
embeddings and thus lack fine-granularity; 2) The brain activities (biological neurons, BNs) are limited to neural recordings of isolated cortical unit (i.e., voxel/region) and thus lack
integrations and interactions among brain functions. To address those problems, in this study, we 1) define ANs with
fine-granularity in transformer-based NLP models (BERT in
this study) and measure their temporal activations to input
text sequences; 2) define BNs as functional brain networks
(FBNs) extracted from functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data to capture functional interactions in the brain;
3) couple ANs and BNs by maximizing the synchronization of their temporal activations. Our experimental results
demonstrate 1) The activations of ANs and BNs are significantly synchronized; 2) the ANs carry meaningful linguistic/semantic information and anchor to their BN signatures;
3) the anchored BNs are interpretable in a neurolinguistic
context. Overall, our study introduces a novel, general, and
effective framework to link transformer-based NLP models
and neural activities in response to language and may provide novel insights for future studies such as brain-inspired
evaluation and development of NLP models.

Introduction
Linking computational natural language processing (NLP)
models and neural responses to language in the human brain
has attracted increasing interest recently. On the one hand,
computational NLP models facilitate the effort towards disentangling the neural representations and cortical structures
underpinning language perception (Caucheteux and King
2021; Schrimpf et al. 2020; Goldstein et al. 2020). On the
* These authors contributed equally.
†

The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8888

