The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Efficient Explorative Key-Term Selection Strategies for Conversational Contextual
Bandits
Zhiyong Wang1 , Xutong Liu1 , Shuai Li2 * , John C.S. Lui1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong ,Hong Kong SAR, China
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
zywang21@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, liuxt@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn, cslui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

Despite the recent success of CRS, there are crucial limitations in using conversational contextual bandit approaches
to design recommender systems. These limitations include:
(a) The information gained from key-term-level conversations and arm-level recommendations is not incorporated
properly to speed up learning, as the user preferences are
essentially assumed to be the same in these two stages but
are estimated separately (Zhang et al. 2020; Xie et al. 2021;
Wu et al. 2021); (b) Queries using traditional key-terms were
restrictive and not explorative enough. Specifically, we say
a key-term is “explorative” if it is under-explored so far and
the system is uncertain about the user’s preferences in its associated items. Asking for the user’s feedback on explorative
key-terms can efficiently elicit her potential interests in various domains (e.g., sports, science), which means we can
quickly estimate the user preference vector in all directions
of the feature space, thus accelerating the learning speed.
Therefore, it is crucial to design explorative key-term selection strategies, which existing works have not considered.
Motivated by the above considerations, we propose to design conversational bandit algorithms that (i) estimate the
user’s preferences utilizing both arm-level and key-termlevel interactions simultaneously to properly incorporate the
information gained from both two levels and (ii) use effective strategies to choose explorative key-terms when conducting conversations for quick user preference inference.
To better utilize the interactive feedback from both recommendations and conversations, we propose ConLinUCB,
a general framework for conversational bandits with possible flexible key-term selection strategies. ConLinUCB estimates the user preference vector by solving one single optimization problem that minimizes the mean squared error
of both arm-level estimated rewards and key-term-level estimated feedback simultaneously, instead of separately estimating at different levels as in previous works. In this manner, the information gathered from these two levels can be
better combined to guide the learning.
Based on this ConLinUCB framework, we design two
new algorithms with explorative key-term selection strategies, ConLinUCB-BS and ConLinUCB-MCR.

Conversational contextual bandits elicit user preferences by
occasionally querying for explicit feedback on key-terms to
accelerate learning. However, there are aspects of existing
approaches which limit their performance. First, information
gained from key-term-level conversations and arm-level recommendations is not appropriately incorporated to speed up
learning. Second, it is important to ask explorative key-terms
to quickly elicit the user’s potential interests in various domains to accelerate the convergence of user preference estimation, which has never been considered in existing works.
To tackle these issues, we first propose “ConLinUCB”, a
general framework for conversational bandits with better information incorporation, combining arm-level and key-termlevel feedback to estimate user preference in one step at each
time. Based on this framework, we further design two bandit algorithms with explorative key-term selection strategies,
ConLinUCB-BS and ConLinUCB-MCR. We prove tighter
regret upper bounds of our proposed algorithms.√Particularly,
ConLinUCB-BS achieves a regret √
bound of O( dT log T ),
better than the previous result O(d T log T ). Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world data show significant
advantages of our algorithms in learning accuracy (up to
54% improvement) and computational efficiency (up to 72%
improvement), compared to the classic ConUCB algorithm,
showing the potential benefit to recommender systems.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, recommender systems are widely used in various areas. The learning speed for traditional online recommender systems is usually slow since extensive exploration
is needed to discover user preferences. To accelerate the
learning process and provide more personalized recommendations, the conversational recommender system (CRS) has
been proposed (Christakopoulou, Radlinski, and Hofmann
2016; Christakopoulou et al. 2018; Sun and Zhang 2018;
Zhang et al. 2018; Li et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2021). In a
CRS, a learning agent occasionally asks for the user’s explicit feedback on some “key-terms”, and leverages this additional conversational information to better elicit the user’s
preferences (Zhang et al. 2020; Xie et al. 2021).

• ConLinUCB-BS makes use of a barycentric spanner containing linearly independent vectors, which can be an efficient exploration basis in bandit problems (Amballa,
Gupta, and Bhat 2021). Whenever a conversation is al-

* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10288

