The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Robust Metrics For Concept Representation Evaluation
Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga1 * , Pietro Barbiero1 * , Zohreh Shams1, 2 * , Dmitry Kazhdan1 , Umang
Bhatt1, 3 , Adrian Weller1, 3 , Mateja Jamnik1
1

University of Cambridge
2
Babylon Health
3
The Alan Turing Institute
{me466, pb737, zs315, dk525, usb20, aw665}@cam.ac.uk, mateja.jamnik@cl.cam.ac.uk
Abstract

is intended) (Mahinpei et al. 2021). Such phenomena may
have severe consequences for how such representations can
be interpreted (as shown in the misleading attribution maps
described by Margeloiu et al. (2021)) and used in practice
(as shown later in our intervention results). Nevertheless, the
CL literature is yet to see concrete metrics to appropriately
capture and measure these phenomena.
In contrast, the closely-related field of disentanglement
learning (DGL) (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013; Higgins et al. 2017; Locatello et al. 2019, 2020b), where methods aim to learn intermediate representations aligned to disentangled factors of variation in the data, offers a wide array of metrics for evaluating the quality of latent representations. However, despite the close relationship between concept representations in CL and latent codes in DGL, metrics
proposed in DGL are built on assumptions that do not hold
in CL, as explained in our Background and Motivation Section, and are thus inappropriate to measure the aforementioned undesired phenomena in CL.
In this paper, we show the inadequacy of current metrics
and introduce two novel metrics for evaluating the purity of
intermediate representations in CL. Our results indicate that
our metrics can be used in practice for quality assurance of
such intermediate representations for:
1. Detecting impurities (i) concealed in soft representations,
(ii) caused by different model capacities, or (iii) caused
by spurious correlations.
2. Indicating when concept interventions are safe.
3. Revealing the impact of supervisions on concept purity.
4. Being robust to inter-concept correlations.

Recent work on interpretability has focused on concept-based
explanations, where deep learning models are explained in
terms of high-level units of information, referred to as concepts. Concept learning models, however, have been shown
to be prone to encoding impurities in their representations,
failing to fully capture meaningful features of their inputs.
While concept learning lacks metrics to measure such phenomena, the field of disentanglement learning has explored
the related notion of underlying factors of variation in the
data, with plenty of metrics to measure the purity of such
factors. In this paper, we show that such metrics are not appropriate for concept learning and propose novel metrics for
evaluating the purity of concept representations in both approaches. We show the advantage of these metrics over existing ones and demonstrate their utility in evaluating the robustness of concept representations and interventions performed
on them. In addition, we show their utility for benchmarking state-of-the-art methods from both families and find that,
contrary to common assumptions, supervision alone may not
be sufficient for pure concept representations.

Introduction
Addressing the lack of interpretability of deep neural networks (DNNs) has given rise to explainability methods,
most common of which are feature importance methods (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Lundberg and Lee
2017) that quantify the contribution of input features to certain predictions (Bhatt et al. 2020). However, input features
may not necessarily form the most intuitive basis for explanations, in particular when using low-level features such as
pixels. Concept-based explainability (Kim et al. 2018; Ghorbani et al. 2019; Koh et al. 2020; Yeh et al. 2020; Ciravegna
et al. 2021) remedies this issue by constructing an explanation at a concept level, where concepts are considered intermediate, high-level and semantically meaningful units of information commonly used by humans to explain their decisions. Recent work, however, has shown that concept learning (CL) models may not correctly capture the intended semantics of their representations (Margeloiu et al. 2021), and
that their learnt concept representations are prone to encoding impurities (i.e., more information in a concept than what

Background and Motivation
Notation In CL, the aim is to find a low-dimensional intermediate representation ĉ of the data, similar to latent codes
ẑ in DGL. This low-dimensional representation corresponds
to a matrix ĉ ∈ Ĉ ⊆ Rd×k in which the i-th column constitutes a d-dimensional representation of the i-th concept, assuming that the length of all concept representations can be
made equal using zero-padding. Under this view, elements
in ĉ(:,i) ∈ Rd are expected to have high values (under some
reasonable aggregation function) if the i-th concept is considered to be activated. As most CL methods assume d = 1,
for succinctness we use ĉi in place of ĉ(:,i) when d = 1.
Analogously, as each latent code ẑ(:,i) aims to encode an

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11791

