The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

i-Code: An Integrative and Composable Multimodal Learning Framework
Ziyi Yang* , Yuwei Fang∗ , Chenguang Zhu, Reid Pryzant, Dongdong Chen, Yu Shi, Yichong Xu,
Yao Qian, Mei Gao, Yi-Ling Chen, Liyang Lu, Yujia Xie, Robert Gmyr, Noel Codella,
Naoyuki Kanda, Bin Xiao, Lu Yuan, Takuya Yoshioka, Michael Zeng, Xuedong Huang
Microsoft Azure Cognitive Services Research
{ziyiyang, yuwfan, chezhu}@microsoft.com

Abstract

2022), however, one important difficulty is the pretraining
requires enormous amounts of three-modality data like captioned videos, which is often several orders of magnitude
smaller than the available single- or dual-modality data. E.g.,
the largest annotated video dataset at the time of writing consists of 180M clips (Zellers et al. 2021), while the largest
available image-caption dataset has 900M pairs (Yuan et al.
2021). Another challenge is to effectively featurize raw signals from different modalities and allow them to interact and
fuse with one another, in an end-to-end framework.
To address these problems, we propose two solutions.
First, in addition to three-modality videos, we leverage
large-scale dual-modality data, e.g., images with captions
(V+L), speech with transcripts (S+L) and video narrations
(V+S). This greatly expands the size and diversity of pretraining data while covering all three target modalities. Second, instead of building a standalone model from scratch,
we leverage state-of-the-art pretrained single-modality encoders to generate powerful representations from raw signals. We propose a fusing architecture that can integrate the
outputs of the single-modality encoders and conducts crossmodality understanding to get a final prediction. To design
the best fusing architecture, we experiment with variations
on the self-attention mechanism inside the transformer architecture, including mechanisms that merge the attention
scores of different modalities. To this end, we propose iCode, an integrative and composable multimodal learning
framework, where “i” stands for the multimodal integration.
i-Code is pretrained on double and triple-modality data
using various self-supervision objectives, including: i)
masked unit modeling, where all input signals are converted
into discrete tokens, and the goal is to predict the tokens for
the masked units of each modality; ii) contrastive learning,
where two input modalities are provided and the model predicts whether the signals come from the same triple (or pair)
in the training data. We evaluate i-Code on diverse multimodal and single-modal benchmarks. Experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed multimodal
pretraining framework: i-Code outperforms state-of-the-art
algorithms across five multimodal datasets, as well as single
modality tasks such as the GLUE NLP benchmark, improving over the previous best by as much as 11%.
Our novelties include: (1) To the best of our knowledge, i-Code is the first work using dual-modality data for

Human intelligence is multimodal; we integrate visual, linguistic, and acoustic signals to maintain a holistic worldview.
Most current pretraining methods, however, are limited to one
or two modalities. We present i-Code, a self-supervised pretraining framework where users may flexibly combine the
modalities of vision, speech, and language into unified and
general-purpose vector representations. In this framework,
data from each modality are first given to pretrained singlemodality encoders. The encoder outputs are then integrated
with a multimodal fusion network, which uses novel mergeand co-attention mechanisms to effectively combine information from the different modalities. The entire system is
pretrained end-to-end with new objectives including masked
modality unit modeling and cross-modality contrastive learning. Unlike previous research using only video for pretraining, the i-Code framework can dynamically process single,
dual, and triple-modality data during training and inference,
flexibly projecting different combinations of modalities into
a single representation space. Experimental results demonstrate how i-Code can outperform state-of-the-art techniques
on five multimodal understanding tasks and single-modality
benchmarks, improving by as much as 11% and demonstrating the power of integrative multimodal pretraining.

1

Introduction

True humanlike intelligence incorporates information from
a variety of signals and sensory organs (Schank and Abelson 1975). This implies that intelligent systems should be
integrative, incorporating signals from all available modalities. In many practical data regimes this corresponds to the
modalities of vision (V), language (L), and speech/audio
(S). Although there has been tremendous progress in making
models to understand one modality (Devlin et al. 2019; Hsu
et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022a) or two modalities (Su et al.
2019; Lu et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019; Radford et al. 2021; Jia
et al. 2021; Yuan et al. 2021) through self-supervised and
semi-supervised pretraining, it is a non-trivial task to extend
these successes to a three-modality system which can simultaneously interpret vision (V), language (L) and speech (S).
A few previous and concurrent attempts are made for the
three-modality pretraining (Akbari et al. 2021; Zellers et al.
* Co-first authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10880

