The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Securing Lifelines: Safe Delivery of Critical Services in Areas with Volatile
Security Situation via a Stackelberg Game Approach
Tien Mai1 , Arunesh Sinha2
1

Singapore Management University
2
Rutgers University
atmai@smu.edu.sg, arunesh.sinha@rutgers.edu

Abstract

2011) in the manner in which security resources are allocated and the center selection aspect is inspired by product
assortment and pricing problems (Wang 2012). While inspired from these models from disparate areas, we believe
this is a first model that brings together security issues and
subset of centers (targets) selection within one framework.

Vaccine delivery in under-resourced locations with security
risks is not just challenging but also life threatening. The
COVID pandemic and the need to vaccinate added even more
urgency to this issue. Motivated by this problem, we propose
a general framework to set-up limited temporary (vaccination) centers that balance physical security and desired (vaccine) service coverage with limited resources. We set-up the
problem as a Stackelberg game between the centers operator
(defender) and an adversary, where the set of centers is not
fixed a priori but is part of the decision output. This results in
a mixed combinatorial and continuous optimization problem.
As part of our scalable approximation solution, we provide a
fundamental contribution by identifying general duality conditions of switching max and min when both discrete and continuous variables are involved. Via detailed experiments, we
show that the solution proposed is scalable in practice.

1

Our second contribution is a hybrid algorithm that combines the best of two different approaches. The first of these
two approaches is a Mixed Integer Linear Program (MILP)
with guaranteed approximation, and the second is a polynomial time heuristic. All algorithms work by a sequence of
modifications to the original optimization problem, starting
with a binary search on the objective value. The first algorithm exploits properties of the problem at hand to convert
a bi-linear MIP formulation to a MILP with guaranteed approximation, but, MILPs are not scalable in practice. Hence,
we design a heuristic where we use Lagrangian duality to
reach a sub-problem which is a max-min-max tri-level optimization with discrete variables for the outer max and continuous variables for the two inner min-max problems.

Introduction

Vaccine delivery has always been a challenge in underresourced parts of the world (Zaffran et al. 2013). The problem is further aggravated by the threat of violence against
vaccine providers in areas where the security situation is
volatile (Gannon, Meldrum, and Keath 2020). A safer vaccine delivery plan for such places can save lives, both via
vaccination of the population and physical protection of the
front line vaccine providers. Specifically, vaccination drives
in underdeveloped areas are often performed by setting up a
limited number of temporary vaccination centers. Motivated
by this issue, we propose and study a general framework
to set-up temporary centers that balance physical security
needs of the centers and achieve desired service coverage.
Our first contribution is a flexible model that allows
choice of a small subset of centers to operate, along with a
consideration of how to allocate security resources to the operational centers. Further, the framework allows for fairness
constraints that ensure fairness in center allocation for different geographical regions as well as fairness in security allocation to operating centers. The model is set-up as a Stackelberg game between the centers operator (defender) and a
bounded rational (Quantal Response) adversary. The model
takes inspiration from Stackelberg security games (Tambe

Then, in a fundamental technical contribution, we identify general conditions for minimax equality when the variables involved are discrete and continuous. While the conditions do not hold in rare cases for our problem, we use this
result as a heuristic to transform our sub-problem to a minmax-max problem and then we present a polytime approximation for the transformed problem. The polynomial time
approach provides for immense scalability in practice, with
solutions close to the MILP approach in almost all cases. Finally, we show that the MILP and heuristic can be made to
work together in a scalable hybrid approach with approximation guarantees for the output solution.
We conduct thorough experiments to analyze various aspects of our three approaches. We show that our main hybrid algorithm is scalable in practice (solving for up to 5000
potential centers within 1.5 minutes) and also much better
than competing baseline approaches. While inspired by vaccine centers operation, our model and ideas can be applied to
critical services operation of temporary health camps, exam
centers, etc. in underdeveloped and security risk-prone areas or even existing security games work where a subset of
targets can be chosen to be made unavailable.

Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5805

