The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Uniform Sequence Better: Time Interval Aware Data Augmentation
for Sequential Recommendation
Yizhou Dang1 , Enneng Yang1 , Guibing Guo1 * , Linying Jiang1 , Xingwei Wang2*
Xiaoxiao Xu3 , Qinghui Sun3 , Hong Liu3
1
Software College, Northeastern University, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, China
3
Alibaba Group
{dangyz,ennengyang}@stumail.neu.edu.cn, {guogb,jiangly}@swc.neu.edu.cn
wangxw@mail.neu.edu.cn, {xiaoxiao.xuxx,yuyang.sqh,liuhong.liu}@alibaba-inc.com
2

Time Interval
(Days)
std=1.70

Abstract
Sequential recommendation is an important task to predict the
next-item to access based on a sequence of interacted items.
Most existing works learn user preference as the transition
pattern from the previous item to the next one, ignoring the
time interval between these two items. However, we observe
that the time interval in a sequence may vary significantly
different, and thus result in the ineffectiveness of user modeling due to the issue of preference drift. In fact, we conducted an empirical study to validate this observation, and
found that a sequence with uniformly distributed time interval
(denoted as uniform sequence) is more beneficial for performance improvement than that with greatly varying time interval. Therefore, we propose to augment sequence data from
the perspective of time interval, which is not studied in the
literature. Specifically, we design five operators (Ti-Crop, TiReorder, Ti-Mask, Ti-Substitute, Ti-Insert) to transform the
original non-uniform sequence to uniform sequence with the
consideration of variance of time intervals. Then, we devise
a control strategy to execute data augmentation on item sequences in different lengths. Finally, we implement these improvements on a state-of-the-art model CoSeRec and validate
our approach on four real datasets. The experimental results
show that our approach reaches significantly better performance than the other 9 competing methods. Our implementation is available: https://github.com/KingGugu/TiCoSeRec.

u1

9

8

13

Item Seq
Categories
Time Interval
(Days)
std=31.93

u2

11

Facial
Serum

Facial
Care

Skin
Care

97

132

Skin
Care

Nutritious

63

176

Item Seq
Elastin

Categories Protein

Hair
Spray

Mascara

Facial
Serum

Makeup

Figure 1: Two sequences drawn from the Amazon Beauty
dataset with different distributions of time intervals.
However, the time interval between two consecutive items
(in a sequence) does not receive much attention in the literature, and we believe this factor plays an important role in
learning user preferences, especially when considering the
issue of preference drift, i.e., user preference may drift away
as time goes by. As a matter of fact, we observe that the
time interval in a sequence may vary significantly different, which may lead to the ineffectiveness of user modeling
merely based on the ordering of interacted items. Figure 1
shows a typical example that we drew from a real dataset
(Amazon Beauty). Both users have a sequence of interacted
items with the same length, but the time intervals for user
u1 are distributed more uniformly than those for user u2 .
Most products purchased by user u1 lie in the category of
Skin / Facial Care, while user u2 begins to purchase products in different features/categories every after a large time
interval (e.g., from Hair Spray to Mascara, from Mascara
to Moisturizer). It is intuitively believed that user preference
can be better learned for user u1 since her sequence is more
uniformly distributed than the other user. We denote such a
kind of sequence for user u1 as ‘uniform sequence’ and that
for user u2 as ‘non-uniform sequence’.
In this paper, we conduct an empirical study to further
validate this intuition. Specifically, we design two strategies
to split the original sequential data into uniform and non-

Introduction
Sequential recommendation has become an important research task to predict an accurate item to access at the next
time step for a user based on her historical data, which is
often organized as a sequence of interacted items. Most existing works attempt to learn user preference as a transition
pattern from the sequential data, i.e., how the previous item
can be properly transited to the next item. The ordering of
interacted items matters a lot in this task (Jiang et al. 2021).
Typical networks such as Transformer are applied to model
sequential data and produce recommendations (Kang and
McAuley 2018; Sun et al. 2019; Li, Wang, and McAuley
2020; Ma et al. 2020; Jiang et al. 2021).
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4225

