The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Global Convergence of Two-Timescale Actor-Critic for Solving Linear Quadratic
Regulator
Xuyang Chen1 , Jingliang Duan2 , Yingbin Liang3 , Lin Zhao 1 *
1

National University of Singapore
University of Science and Technology Beijing
3
The Ohio State University
chenxuyang@u.nus.edu, duanjl@ustb.edu.cn, liang.889@osu.edu, elezhli@nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract

plied to the continuous control setting (Silver et al. 2014)
and meanwhile enjoy the low variance of bootstrapping.
Despite its empirical success, theoretical guarantees of
AC still lag behind. Most existing works focus exclusively
on the double-loop setting, where the critic updates many
steps in the inner loop, followed by an actor update in the
outer loop (Yang et al. 2019; Agarwal et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2019; Abbasi-Yadkori et al. 2019; Bhandari and Russo 2021;
Xu, Wang, and Liang 2020a). This setting yields accurate estimation of the Q-function and consequently the policy gradient. Therefore, double-loop setting decouples the convergence analysis of the actor and the critic, which further allows analyzing AC as a gradient method with error (Sutton
et al. 1999; Kakade and Langford 2002; Shalev-Shwartz and
Ben-David 2014; Ruder 2016).
A more favorable implementation of AC in practice is the
single-loop two-timescale setting, where the actor and critic
are updated simultaneously in each iteration with differenttimescale stepsizes. Typically, the actor stepsize is smaller
than that of the critic. To establish the finite-time convergence of two-timescale AC methods, most existing results
either focus on the multi-sample methods (Xu, Wang, and
Liang 2020b; Qiu et al. 2021) or the finite discrete action
space (Wu et al. 2020). The former allows the critic to collect multiple samples to accurately estimate the Q-function
given the actor, which are rarely implemented in practice.
It essentially decouples actor and critic in a similar way to
the double-loop setting. We study the more practical singlesample AC algorithm similar to the one considered in Wu
et al. (2020), where the critic updates only once using a single sample per policy evaluation step. However, the latter
only attains a stationary point under the finite-action space
setting (see Table 1 for comparisons). We address the important yet more challenging question: can the single-sample
two-timescale AC find a global optimal policy on the general unbounded continuous state-action space?
To this end, we analyze the classic single-sample AC for
solving the Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR), a fundamental control task which is commonly employed as a testbed
to explore the behavior and limits of RL algorithms under
continuous state-action spaces (Fazel et al. 2018; Yang et al.
2019; Tu and Recht 2018; Krauth, Tu, and Recht 2019; Duan
et al. 2022). In the LQR case, the Q-function is a linear function of the quadratic form of state and action. In general, it is

The actor-critic (AC) reinforcement learning algorithms have
been the powerhouse behind many challenging applications.
Nevertheless, its convergence is fragile in general. To study
its instability, existing works mostly consider the uncommon
double-loop variant or basic models with finite state and action space. We investigate the more practical single-sample
two-timescale AC for solving the canonical linear quadratic
regulator (LQR) problem, where the actor and the critic update only once with a single sample in each iteration on an
unbounded continuous state and action space. Existing analysis cannot conclude the convergence for such a challenging
case. We develop a new analysis framework that allows establishing the global convergence to an epsilon-optimal solution with at most an order of epsilon to -2.5 sample complexity. To our knowledge, this is the first finite-time convergence analysis for the single sample two-timescale AC for
solving LQR with global optimality. The sample complexity improves those of other variants by orders, which sheds
light on the practical wisdom of single sample algorithms.
We also further validate our theoretical findings via comprehensive simulation comparisons.

Introduction
The actor-critic (AC) methods (Konda and Tsitsiklis 1999)
are among the most commonly used reinforcement learning
(RL) algorithms, which have achieved tremendous empirical
successes (Mnih et al. 2016; Silver et al. 2017). In AC methods, the actor refers to the policy and the critic characterizes
the action-value function (Q-function) given the actor. In
each iteration, the critic tries to approximate the Q-function
by applying policy evaluation algorithms (Dann et al. 2014;
Sutton and Barto 2018), while the actor typically follows
policy gradient (Sutton et al. 1999; Agarwal et al. 2021)
updates according to the Q-function provided by the critic.
Compared with other RL algorithms, AC methods combine
the advantages of both policy-based methods such as REINFORCE (Williams 1992) and value-based methods such
as temporal difference (TD) learning (Sutton 1988; Bhandari, Russo, and Singal 2018) and Q-learning (Watkins and
Dayan 1992). Therefore, AC methods can be naturally ap* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7087

