The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Compressed Decentralized Learning of Conditional Mean Embedding Operators in
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces
Boya Hou, Sina Sanjari, Nathan Dahlin, Subhonmesh Bose
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801.
{boyahou2,sanjari,dahlin,boses}@illinois.edu

Abstract

decentralized scenarios, individual agents or sensors share
observations and other information across a communication
network in order to reach a consensus regarding quantities of
interest. However, this process is complicated by constraints
arising from characteristics of the network and the agents
themselves, including limitations on sensing, communication
and computation.
In this work, our particular interest lies in a decentralized, networked multi-agent setting where agents cooperatively seek to learn CME operators describing a common
dynamical system, while interacting across a network with
constraints on the capacity of communication links. Specifically, agents communicate their tentative empirical estimates
with neighbors in order to augment and refine their system
model estimates. The empirical estimators maintained by
each agent are represented using kernel functions centered at
data points and weight coefficients locally observed and computed, whose size scales with the number of samples. Thus,
with large amount of data, the required inter-agent exchanges
may exceed network link capacities.
Scalability has long been identified as a critical issue facing kernel methods, e.g., see (Lever et al. 2016). As such,
it has generated a considerable body of literature developing sparsification techniques that attempt to discard data
found to be essentially redundant for the purposes of estimation (Engel, Mannor, and Meir 2002; Kivinen, Smola, and
Williamson 2004; Richard, Bermudez, and Honeine 2008;
Koppel et al. 2017; Hou, Bose, and Vaidya 2021). Here, we
draw upon this work to design a compression protocol executed by agents prior to transmission. Specifically, we adopt
the notion of coherency to control message length. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first work that provides detailed
theoretical analysis on compressed decentralized learning in
RKHS.
Our approach is most closely related to the scalar-valued
quantized averaging techniques found in the networked
consensus literature (Kashyap, Başar, and Srikant 2007;
El Chamie, Liu, and Başar 2016), as the resulting evolution of
estimates involves nonlinear dynamics, wherein the initial average across agents is not necessarily preserved (Nedic et al.
2009; Carli et al. 2010; El Chamie, Liu, and Başar 2016;
Frasca et al. 2009; Aysal and Barner 2010). Nevertheless,
our problem differs from the aforementioned ones in many
respects. First, we consider learning operators rather than

Conditional mean embedding (CME) operators encode conditional probability distributions within reproducing kernel
Hilbert spaces (RKHS). In this paper, we present a decentralized algorithm for a collection of agents to cooperatively
approximate CME over a network. Communication constraints
limit the agents from sending all data to their neighbors; we
only allow sparse representations of covariance operators to be
exchanged among agents, compositions of which defines CME.
Using a coherence-based compression scheme, we present a
consensus-type algorithm that preserves the average of the approximations of the covariance operators across the network.
We theoretically prove that the iterative dynamics in RKHS
is stable. We then empirically study our algorithm to estimate
CMEs to learn spectra of Koopman operators for Markovian
dynamical systems and to execute approximate value iteration
for Markov decision processes (MDPs).

1

Introduction

Over the last several years, embeddings of conditional probability distributions into reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces
(RKHS), known as conditional mean embeddings (CMEs),
have gained recognition as a powerful tool for both describing and estimating the dynamics of unknown or uncertain
nonlinear dynamical systems. The CME framework captures
transition dynamics without resorting to explicit modeling of
system dynamics such as differential equations, yielding a
representation which reduces computationally intensive, high
dimensional integrations to inner products with linear complexity. Moreover, convergence guarantees on data-driven
estimates of the embeddings are available, e.g., (Song et al.
2009; Grünewälder et al. 2012).
In many applications involving dynamical systems, a distributed, multi-agent approach to sensing and estimation is desired, if not required. The training time incurred in industrialscale machine learning, for example, can be reduced when
model estimation is decentralized across parallelized computing resources (Koppel et al. 2018). Operations involving
systems which naturally encompass large geographical areas,
such as wind condition assessment, necessitate deployment
of multi-robot sensing teams in order to maintain feasible exploration time (Bobade, Panagou, and Kurdila 2019). In fully
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7902

