The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Separate but Equal: Equality in Belief Propagation for Single Cycle Graphs
Erel Cohen, Omer Lev and Roie Zivan
Ben Gurion University of the Negev
erelco@post.bgu.ac.il, omerlev@bgu.ac.il, zivanr@bgu.ac.il

Abstract

Galiki, and Zivan (2020)) is a version of belief propagation
that has drawn considerable attention (Ruozzi and Tatikonda
2013; Rogers et al. 2011; Chen et al. 2018), including being
proposed for multi-agent applications such as sensor systems (Teacy et al. 2008; Stranders et al. 2009) and task allocation for rescue teams in disaster areas (Ramchurn et al.
2010). For convenience of presentation, we will focus on this
version of belief propagation. However, the results that we
present apply to other versions of belief propagation as well.
Belief propagation is known to converge to the optimal
solution when solving problems represented by an acyclic
graph. On problems represented by graphs that include cycles, the beliefs may fail to converge, and the resulting assignments that are considered optimal under those beliefs
may be of low quality (Yanover, Meltzer, and Weiss 2006;
Farinelli et al. 2008b; Zivan et al. 2017). This occurs because cyclic information propagation leads to computation
of inaccurate and inconsistent information (Pearl 1988).
On graphs with a single cycle, it is known that belief
propagation is not guaranteed to converge. However, when
it does converge, the result is the optimal solution (Weiss
2000; Forney et al. 2001). Moreover, the conditions for convergence of belief propagation on a single cycle, are known:
Forney et al. (2001) show the resemblance between the operation of the algorithm on a single cyclic graph and a chain
of assignments (a route), which incurs costs with respect to
the constraints along the chain. Every propagated belief is a
result of a sum of costs, which are the result of the selection
of value assignments in this route. Given enough iterations
the route converges to a periodic traversal of the lowest cost
sequence of assignments. The algorithm converges to the optimal solution if and only if this periodic route is consistent,
i.e., nodes in the chain representing the same variable are not
assigned different values. If it does include different value
assignments to nodes representing the same variable, the algorithm will oscillate.
Recent work by Zivan, Lev, and Galiki (2020) tries to generalize the conditions for convergence of belief propagation,
presented for single-cycle graphs (Forney et al. 2001; Weiss
2000), to the general case where graphs include multiple cycles. To do so, they proposed using a backtrack cost tree
(BCT), which reveals the components that were summed in
order to generate a propagated belief. They prove that after
enough iterations, the bottom layers of all BCTs of a belief

Belief propagation is a widely used incomplete optimization
algorithm, whose main theoretical properties hold only under
the assumptions that beliefs are not equal. Nevertheless, there
is much evidence that equality between beliefs does occur. A
method to overcome belief equality by using unary functionnodes is assumed to resolve the problem.
We focus on Min-sum, the belief propagation version for
solving constraint optimization problems. We prove that on a
single cycle graph, belief equality can be avoided only when
the algorithm converges to the optimal solution. In any other
case, the unary function methods will not prevent equality,
rendering some existing results in need of reassessment. We
differentiate between belief equality, which includes equal
beliefs in a single message, and assignment equality, that prevents a coherent selection of assignments to variables. We
show the necessary and satisfying conditions for both.

Introduction
The belief propagation algorithm (Pearl 1988; Yanover,
Meltzer, and Weiss 2006) is an incomplete inference algorithm for solving problems that can be represented by graphical models. One major problem for which it can be applied
is constraint optimization (Dechter 2003), a general model
for centralized and distributed problem solving, which has a
wide range of applications in artificial intelligence and multi
agent systems (Ramchurn et al. 2010; Farinelli, Rogers, and
Jennings 2014).
In belief propagation, each node in the graph acts as an
agent within a distributed algorithm. In the standard synchronous version, this means that in each iteration of the algorithm it receives messages from all its neighboring nodes,
performs computations, and sends messages to its neighbors.
The agents maintain (and propagate) beliefs regarding the
differences in the costs1 which they will incur for assigning
various possible value assignments to their variables.
Min-sum (often named Max-sum, e.g., Farinelli et al.
(2008b); Rogers et al. (2011); Zivan et al. (2017); Cohen,
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In this paper, without loss of generality, we will use costs and
not utilities. Thus, the problem that the algorithm aims to solve is
a minimization problem and violating a constraint incurs a finite
cost.

3924

