The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Explicit Invariant Feature Induced Cross-Domain Crowd Counting
†

Yiqing Cai1 * , Lianggangxu Chen1 * , Haoyue Guan3 , Shaohui Lin1 ,
†
Changhong Lu2 , Changbo Wang1 , Gaoqi He1, 4, 5†
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3
Johns Hopkins University, Mason Hall, USA
4
Innovation Center for AI and Drug Discovery, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
5
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Precision Optics, Chongqing Institute of East China Normal University, Chongqing, China
{yqcai, lgxchen}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, ghyherbert@163.com, shlin@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
chlu@math.ecnu.edu.cn, {cbwang, gqhe}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

Source

Previous
Methods

Cross-domain crowd counting has shown progressively improved performance. However, most methods fail to explicitly consider the transferability of different features between
source and target domains. In this paper, we propose an
innovative explicit Invariant Feature induced Cross-domain
Knowledge Transformation framework to address the inconsistent domain-invariant features of different domains.
The main idea is to explicitly extract domain-invariant features from both source and target domains, which builds a
bridge to transfer more rich knowledge between two domains.
The framework consists of three parts, global feature decoupling (GFD), relation exploration and alignment (REA), and
graph-guided knowledge enhancement (GKE). In the GFD
module, domain-invariant features are efficiently decoupled
from domain-specific ones in two domains, which allows the
model to distinguish crowds features from backgrounds in the
complex scenes. In the REA module both inter-domain relation graph (Inter-RG) and intra-domain relation graph (IntraRG) are built. Specifically, Inter-RG aggregates multi-scale
domain-invariant features between two domains and further
aligns local-level invariant features. Intra-RG preserves taskrelated specific information to assist the domain alignment.
Furthermore, GKE strategy models the confidence of pseudolabels to further enhance the adaptability of the target domain.
Various experiments show our method achieves state-of-theart performance on the standard benchmarks. Code is available at https://github.com/caiyiqing/IF-CKT.

Direct
Adaptation

Target

Proposed
Methods

Source
Target

Source
DomainInvariant

Souce
DomainSpecific

Target
DomainInvariant

Target
DomainSpecific

Low
Confidence
Feature

Figure 1: Comparison of previous cross-domain crowd
counting methods and our proposed method. Top: Previous approaches attempt to align directly with the overall
distribution while the domain invariant parts do not match.
Bottom: In our method, domain-invariant features are first
aligned, and then domain-invariant features serve as an intermediate bridge to further align task-related domain-specific
features.

networks (CNNs) have achieved outstanding performance
(Zhang et al. 2019; Qiu et al. 2019; Song et al. 2021; Lin
et al. 2022). However, these fully-supervised models have
been criticized for the lack of generalization ability, which
suffer from severe performance degradation when being deployed into the wild. This is due to the bias towards the
data distribution of the training domain. Moreover, collecting sufficient annotations for each new domain are laborintensive, which restricts its real applications.
To improve the scalability of the model on the unlabeled target domain, unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA) methods have been proposed to transfer the domaininvariant information from the labeled source domain to the
related but unlabeled target domain (Weiss, Khoshgoftaar,

Introduction
Crowd counting aims to estimate the number of pedestrians
in an image, which is one of the most important tasks in
computer vision. For example, during the current COVID19 pandemic, it can play a substantial role in monitoring crowd gathering and reducing the spread of the virus.
Taking advantage of the deep learning techniques, previous crowd counting methods based on convolutional neural
* These authors contributed equally.
†
Shaohui Lin, Changbo Wang and Gaoqi He are the corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

259

