The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

GENNAPE: Towards Generalized Neural Architecture
Performance Estimators
Keith G. Mills1,2 * , Fred X. Han2 , Jialin Zhang3 , Fabian Chudak2 ,
Ali Safari Mamaghani1 , Mohammad Salameh2 , Wei Lu2 , Shangling Jui3 , Di Niu1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta
2
Huawei Technologies, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
3
Huawei Kirin Solution, Shanghai, China
{kgmills, safarima, dniu}@ualberta.ca
{fred.xuefei.han1, fabian.chudak, mohammad.salameh, jui.shangling}@huawei.com
{zhangjialin10, robin.luwei}@hisilicon.com
Abstract

methods (Zoph and Le 2017) rely on training individual architectures from scratch via intensive GPU usage. Weightsharing methodologies like DARTS (Liu, Simonyan, and
Yang 2019) propose supernet models that superimpose the
features of all architectures in a search space, substantially
reducing the cost of search. DARTS further reduces this
cost by searching for an architecture on a small image
classification dataset like CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, Hinton
et al. 2009) before transferring the found architecture to a
larger benchmark dataset, like ImageNet (Russakovsky et al.
2015). In contrast, Once-for-All (OFA) (Cai et al. 2020) employs strategies to effectively pre-train a re-usable supernet
on ImageNet prior to performing search. Newer methods
have seen the introduction of Zero-Cost Proxies (Abdelfattah et al. 2021) which estimate performance from forward
pass gradients.
Advancements in neural predictors (Tang et al. 2020; Wen
et al. 2020) allow for faster inference time, which significantly lowers the architecture evaluation cost incurred in
NAS. However, one major trade-off associated with using
neural predictors is a lack of generalizability. The input to
a neural predictor is usually a vector encoding of the architecture, whose scope is confined to the designated search
space the predictor is meant to operate in. For example, to
facilitate architecture search, Once-for-All, SemiNAS (Luo
et al. 2020) and BANANAS (White, Neiswanger, and Savani 2021) design specialized predictors, each performing in
an individually defined search space. Such a restriction seriously limits the scope that a search algorithm (Mills et al.
2021a,c) can explore, regardless of how effective it is.
Furthermore, as a separate new predictor must be trained
for each new search space created, there is an implied
additional heavy cost associated with the laborious and
resource-intensive task of labelling the performance of a
suitable amount of neural architecture samples in this search
space, since these architecture samples must be trained from
scratch for evaluation. Ideally, a generalized neural predictor would not be subject to these constraints. Not only would
it be able to receive input from multiple search spaces, but
it would learn an architecture representation that is robust
enough to accurately estimate and rank the performance of

Predicting neural architecture performance is a challenging
task and is crucial to neural architecture design and search.
Existing approaches either rely on neural performance predictors which are limited to modeling architectures in a predefined design space involving specific sets of operators and
connection rules, and cannot generalize to unseen architectures, or resort to Zero-Cost Proxies which are not always accurate. In this paper, we propose GENNAPE, a Generalized
Neural Architecture Performance Estimator, which is pretrained on open neural architecture benchmarks, and aims to
generalize to completely unseen architectures through combined innovations in network representation, contrastive pretraining, and a fuzzy clustering-based predictor ensemble.
Specifically, GENNAPE represents a given neural network as
a Computation Graph (CG) of atomic operations which can
model an arbitrary architecture. It first learns a graph encoder
via Contrastive Learning to encourage network separation by
topological features, and then trains multiple predictor heads,
which are soft-aggregated according to the fuzzy membership of a neural network. Experiments show that GENNAPE
pretrained on NAS-Bench-101 can achieve superior transferability to 5 different public neural network benchmarks, including NAS-Bench-201, NAS-Bench-301, MobileNet and
ResNet families under no or minimum fine-tuning. We further
introduce 3 challenging newly labelled neural network benchmarks: HiAML, Inception and Two-Path, which can concentrate in narrow accuracy ranges. Extensive experiments show
that GENNAPE can correctly discern high-performance architectures in these families. Finally, when paired with a
search algorithm, GENNAPE can find architectures that improve accuracy while reducing FLOPs on three families.

Introduction
Understanding and predicting the performance of neural networks is crucial to automated neural architecture design and
neural architecture search (NAS). In fact, the amount of time
and computational resources required by a NAS scheme is
critically dependent on how evaluation is performed. Early
* Work done during an internship at Huawei.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9190

