The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fast Online Hashing with Multi-Label Projection
Wenzhe Jia1,2 , Yuan Cao* 1,2 , Junwei Liu1 , Jie Gui 3,4
1
Ocean University of China, China
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks (Xidian University), China
3
Southeast University, China
4
Purple Mountain Laboratories, China
jiawenzhe@stu.ouc.edu.cn, cy8661@ouc.edu.cn, liujunwei@stu.ouc.edu.cn, guijie@seu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

as a dataset grows and diversifies, because the computational
cost may become intractable and infeasible. Hence, online
hashing methods have emerged, which demonstrate good
performance-complexity trade-offs by updating hash functions from streaming data (Cakir et al. 2017). Online hashing focuses on updating hash functions and hash tables constantly on the basis of continual stream data with low cost
(Cakir, Bargal, and Sclaroff 2017; Lu et al. 2019b; Wang,
Luo, and Xu 2020).
Online hashing can be generally divided into unsupervised hashing (Leng et al. 2015; Chen et al. 2017) and supervised hashing (Lin et al. 2020; Fang, Zhang, and Liu
2021). Unsupervised online hashing is roughly based on
the idea of “sketching” (Clarkson and Woodruff 2009). The
sketch is a smaller feature matrix that preserves the main
features of the database. By realizing matrix decomposition, the hash functions can be updated dynamically and
efficiently. Supervised online hashing is mainly based on
two kinds of supervision information: similarity matrix and
label, which can narrow the semantic gap. Online Kernel
Hashing (OKH) (Huang, Yang, and Zheng 2013) is the first
attempt to update hash functions in a paired-input fashion.
With an online passive-aggressive strategy, important information about the stream data is maintained. AdaptiveHash
(Cakir and Sclaroff 2015a) defines a hinge-loss function and
optimises the model dramatically based on SGD. Mutual Information Hashing (MIH) (Cakir et al. 2017) utilizes mutual
information as the objective function and updates the hash
tables based on it. Balanced Similarity for online Discrete
Hashing (Lin et al. 2019b) investigates the correlation between the existing data and the new data. BSODH sets two
balancing factors to solve the “imbalance problem” caused
by the asymmetric graphs and optimises them by means
of discretization. Hadamard Matrix Guided Online Hashing
(HMOH) (Lin et al. 2020) considers the Hadamard matrix as
a more discriminative codebook. By assigning each column
of the Hadamard matrix a unique label as target, the hash
functions are updated.
With the rapid growth of multi-modal data, multi-modal
online hashing has appeared (Xie et al. 2017; Yi et al. 2021).
The first proposed cross-modal online hashing (OCMH)
(Xie, Shen, and Zhu 2016) learns shared latent matrices and
variable matrices for each modality, enabling efficient update of the hash codes. Flexible Online Multi-modal Hash-

Hashing has been widely researched to solve the large-scale
approximate nearest neighbor search problem owing to its
time and storage superiority. In recent years, a number of online hashing methods have emerged, which can update the
hash functions to adapt to the new stream data and realize
dynamic retrieval. However, existing online hashing methods
are required to update the whole database with the latest hash
functions when a query arrives, which leads to low retrieval
efficiency with the continuous increase of the stream data.
On the other hand, these methods ignore the supervision relationship among the examples, especially in the multi-label
case. In this paper, we propose a novel Fast Online Hashing
(FOH) method which only updates the binary codes of a small
part of the database. To be specific, we first build a query
pool in which the nearest neighbors of each central point are
recorded. When a new query arrives, only the binary codes of
the corresponding potential neighbors are updated. In addition, we create a similarity matrix which takes the multi-label
supervision information into account and bring in the multilabel projection loss to further preserve the similarity among
the multi-label data. The experimental results on two common benchmarks show that the proposed FOH can achieve
dramatic superiority on query time up to 6.28 seconds less
than state-of-the-art baselines with competitive retrieval accuracy.

Introduction
With the increasing amount of data available on the Internet,
Approximate Nearest neighbor (ANN) search (Wang et al.
2017) has achieved a widespread success in many applications, e.g. computer vision and cross-modal retrieval problems. Hashing-based methods (Wang, Kumar, and Chang
2012; Liu et al. 2016; Lu, Liong, and Zhou 2017) have attracted extensive attention for ANN search due to their advantages in terms of data storage and computational efficiency. Hashing aims at mapping high-dimensional features
into compact binary codes, while preserving similarities between the original space and the binary space.
Most of the existing popular hashing methods are based
on batch-learning strategy (He, Wang, and Cheng 2019; Cao
et al. 2021), which hinders their ability to adapt to changes
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1007

