The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

“Nothing Abnormal”: Disambiguating Medical Reports
via Contrastive Knowledge Infusion
Zexue He1 , An Yan1 , Amilcare Gentili1,2 , Julian McAuley1 , Chun-Nan Hsu1,2,3
1

University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
VA San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, CA
3
VA National AI Institute, Washington, DC
zehe@eng.ucsd.edu, ayan@eng.ucsd.edu, amilcare.gentili2@va.gov,
jmcauley@eng.ucsd.edu, chunnan@ucsd.edu
2

Abstract

Report Sentence
Medical
Jargon

Sharing medical reports is essential for patient-centered care.
A recent line of work has focused on automatically generating reports with NLP methods. However, different audiences
have different purposes when writing/reading medical reports – for example, healthcare professionals care more about
pathology, whereas patients are more concerned with the diagnosis (“Is there any abnormality?”). The expectation gap
results in a common situation where patients find their medical reports to be ambiguous and therefore unsure about the
next steps. In this work, we explore the audience expectation
gap in healthcare and summarize common ambiguities that
lead patients to be confused about their diagnosis into three
categories: medical jargon, contradictory findings, and misleading grammatical errors. Based on our analysis, we define
a disambiguation rewriting task to regenerate an input to be
unambiguous while preserving information about the original content. We further propose a rewriting algorithm based
on contrastive pretraining and perturbation-based rewriting.
In addition, we create two datasets, OpenI-Annotated based
on chest reports and VA-Annotated based on general medical
reports, with available binary labels for ambiguity and abnormality presence annotated by radiology specialists. Experimental results on these datasets show that our proposed algorithm effectively rewrites input sentences in a less ambiguous
way with high content fidelity. Our code and annotated data
will be released to facilitate future research.

Diagnosis

Am: Unremarkable bony structure.
Re: Normal bony structure.

Normal

Contradictory
Findings

Am: The lung volumes are low normal .
Re: The lung volumes are in the lower
half of the normal limit.

Normal

Misleading
Grammatical
Errors

Am: Cardiomegaly and hiatal hernia
without an acute abnormality
identified.
Re: Cardiomegaly and hiatal hernia .
Without an acute ab-normality
identified.

Abnormal

Table 1: Ambiguous sentences (Am) from three categories
with the unambiguous rewritten (Re). We highlight the parts
causing ambiguity in gray, and show comparisons in bold.
results of medical examinations may lead to delays in proper
treatment or malpractice lawsuits against providers (Mityul
et al. 2018; Srinivasa Babu and Brooks 2015).
As a carrier of medical information, medical reports are
shared with their patients by healthcare providers nowadays.
Medical reports serve many communication purposes with
different audiences including ordering physicians, other care
team staff members, patients and their families, and researchers (Hartung et al. 2020; Gunn et al. 2013). Each
group has different needs and expectations when reading
the reports: peer medical professionals pay more attention to
actionable findings, while patients usually care more about
the diagnostic outcome2 (i.e., Is there anything abnormal?).
How to address various communication needs for different
audiences, and to bridge the expectation gap between audiences without increasing workload of report writers is critical.
To build such a bridge, it is important for medical reports
to 1) be understandable with little specialized terms and 2)
to have no ambiguity about the significance of findings when
communicating with patients (Hartung et al. 2020; Mityul
et al. 2018). Previous works mainly focus on the first point
where they change terminology to lay-person terms with
replacement-based or deep learning methods (Qenam et al.
2017; Oh, Cook, and Kahn 2016; Xu et al. 2022). However,

Introduction
Effective communication between healthcare providers and
patients plays a critical role in patient outcome. Patientcentered care (Catalyst 2017; Stewart et al. 2013) is reforming traditional healthcare to shift a patient’s role from an “order taker” to an active “team member” in their own healthcare process, to improve individual health outcomes and satisfaction (Stewart et al. 2000), and advocates sharing medical information fully and in a timely manner with patients.
It is also required by legal obligation (e.g., HIPAA1 in the
US) that patients have a legal right to access their personal
health information. Failure of healthcare providers to communicate with patients efficiently and effectively about the
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Shorten for Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act

2
We use exam result, diagnostic decision, abnormality existence interchangeably, to express “if there is anything abnormal”.

14232

