The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Balanced Meta Learning and Diverse Sampling for Lifelong Task-Oriented
Dialogue Systems
Qiancheng Xu1 , Min Yang2 * , Ruifeng Xu3
1

2

Georgia Institute of Technology
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
qxu309@gatech.edu, min.yang@siat.ac.cn, xuruifeng@hit.edu.cn
Abstract

et al. 2021; Madotto et al. 2021). The TDSs with isolated
learning (Lee 2017) would suffer from significant performance degradation on previously learned tasks after being
trained on a new one, which is known as catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen 1989; Goodfellow et al. 2014).
In addition, existing TDSs struggle to be adapted to new domains or functionalities so as to support new services over
time (Mazumder and Liu 2022). Therefore, it is crucial for a
TDS to continually learn new knowledge without forgetting
previously acquired functionalities when confronted with a
sequence of different tasks, which is known as lifelong or
continual learning (Biesialska, Biesialska, and Costa-jussà
2020; Qu et al. 2021).
One major challenge in lifelong learning is to balance the trade-off between stability and plasticity (i.e.,
the stability-plasticity dilemma) (Mermillod, Bugaiska, and
Bonin 2013). On the one hand, although a TDS is expected to remember previously acquired knowledge and
avoid catastrophic forgetting (i.e., high stability), focusing
too much on stability may hinder it from quickly adapting
to new tasks. On the other hand, when a TDS is drastically
updated based on new knowledge (i.e., high plasticity), it
may quickly forget previously-learned experiences and thus
suffer from catastrophic forgetting of previous tasks.
In recent years, plenty of lifelong learning studies have
been proposed, which can be divided into three categories:
memory-based approaches (de Masson d’Autume et al.
2019), architecture-based approaches (Mallya and Lazebnik 2018), and regularization-based approaches (Kirkpatrick
et al. 2017; Ahn et al. 2019). These methods primarily focus
on dealing with the catastrophic forgetting problem in lifelong learning, which preserve the previously learned knowledge to hold long-term durability when learning new tasks
over time. However, how to effectively reuse previously acquired knowledge when processing new tasks remains underexplored. One possible solution is to employ knowledge transfer (e.g., domain adaptation) techniques to adapt a
model trained on source domains to target domains, exploiting the previously learned knowledge in future learning. The
performance of domain adaptation techniques (Volpi, Larlus, and Rogez 2021) generally depends on the similarity
between source and target data distributions. Nevertheless,
in the lifelong learning scenario, we cannot decide whether
the sequentially coming domains will be more or less similar

In real-world scenarios, it is crucial to build a lifelong taskoriented dialogue system (TDS) that continually adapts to
new knowledge without forgetting previously acquired experiences. Existing approaches mainly focus on mitigating
the catastrophic forgetting in lifelong TDS. However, the
transfer ability to generalize the accumulated old knowledge
to new tasks is underexplored. In this paper, we propose a
two-stage lifelong task-oriented dialogue generation method
to mitigate catastrophic forgetting and encourage knowledge
transfer simultaneously, inspired by the learning process. In
the first stage, we learn task-specific masks which adaptively
preserve the knowledge of each visited task so as to mitigate catastrophic forgetting. In this stage, we are expected
to learn the task-specific knowledge which is tailored for
each task. In the second stage, we bring the knowledge from
the encountered tasks together and understand thoroughly.
To this end, we devise a balanced meta learning strategy
for both forward and backward knowledge transfer in the
lifelong learning process. In particular, we perform metaupdate with a meta-test set sampled from the current training data for forward knowledge transfer. In addition, we employ an uncertainty-based sampling strategy to select and
store representative dialogue samples into episodic memory
and perform meta-update with a meta-test set sampled from
the memory for backward knowledge transfer. With extensive experiments on 29 tasks, we show that MetaLTDS outperforms the strong baselines in terms of both effectiveness
and efficiency. For reproducibility, we submit our code at:
https://github.com/travis-xu/MetaLTDS.

Introduction
Task-oriented dialog systems (TDSs) allow users to accomplish complex tasks using natural language in an interactive manner, such as restaurant reservations, car navigation, and weather inquiry. Existing end-to-end TDSs (Peng
et al. 2021; Hosseini-Asl et al. 2020) have achieved impressive performance on specific domains in a static environment, where the datasets from different domains remain unchanged and are always available. However, a TDS
in the production environment often encounters continuous
streams of domains or functionalities through time (Geng
* Min Yang is corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13843

