The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

GuidedMixup: An Efficient Mixup Strategy Guided by Saliency Maps
Minsoo Kang1,2 , Suhyun Kim2 *
1

2

Korea University, Republic of Korea
Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea
{minsoo.kang0918, dr.suhyun.kim}@gmail.com

Abstract
Data augmentation is now an essential part of the image training process, as it effectively prevents overfitting and makes
the model more robust against noisy datasets. Recent mixing augmentation strategies have advanced to generate the
mixup mask that can enrich the saliency information, which is
a supervisory signal. However, these methods incur a significant computational burden to optimize the mixup mask. From
this motivation, we propose a novel saliency-aware mixup
method, GuidedMixup, which aims to retain the salient regions in mixup images with low computational overhead. We
develop an efficient pairing algorithm that pursues to minimize the conflict of salient regions of paired images and
achieve rich saliency in mixup images. Moreover, GuidedMixup controls the mixup ratio for each pixel to better preserve the salient region by interpolating two paired images
smoothly. The experiments on several datasets demonstrate
that GuidedMixup provides a good trade-off between augmentation overhead and generalization performance on classification datasets. In addition, our method shows good performance in experiments with corrupted or reduced datasets.

1

Source Image

Mixup

CutMix

SnapMix

Target Image

PuzzleMix

Co-Mixup

GuidedMixup

Figure 1: The generated images of previous mixup augmentation methods and the proposed GuidedMixup.

(2018) proposed Mixup, which linearly interpolates images
to address the issues of generalization and robustness (Stanton et al. 2021). Yun et al. (2019) proposed CutMix that replaces a random-sized patch of the source image with the
same-sized region of the target image.
These mixup strategies have improved generalization and
robustness with lower computational costs. However, as
shown in Figure 1, these approaches have limitations in containing enough saliency information (i.e., a supervisory signal). In order to address this issue, there has been another
line of studies on properly assigning the saliency information from each image to the mixup images (Kim, Choo, and
Song 2020; Kim et al. 2020). PuzzleMix (Kim, Choo, and
Song 2020) argued how to generate the mixup mask and
optimally transport guided by saliency information. While
PuzzleMix rearranges the salient region to the proper location for obtaining maximum saliency, Co-Mixup (Kim
et al. 2020) finds the optimal pairs and generates the optimal
masks simultaneously from the input batch by solving an optimization problem. With the optimal pairs, Co-Mixup was
able to obtain richer saliency information in an image than
PuzzleMix without the rearrangement. However, saliencybased mixup strategies require a non-trivial computational
cost to achieve optimal performance. Furthermore, as the
computational inefficiency increases with larger mini-batch,
the option of large mini-batch size can be restricted, which
may have an optimal point.
In this regard, we propose GuidedMixup, which achieves

Introduction

Improvement and success of deep neural networks have been
achieved in various tasks by employing more parameters and
larger architectures. However, compared to the capacity increase of deep neural networks, the number of samples in
datasets has not kept up. The capacity increase can incur the
memorization effect, which appears as an overfitting phenomenon to training data (Srivastava et al. 2014) and vulnerability to noisy data.
In order to tackle these issues, many regularization methods have been studied (Srivastava et al. 2014; Huang
et al. 2016). In particular, data augmentation (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; DeVries and Taylor 2017) can
effectively regularize the model independently and is now a
crucial part of training. The primary purpose of augmentation is to improve the model’s generalization ability by generating appropriate unseen data without additional datasets.
Recently, a body of research has attempted to develop mixing augmentation techniques. For example, Zhang et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1096

