The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Supervised Joint Dynamic Scene Reconstruction and Optical Flow Estimation
for Spiking Camera
Shiyan Chen1 , Zhaofei Yu2,3 * , Tiejun Huang1,2,3
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
School of Computer Science, Peking University
strerichia002p@stu.pku.edu.cn, {yuzf12, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Spiking camera, a novel retina-inspired vision sensor, has
shown its great potential for capturing high-speed dynamic
scenes with a sampling rate of 40,000 Hz. The spiking camera abandons the concept of exposure window, with each of
its photosensitive units continuously capturing photons and
firing spikes asynchronously. However, the special sampling
mechanism prevents the frame-based algorithm from being
used to spiking camera. It remains to be a challenge to reconstruct dynamic scenes and perform common computer vision tasks for spiking camera. In this paper, we propose a
self-supervised joint learning framework for optical flow estimation and reconstruction of spiking camera. The framework reconstructs clean frame-based spiking representations
in a self-supervised manner, and then uses them to train the
optical flow networks. We also propose an optical flow based
inverse rendering process to achieve self-supervision by minimizing the difference with respect to the original spiking temporal aggregation image. The experimental results demonstrate that our method bridges the gap between synthetic and
real-world scenes and achieves desired results in real-world
scenarios. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to jointly reconstruct dynamic scenes and estimate optical flow for spiking camera from a self-supervised learning
perspective.

(a) Spike stream

(b) Long-term spiking
temporal aggregation image

(c) Reconstruction image

(d) Optical Flow

Figure 1: llustrations of the spiking camera reconstruction
and optical flow estimation task. The scene is about a highspeed car with a speed of 100 km/h. (a) Spike stream captured by a spiking camera. (b) Long-term spiking temporal
aggregation image of the spike stream. (c-d) Reconstruction
image and optical flow predicted through our framework.

Introduction

inspired camera, named spiking camera (Huang et al. 2022;
Dong, Huang, and Tian 2017). Instead of using an exposure
window, the spiking camera mimics the sampling mechanism of the primate fovea (Wässle 2004; Masland 2012),
with each of its photosensitive units continuously capturing
photons and firing spikes asynchronously when the dispatch
threshold is reached. These characteristics enable the spiking camera to record high-speed motion at a frequency of
40,000 Hz. Different from the commonly used event camera (also called dynamic vision sensor, DVS) (Lichtsteiner,
Posch, and Delbruck 2008; Brandli et al. 2014), which only
monitors relative brightness changes at each photosensitive
unit, the spiking camera has the ability to record absolute
light intensity as the spike firing frequency is proportional to
the received scene radiance. This advantage allows the spiking camera to record more texture information than DVS,
enabling the spiking camera more suitable for visualization
of high-speed imaging.
Due to the distinct different sampling mechanisms, the

High-speed scenarios, such as autonomous driving and scientific imaging, are challenging for conventional cameras
that generally accumulate photons information within a
fixed exposure window. However, certain points on a fastmoving object may be projected onto different pixels on the
sensor, which introduces motion blur. Besides, conventional
high-speed cameras record frames synchronously at a constant shutter speed, resulting in significant data redundancy
and memory consumption. In addition, the complex manufacturing process and high costs have prevented them from
being widely used.
Recently, neuromorphic vision sensors (Chen et al. 2011;
Dong et al. 2019; Gallego et al. 2020) have attracted extensive attention due to their outstanding ability to capture highspeed scenes. One of their newest members is a novel retina* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

350

