The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Feature-Level Debiased Natural Language Understanding
Yougang Lyu1 , Piji Li2 , Yechang Yang1 , Maarten de Rijke3 , Pengjie Ren1
Yukun Zhao1,4 , Dawei Yin4 , Zhaochun Ren1 *
2

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao, China
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
3
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
4
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
{youganglyu, yyc002}@mail.sdu.edu.cn, pjli@nuaa.edu.cn, m.derijke@uva.nl, jay.ren@outlook.com,
zhaoyukun02@baidu.com, yindawei@acm.org, zhaochun.ren@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Natural language understanding (NLU) models often rely on
dataset biases rather than intended task-relevant features to
achieve high performance on specific datasets. As a result,
these models perform poorly on datasets outside the training distribution. Some recent studies address this issue by
reducing the weights of biased samples during the training
process. However, these methods still encode biased latent
features in representations and neglect the dynamic nature of
bias, which hinders model prediction. We propose an NLU debiasing method, named debiasing contrastive learning (DCT),
to simultaneously alleviate the above problems based on contrastive learning. We devise a debiasing, positive sampling
strategy to mitigate biased latent features by selecting the least
similar biased positive samples. We also propose a dynamic
negative sampling strategy to capture the dynamic influence of
biases by employing a bias-only model to dynamically select
the most similar biased negative samples. We conduct experiments on three NLU benchmark datasets. Experimental results show that DCT outperforms state-of-the-art baselines on
out-of-distribution datasets while maintaining in-distribution
performance. We also verify that DCT can reduce biased latent
features from the model’s representations.

1

(a) Different debiasing methods

(b) Different training epochs

Figure 1: Probing accuracy for three types of biased features (Overlap, Subsequence and Negwords) with different
methods and different training epochs on the MNLI dataset.
(a) Recent NLU debiasing methods (Reweight, POE, and
Conf-reg) have a higher probing accuracy of biased features
compared to BERT-base. (b) Biased features probing accuracy of BERT-base changes dynamically during the training
process.

Introduction

Pre-trained language models such as BERT (Devlin et al.
2019) have achieved impressive performance on many NLU
benchmarks, such as natural language inference (NLI) (Bowman et al. 2015; Williams, Nangia, and Bowman 2018) and
fact verification (Thorne et al. 2018). However, recent studies
have shown that these models tend to leverage dataset biases
instead of intended task-relevant features (McCoy, Pavlick,
and Linzen 2019; Schuster et al. 2019; Du et al. 2022). For
example, Gururangan et al. (2018) find that NLU models rely
on the spurious association between negative words (e.g.,
nobody, no, never and nothing) and contradiction labels for
prediction in NLI datasets, leading to low accuracy on outof-distribution datasets that lack spurious associations.
To mitigate bias in training datasets, recent NLU debiasing methods attempt to train more robust models. Three
prevailing debiasing methods exist in NLU: (i) example
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13353

reweighting (Reweight) (Schuster et al. 2019), (ii) product-of–
experts (POE) (Clark, Yatskar, and Zettlemoyer 2019; He,
Zha, and Wang 2019; Mahabadi, Belinkov, and Henderson
2020), and (iii) confidence regularization (Conf-reg) (Utama,
Moosavi, and Gurevych 2020a). These debiasing methods
encourage the model to pay less attention to the biased examples, which forces it to learn harder samples to improve
out-of-distribution (OOD) performance.
From the perspective of debiasing NLU, two main challenges remain. Both concern biased features, that is, features
that have spurious correlations with the label, e.g., negative
words in input sentences in NLU tasks. First, existing NLU
debiasing methods still encode biased latent features in representations. We follow Mendelson and Belinkov (2021) to use
probing tasks for several types of bias (Overlap, Subsequence
and Negwords) to verify whether biased latent features have
been removed from representations. The probing task for bias
is to predict whether a sample is biased based on the model’s
representation in terms of probing accuracy, the accuracy
of the probing task. Higher probing accuracy of bias means
that the model’s representation contains more biased features.
Fig. 1(a) shows that existing debiasing methods have a higher
probing accuracy of three types of biased latent features from

