The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Reward-Biased Maximum Likelihood Estimation for Neural Contextual Bandits:
A Distributional Learning Perspective
Yu-Heng Hung, Ping-Chun Hsieh
Department of Computer Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
hungyh.cs08@nycu.edu.tw, pinghsieh@nycu.edu.tw

Abstract

the classic non-contextual multi-armed bandit problems (Liu
et al. 2020), the contextual bandit problems with generalized linear reward functions (Hung et al. 2021) and modelbased reinforcement learning for finite MDPs (Mete et al.
2021). Moreover, RBMLE has been shown to achieve orderoptimal finite-time regret bounds and competitive empirical
regret performance in the above settings. Despite the recent
progress, the existing RBMLE bandit algorithms, as well
as their regret guarantees, rely heavily on the structural assumptions, such as the absence of contextual information
in (Liu et al. 2020) and linear realizability in (Hung et al.
2021), and hence are not readily applicable to various realworld bandit applications with more complex reward structures, such as recommender systems and clinical trials.
Motivated by the competitive performance of the RBMLE
principle in the bandit problems mentioned above, this paper
takes one step further to study RBMLE in contextual bandits with general reward functions. To unleash the full potential of RBMLE in contextual bandits, we propose NeuralRBMLE, which leverages the representation power of neural
networks to learn the unknown reward distributions. Compared to the existing regression-based neural bandit algorithms (Zhou, Li, and Gu 2020; Zhang et al. 2021), NeuralRBMLE presents its novel technical insights into addressing
its own salient technical challenges:
• A new perspective for neural contextual bandits – The
main idea of NeuralRBMLE is to leverage the likelihood
of the parametric distributions to learn the unknown reward distributions and thereafter achieve efficient exploration through a reward-bias term. With that said, NeuralRBMLE takes a distributional viewpoint toward understanding the power of neural networks for contextual bandits, and this viewpoint is fundamentally different
from the existing regression-based neural bandit methods
(Zhou, Li, and Gu 2020; Zhang et al. 2021), which focus on learning the mean rewards. Notably, our attempt of
NeuralRBMLE resonates with the recent progress in distributional methods in deep RL (Bellemare, Dabney, and
Munos 2017), which leverages the representation power
of neural networks to learn the value distributions.
• Model misspecification of reward distributions – NeuralRBMLE is a distributional approach that leverages the
machinery of MLE. The standard use of MLE requires
the knowledge of the likelihood function of the stochas-

Reward-biased maximum likelihood estimation (RBMLE) is
a classic principle in the adaptive control literature for tackling explore-exploit trade-offs. This paper studies the neural
contextual bandit problem from a distributional perspective
and proposes NeuralRBMLE, which leverages the likelihood
of surrogate parametric distributions to learn the unknown reward distributions and thereafter adapts the RBMLE principle
to achieve efficient exploration by properly adding a rewardbias term. NeuralRBMLE leverages the representation power
of neural networks and directly encodes exploratory behavior
in the parameter space, without constructing confidence intervals of the estimated rewards. We propose two variants of
NeuralRBMLE algorithms: The first variant directly obtains
the RBMLE estimator by gradient ascent, and the second
variant simplifies RBMLE to a simple index policy through
an approximation. We show that both algorithms achieve
order-optimality. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that the NeuralRBMLE algorithms achieve comparable
or better empirical regrets than the state-of-the-art methods
on real-world datasets with non-linear reward functions.

1

Introduction

Efficient exploration has been a fundamental challenge in
sequential decision-making in unknown environments. As a
classic principle originally proposed in the stochastic adaptive control literature for solving unknown Markov decision processes (MDPs), Reward-Biased Maximum Likelihood Estimation (RBMLE) learns an optimal policy by alternating between estimating the unknown model parameters in
an “exploratory” manner and applying the optimal control
law based on the estimated parameters (Kumar and Becker
1982; Borkar 1990; Campi and Kumar 1998; Prandini and
Campi 2000). Specifically, to resolve the inherent issue of
insufficient exploration of maximum likelihood estimation
(MLE), RBMLE enforces exploration by incorporating into
the likelihood function a bias term in favor of those model
parameters that correspond to higher long-term average rewards. This generic exploration scheme has been shown to
asymptotically attain the optimal long-term average reward
(Kumar and Becker 1982).
Recently, the RBMLE principle has been adapted to optimize the regrets in stochastic bandit problems, including
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7944

