The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PLMmark: A Secure and Robust Black-Box Watermarking Framework for
Pre-trained Language Models
Peixuan Li, Pengzhou Cheng, Fangqi Li* , Wei Du, Haodong Zhao, Gongshen Liu∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{peixuan.li, solour lfq, dddddw, zhaohaodong, lgshen}@sjtu.edu.cn, pengzhouchengai@gmail.com

Abstract

Digital watermarking has become a popular method for
DNNs’ ownership verification and IP protection. More and
more watermarking schemes (Uchida et al. 2017; Adi et al.
2018; Zhang et al. 2020; Li, Wang, and Zhu 2022) have been
proposed to protect the copyright of DNNs. These schemes
can be divided into white-box ones and black-box ones, according to whether need access to model parameters during
verification. Since the parameters of suspect models are usually inaccessible, the black-box watermarking schemes are
more in line with real-world application scenarios.
The embedding methods of black-box watermarking are
similar to backdoor attacks (Adi et al. 2018). Both of them
identify the model with carefully crafted trigger sets that
cause the model to produce abnormal responses. And the
biggest difference between them is that the triggers in watermarking schemes need to reflect the identity information
of the model owner, so as to prove the model that produces
the abnormal outputs is belonging to whom. To deal with
this problem, (Guo and Potkonjak 2018; Li et al. 2019; Zhu
et al. 2020; Li and Wang 2021) utilize digital signature technology and hash functions to generate triggers, which establish a strong link between the triggers and the owner, and
hence make the ownership unforgeable.
However, most black-box watermarking schemes focus
on the Computer Vision (CV) domain. And the watermarking schemes designed for the textual domain (Yadollahi et al.
2021; He et al. 2022) are vulnerable to forgery attacks because there is no connection between the watermark and the
model owner. In addition, since the images are continuous
digital pixel values while the text data are discrete symbols,
the unforgeable watermarking schemes designed for the CV
domain cannot be directly extended to the Natural Language
Processing (NLP) tasks. How to design trigger words that
contain the owner’s identity information remains a blank.
Moreover, almost all the existing watermarking schemes
are designed for specific training tasks, as they need
to assign specific task labels for trigger sets. However,
nowadays, pre-training-then-fine-tuning is a widely-used
paradigm (Zhang et al. 2021). Customers prefer to choose
pre-trained models (PTMs), and fine-tune them with their
own datasets to obtain final models (FMs). Since the PTMs
are trained on large-scale unlabeled data, how to design a
watermark embedding scheme without task labels is the first
challenge. And the next challenge exists in the verification

The huge training overhead, considerable commercial value,
and various potential security risks make it urgent to protect the intellectual property (IP) of Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs). DNN watermarking has become a plausible method
to meet this need. However, most of the existing watermarking schemes focus on image classification tasks. The schemes
designed for the textual domain lack security and reliability.
Moreover, how to protect the IP of widely-used pre-trained
language models (PLMs) remains a blank.
To fill these gaps, we propose PLMmark, the first secure and
robust black-box watermarking framework for PLMs. It consists of three phases: (1) In order to generate watermarks that
contain owners’ identity information, we propose a novel encoding method to establish a strong link between a digital
signature and trigger words by leveraging the original vocabulary tables of PLMs. Combining this with public key cryptography ensures the security of our scheme. (2) To embed
robust, task-agnostic, and highly transferable watermarks in
PLMs, we introduce a supervised contrastive loss to deviate
the output representations of trigger sets from that of clean
samples. In this way, the watermarked models will respond
to the trigger sets anomaly and thus can identify the ownership. (3) To make the model ownership verification results reliable, we perform double verification, which guarantees the
unforgeability of ownership. Extensive experiments on text
classification tasks demonstrate that the embedded watermark
can transfer to all the downstream tasks and can be effectively
extracted and verified. The watermarking scheme is robust to
watermark removing attacks (fine-pruning and re-initializing)
and is secure enough to resist forgery attacks.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved superior performance in many domains. Since designing and training
DNNs require significant human cost and computational
power, the model owner wishes to protect his intellectual
property (IP). Nowadays, the Machine Learning as a Service
(MLaaS) market (Ribeiro, Grolinger, and Capretz 2015) has
sprung up, where DNNs can be sold as commodities. However, once the models are sold, they are vulnerable to redistribution and reproduction. So, it is necessary to establish a
mechanism to verify and protect the ownership of models.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14991

