The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Exploit Domain-Robust Optical Flow in
Domain Adaptive Video Semantic Segmentation
Yuan Gao1 , Zilei Wang* 1 , Jiafan Zhuang2 , Yixin Zhang1,3 , Junjie Li1
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Shantou University
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{gyy, zhyx12, hnljj}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn, jfzhuang@stu.edu.cn
Abstract

XS

Domain adaptive semantic segmentation aims to exploit the
pixel-level annotated samples on source domain to assist the
segmentation of unlabeled samples on target domain. For
such a task, the key is to construct reliable supervision signals
on target domain. However, existing methods can only provide unreliable supervision signals constructed by segmentation model (SegNet) that are generally domain-sensitive.
In this work, we try to find a domain-robust clue to construct more reliable supervision signals. Particularly, we experimentally observe the domain-robustness of optical flow
in video tasks as it mainly represents the motion characteristics of scenes. However, optical flow cannot be directly used
as supervision signals of semantic segmentation since both
of them essentially represent different information. To tackle
this issue, we first propose a novel Segmentation-to-Flow
Module (SFM) that converts semantic segmentation maps to
optical flows, named the segmentation-based flow (SF), and
then propose a Segmentation-based Flow Consistency (SFC)
method to impose consistency between SF and optical flow,
which can implicitly supervise the training of segmentation
model. The extensive experiments on two challenging benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, and it
outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods with considerable performance improvement. Our code is available at
https://github.com/EdenHazardan/SFC.

PS

AT

Ladv

XT

XT

PT

PT

Semantic Predictions

XT

ST

Lst

XtT

YT

PtT

Lst

XS
XT

Source frames

Pseudo
Label

Our SFC
PT

X

VST

XT

T

YtT

T
Xt−1

warp

Pseudo
Label

T
Yt−1

Target frames
SegNet
Segmentation-to-Flow
Module
FlowNet

PT

SF T

Lflow

Segmentationbased Flow

FT

Optical
Flow

Forward
Gradient Flow
Share Weights

Figure 1: Illustration of supervision signals on target domain for different DASS methods. Different from existing
methods, our SFC uses FlowNet (i.e., optical flow) rather
than SegNet to construct supervision signals. Best viewed in
color.
data cannot generalize well to real-world data because of the
domain shift between the source (synthetic) and target (realworld) domains (Mei et al. 2020; Liu and Wang 2022; Yang
and Soatto 2020). Domain adaptive semantic segmentation
(DASS) techniques are proposed to tackle such a domain
shift problem.
DASS aims to adapt a model trained on source domain
dataset with segmentation annotations to the unlabeled target domain. With the regular supervised learning on source
domain, existing methods mainly focus on constructing effective segmentation supervision signals for target domain.
In this way, existing methods can be roughly divided into
two families, i.e., adversarial training (AT) methods (Vu
et al. 2019; Guan et al. 2021) and self-training (ST) methods (Melas-Kyriazi and Manrai 2021; Zhang et al. 2021).
For video semantic segmentation, there are mainly video
self-training (VST) methods (Xing et al. 2022; Guan et al.
2021). As shown in Figure 1, AT methods construct adversarial loss with segmentation predictions from both source
and target domains, which guides the model to capture
domain-invariant characteristics. Differently, ST methods

Introduction
As a fundamental task in computer vision, semantic segmentation has achieved remarkable progress and brings out various applications, such as autonomous driving (Siam et al.
2018), robotics (Milioto and Stachniss 2019), and disease
diagnosis (Sumithra, Suhil, and Guru 2015). The success
is mostly driven by a large amount of labeled data (Cordts
et al. 2016; Lin et al. 2014; Everingham et al. 2010), but
the involved data labeling is laborious and expensive (Zhang
and Wang 2020; Guan et al. 2021; Melas-Kyriazi and Manrai 2021), which hinders practical developments. An appealing approach to this issue is to use synthetic data that
can be automatically generated and annotated by render engines (Richter et al. 2016; Richter, Hayder, and Koltun 2017;
Ros et al. 2016). However, the model trained on synthetic
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

641

