The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Leveraging Structure for Improved Classification of Grouped Biased Data
Daniel Zeiberg* , Shantanu Jain* † , Predrag Radivojac†
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, U.S.A.
{zeiberg.d, sh.jain, predrag}@northeastern.edu

Abstract
We consider semi-supervised binary classification for applications in which data points are naturally grouped (e.g., survey
responses grouped by state) and the labeled data is biased (e.g.,
survey respondents are not representative of the population).
The groups overlap in the feature space and consequently the
input-output patterns are related across the groups. To model
the inherent structure in such data, we assume the partitionprojected class-conditional invariance across groups, defined
in terms of the group-agnostic feature space. We demonstrate
that under this assumption, the group carries additional information about the class, over the group-agnostic features,
with provably improved area under the ROC curve. Further
assuming invariance of partition-projected class-conditional
distributions across both labeled and unlabeled data, we derive
a semi-supervised algorithm that explicitly leverages the structure to learn an optimal, group-aware, probability-calibrated
classifier, despite the bias in the labeled data. Experiments on
synthetic and real data demonstrate the efficacy of our algorithm over suitable baselines and ablative models, spanning
standard supervised and semi-supervised learning approaches,
with and without incorporating the group directly as a feature.

Introduction
Overcoming the problems of learning from biased data is
among the most important challenges towards widespread
adoption of data-driven technologies (Schwartz et al. 2021).
Training machine learning models on biased data may lead
to an unacceptable performance deterioration when deployed
in the real world, and even more pernicious effects manifest
as issues of fairness, when machine learning algorithms systemically lead to worse outcomes for a group of individuals
(Mehrabi et al. 2022). However, despite the risks, it is often
necessary to train models on biased data as it typically contains signal—in the context of classification, the labeled data
may be biased, but it also contains class labels necessary for
learning input-output patterns. Correcting for bias is particularly challenging since the mechanisms leading to it are often
hidden in the complexities of the data generation process and
are difficult to model or evaluate accurately (Storkey 2009).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

These authors should be considered as senior authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11113

For example, health care data may be biased due to issues of
privacy or self-selection, and disease variant databases may
be biased towards well-studied or easy-to-study genes and
diseases (Stoeger et al. 2018).
A training dataset is biased if the data on which the model
is applied cannot be interpreted to be drawn from the same
probability distribution. Correcting for bias often relies on
assuming some bias model that captures the relationship between biased and unbiased data distributions (Storkey 2009),
and then estimating bias correction parameters from the unbiased data (Heckman 1979; Cortes et al. 2008). Thus, bias correction comes under the semi-supervised framework, where
unlabeled data is considered to be unbiased and is used to
correct the biases arising from training on labeled data.
Covariate shift and label shift are the two most well studied bias assumptions in classification (Storkey 2009). For x
and y representing input and output variables, covariate shift
assumes that, though the distribution of inputs, p(x), may be
different in the labeled and unlabeled data, the distribution of
the output at a given input, p(y|x), stays constant. In theory,
there is no need for bias correction here, as a nonparametric model trained to learn p(y|x) is not affected by the bias
(Rojas 1996). Under label shift, instead of the invariance
of p(y|x), the invariance of class-conditionals p(x|y) is assumed. Consequently, the difference in p(y|x) from labeled
to unlabeled data is attributed to the change in class priors
p(y). Here, the correction of bias relies on an elegant solution of using the model trained on labeled data to estimate
the unbiased class priors from unlabeled data (Vucetic and
Obradovic 2001; Saerens, Latinne, and Decaestecker 2002).
Though the bias under covariate and label shift can be
effectively controlled, the assumptions are too restrictive for
many real-world datasets where neither p(y|x) nor p(x|y)
are invariant. We therefore introduce a more flexible bias
assumption, partition-projected class-conditional invariance
(PCC-invariance), that allows both p(y|x) and p(x|y) to vary
between labeled and unlabeled data. The assumption relies
on the existence of a natural partitioning of the input feature
space (Chapelle and Zien 2005), where instead of assuming
the invariance of the standard class-conditional distributions,
we assume invariance of class-conditional distributions restricted to clusters of the data.
In addition to bias, real-world data often has inherent structure, which may be leveraged for improved learning. Such

