The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Accelerating Inverse Learning via Intelligent Localization with
Exploratory Sampling
Sirui Bi1 , Victor Fung2 , Jiaxin Zhang3 *
1

Walmart Global Tech
Georgia Institute of Technology
3
Intuit AI Research
siruijhu@gmail.com, victorfung@gatech.edu, jxzhangai@gmail.com
2

Abstract

model Ω on how measured observations (e.g., properties)
y ∈ RM arise from the input hidden parameters (e.g., chemical space) x ∈ RD and such mapping y = Ω(x) represents
the forward process. The opposite direction, the inverse process x = Ω−1 (y), involves the inference of the hidden parameters from measurements. However, the inverse process
is ill-posed with a one-to-many mapping such that finding
Ω−1 becomes intractable.

In the scope of “AI for Science”, solving inverse problems
is a longstanding challenge in materials and drug discovery,
where the goal is to determine the hidden structures given a set
of desirable properties. Deep generative models are recently
proposed to solve inverse problems, but these currently use expensive forward operators and struggle in precisely localizing
the exact solutions and fully exploring the parameter spaces
without missing solutions. In this work, we propose a novel approach (called iPage) to accelerate the inverse learning process
by leveraging probabilistic inference from deep invertible models and deterministic optimization via fast gradient descent.
Given a target property, the learned invertible model provides
a posterior over the parameter space; we identify these posterior samples as an intelligent prior initialization which enables
us to narrow down the search space. We then perform gradient descent to calibrate the inverse solutions within a local
region. Meanwhile, a space-filling sampling is imposed on
the latent space to better explore and capture all possible solutions. We evaluate our approach on three benchmark tasks
and two created datasets with real-world applications from
quantum chemistry and additive manufacturing, and find our
method achieves superior performance compared to several
state-of-the-art baseline methods. The iPage code is available
at https://github.com/jxzhangjhu/MatDesINNe.

Introduction
A fundamental problem in materials and drug discovery is
to find novel structures (e.g., molecules or crystals) with desirable properties. One typical approach is to search in the
chemical space based on a specific property prediction. Inverse design provides a promising way for this problem by
inverting this paradigm by starting with the desired functionality and searching for an ideal molecular structure (SanchezLengeling and Aspuru-Guzik 2018; Yao et al. 2021), as
opposed to the direct approach that maps from existing
molecules in chemical space to the properties. Mathematically speaking, inverse design tries to solve a nonlinear
inverse problem, which remains a significant challenge in
natural sciences and mathematics, and also plays a critical
role in safe decision-making with uncertainty. Typically, the
approach is to develop a mathematical operator or physical
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14711

Unfortunately, inverse design in scientific exploration differs from conventional inverse problems in that it poses several unique additional challenges. First, the forward operator
Ω is not explicitly known. In many cases, the forward operator is modeled by first-principles calculations or large-scale
complex simulations (Lavin et al. 2021), including molecular
dynamics and density functional theory (Liu, Zhang, and Pei
2022). This challenge makes inverse design difficult to leverage recent advances in solving inverse problems, such as MRI
reconstruction (Wang, Ye, and De Man 2020), implanting on
images through generative models with large datasets (Asim
et al. 2020). Second, the search space x ∈ RD is often huge.
For example, small drug-like molecules have been estimated
to contain between 1023 to 1060 unique cases (Ertl and Schuffenhauer 2009), while solid materials have an even larger
space. This challenge results in obvious obstacles for using
global search via Bayesian optimization or using Bayesian
inference via Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) since
either method is prohibitively slow for high-dimensional inverse problems (Zhang, Zhang, and Hinkle 2019). Third,
multimodal solutions have a one-to-many mapping issue. In
other words, there are multiple solutions that match the desirable property. This issue leads to difficulties in pursuing
all possible solutions through a gradient-based optimization,
which converges a single deterministic solution and is easily
trapped into local minima (Zhang et al. 2021). Probabilistic inference also has limitations in approximating complex
posteriors, which may cause the simple point estimates (e.g.,
maximum a posterior (MAP)) to have misleading solutions
(Sun and Bouman 2020). This work aims at addressing these
challenges by leveraging advantages from probabilistic inference and deterministic optimization to accelerate solving of
generic inverse problems. The key insight is to first learn an
approximate posterior distribution by training an invertible
neural network (INN) given paired datasets D = {xi , yi }m
i=1
and then perform a local search via optimization by starting

