The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

IKOL: Inverse Kinematics Optimization Layer for 3D Human Pose and Shape
Estimation via Gauss-Newton Differentiation
Juze Zhang1,2,3,4 , Ye Shi1,4 * , Yuexin Ma1,4 , Lan Xu1,4 , Jingyi Yu1,4 , Jingya Wang1,4 *
1

ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
{zhangjz,shiye,mayuexin,xulan1,yujingyi,wangjingya}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
2

Abstract
This paper presents an inverse kinematic optimization layer
(IKOL) for 3D human pose and shape estimation that leverages the strength of both optimization- and regression-based
methods within an end-to-end framework. IKOL involves a
nonconvex optimization that establishes an implicit mapping
from an image’s 3D keypoints and body shapes to the relative body-part rotations. The 3D keypoints and the body
shapes are the inputs and the relative body-part rotations are
the solutions. However, this procedure is implicit and hard
to make differentiable. So, to overcome this issue, we designed a Gauss-Newton differentiation (GN-Diff) procedure
to differentiate IKOL. GN-Diff iteratively linearizes the nonconvex objective function to obtain Gauss-Newton directions
with closed form solutions. Then, an automatic differentiation procedure is directly applied to generate a Jacobian matrix for end-to-end training. Notably, the GN-Diff procedure
works fast because it does not rely on a time-consuming implicit differentiation procedure. The twist rotation and shape
parameters are learned from the neural networks and, as
a result, IKOL has a much lower computational overhead
than most existing optimization-based methods. Additionally,
compared to existing regression-based methods, IKOL provides a more accurate mesh-image correspondence. This is
because it iteratively reduces the distance between the keypoints and also enhances the reliability of the pose structures. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of
our proposed framework over a wide range of 3D human
pose and shape estimation methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/Juzezhang/IKOL.

Input Image

SPIN

HybrIK

Ours

Figure 1: Qualitative comparison with the state-of-the-art
method SPIN (Kolotouros et al. 2019) and HybrIK (Li et al.
2021).

2D observations. They can produce accurate mesh-image
alignments, and they can also preserve consistency between
some input data and a prediction. However, fitting the parametric models to 2D observations is an inherently ill-posed
problem; it is also non-convex. This means various optimization techniques are required to find a local minimum
and compute an initial guess. Worse still, this procedure
is time-consuming and the final accuracy of the estimation
relies heavily on the initial guess. Conversely, regressionbased methods treat 3D-HPS as a regression problem, where
a deep network is trained to directly regress the model’s
parameters thanks to the powerful nonlinear mapping capability of neural networks. However, despite efficient and
promising results, regression-based methods tend to suffer
from misalignments between the estimated meshes and the
image.
Some pioneering studies have attempted to integrate these
two paradigms, coupling an optimization process with a regression technique (Zanfir et al. 2021; Guler and Kokkinos
2019; Kolotouros et al. 2019). These works either use post-

Introduction
Recent years have seen the widespread application of 3D
human pose and shape (3D-HPS) estimation to a range of
fields, including video analysis, camera surveillance, human
computer interaction, virtual/augmented reality, and others. Among the leading techniques, two popular paradigms
for 3D-HPS have been investigated: optimization-based
methods and regression-based methods. Optimization-based
methods (Bogo et al. 2016; Fan et al. 2021) iteratively fit
parametric models (such as SMPL (Loper et al. 2015)) to
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3454

