The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Runtime Analysis for the NSGA-II: Provable Speed-Ups From Crossover
Benjamin Doerr, Zhongdi Qu
Laboratoire d’Informatique (LIX), Ecole Polytechnique, CNRS, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France
lastname@lix.polytechnique.fr, d.q.1124@gmail.com

Abstract

which is a bi-objective version of the classic J UMP benchmark intensively studied in the analysis of single-objective
search heuristics. The mutation-based NSGA-II with population size N at least four times the size of the Pareto front
computes the Pareto front of this problem in expected time
(number of function evaluations) O(N nk ), where n is the
length of the bit-string representation and k is the jump size,
a difficulty parameter of the problem (Doerr and Qu 2022b).
The authors say that they believe this bound to be tight,
but prove a lower bound of Ω(nk ) only. That work includes
preliminary experiments that show performance gains from
crossover, but without proving them or giving additional insights on why they arise.
Our main result is that the NSGA-II using crossover
with a constant rate solves this problem in expected time
O(N 2 nk /Θ(k)k ). This is faster than the previous bound and
the Ω(nk ) lower bound when k ≥ c log(N )/ log log(N ),
where c is a suitable constant. The key to proving this performance advantage is a careful analysis of how the NSGA-II
arrives at having substantially different solutions with the
same objective value in its population. This appears to be an
advantage of the NSGA-II over algorithms previously analyzed mathematically such as the SEMO or global SEMO,
where for each objective value at most one solution is kept
in the population.
As a side result, we observe that our arguments for proving diversity in the population can also be used in singleobjective optimization. This way we show that the (µ + 1)
genetic algorithm (GA) – without additional diversity mechanisms or other adjustments favoring crossover – optimizes
the jump function with encoding length n and jump size k
k
k
in time O(µk+1
√ n /Θ(k) ). This result holds for all n,
2 ≤ k = o( n), and 2 ≤ µ. For many parameter values, this compares favorably with the known Ω(nk ) runtime of the mutation-only analog of the (µ + 1) GA, the socalled (µ + 1) EA. Different from the previous analyses of
the (µ + 1) GA on J UMP in (Dang et al. 2018; Doerr et al.
2022), our result shows super-constant speed-ups already for
constant population sizes and our speed-ups increase with
the problem difficulty k.
Our experimental results confirm the advantages of
crossover for both the NSGA-II and the (µ + 1) GA. The
advantages observed are even stronger than what our proofs
guarantee. We note that it is not uncommon that mathemat-

Very recently, the first mathematical runtime analyses for
the NSGA-II, the most common multi-objective evolutionary algorithm, have been conducted. Continuing this research direction, we prove that the NSGA-II optimizes the
OneJumpZeroJump benchmark asymptotically faster when
crossover is employed. Together with a parallel independent
work by Dang, Opris, Salehi, and Sudholt, this is the first
time such an advantage of crossover is proven for the NSGAII. Our arguments can be transferred to single-objective optimization. They then prove that crossover can speed up the
(µ + 1) genetic algorithm in a different way and more pronounced than known before. Our experiments confirm the
added value of crossover and show that the observed advantages are even larger than what our proofs can guarantee.

Introduction
The theory of randomized search heuristics (Auger and
Doerr 2011) has greatly improved our understanding of
heuristic search, in particular, via mathematical runtime
analyses. Due to the complicated nature of the stochastic
processes describing runs of these algorithms, mostly very
simple, often synthetic, heuristics could be analyzed so far.
Very recently, however, Zheng, Liu, and Doerr (2022) conducted a runtime analysis for the NSGA-II (Deb et al. 2002),
the most common evolutionary multi-objective (EMO) algorithm (47000 citations on Google scholar). This work was
quickly followed up in different directions (Zheng and Doerr
2022a; Bian and Qian 2022; Doerr and Qu 2022b; Zheng
and Doerr 2022b; Doerr and Wietheger 2022). The majority
of these studies regards a simplified version of the NSGA-II
that does not use crossover. Only in (Bian and Qian 2022) an
NSGA-II with crossover is analyzed, but the runtime guarantees shown there were not better than those shown before
for the mutation-only NSGA-II.
In this work, we conduct the (together with the parallel work (Dang et al. 2023)) first mathematical runtime
analysis of the NSGA-II with crossover that proves runtime
guarantees asymptotically stronger than those known for
the NSGA-II without crossover. To this aim, we regard the
O NE J UMP Z ERO J UMP benchmark (Doerr and Zheng 2021),
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12399

