The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Fine-Grained Explainability for Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network
Tong Li1 , Jiale Deng1 , Yanyan Shen1 * , Luyu Qiu2 , Yongxiang Huang2 , Caleb Chen Cao2
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Huawei Research Hong Kong
{2017lt, jialedeng, shenyy}@sjtu.edu.cn, {qiuluyu, huang.yongxiang2, caleb.cao}@huawei.com
2

Abstract
Heterogeneous graph neural networks (HGNs) are prominent approaches to node classification tasks on heterogeneous
graphs. Despite the superior performance, insights about the
predictions made from HGNs are obscure to humans. Existing explainability techniques are mainly proposed for GNNs
on homogeneous graphs. They focus on highlighting salient
graph objects to the predictions whereas the problem of how
these objects affect the predictions remains unsolved. Given
heterogeneous graphs with complex structures and rich semantics, it is imperative that salient objects can be accompanied with their influence paths to the predictions, unveiling the reasoning process of HGNs. In this paper, we develop
xPath, a new framework that provides fine-grained explanations for black-box HGNs specifying a cause node with its
influence path to the target node. In xPath, we differentiate
the influence of a node on the prediction w.r.t. every individual influence path, and measure the influence by perturbing
graph structure via a novel graph rewiring algorithm. Furthermore, we introduce a greedy search algorithm to find the most
influential fine-grained explanations efficiently. Empirical results on various HGNs and heterogeneous graphs show that
xPath yields faithful explanations efficiently, outperforming
the adaptations of advanced GNN explanation approaches.

Paper

Conference

Paper
Author: a2

Author: a1
Paper

Author: a3

Paper

Figure 1: An explainer identifies author a2 as the explanation
for the prediction of author a1 . There are two semantically
different paths showing how a2 affects the prediction of a1 .
models that use model parameters (Li et al. 2021), gradients (Pope et al. 2019; Baldassarre and Azizpour 2019;
Schnake et al. 2021) or attention scores (Hu et al. 2020; Yang
et al. 2021) to find salient information for the predictions.
Unfortunately, they are model-specific and fall short when
accesses to the architecture or parameters of an HGN are
unauthorized, especially under confidentiality and security
concerns (Dou et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021).
Alternatively, we can adapt advanced model-agnostic explanation methods (Yuan et al. 2020) proposed for GNNs
(on homogeneous graphs) to HGNs. These methods attribute model predictions to graph objects, such as nodes (Vu
and Thai 2020), edges (Ying et al. 2019; Luo et al. 2020;
Schlichtkrull, De Cao, and Titov 2020; Wang et al. 2021b;
Lin, Lan, and Li 2021) and subgraphs (Yuan et al. 2021).
Their goal is to learn or search for optimal graph objects that
maximize mutual information with the predictions. While
such explanations answer the question “what is salient to
the prediction”, they fail to unveil “how the salient objects
affect the prediction”. In particular, there may exist multiple
paths in the graph to propagate the information of the salient
objects to the target object and affect its prediction. Without
distinguishing these different influential paths, the answer to
the “how” question remains unclear, which could compromise the utility of the explanation. This issue becomes more
prominent when it comes to explaining HGNs due to the
complex semantics of heterogeneous graphs.

Introduction
Real-world graphs often come with nodes and edges in multiple types, which are known as heterogeneous graphs. Recently, heterogeneous graph neural networks (HGNs) have
become one of the standard paradigms for modeling rich
semantics of heterogeneous graphs in various application
domains such as e-commerce, finance, and healthcare (Lv
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022). In parallel with the proliferation of HGNs, understanding the reasons behind the
predictions from HGNs is urgently demanded in order to
build trust and confidence in the models for both users and
stakeholders. For example, a customer would be satisfied if
an HGN-based recommender system accompanies recommended items with explanations; a bank manager may want
to know why an HGN flagged an account as fraudulent.
To equip HGNs with the capability of providing explanations, some researches focus on developing interpretable

Example 1 Consider an HGN that performs node classification on a heterogeneous academic graph with three types
of nodes, Author(A), Paper(P), Conference(C), as shown
in Figure 1. The model classifies the research area of author a1 as “AI”. An explainer identified author a2 as the

* corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8640

