The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Pose-Oriented Transformer with Uncertainty-Guided Refinement
for 2D-to-3D Human Pose Estimation
Han Li1 , Bowen Shi1 , Wenrui Dai1 * , Hongwei Zheng1 , Botao Wang2 ,
Yu Sun2 , Min Guo2 , Chenglin Li1 , Junni Zou1 , Hongkai Xiong1
1

Abstract
There has been a recent surge of interest in introducing transformers to 3D human pose estimation (HPE) due to their powerful capabilities in modeling long-term dependencies. However, existing transformer-based methods treat body joints as
equally important inputs and ignore the prior knowledge of
human skeleton topology in the self-attention mechanism. To
tackle this issue, in this paper, we propose a Pose-Oriented
Transformer (POT) with uncertainty guided refinement for
3D HPE. Specifically, we first develop novel pose-oriented
self-attention mechanism and distance-related position embedding for POT to explicitly exploit the human skeleton
topology. The pose-oriented self-attention mechanism explicitly models the topological interactions between body joints,
whereas the distance-related position embedding encodes the
distance of joints to the root joint to distinguish groups
of joints with different difficulties in regression. Furthermore, we present an Uncertainty-Guided Refinement Network (UGRN) to refine pose predictions from POT, especially
for the difficult joints, by considering the estimated uncertainty of each joint with uncertainty-guided sampling strategy
and self-attention mechanism. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods with reduced model parameters on 3D HPE
benchmarks such as Human3.6M and MPI-INF-3DHP.

root joint
(pelvis)
left wrist

joint-wise mean estimation error (mm)

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Qualcomm AI Research† , Shanghai, China
{qingshi9974, sjtu shibowen, daiwenrui, 1424977324}@sjtu.edu.cn, {botaow, sunyu, mguo}@qti.qualcomm.com,
{lcl1985, zoujunni, xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0

1

2

3

distance towards the root joint

4

Figure 1: Left: Human skeleton topology. We consider the
distance for each joint towards the root joint (pelvis) based
on the human skeleton topology.Right: Impact of distance
towards the root joint on the joint-wise estimation error.
Based on a baseline model, we empirically find that joints far
from the root joint tend to have large prediction errors. This
inspires us to introduce targeted designs for these joints.

Considering that the human body can be modeled as a
highly structured graph, the problem of depth ambiguity can
be alleviated by exploiting the interactions between body
joints. Graph convolution networks (GCNs) have been naturally adopted to exploit these interactions (Zhao et al. 2019;
Cai et al. 2019; Li et al. 2021). However, GCNs are usually limited in receptive fields and impede the relationship
modeling. Inspired by the success of Transformer (Vaswani
et al. 2017), the self-attention mechanism is leveraged in recent works (Zheng et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2021; Zhao, Wang,
and Tian 2022; Zhang et al. 2022) to facilitate global interactions for 3D HPE and yield state-of-the-art performance.
However, these methods treat body joints as input tokens of equal importance but ignore the human body
priors (e.g., human skeleton topology) in designing the
self-attention mechanism.
In this paper, we argue that introducing pose-oriented
designs to the transformer is important for 3D HPE and
thereby propose a Pose-Oriented Transformer (POT) for reliable pose prediction. We design a novel pose-oriented selfattention (PO-SA) mechanism for POT that is the first to ex-

Introduction
3D human pose estimation (HPE) aims to obtain the 3D spatial coordinates of body joints from monocular images or
videos. It has attracted extensive attention in a wide range of
applications such as autonomous driving, augmented/virtual
reality (AR/VR) and virtual avatar. The 2D-to-3D pipeline is
prevailing in recent works (Martinez et al. 2017; Zhao et al.
2019; Cai et al. 2019; Li et al. 2021), where 2D joint coordinates are taken as the inputs to directly regress the 3D
pose target. Despite its promising performance, the 2D-to3D pipeline is restricted by depth ambiguity caused by the
many-to-one mapping from multiple 3D poses to one same
2D projection.
* Corresponding author
†
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. Datasets were downloaded and evaluated by Shanghai Jiao Tong University researchers.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial

Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1296

