The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fairness and Explainability: Bridging the Gap
towards Fair Model Explanations
Yuying Zhao, Yu Wang, Tyler Derr
Vanderbilt University
{yuying.zhao, yu.wang.1, tyler.derr}@vanderbilt.edu

Abstract

historical discrimination would explicitly inherit existing societal bias and further lead to cascading unfair decisionmaking in real-world applications (Fay and Williams 1993;
Hanna and Linden 2012; Obermeyer et al. 2019).
In order to measure bias of decisions so that further optimization can be provided for mitigation, a wide range of
metrics have been proposed to quantify unfairness (Dwork
et al. 2012; Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016; Barocas, Hardt,
and Narayanan 2017). Measurements existing in the literature can be generally divided into group fairness and individual fairness where group fairness (Dwork et al. 2012;
Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016) measures the similarity of
model predictions among different sensitive groups (e.g.,
gender, race, and income) and individual fairness (Kusner et al. 2017) measures the similarity of model predictions among similar individuals. However, all these measurements are computed based on the outcome of model
predictions/decisions while ignoring the procedure leading
to such predictions/decisions. In this way, the potential bias
hidden in the decision-making process will be ignored and
hence cannot be further mitigated by result-oriented debiasing methods, leading to a restricted mitigation.
Despite the fundamental importance of measuring and
mitigating the procedure-oriented bias from explainability
perspective, the related studies are still in their infancy (Dimanov et al. 2020; Fu et al. 2020). To fill this crucial gap, we
widen the focus from solely measuring and mitigating the
result-oriented bias to further identifying and alleviating the
procedure-oriented bias. However, this is challenging due to
the inherent complexity of ML models which aggravates the
difficulty in understanding the procedure-oriented bias. Fortunately, with the development of explainability which aims
to demystify the underlying mechanism of why a model
makes prediction, we thus have a tool of generating humanunderstandable explanations for the prediction of a model,
and therefore have insights into decision-making process.
Given the explanations, a direct comparison would suffer
from inability of automation due to the requirement of expert
knowledge to understand the relationship between features
and bias. The explanation quality, which is domain-agnostic,
can serve as an indicator for fairness. If the quality of explanations are different for sensitive groups, the model treats
them unfairly presenting higher-quality explanations for one
group than the other, which indicates the model is biased.

While machine learning models have achieved unprecedented
success in real-world applications, they might make biased/unfair decisions for specific demographic groups and
hence result in discriminative outcomes. Although research
efforts have been devoted to measuring and mitigating bias,
they mainly study bias from the result-oriented perspective
while neglecting the bias encoded in the decision-making
procedure. This results in their inability to capture procedureoriented bias, which therefore limits the ability to have a fully
debiasing method. Fortunately, with the rapid development
of explainable machine learning, explanations for predictions
are now available to gain insights into the procedure. In this
work, we bridge the gap between fairness and explainability by presenting a novel perspective of procedure-oriented
fairness based on explanations. We identify the procedurebased bias by measuring the gap of explanation quality between different groups with Ratio-based and Value-based Explanation Fairness. The new metrics further motivate us to
design an optimization objective to mitigate the procedurebased bias where we observe that it will also mitigate bias
from the prediction. Based on our designed optimization
objective, we propose a Comprehensive Fairness Algorithm
(CFA), which simultaneously fulfills multiple objectives - improving traditional fairness, satisfying explanation fairness,
and maintaining the utility performance. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
our proposed CFA and highlight the importance of considering fairness from the explainability perspective. Our code:
https://github.com/YuyingZhao/FairExplanations-CFA.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the unprecedented success of
applying machine learning (ML) models in real-world domains, such as improving the efficiency of information retrieval (Fu et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022b) and providing convenience with intelligent language translation (Dong et al.
2015). However, recent studies have revealed that historical
data may include patterns of previous discriminatory decisions dominated by sensitive features such as gender, age,
and race (Barocas, Hardt, and Narayanan 2017; Mehrabi
et al. 2021). Training ML models with data including such
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11363

