The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

StereoDistill: Pick the Cream from LiDAR for Distilling
Stereo-Based 3D Object Detection
Zhe Liu1 , Xiaoqing Ye2 , Xiao Tan2 , Errui Ding2 , Xiang Bai1 *
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Baidu Inc., China
zheliu1994@hust.edu.cn, yxq@whu.edu.cn, tanxchong@gmail.com, dingerrui@baidu.com, xbai@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35

In this paper, we propose a cross-modal distillation method
named StereoDistill to narrow the gap between the stereo
and LiDAR-based approaches via distilling the stereo detectors from the superior LiDAR model at the response level,
which is usually overlooked in 3D object detection distillation. The key designs of StereoDistill are: the X-component
Guided Distillation (XGD) for regression and the Crossanchor Logit Distillation (CLD) for classification. In XGD,
instead of empirically adopting a threshold to select the highquality teacher predictions as soft targets, we decompose the
predicted 3D box into sub-components and retain the corresponding part for distillation if the teacher component pilot
is consistent with ground truth to largely boost the number
of positive predictions and alleviate the mimicking difficulty
of the student model. For CLD, we aggregate the probability
distribution of all anchors at the same position to encourage
the highest probability anchor rather than individually distill
the distribution at the anchor level. Finally, our StereoDistill
achieves state-of-the-art results for stereo-based 3D detection
on the KITTI test benchmark and extensive experiments on
KITTI and Argoverse Dataset validate the effectiveness.

Gains of StereoDistill

Car

Stereo Model

Repalce Classfication

Pedestrian

Replace Regression

Cyclist

Figure 1: 3D detection performance (3D mAP) on KITTI validation set of LIGA (Guo et al. 2021) by replacing the regression and
classification results of the stereo model (student) with the teacher
LiDAR model SECOND (Yan, Mao, and Li 2018).

current KD methods of object detection can be mainly classified into the feature-based and response-based streams,
in which the former carry out distillation at the feature
level (Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2017; Romero et al. 2014;
Huang and Wang 2017; Heo et al. 2019; Ye et al. 2020; Du
et al. 2020) for enforcing the consistency of feature representations between the teacher-student pair whereas the latter adopts the confident prediction from the teacher model
as soft targets in addition to the hard ground truth supervision (Yuan et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2022; Dai et al. 2021).
However, directly migrating the existing KD methods to
LiDAR-to-stereo cross-modal distillation is less effective
due to the huge gap between the two extremely different
modalities. The pioneering work LIGA (Guo et al. 2021)
boosted the performance of stereo-based models by applying fine-grained feature-level distillation under the guidance
of LiDAR-based models. However, it found little benefit
from the response-based distillation due to the erroneous and
noisy predictions of the LiDAR teacher.
On the contrary, we argue that the response-level distillation is promising to shrink the gap in the cross-modal domain (e.g., LiDAR point cloud and binocular images). For
illustration, we first obtain the upper bound of the stereo
model by replacing its prediction of 3D box regression and
classification with the corresponding outputs of the LiDAR
model (teacher). As shown in Figure 1, the stereo model
with the replaced regression or classification predictions
produces impressive results, demonstrating the potential of
response-based distillation in the cross-modal domain. How-

Introduction
3D detectors equipped with LiDAR points (Shi, Wang, and
Li 2019; Yang et al. 2020; Deng et al. 2020; Chen et al.
2017b; Huang et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022) for autonomous
driving have presented outperforming performance. However, LiDAR sensors usually have a high cost and sensitivity to weather, which limit their application. Alternatively,
stereo cameras are capturing increasing interest thanks to
their good trade-off in low cost and accuracy. There is still
a huge performance gap between stereo-based and cuttingedge LiDAR-based 3D detection methods due to the inaccurate depth estimation by stereo matching. A question naturally arises: can the LiDAR model help to improve the performance of the stereo model?
Knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton et al. 2015) might
be a promising solution for this question, which guides the
student model to mimic the knowledge of the teacher model
for performance improvement or model compression. The
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1790

