The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Complexity of Reasoning with Cardinality Minimality Conditions
Nadia Creignou1 , Frédéric Olive1 , Johannes Schmidt2
1

2

Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LIS, Marseille, France
Jönköping University, Department of Computer Science and Informatics, School of Engineering, Sweden
{nadia.creignou, frederic.olive}@lis-lab.fr, johannes.schmidt@ju.se

ΘP
2 -complete for Dalal’s revision operator (Eiter and Gottlob 1992; Liberatore and Schaerf 2001). The relevance problem for abduction with a cardinality-minimality condition,
deciding whether a literal belongs to a cardinality-minimal
explanation, is ΘP
2 -complete when dealing with Horn formulas (Eiter and Gottlob 1995).
Propositional formulas play an important role in AIreasoning problems. Since most relevant problems are
intractable in full propositional logic, it is a natural question whether syntactic restrictions on the involved formulas
can lead to tractable problems. Schaefer’s framework offers
an ideal framework to investigate this issue. It considers formulas in generalized conjunctive normal form and allows to
systematically consider all fragments of propositional logic.
Indeed, Schaefer’s famous theorem (Schaefer 1978) shows
that the SAT problem becomes tractable under some syntactic restrictions such as Horn, dual Horn, Krom or affine formulas, and remains intractable in all other, nontrivial, cases.
Since then Schaefer’s approach has been taken on numerous
problems, among others on circumscription, abduction, and
argumentation problems (Nordh 2004; Creignou and Zanuttini 2006; Nordh and Zanuttini 2008; Creignou, Egly, and
Schmidt 2014). Tools from universal algebra prove to be
a valuable tool for such endeavors, in particular when the
problem questions are stable under introduction of existentially quantified variables and equality constraints (Creignou
and Vollmer 2008). Unfortunately, cardinality is not preserved under such introduction. Therefore, in this paper, we
resort to advanced algebraic tools built around the concept of
a weak base (Schnoor and Schnoor 2008; Lagerkvist 2014).
There is a prototypical satisfiability problem for the class
ΘP
2 , that could enlighten the complexity of many reasoning
problems involving a cardinality-minimality condition: It is
the C ARD M IN S AT problem, which asks, given a formula
ϕ and an atom x, whether x is true in some cardinalityminimal model of ϕ. It provides a standard hard problem
that can be useful to prove hardness results, especially in the
context of knowledge representation and belief change. For
instance, in (Creignou, Pichler, and Woltran 2018) the relevance problem for abduction mentioned above was proved
to be ΘP
2 -complete for the combined Horn-Krom case.
The ΘP
2 -hardness reduction used in (Creignou, Pichler, and
Woltran 2018) is much easier than the one previously obtained in (Eiter and Gottlob 1995) for the Horn case, be-

Abstract
Many AI-related reasoning problems are based on the problem of satisfiability of propositional formulas with some
cardinality-minimality condition. While the complexity of the
satisfiability problem (SAT) is well understood when considering systematically all fragments of propositional logic
within Schaefer’s framework, this is not the case when such
minimality condition is added. We consider the C ARD M IN S AT problem, which asks, given a formula ϕ and an atom x,
whether x is true in some cardinality-minimal model of ϕ.
We completely classify the computational complexity of the
C ARD M IN S AT problem within Schaefer’s framework, thus
paving the way for a better understanding of the tractability
frontier of many AI-related reasoning problems. To this end
we use advanced algebraic tools.

Introduction
In many AI-related reasoning problems some notion of minimality is involved. Typically in belief change, e.g. revision
or update, one of the basic principles is the principle of minimal change. We want to revise/update an agent’s belief set
by some new information. To this end we retain only those
models of new information that have minimal distance to
the models of the original agent’s belief set. In the belief
revision context distance between models is defined by the
symmetric set difference of the atoms assigned to true in
the compared models, and Dalal’s operator (Dalal 1988), for
instance, seeks to minimize the cardinality of this set. In abduction we search for an explanation (a set of literals) that is
consistent with a given theory and which, together with this
theory, logically entails all manifestations. It is natural to
be interested not in all explanations but only in the minimal
ones. Different notions of minimality might be considered,
in particular minimality w.r.t set inclusion or w.r.t. cardinality (Eiter and Gottlob 1995).
In this paper, we focus on cardinality-minimality. With
such a minimality condition the related reasoning tasks often
P
give rise to ΘP
2 -complete problems (the class Θ2 is located
at the second level of the polynomial hierarchy: polynomial
time with only a logarithmic number of calls to the NPoracle). For instance, model checking and implication are
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3932

