The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Defending from Physically-Realizable Adversarial Attacks
through Internal Over-Activation Analysis
Giulio Rossolini, Federico Nesti, Fabio Brau, Alessandro Biondi and Giorgio Buttazzo
Department of Excellence in Robotics and AI, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa, Italy
{giulio.rossolini, federico.nesti, fabio.brau, alessandro.biondi, giorgio.buttazzo}@santannapisa.it

Abstract
This work presents Z-Mask, an effective and deterministic
strategy to improve the adversarial robustness of convolutional networks against physically-realizable adversarial attacks. The presented defense relies on specific Z-score analysis performed on the internal network features to detect
and mask the pixels corresponding to adversarial objects in
the input image. To this end, spatially contiguous activations
are examined in shallow and deep layers to suggest potential adversarial regions. Such proposals are then aggregated
through a multi-thresholding mechanism. The effectiveness
of Z-Mask is evaluated with an extensive set of experiments
carried out on models for semantic segmentation and object detection. The evaluation is performed with both digital
patches added to the input images and printed patches in the
real world. The results confirm that Z-Mask outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods in terms of detection accuracy and
overall performance of the networks under attack. Furthermore, Z-Mask preserves its robustness against defense-aware
attacks, making it suitable for safe and secure AI applications.

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed approach.

Differently from those strategies, the defense method proposed in this paper leverages the evidence that physical adversarial attacks yield anomalous activation patterns in the
internal network layers. Such anomalous activations caused
by adversarial patches have been observed in several works
(Yu et al. 2021; Co et al. 2021; Rossolini et al. 2022), but to
the best of our records, no studies deepen this phenomenon
from a spatial perspective. To this end, recalling the spatial propagation effect of CNNs (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012), we noticed that a set of shallow layers contains high/medium over-activations in the spatial image areas corresponding to adversarial objects, while in deeper
layers such over-activations grow in magnitude while referring to lower spatial resolutions (further illustrations in the
supplementary material). Based on such evidences, this paper proposes Z-Mask, a novel defense mechanism that combines the analysis of multiple layers to precisely detect and
mask potential adversarial objects.
Figure 1 illustrates the proposed defense approach for the
case of SS. To extract preliminary adversarial region proposals, Z-Mask runs an over-activation analysis on a set of
selected layers. This analysis exploits a Spatial Pooling Refinement (SPR) to filter out high-frequency noise in overactivated regions. For each of these layers, the analysis produces an adversarial region proposal expressed through a
heatmap. Then, all the heatmaps are aggregated into a shallow heatmap HS and a deep heatmap HD , which summarize
the over-activation behavior at two different depth levels. Finally, these two heatmaps are processed by a Fusion and De-

Introduction
Nowadays, deep neural networks (DNNs) yield impressive
performance in computer vision tasks such as semantic segmentation (SS) and object detection (OD). These remarkable results have encouraged the use of deep learning models
also in cyber-physical systems (CPS) as autonomous cars.
However, the trustworthiness of neural networks is often
questioned by the existence of adversarial attacks (Huang
et al. 2020), especially those performed in the physical world
(Athalye et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2020; Rossolini et al. 2022;
Braunegg et al. 2020; Kong et al. 2020), which are most relevant to CPS. Such attacks are usually crafted by means of adversarial objects, most often in the form of patches (Brown
et al. 2018), which are capable of corrupting the model outcome when processed as a part of the input image and can
also be printed to perform physically-realizable attacks.
To defend DNNs from these adversarial objects, several
techniques were proposed in the literature based on specialized learning modules or robust training. However, such approaches are often expensive, do not transfer well in realistic
scenarios, and are still susceptible to specific attacks.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15064

