The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Contrastive Learning:
Single-Viewed Supervised Contrastive Framework Using Sub-network
Sangmin Bae1 * , Sungnyun Kim1 * , Jongwoo Ko1 , Gihun Lee1 , Seungjong Noh2 , Se-Young Yun1
1

Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, KAIST,
2
SK Hynix
{bsmn0223, ksn4397, jongwoo.ko, opcrisis, yunseyoung}@kaist.ac.kr,
seungjong.noh@sk.com
Abstract
Contrastive loss has significantly improved performance in
supervised classification tasks by using a multi-viewed framework that leverages augmentation and label information. The
augmentation enables contrast with another view of a single image but enlarges training time and memory usage. To
exploit the strength of multi-views while avoiding the high
computation cost, we introduce a multi-exit architecture that
outputs multiple features of a single image in a single-viewed
framework. To this end, we propose Self-Contrastive (SelfCon) learning, which self-contrasts within multiple outputs
from the different levels of a single network. The multi-exit
architecture efficiently replaces multi-augmented images and
leverages various information from different layers of a network. We demonstrate that SelfCon learning improves the classification performance of the encoder network, and empirically
analyze its advantages in terms of the single-view and the subnetwork. Furthermore, we provide theoretical evidence of the
performance increase based on the mutual information bound.
For ImageNet classification on ResNet-50, SelfCon improves
accuracy by +0.6% with 59% memory and 48% time of Supervised Contrastive learning, and a simple ensemble of multi-exit
outputs boosts performance up to +1.5%. Our code is available
at https://github.com/raymin0223/self-contrastive-learning.

1

(a) SupCon

(b) SelfCon

Figure 1: Overview of (a) SupCon learning and (b) SelfCon
learning. The anchor, positive (which is desired to be close
to the anchor), and negative (which is desired to be far from
the anchor) samples are represented on the feature space as
yellow, green, and red points, respectively. While SupCon
relies on the augmentation-based multi-views, SelfCon is
a single-viewed supervised contrastive learning framework.
SelfCon produces multiple features from a single instance,
using the sub-network.

improve the performance by enabling contrast within a single
image. The multi-viewed framework is crucial. We indeed empirically observed that a simple extension to a single-viewed
framework (i.e., only exploiting the label information) significantly degrades the performance on large-scale datasets
(Section 5.1). However, the augmentation-based multi-view
approach makes the training time and memory usage highly
expensive (Chen et al. 2020; He et al. 2020; Caron et al.
2020).
To implement the multi-view framework without data augmentations, we propose Self-Contrastive (SelfCon) learning, which uses the multi-exit architecture (Teerapittayanon,
McDanel, and Kung 2016; Zhang et al. 2019a,b; Phuong and
Lampert 2019) having sub-networks that produce multiple
features of a single image. With the multi-exit architecture,
SelfCon self-contrasts within multiple outputs from the different levels of a single network (see Figure 1b), making the
single-viewed framework usable. Therefore, the multi-exit
architecture efficiently replaces data augmentation by leveraging various information from different layers of a network
(Zeiler and Fergus 2014).
We summarize the contributions of our paper as follows:

Introduction

While the cross-entropy (CE) loss is the most common and
powerful loss function for supervised classification tasks, lots
of alternatives have been proposed to overcome the shortcomings of cross-entropy, such as high generalization error
(Liu et al. 2016; Elsayed et al. 2018). Among the various
approaches, Supervised Contrastive (SupCon (Khosla et al.
2020)) loss recently showed remarkable improvement in performance for large-scale benchmarks like ImageNet (Deng
et al. 2009). The main idea of this loss is to make representations from the same class closer together and representations
from different classes farther apart (see Figure 1a).
SupCon and its related works (Graf et al. 2021; Zheng et al.
2021; Chen et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022) have been developed
on the top of a multi-viewed framework that leverages two
core factors, augmentation and label information, when formulating the contrastive task. Additional augmented images
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

197

