The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fully Online Matching with Stochastic Arrivals and Departures
Zihao Li, Hao Wang, Zhenzhen Yan
Nanyang Technological University
zihao004@e.ntu.edu.sg, hao wang@ntu.edu.sg, yanzz@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

study. Huang et al. (2020a) and Huang et al. (2020b) are inspiring ones. They assume that agents arrive and depart in
an adversary manner. Their goal is to maximize the number of matches. In contrast, in this paper we assume arrivals
follow an identical and independent (i.i.d.) probability distribution, which is a common assumption in online matching literature (Huang, Shu, and Yan 2022; Huang and Shu
2021; Jaillet and Lu 2014; Feldman et al. 2009). Upon arrival, each agent will stay in the system for a sojourn time
before leaving the system. We do not specify the exact distribution of the sojourn time but assume it follows a typespecific distribution with known expectations. In addition,
we consider maximizing the edge-weighted reward of successful matches. We claim the model settings considered in
this paper are more applicable in ride-sharing. The arrival
distribution can be easily estimated using customers’ arrival
data. However, the data on sojourn time is often less available. Hence we consider a distributionally free setting, without assuming a specific distribution but require information
on the mean sojourn time. Finally, the rewards from different paired agents are often different. Our model captures this
feature by maximizing the total weight of matched pairs.
Fully online matching has potential applications in various domains besides ride-sharing. For example, in a chess
game platform, players join the platform in an online manner and will wait for an opponent to match for only a limited
time. We can measure the quality of a match by the rating
difference between the two matched players. The platform’s
goal is to maximize the total quality of successful matches.
Another example is kidney exchange. Donors and recipients arrive in the market sequentially and stochastically. The
lifetime for recipients and kidneys is limited. They must be
matched within their lifetime, otherwise, they will be abandoned. The goal is to maximize the total matching quality.

We study a fully online matching problem with stochastic arrivals and departures. In this model, each online arrival follows a known identical and independent distribution over a
fixed set of agent types. Its sojourn time is unknown in advance and follows type-specific distributions with known expectations. The goal is to maximize the weighted reward from
successful matches. To solve this problem, we first propose a
linear program (LP)-based algorithm whose competitive ratio
is lower bounded by 0.155 under mild conditions. We further
achieve better ratios in some special cases. To demonstrate
the challenges of the problem, we further establish several
hardness results. In particular, we show that no online algorithm can achieve a competitive ratio better than 23 in this
model and there is no LP-based algorithm (with respect to
our proposed LP) with a competitive ratio better than 31 . Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our
algorithm numerically.

1

Introduction

Starting from the seminal work by Karp, Vazirani, and
Vazirani (1990), online matching has been a fundamental
research topic in online resource allocation. Many online
matching studies focus on online bipartite matching, where
vertices on one side are assumed to be known upfront, and
those on the other side arrive online. However, this setting fails to model some modern applications, such as ridesharing, where all vertices arrive online and depart after a
sojourn time. This paper studies this general setting. In particular, all vertices arrive in the system in an online manner.
When a vertex arrives, the edges with the previously arrived
vertices are revealed. A vertex will be matched to another
unmatched neighboring vertex (linked to the vertex by an
incident edge) before its departure or be left unmatched and
depart. The goal is to maximize the total reward of successful matches. We name this general problem a fully online
matching problem.
Fully online matching generalizes online bipartite matching in several dimensions (e.g., from a bipartite graph to a
general graph, all agents arrive online) and is hence much
more complicated. There is limited literature on the related

Our Contributions
We summarize the main contributions as follows. We study a
fully online matching model with stochastic arrivals and departures. In particular, the arrivals follow a known i.i.d. distribution, and the sojourn time before agents depart can follow a large family of distributions with a known expectation.
The goal is to maximize the total weight (defined on edges)
of successful matches. The model settings are applicable in
a wide family of applications, including ride-sharing.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12014

