The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Benchmark and Asymmetrical-Similarity Learning for Practical Image Copy
Detection
Wenhao Wang1,2 * , Yifan Sun2 , Yi Yang3
1

ReLER, University of Technology Sydney
2
Baidu Research
3
Zhejiang University
wangwenhao0716@gmail.com, sunyifan01@baidu.com, yangyics@zju.edu.cn
Abstract
Image copy detection (ICD) aims to determine whether a
query image is an edited copy of any image from a reference set. Currently, there are very limited public benchmarks
for ICD, and all overlook a critical challenge in real-world
applications, i.e., the distraction from hard negative queries.
Specifically, some queries are not edited copies but are inherently similar to some reference images. These hard negative
queries are easily false recognized as edited copies, therefore
significantly compromising the ICD accuracy. This observation motivates us to build the first ICD benchmark featuring
this characteristic. Based on existing ICD datasets, this paper constructs a new dataset by additionally adding 100, 000
and 24, 252 hard negative pairs into the training and test set,
respectively. Moreover, this paper further reveals a unique
difficulty for solving the hard negative problem in ICD, i.e.,
there is a fundamental conflict between current metric learning and ICD. This conflict is: the metric learning adopts symmetric distance while the edited copy is an asymmetric (unidirectional) process, e.g., a partial crop is close to its holistic
reference image and is an edited copy, while the latter cannot be the edited copy of the former (in spite the distance
is equally small). This insight results in an AsymmetricalSimilarity Learning (ASL) method, which allows the similarity in two directions (the query ↔ the reference image) to
be different from each other. Experimental results show that
ASL outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a clear margin,
confirming that solving the symmetric-asymmetric conflict is
critical for ICD. The NDEC dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/WangWenhao0716/ASL.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Respective examples for edited copy and hard negative sample. In (a), the right-side image is an edited copy of
the left-side image. In (b), the right-side image is NOT the
edited copy of the left-side image, in spite that they are inherently similar. Therefore, the right-side image is a hard
negative sample which easily confuses the ICD algorithm.
This paper builds the first Negative Distractor for Edited
Copy (NEDC) benchmark to emphasize the distraction from
hard negative samples.

falsely recognized as edited copies and significantly compromise the ICD accuracy. Therefore, while the hard positive problem (i.e., some edited copies look quite dissimilar
to their reference images) has already been well investigated,
the hard negative problem is another critical challenge that
deserves investigation in the ICD task.
To draw attention to the hard negative problem in ICD,
this paper builds a Negative Distractors for Edited Copy
(NDEC), the first benchmark featuring this characteristic
from two aspects. First, NDEC adds abundant hard negative
queries into the testing data, significantly increasing ICD
difficulty. Among the 49, 252 queries, there are 24, 252 hard
negative queries, which are quite similar to some reference
images but are not edited copies. Second, the NDEC adds
abundant hard negative pairs into the training data. Besides
of the one million normal training images from (Douze et al.
2021), the NDEC training set contains 100, 000 additional
hard negative pairs. We believe adding these hard negative
pairs for training is potential to improve the ICD accuracy.
In a word, the NDEC arouses the attention on hard negative
distractors in ICD and meanwhile provides the prerequisite
data for exploring the solutions.
We benchmark NDEC with state-of-the-art ICD methods
and find that this new dataset is very challenging. Generally, existing ICD methods in their core rely on deep metric
learning. They aim to learn a deep feature space where each
edited copy and its reference image are close to each other,

Introduction
Image copy detection (ICD) is to detect whether a query
image is an edited copy of any image from a reference set
(Fig. 1 (a)). It has extensive applications, such as preserving information legitimacy and integrity. However, current
resources available for ICD research are not sufficient: the
public datasets are rare and all overlook a critical challenge,
i.e., the distraction from hard negative samples. Concretely,
in realistic ICD systems, some queries are not edited copies
but look inherently similar to the reference images, as shown
in Fig. 1 (b). These hard negative samples are prone to being
* Work done during an internship at Baidu Research.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2672

