The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Supervised Bidirectional Learning for Graph Matching
Wenqi Guo, Lin Zhang, Shikui Tu, Lei Xu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{wenqiguo,linzhang,tushikui,leixu}@sjtu.edu.cn

where Z ∈ Rn1 ×n2 is a (partial) permutation matrix encoding the node-to-node correspondence, vec(Z) is its columnvectorized version, and 1n is a column vector of length n
whose elements all equal to 1. K ∈ Rn1 n2 ×n1 n2 is called
affinity matrix, and denotes the node-to-node and edge-toedge similarity in its diagonal and off-diagonal elements, respectively. Since it is intractable to compute a global optimum for the general QAP, traditional methods are usually
approximate relaxation algorithms, under a given affinity
matrix (Leordeanu, Hebert, and Sukthankar 2009; Gold and
Rangarajan 1996; Yu et al. 2018).
Predefined hand-crafted graph attributes and affinity functions may not fit the underlying structure of the real-world
matching problem. Advances in machine learning inspire
researchers to construct learnable models for graph representation and affinity metrics, so that efficient GM algorithms may be appropriately developed to solve the practical
task (Caetano et al. 2009). Recently, with the strong learning ability of deep neural networks, various deep learning
methods have been proposed to solve the GM problem in a
data-dependent fashion. They have achieved superior performance over those with fixed graph representation and affinity functions on challenging real benchmarks. However, the
existing deep learning GM methods usually require a large
amount of training data with ground-truth matching solutions. This limits the applications on real-world tasks where
the ground-truth correspondences may be difficult and expensive to annotate.
This paper is concerned with developing a self-supervised
learning method for the GM problem. It is difficult to perform self-supervised learning on GM without ground-truth
labels as it usually involves a non-differentiable discretization optimization step through which the learning gradients cannot pass. The challenge also lies in the node/edgewise structural graph representation, which has been demonstrated to significantly affect the performance (Fey et al.
2018). There exist only a few attempts in this direction, which either need the empirically hand-drafted initial node/edge features by shape context (Leordeanu, Sukthankar, and Hebert 2012; Zhao, Tu, and Xu 2021) or adopt
a classic GM solver with annealing parameters to gradually approach the discrete solution (Wang et al. 2021),
which is approximate and time-consuming. Their performances are still not satisfactory. Motivated by the IA-DSM

Abstract
Deep learning methods have demonstrated promising performance on the NP-hard Graph Matching (GM) problems.
However, the state-of-the-art methods usually require the
ground-truth labels, which may take extensive human efforts
or be impractical to collect. In this paper, we present a robust
self-supervised bidirectional learning method (IA-SSGM) to
tackle GM in an unsupervised manner. It involves an affinity learning component and a classic GM solver. Specifically,
we adopt the Hungarian solver to generate pseudo correspondence labels for the simple probabilistic relaxation of the
affinity matrix. In addition, a bidirectional recycling consistency module is proposed to generate pseudo samples by recycling the pseudo correspondence back to permute the input.
It imposes a consistency constraint between the pseudo affinity and the original one, which is theoretically supported to
help reduce the matching error. Our method further develops
a graph contrastive learning jointly with the affinity learning
to enhance its robustness against the noise and outliers in real
applications. Experiments deliver superior performance over
the previous state-of-the-arts on five real-world benchmarks,
especially under the more difficult outlier scenarios, demonstrating the effectiveness of our method.

Introduction
Graph matching (GM) aims to find the structural correspondence of nodes in two graphs or multiple graphs by taking both node and edge similarities (affinities) into account
(Zanfir and Sminchisescu 2018; Yan et al. 2016; Wang,
Yan, and Yang 2019). It has various real-world applications,
e.g., protein matching (Krissinel and Henrick 2004; Sharan and Ideker 2006), molecules comparing (Koch, Kriege,
and Humbeck 2019), image matching (Wang, Zhou, and
Daniilidis 2018), objects tracking, 2D/3D shapes matching
(Vento and Foggia 2013), entity alignment (Mao et al. 2021)
and model fusion (Liu et al. 2022). Mathematically, for twographs with n1 and n2 nodes, GM can be formulated as an
NP-hard quadratic assignment problem (QAP) (Loiola et al.
2007):
max J(Z) = vec(Z)⊤ K vec(Z),
subject to Z1n2 = 1n1 , Z ⊤ 1n1 ≤ 1n2 ,

(1)

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7784

