The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On the Effectiveness of Curriculum Learning in Educational Text Scoring
Zijie Zeng, Dragan Gašević and Guanliang Chen*
Centre for Learning Analytics, Monash University, Australia
{Zijie.Zeng, Dragan.Gasevic, Guanliang.Chen}@monash.edu

Abstract

et al. 2020) and Grammarly (Karyuatry 2018)) have been increasingly used in practice to facilitate instructors’ teaching
practices.
Given the important role of ATS in education, researchers
have made great efforts in designing effective scoring algorithms with the aid of different techniques, such as early
rule-based methods (Leacock and Chodorow 2003), subsequent machine learning methods with hand-crafted features as input (Mohler, Bunescu, and Mihalcea 2011; Sultan, Salazar, and Sumner 2016; Amorim, Cançado, and
Veloso 2018), and recent methods based on deep neural
networks that can automatically engineer features from input text (Xia et al. 2020; Rodriguez, Jafari, and Ormerod
2019; Sung, Dhamecha, and Mukhi 2019; Sung et al. 2019;
Lun et al. 2020; Uto, Xie, and Ueno 2020; Ormerod, Malhotra, and Jafari 2021). In certain writing evaluation tasks,
e.g., when assessing students’ responses to the prompt questions, these ATS algorithms have demonstrated scoring performance comparable to human graders. However, there still
exist scenarios which call for more research efforts to further
improve the performance of ATS (Uto 2021; Ridley et al.
2020).
It is worth noting that most of the existing ATS studies
boost the scoring performance by designing a more dedicated (and oftentimes more complicated) model structure to
capture the unique characteristics of a writing assessment
task. However, given the difficult nature of this task, i.e.,
sometimes even experienced human graders can disagree on
the score assigned to a piece of writing (refer to Figure 1 to
see such examples from the short answer scoring dataset 1
and the essay scoring dataset 2 released in the Kaggle platform), we argued that, in addition to designing more dedicated model structure, the process of the model training is
worthy of our attention as well and this is where curriculum
learning (CL) can potentially help. CL is a strategy used
to train a prediction model by inputting data sorted in an
easy-to-hard manner, which imitates the learning order in
human curricula. As a model-agnostic training strategy, CL
has been widely investigated and applied in various predictive tasks (Wu, Dyer, and Neyshabur 2020; Platanios et al.
2019) in terms of improving a model’s generalization ability

Automatic Text Scoring (ATS) is a widely-investigated task
in education. Existing approaches often stressed the structure
design of an ATS model and neglected the training process
of the model. Considering the difficult nature of this task, we
argued that the performance of an ATS model could be potentially boosted by carefully selecting data of varying complexities in the training process. Therefore, we aimed to investigate the effectiveness of curriculum learning (CL) in scoring educational text. Specifically, we designed two types of
difficulty measurers: (i) pre-defined, calculated by measuring a sample’s readability, length, the number of grammatical errors or unique words it contains; and (ii) automatic,
calculated based on whether a model in a training epoch can
accurately score the samples. These measurers were tested
in both the easy-to-hard to hard-to-easy training paradigms.
Through extensive evaluations on two widely-used datasets
(one for short answer scoring and the other for long essay
scoring), we demonstrated that (a) CL indeed could boost the
performance of state-of-the-art ATS models, and the maximum improvement could be up to 4.5%, but most improvements were achieved when assessing short and easy answers;
(b) the pre-defined measurer calculated based on the number of grammatical errors contained in a text sample tended
to outperform the other difficulty measurers across different
training paradigms.

Introduction
Automatic Text Scoring (ATS) is a common but important task in the field of education. With the aid of ATS
techniques, instructors can automatically assess the quality of student-authored texts such as short answers to openended questions (Sung et al. 2019; Lun et al. 2020; Leacock and Chodorow 2003; Xia et al. 2020; Ramachandran,
Cheng, and Foltz 2015) and relatively longer essays (Uto,
Xie, and Ueno 2020; Burstein and Chodorow 1999; Attali
and Burstein 2006; Rodriguez, Jafari, and Ormerod 2019;
Amorim, Cançado, and Veloso 2018). Considering the large
student-teacher ratio in certain educational scenarios, e.g.,
the ratio can be up to 10,000:1 or even worse in Massive
Open Online Courses (Pappano 2012), ATS or writing assessment tools building upon ATS (e.g., AcaWriter (Knight
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
2

14602

https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/asap-sas/
https://www.kaggle.com/c/asap-aes

