The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FAST D IAG P: An Algorithm for Parallelized Direct Diagnosis
Viet-Man Le1 , Cristian Vidal Silva2 , Alexander Felfernig1 ,
David Benavides3 , José Galindo3 , Thi Ngoc Trang Tran1
1

Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria
2
Universidad de Talca, Talca, Chile
3
University of Sevilla, Seville, Spain
{vietman.le,alexander.felfernig,ttrang}@ist.tugraz.at, cvidal@utalca.cl, {jagalindo,benavides}@us.es
Abstract

Schubert, and Zehentner 2012; Felfernig et al. 2018). FASTD IAG (Felfernig, Schubert, and Zehentner 2012) is a typical
example of these techniques, designed to find one preferred
minimal diagnosis at a time within a given set of constraints
(C). The algorithm divides C into two subsets. If a subset
is consistent, then diagnosis detection must not be applied
to this subset since no diagnosis elements can be found in
it. This way, C can be reduced by half, and the algorithm
returns one preferred minimal diagnosis at a time. Although
FAST D IAG works efficiently in many scenarios, there exist
cases where it faces runtime issues, especially in interactive
settings, where users are interacting with a configurator with
a huge and complex knowledge base and expect to receive
instant responses (Felfernig et al. 2018).
Consistency checking is an expensive computational task
that makes up most of FAST D IAG’s execution time (Felfernig et al. 2014). A practical solution for this issue is to precalculate in parallel consistency checks potentially required
by FAST D IAG. This solution provides fast answers for consistency checks (via simple lookup in a list of alreadycalculated consistency checks instead of a direct solver call),
which helps to accelerate the algorithm’s execution. Based
on this idea, we propose in this paper a novel diagnosis
detection algorithm, so-called FAST D IAG P, dealing with
FAST D IAG’s run-time limitation. FAST D IAG P is a parallelized version of FAST D IAG, adopting the speculative programming principle (Burton 1985) to pre-calculate consistency checks. Although this principle is not new, modern
CPUs with integrated parallel computation capabilities now
make it possible to implement some speculative approaches.
The contributions of our paper are three-fold. First, we
show how to parallelize direct diagnosis based on a flexible look-ahead strategy to scale its performance depending on the number of available computing cores. Second,
we show how to integrate the proposed approach into FASTD IAG, which is applicable to interactive constraint-based applications. Third, using the inconsistent Linux-2.6.33.3 feature model taken from Diverso Lab’s benchmark (Heradio
et al. 2022), we show the performance improvements of
FAST D IAG P when working with large-scale configuration
knowledge bases. Particularly, this algorithm improves the
performance of diagnosis detection tasks scaling with available CPU cores, making it possible to efficiently solve more
complex diagnosis problems.

Constraint-based applications attempt to identify a solution
that meets all defined user requirements. If the requirements
are inconsistent with the underlying constraint set, algorithms
that compute diagnoses for inconsistent constraints should
be implemented to help users resolve the “no solution could
be found” dilemma. FAST D IAG is a typical direct diagnosis algorithm that supports diagnosis calculation without predetermining conflicts. However, this approach faces runtime
performance issues, especially when analyzing complex and
large-scale knowledge bases. In this paper, we propose a
novel algorithm, so-called FAST D IAG P, which is based on
the idea of speculative programming. This algorithm extends
FAST D IAG by integrating a parallelization mechanism that
anticipates and pre-calculates consistency checks requested
by FAST D IAG. This mechanism helps to provide consistency
checks with fast answers and boosts the algorithm’s runtime
performance. The performance improvements of our proposed algorithm have been shown through empirical results
using the Linux-2.6.3.33 configuration knowledge base.

Introduction
In many applications of constraint-based representations
such as knowledge-based configuration (Stumptner 1997),
recommendation (Felfernig and Burke 2008), automated
analysis of feature models (Benavides, Segura, and RuizCortés 2010), and scheduling (Castillo et al. 2005), there exist some scenarios where over-constrained formulations occur in the underlying constraint sets (Felfernig et al. 2010;
Jannach, Schmitz, and Shchekotykhin 2015). Some examples thereof are inconsistencies between the knowledge base
and a set of test cases (Felfernig et al. 2004; Le et al. 2021),
or inconsistencies between user requirements and the knowledge base (Felfernig et al. 2009). In such scenarios, diagnosis detection mechanisms are essential to identify preferred
minimal sets of constraints (i.e., diagnoses) that are less important (from the user’s point of view) and can be adapted or
deleted to restore consistency in the knowledge base (Reiter
1987; Felfernig, Schubert, and Zehentner 2012).
Direct diagnosis techniques have been recognized as efficient solutions in identifying faulty constraints without
predetermining the corresponding conflict sets (Felfernig,
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6442

