The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MVCINN: Multi-View Diabetic Retinopathy Detection Using a Deep
Cross-Interaction Neural Network
Xiaoling Luo1, * , Chengliang Liu1, * , Waikeung Wong2, 3 , Jie Wen1, † , Xiaopeng Jin4 , Yong Xu1, †
1

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Visual Object Detection and Recognition, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
School of Fashion and Textiles, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon, Hong Kong
3
Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence in Design, Hong Kong
4
College of Big Data and Internet, Shenzhen Technology University, Shenzhen, China
xiaolingluoo@outlook.com, liucl1996@163.com, calvin.wong@polyu.edu.hk, jiewen pr@126.com,
jinxiaopengit@gmail.com, laterfall@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

1

2

3

Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is the main cause of irreversible
blindness for working-age adults. The previous models for
DR detection have difficulties in clinical application. The
main reason is that most of the previous methods only use
single-view data, and the single field of view (FOV) only
accounts for about 13% of the FOV of the retina, resulting
in the loss of most lesion features. To alleviate this problem, we propose a multi-view model for DR detection, which
takes full advantage of multi-view images covering almost
all of the retinal field. To be specific, we design a crossinteraction self-attention based module (CISAM) that interfuses local features extracted from convolutional blocks with
long-range global features learned from transformer blocks.
Furthermore, considering the pathological association in different views, we use the feature jigsaw to assemble and learn
the features of multiple views. Extensive experiments on the
latest public multi-view MFIDDR dataset with 34,452 images
demonstrate the superiority of our method, which performs
favorably against state-of-the-art models. To the best of our
knowledge, this work is the first study on the public largescale multi-view fundus images dataset for DR detection.

4

5

6

8

9

7

(a)

(b)

V1

V2

V1

V2

V3

V4

V3

V4

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: (a) Single-view fundus image. (b) A schematic diagram of long-range global features of the same lesion in different image patches, showing the lesions of hemorrhages.
(c) Multi-view fundus images. (d) The related area of the
same lesion in different retinal views from one eye, where
hemorrhages are marked in the blue boxes.

the successful development of neural network (Huang et al.
2022; Hu, Shi, and Ye 2022; Huang et al. 2021), frameworks such as image classification have been used to predict and analyze the progression of DR (Wang et al. 2017;
Luo et al. 2022). However, most previous works are trained
on the single-view databases (e.g., MESSIDOR (Decenciere
et al. 2014), EyePACS (EyePACS 2015)), which face a risk
of losing a large proportion of the lesion features on the
retina. The reason is that the single-view data typically has
a FOV of only about 45◦ -50◦ . Most of the retinal regions
are missing in the fundus images used for training, resulting in the poor performance of these single-view models
in clinical applications. Furthermore, clinical medical studies (Hu et al. 2019) have also shown that 45◦ single-view
Non-mydriatic fundus photography does not meet the technical requirements of DR screening, because of the inability
to detect microaneurysms and retinopathy outside a single
45◦ image. Some studies have shown that multi-view fundus
imaging has better performance in DR detection (Srihatrai
and Hlowchitsieng 2018). The extensive exploration of various multi-view methods (Liu et al. 2022a; Wang et al. 2021;
Hu, Lou, and Ye 2022; Wen et al. 2022) indicates that multiview method has a great performance in solving the problem
of data defects. Therefore, we propose a multi-view DR detection model that can simultaneously extract features from
four 45◦ views of the same eye, i.e., view V 1-V 4: the field

Introduction
The IDF Diabetes Atlas 10th edition (Federation 2021) reported that the destructive effects of diabetes are set to continue as a result of the predicted increase in prevalence
from 537 million in 2021 to 783 million in 2045. Diabetic
retinopathy (DR) is one of the most common complications
of diabetes and is a leading cause of preventable blindness in
the working-age population. According to the international
clinical diabetic retinopathy disease severity scales (Ophthalmoscopy and Levels 2002), the severity of DR can be
graded into 0-4 stages: normal, mild, moderate, severe, and
proliferative DR (PDR). Over the past decade, computer vision and deep learning-based algorithms have largely contributed to the research in medical image processing. With
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Co-corresponding authors: Jie Wen, Yong Xu.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8993

