The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Efficient Gradient Approximation Method for Constrained Bilevel Optimization
Siyuan Xu, Minghui Zhu*
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, USA
{spx5032, muz16}@psu.edu

Abstract
Bilevel optimization has been developed for many machine
learning tasks with large-scale and high-dimensional data.
This paper considers a constrained bilevel optimization problem, where the lower-level optimization problem is convex
with equality and inequality constraints and the upper-level
optimization problem is non-convex. The overall objective
function is non-convex and non-differentiable. To solve the
problem, we develop a gradient-based approach, called gradient approximation method, which determines the descent
direction by computing several representative gradients of the
objective function inside a neighborhood of the current estimate. We show that the algorithm asymptotically converges to
the set of Clarke stationary points, and demonstrate the efficacy of the algorithm by the experiments on hyperparameter
optimization and meta-learning.

1

Introduction

A general constrained bilevel optimization problem is formulated as follows:
min Φ(x) = f (x, y ∗ (x))

x∈Rdx

s.t. r (x, y ∗ (x)) ≤ 0; s (x, y ∗ (x)) = 0;
(1)
∗
y (x) = arg min{g(x, y) : p (x, y) ≤ 0; q (x, y) = 0}.
y∈Rdy

The bilevel optimization minimizes the overall objective function Φ(x) with respect to (w.r.t.) x, where y ∗ (x) is the optimal
solution of the lower-level optimization problem and parametric in the upper-level decision variable x. In this paper,
we assume that y ∗ (x) is unique for any x ∈ Rdx .
Existing methods to solve problem (1) can be categorized
into two classes: single-level reduction methods (Bard and
Falk 1982; Bard and Moore 1990; Shi, Lu, and Zhang 2005)
and descent methods (Savard and Gauvin 1994; Dempe 1998).
Single-level reduction methods use the KKT conditions to replace the lower-level optimization problem when it is convex.
Then, they reformulate the bilevel optimization problem (1)
as a single-level constrained optimization problem. Descent
methods aim to find descent directions in which the new point
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12509

is feasible and meanwhile reduces the objective function. Paper (Savard and Gauvin 1994) computes a descent direction
of the objective function by solving a quadratic program.
Paper (Dempe 1998) applies the gradient of the objective
function computed in (Kolstad and Lasdon 1990; Fiacco and
McCormick 1970) to compute a generalized Clarke Jacobian,
and uses a bundle method (Schramm and Zowe 1992) for
the optimization. When applied to machine learning, bilevel
optimization faces additional challenges as the dimensions
of decision variables in the upper-level and lower-level problems are high (Liu et al. 2021a).
Gradient-based methods have been shown to be effective
in handling large-scale and high-dimensional data in a variety
of machine learning tasks (Bottou and Bousquet 2008). They
have been extended to solve the bilevel optimization problem where there is no constraint in the lower-level optimization. The methods can be categorized into the approximate
implicit differentiation (AID) based approaches (Pedregosa
2016; Gould et al. 2016; Ghadimi and Wang 2018; Grazzi
et al. 2020) and the iterative differentiation (ITD) approaches
(Grazzi et al. 2020; Franceschi et al. 2017, 2018; Shaban et al.
2019; Ji, Yang, and Liang 2021). The AID based approaches
evaluate the gradients of y ∗ (x) and Φ(x) based on implicit
differentiation (Bengio 2000). The ITD based approaches
treat the iterative optimization steps in the lower-level optimization as a dynamical system, impose y ∗ (x) as its stationary point, and compute ∇y ∗ (x) at each iterative step. The
gradient-based algorithms have been applied to solve several
machine learning tasks, including meta-learning (Franceschi
et al. 2018; Rajeswaran et al. 2019; Ji et al. 2020), hyperparameter optimization (Pedregosa 2016; Franceschi et al. 2017,
2018), reinforcement learning (Hong et al. 2020; Konda and
Tsitsiklis 2000), and network architecture search (Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2018). The above methods are limited to
unconstrained bilevel optimization and require the objective
function to be differentiable. They cannot be directly applied
when constraints are present in the lower-level optimization,
as the objective function is non-differentiable.
Contributions. In this paper, we consider a special case of
problem (1) where the upper-level constraints r and s are not
included. In general, the objective function Φ is nonconvex
and non-differentiable, even if the upper-level and lower-level
problems are convex and functions f , g, p, q are differentiable
(Hansen, Jaumard, and Savard 1992; Liu et al. 2021a). Most

