The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Simple and Effective Synthesis of Indoor 3D Scenes
∗

†

∗

‡

Jing Yu Koh ,1, , Harsh Agrawal ,2, ,
‡
2
Dhruv Batra , Richard Tucker1 , Austin Waters1 , Honglak Lee3 , Yinfei Yang4, ,
Jason Baldridge1 , Peter Anderson1
1

2

Google Research
Georgia Institute of Technology
3
University of Michigan
4
Apple

Abstract

clouds, which are accumulated from the available context
images. The use of point clouds naturally incorporates camera projective geometry into the model and helps maintain
the 3D consistency of the scene (Mallya et al. 2020). To
generate novel views, these approaches reproject the pointcloud relative to the target camera pose into an RGB-D
guidance image (see Fig. 1). These guidance images are
sparse because of missing context and completing them requires extensive inpainting and outpainting. In prior work,
Pathdreamer (Koh et al. 2021b) achieves this by assuming
the availability of semantic segmentations, and combining a
stochastic depth and semantic segmentation (structure) generator with an RGB image generator infused with semantic,
depth and guidance information via Multi-SPADE spatially
adaptive normalization layers (Park et al. 2019; Mallya et al.
2020). On the other hand, PixelSynth (Rockwell, Fouhey,
and Johnson 2021) creates guidance images using a differentiable point cloud renderer, generates a support set of additional views using PixelCNN++ (Salimans et al. 2017) operating on the latent space of a VQ-VAE (Razavi, van den
Oord, and Vinyals 2019), combines and refines these images using a GAN (Goodfellow et al. 2014) similar to
SynSin (Wiles et al. 2020), and then repeats this process over
many samples using a combination of discriminator loss and
the entropy of a scene classifier to select the best output.
We propose a simple alternative: an image-to-image GAN
that maps directly from guidance images to high-resolution
photorealistic RGB-D (see Fig. 1). Compared to Pathdreamer, our simple model forgoes the stochastic structure
generator, spatially adaptive normalization layers, dependence on semantic segmentations, and multi-step training.
By dropping the dependence of semantic segmentation inputs, we unlock training on a much broader range of data,
such as more commonly available RGB-D datasets (Xia
et al. 2018; Li and Snavely 2018; Nathan Silberman and
Fergus 2012), and video data such as the RealEstate10K
dataset (Zhou et al. 2018b) from YouTube. We eschew many
components of PixelSynth: differentiable rendering, support
set generation using PixelCNN++and a VQ-VAE, and the
multiple sampling and re-ranking procedure.
Perhaps surprisingly, with random masking of the guidance images during training, plus other architectural changes
supported by thorough ablation studies, our lightweight ap-

We study the problem of synthesizing immersive 3D indoor
scenes from one or a few images. Our aim is to generate
high-resolution images and videos from novel viewpoints, including viewpoints that extrapolate far beyond the input images while maintaining 3D consistency. Existing approaches
are highly complex, with many separately trained stages and
components. We propose a simple alternative: an image-toimage GAN that maps directly from reprojections of incomplete point clouds to full high-resolution RGB-D images. On
the Matterport3D and RealEstate10K datasets, our approach
significantly outperforms prior work when evaluated by humans, as well as on FID scores. Further, we show that our
model is useful for generative data augmentation. A visionand-language navigation (VLN) agent trained with trajectories spatially-perturbed by our model improves success rate
by up to 1.5% over a state of the art baseline on the mature
R2R benchmark. Our code is publicly released to facilitate
generative data augmentation and applications to downstream
robotics and embodied AI tasks.

Introduction
We synthesize immersive 3D indoor scenes from one or
more context images captured along a trajectory. Our aim
is to generate high-resolution images and videos from novel
viewpoints, including viewpoints that extrapolate far beyond
the context image(s).
Solving this problem would make photos and videos interactive and immersive, with applications not only to content
creation but also robotics and embodied AI. For example,
models that can predict around corners could be used by navigation agents as world models (Ha and Schmidhuber 2018)
for model-based planning in novel environments (Koh et al.
2021b; Finn and Levine 2017). Such models could also be
used to train agents in interactive environments synthesized
from static images or video.
Previous approaches attempting this under large viewpoint changes (Wiles et al. 2020; Koh et al. 2021b; Rockwell, Fouhey, and Johnson 2021) typically operate on point
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Now at Carnegie Mellon University.
‡
Work done while at Google.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1169

