The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MGTCF: Multi-Generator Tropical Cyclone Forecasting with Heterogeneous
Meteorological Data
Cheng Huang1 , Cong Bai1,2∗ , Sixian Chan1,3 , Jinglin Zhang4 , YuQuan Wu5
1

College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University of Technology
Key Laboratory of Visual Media Intelligent Processing Technology of Zhejiang Province
3
KLME, CIC-FEMD, Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology
4
School of Control Science and Engineering, Shangdong University
5
Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences
{chenghuang, congbai, sxchan}@zjut.edu.cn, jinglin.zhang@sdu.edu.cn, yuquan@iscas.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Accurate forecasting of tropical cyclone (TC) plays a critical role in the prevention and defense of TC disasters. We
must explore a more accurate method for TC prediction.
Deep learning methods are increasingly being implemented
to make TC prediction more accurate. However, most existing methods lack a generic framework for adapting heterogeneous meteorological data and do not focus on the importance
of the environment. Therefore, we propose a Multi-Generator
Tropical Cyclone Forecasting model (MGTCF), a generic,
extensible, multi-modal TC prediction model with the key
modules of Generator Chooser Network (GC-Net) and Environment Net (Env-Net). The proposed method can utilize heterogeneous meteorologic data efficiently and mine environmental factors. In addition, the Multi-generator with Generator Chooser Net is proposed to tackle the drawbacks of singlegenerator TC prediction methods: the prediction of undesired out-of-distribution samples and the problems stemming
from insufficient learning ability. To prove the effectiveness
of MGTCF, we conduct extensive experiments on the China
Meteorological Administration Tropical Cyclone Best Track
Dataset. MGTCF obtains better performance compared with
other deep learning methods and outperforms the official prediction method of the China Central Meteorological Observatory in most indexes.

Figure 1: The development of TC with environment factors.
The sub-figures in the left are the examples of heterogeneous
meteorological data.

this work. However, it is very difficult to predict TCs, because there are many factors involved in the development of
a TC, including the general circulation of atmosphere, the
region of the subtropical high, the pressure structure and
location of the TC, the sea surface temperature, and other
environment-related factors, (Emanuel 2007), as shown in
Figure 1. Researchers still do not understand how all these
factors impact the TC. Because TC prediction is so critical,
researchers began studying this topic in the previous century
(Neumann and Lawrence 1975). They studied the principle
of TC and tried various approaches to improve the accuracy
of TC prediction, including empirical methods, statistical
methods, and numerical methods. Based on these methods,
other approaches have been developed in recent years (Wang
et al. 2015; Chen and Zhang 2019).
Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) systems have become the mainstream TC prediction method, used by many
official meteorological forecasting agencies, including the
China Central Meteorological Observatory (CMO). This
method uses supercomputers to simulate various factors influencing the development of TCs. However, because the
principle of TC development is complex, supercomputers

Introduction
Tropical cyclones (TCs) are powerful and complex weather
systems, also known as typhoons, hurricanes, or cyclonic
storms. They usually develop in tropical, subtropical, and
temperate zones with substantial precipitation, which maintain a balance of global heat and momentum distribution
(Emanuel 2018). However, strong TCs can prove lethal for
vessels and platforms at sea. Furthermore, when a TC makes
landfall, it can also bring about ensuing natural disasters,
such as gales, storm surges, floods (Anthes 2016), which
can cause significant economic losses and casualties. To defend against these disasters, we need to be able to predict
the future tendencies of the trajectory and intensity of TC in
advance. These are the most important aspects of TC prediction and are also the ones that we want to forecast in
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5096

