The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Explaining (Sarcastic) Utterances to Enhance Affect Understanding in
Multimodal Dialogues
Shivani Kumar1 , Ishani Mondal2 , Md Shad Akhtar1 , Tanmoy Chakraborty3
1

Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology Delhi, India
2
University of Maryland, College Park
3
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India
shivaniku@iiitd.ac.in, ishani340@gmail.com, shad.akhtar@iiitd.ac.in, tanchak@iitd.ac.in
Text

Abstract
Conversations emerge as the primary media for exchanging
ideas. Identifying various affective qualities, such as sarcasm,
humour, and emotions, is paramount for comprehending the
true connotation of the emitted utterance. However, one of
the major hurdles faced in learning these affect dimensions
is the presence of figurative language viz. irony, metaphor, or
sarcasm. We hypothesize that any detection system constituting the exhaustive and explicit presentation of the emitted
utterance would improve the overall comprehension of the
dialogue. To this end, we explore the task of Sarcasm Explanation in Dialogues that aims to unfold the hidden irony behind sarcastic utterances. We propose MOSES, a deep neural
network, which takes a multimodal (sarcastic) dialogue instance as an input and generates a natural language sentence
as its explanation. Subsequently, we leverage the generated
explanation for various natural language understanding tasks
in a conversational dialogue setup, such as sarcasm detection,
humour identification, and emotion recognition. Our evaluation shows that MOSES outperforms the state-of-the-art system for SED by an average of ∼ 2% on different evaluation
metrics, such as ROUGE, BLEU, and METEOR. Further, we
observe that leveraging the generated explanation advances
three downstream tasks for affect classification – an average
improvement of ∼ 14% F1-score in the sarcasm detection
task and ∼ 2% in the humour identification and emotion
recognition task. We also perform extensive analyses to assess the quality of the results.

This party is
sick

Audio

Low tone

Video

Disgusted
face

Neutral tone
This party is
so fun

High tone

Verdict
Sarcastic

Case I

Sarcastic

Case II

Not sarcastic Case III
Dancing
Sarcastic

Case IV

Figure 1: [Best viewed in color] Effect of multimodality on
sarcasm.
proposing MOSES, a deep neural network which leverages
the peculiarities of the benchmark dataset, WITS.
Congruent to how humans make decisions after compiling
data from all their available senses, (predominantly optical
and auditory) multimodal analysis helps the machine mimic
this behaviour. Particularly in the case of sarcasm interpretation, multimodal information provides us with essential
indications to interpret irony. Figure 1 shows cases where
multimodal knowledge such as audio and video can assist
in comprehending sarcasm. The identical text, “This party is
so fun”, can result in diverse classes when integrated with
different multimodal signals. For instance, when said with
a neutral tone and a disgusted face (Case II), it results in a
‘sarcastic’ verdict. On the other hand, when the same utterance is expressed with a low tone and while the speaker is
dancing (Case III), we can assume the speaker means what
they say without any sarcasm. To capture multimodality efficaciously, it is vital to grant a prime prerogative to each
input modality in order to capture its’ peculiarities. To this
end, we propose a spotlight-aware fusion mechanism, where
the final multimodal amalgamated vector is tailored by paying special attention to individual modalities.
All affective components, such as sarcasm, humour, and
emotion, work in tandem to convey a statement’s intended
meaning (Hasan et al. 2021; Chauhan et al. 2020). Accordingly, we hypothesize that understanding one of the affective markers, like sarcasm, in its entirety will influence comprehending others. Consequently, in this work, we deal with
leveraging sarcasm explanations for three affect understanding tasks in dialogues, namely sarcasm detection, humour
identification, and emotion recognition. The performance
obtained from these tasks can be employed as a method to
estimate the relevance of the SED task extrinsically.
We summarize our contributions below:

Introduction
Expressing oneself eloquently to our conversation partner
requires employing multiple affective components such as
emotion, humour, and sarcasm. All such attributes interact
with each another to present a concrete definition of an uttered statement (Roberts and Kreuz 1994). While affects
such as emotion and humour deem easier to comprehend,
sarcasm, on the other hand, is a challenging aspect to comprehend (Olkoniemi, Ranta, and Kaakinen 2016). Consequently, it becomes imperative for NLP systems to capture
and understand sarcasm in its entirety. Sarcasm Explanation
in Dialogues (SED) is a new task proposed recently in this
direction (Kumar et al. 2022). In this work, we scour the
task of SED and considerably improve the performance by
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12986

