The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

H OT C OLD Block: Fooling Thermal Infrared Detectors with
a Novel Wearable Design
Hui Wei* 1,2 , Zhixiang Wang* 3,4,5 , Xuemei Jia1,2 ,
Yinqiang Zheng3 , Hao Tang6 , Shin’ichi Satoh5,3 , Zheng Wang†1,2
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering
3
The University of Tokyo
4
RIISE
5
National Institute of Informatics
6
CVL, ETH Zurich
Abstract

Adversarial attacks on thermal infrared imaging expose the
risk of related applications. Estimating the security of these
systems is essential for safely deploying them in the real
world. In many cases, realizing the attacks in the physical
space requires elaborate special perturbations. These solutions are often impractical and attention-grabbing. To address the need for a physically practical and stealthy adversarial attack, we introduce H OT C OLD Block, a novel physical attack for infrared detectors that hide persons utilizing the wearable Warming Paste and Cooling Paste. By attaching these readily available temperature-controlled materials to the body, H OT C OLD Block evades human eyes efficiently. Moreover, unlike existing methods that build adversarial patches with complex texture and structure features, H OT C OLD Block utilizes an SSP-oriented adversarial
optimization algorithm that enables attacks with pure color
blocks and explores the influence of size, shape, and position on attack performance. Extensive experimental results in
both digital and physical environments demonstrate the performance of our proposed H OT C OLD Block. Code is available https://github.com/weihui1308/HOTCOLDBlock.

(a) Bulb attack

(b) QR attack

(c) HOTCOLD block

(d) HOTCOLD block attack

Figure 1: Different infrared attack methods. Our H OT C OLD
Block is effective and stealthy. It achieves competitive attack performance on YOLOv5 (Jocher 2020) while evades
human eyes better.

This paper focuses on the physical adversarial attack on
infrared detectors (for brevity, we refer to “thermal infrared”
as “infrared” throughout the paper), which hides persons
from smart infrared cameras. Different from adversarial attack in the digital world that directly injects adversarial perturbations to captured images, adversarial attack in the physical world requires physically realizable objects—defined as
adversarial medium—to compose adversarial perturbations.
Recently, Zhu et al. (2021, 2022) successively propose to
perform attacks on infrared detectors with patches that consists of small light bulbs and invisible clothing made of aerogel. While they achieve reasonable attack effectiveness, their
adversarial mediums are attention-grabbing and look unnatural to the human, making the attack suspicious.
To address the aforementioned problems, we introduce
new adversarial mediums—Warming Paste and Cooling
Paste—based on our findings. First, such temperaturecontrolled materials can affect infrared imaging. They appear as pure color blocks under the infrared camera and interfere with detectors consequently. Second, they are wearable, making the attacks quite stealthy. Figure 1 gives the

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved great success
in various fields. They work not only well in visible light but
also in thermal infrared imaging, e.g., thermal infrared detection systems that are widely used in autonomous driving,
night surveillance, temperature measurement, etc. However,
adversarial attacks in both digital and physical worlds expose the vulnerability of DNNs, raising concerns about the
security of related applications. The security of DNNs has
attracted significant attention in visible light (Xu et al. 2021;
Duan et al. 2021; Cai et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022; Hu et al.
2022; Zhong et al. 2022) but has not been fully explored in
thermal infrared imaging.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15233

