The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Question-Answering Approach to Key Value Pair Extraction from Form-Like
Document Images
†

†

‡

Kai Hu1,3,* , , Zhuoyuan Wu2,3,* , , Zhuoyao Zhong3, , Weihong Lin3 , Lei Sun3 , Qiang Huo3
1

Department of EEIS., University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China
3
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
hk970213@mail.ustc.edu.cn, wuzhuoyuan@pku.edu.cn, zhuoyao.zhong@gmail.com,
lwher1996@gmail.com, kuangtongustc@gmail.com, qianghuo@microsoft.com

Abstract

Responsibility

In this paper, we present a new question-answering (QA)
based key-value pair extraction approach, called KVPFormer,
to robustly extracting key-value relationships between entities from form-like document images. Specifically, KVPFormer first identifies key entities from all entities in an image
with a Transformer encoder, then takes these key entities as
questions and feeds them into a Transformer decoder to predict their corresponding answers (i.e., value entities) in parallel. To achieve higher answer prediction accuracy, we propose
a coarse-to-fine answer prediction approach further, which
first extracts multiple answer candidates for each identified
question in the coarse stage and then selects the most likely
one among these candidates in the fine stage. In this way, the
learning difficulty of answer prediction can be effectively reduced so that the prediction accuracy can be improved. Moreover, we introduce a spatial compatibility attention bias into
the self-attention/cross-attention mechanism for KVPFormer
to better model the spatial interactions between entities. With
these new techniques, our proposed KVPFormer achieves
state-of-the-art results on FUNSD and XFUND datasets, outperforming the previous best-performing method by 7.2%
and 13.2% in F1 score, respectively.

Tobacco Blend

Ammons

Filter Production

Wicker
Brown/Routh

Making & Packing
Shipping

Responsibility

Routh

Tobacco Blend

Ammons

Filter Production

Wicker

Making & Packing

Brown/Routh

Shipping

Routh

Figure 1: Examples of key-value pairs in the form-like document images. A red arrow stands for a directed key-value
relationship pointing from a key entity (green dashed box)
to a value entity (red dashed box).

Introduction
Form-like documents like invoices, receipts, purchase orders
and tax forms are widely used in day-to-day business workflows. Most of these documents contain critical information
represented in the structure of key-value pairs (KVPs). Essentially, a key-value pair is a pair of linked data items: a
key and a value, where the key is used as a unique identifier for the value, as shown in Fig. 1. Automatically extracting key-value pairs is crucial for improving the efficiency
of business document processing and reducing human labor.

However, due to the diverse contents and complex layouts of
form-like documents, key-value pair extraction from formlike document images is a challenging task. Although many
deep learning based key-value pair extraction approaches
(Jaume, Ekenel, and Thiran 2019; Davis et al. 2019; Xu et al.
2022; Davis et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021; Dang et al. 2021;
Wang, Jin, and Ding 2022) have emerged and significantly
outperformed traditional rule or handcrafted feature based
methods (Watanabe, Luo, and Sugie 1995; Seki et al. 2007;
Hirayama et al. 2011) in terms of both accuracy and capability, their performance is still far from satisfactory, e.g.,
the current state-of-the-art F1 score achieved on the widely
used FUNSD dataset (Jaume, Ekenel, and Thiran 2019) is
only 75.0% (Dang et al. 2021).
Recently, there is a trend to unify different NLP, CV, and

* This work was done when Kai Hu and Zhuoyuan Wu were interns in Multi-Modal Interaction Group, Microsoft Research Asia,
Beijing, China.
†
Equal contribution.
‡
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12899

