The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Effective Continual Learning for Text Classification with Lightweight Snapshots
Jue Wang1,2 * , Dajie Dong1,2 * , Lidan Shou1,2† , Ke Chen1,2 , Gang Chen1,2
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Computing Based Big Data of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang University
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{zjuwangjue,dajiedong,should,chenk,cg}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

finance

Continual learning is known for suffering from catastrophic
forgetting, a phenomenon where previously learned concepts
are forgotten upon learning new tasks. A natural remedy is
to use trained models for old tasks as ‘teachers’ to regularize
the update of the current model to prevent such forgetting.
However, this requires storing all past models, which is very
space-consuming for large models, e.g. BERT, thus impractical in real-world applications. To tackle this issue, we propose
to construct snapshots of seen tasks whose key knowledge
is captured in lightweight adapters. During continual learning, we transfer knowledge from past snapshots to the current
model through knowledge distillation, allowing the current
model to review previously learned knowledge while learning new tasks. We also design representation recalibration
to better handle the class-incremental setting. Experiments
over various task sequences show that our approach effectively mitigates catastrophic forgetting and outperforms all
baselines.

1

tech

furnishing

sports

education

Task1

Snapshot1

society

Task2

Snapshot2

...

...

entertainment

constellation

games

Taski-1
Taski

Learning from
Snapshots

Snapshoti-1
Fine-Tuning
Snapshoti

Global
Model

Snapshot Construction

Figure 1: Overview of learning with snapshots. The global
model learns from past snapshots when training new tasks.

those models as snapshots of previous tasks, a compressed
form of task-specific knowledge. So the current model can
access old knowledge by learning from them via knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015). However, storing all parameters of the past models is often unrealistic in practice due to the high storage cost. For instance, even the base version of BERT model (Devlin et al.
2019) contains 110 million parameters, which means 440
MB for each task. To tackle the storage challenge, we propose to construct snapshots with adapters (Rebuffi, Bilen,
and Vedaldi 2018; Houlsby et al. 2019). The adapters make
each snapshot only 0.8% the capacity of BERT while maintaining comparable accuracy, thus drastically reducing the
space complexity. And since snapshots are no longer updated once created, the task-specific knowledge that they
learned can also be preserved.
This paper will focus on class-incremental learning
(Class-IL) (Van de Ven and Tolias 2019), a challenging scenario where the task identity (indicating the candidate label
set) is unknown at test time. Therefore, the model needs to
make predictions on the complete label set for all tasks seen
so far. In contrast, task-incremental learning (Task-IL) relaxes this constraint, and assumes that the task identity is
given at test time, so the model can use its task-specific
components to predict that task. Recent work finds neural
networks are often less calibrated, and tend to yield overconfident predictions (Guo et al. 2017). As a result, it becomes difficult to determine the task identity by compar-

Introduction

Continual learning (CL) (Ring 1997; Thrun 1998) has become increasingly important in NLP. It aims to continually update the model and accumulate knowledge over a
sequence of tasks. A fundamental problem in CL is catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen 1989), i.e. knowledge acquired in previous tasks could be forgotten when the
model is trained on new tasks. To overcome this problem,
various methods have been proposed. Regularization-based
methods constrain the model’s updates to prevent it from
changing too much from its previous state. However, as the
number of tasks increases, the model will still gradually deviate from the state of the first few tasks. Exemplar-based
methods selectively store seen examples from previous tasks
and replay them while learning new tasks, but storing training data further brings data privacy concerns.
Therefore, how to preserve previously learned knowledge
without storing training data becomes an important problem.
This paper first investigates a straightforward solution that
retains past models trained on previous tasks. We consider
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10122

