The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Parameterized Theory of PAC Learning
Cornelius Brand1 , Robert Ganian1 , Kirill Simonov2
1

2

Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Austria
Chair for Algorithm Engineering, Hasso Plattner Institute, Germany
{cbrand, rganian}@ac.tuwien.ac.at, kirill.simonov@hpi.de

class P in the classical complexity theory of computational
problems.
In spite of this parallel, our understanding of the sample complexity of learning problems remains significantly
behind the vast amounts of knowledge we have by now gathered about the time complexity of computational problems.
Indeed, while understanding the distinction between NP-hard
and polynomially tractable classes of instances for computational problems remains an important research direction, over
the past two decades focus has gradually shifted towards a
more fine-grained analysis of the boundaries of tractability for
such problems. In particular, parameterized complexity (Cygan et al. 2015; Downey and Fellows 2013) has emerged
as a prominent paradigm that yields a much deeper understanding of the limits of tractability than classical complexity
theory, and today we see research exploring the parameterized complexity of relevant problems appear in a broad range
of venues spanning almost all areas of computer science. The
main idea behind the parameterized paradigm is to investigate the complexity of problems not only with respect to the
input size n, but also based on a numerical parameter k that
captures some property of the input; the central notion is then
that of fixed-parameter tractability (FPT), which means that
the problem of interest can be solved in time f (k) · nO(1) for
some computable function f .
Given its ubiquitous applications, it is natural to ask
whether (and how) the principles of parameterized complexity analysis can also be used to expand our understanding of
the foundations of sample complexity beyond what may be
possible through the lens of efficient PAC-learnability. In fact,
there already are a handful of papers (Li and Liang 2018;
Arvind, Köbler, and Lindner 2009; Alekhnovich et al. 2008;
Gärtner and Garriga 2007) that have hinted at the potential
of this novel field by identifying learning algorithms that
seem to act as intuitive counterparts to the fixed-parameter
algorithms emblematic of parameterized complexity. However, the theoretical foundations of a general parameterized
extension to the PAC-learning framework have yet to be formalized and developed, stifling further development of this
unique bridge between the two research communities.
Contribution. As our first conceptual contribution, we lay
down the foundations of a general parameterized extension
to the PAC-learning framework. Crucially, when defining
the analogue of fixed-parameter tractability in the sample

Abstract
Probably Approximately Correct (i.e., PAC) learning is a core
concept of sample complexity theory, and efficient PAC learnability is often seen as a natural counterpart to the class P
in classical computational complexity. But while the nascent
theory of parameterized complexity has allowed us to push
beyond the P-NP “dichotomy” in classical computational complexity and identify the exact boundaries of tractability for numerous problems, there is no analogue in the domain of sample
complexity that could push beyond efficient PAC learnability.
As our core contribution, we fill this gap by developing a theory of parameterized PAC learning which allows us to shed
new light on several recent PAC learning results that incorporated elements of parameterized complexity. Within the
theory, we identify not one but two notions of fixed-parameter
learnability that both form distinct counterparts to the class
FPT—the core concept at the center of the parameterized
complexity paradigm—and develop the machinery required
to exclude fixed-parameter learnability. We then showcase the
applications of this theory to identify refined boundaries of
tractability for CNF and DNF learning as well as for a range
of learning problems on graphs.

1

Introduction

While a number of different models for sample complexity
have by now been considered in the literature, the fundamental concept of Probably Approximately Correct (i.e., PAC)
learning (Valiant 1984) remains a core pillar which can theoretically capture and explain the success of learning algorithms in a broad range of contexts. Intuitively, in the classical
proper PAC setting we ask whether it is possible to identify
(or “learn”) a hypothesis from a specified hypothesis space
after drawing a certain number of labeled samples1 according
to an unknown distribution. As the best case scenario, one
would wish to have an algorithm that can learn a hypothesis
with arbitrarily high precision and with arbitrarily high probability after spending at most polynomial time and using at
most polynomially-many samples. These are called efficient
PAC-learning algorithms, and the class of learning problems
admitting such algorithms forms a natural counterpart to the
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Formal definitions are provided in the Preliminaries.

6834

