The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning a Generalized Gaze Estimator from Gaze-Consistent Feature
Mingjie Xu1 , Haofei Wang2 , Feng Lu1, 2 *
1

State Key Laboratory of VR Technology and Systems, School of CSE, Beihang University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{xumingjie, lufeng}@buaa.edu.cn, wanghf@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract

Cheng et al. 2020a) to regress gaze directions. They usually
trained and tested on the same dataset, i.e., the same domain.
However, these algorithms suffer from severe performance
degradation when they are trained on one dataset (source
domain) and tested on another dataset (target domain). Such
problem has been defined as cross-domain gaze estimation
problem (Liu et al. 2021). This limits its applications, since
the background is often changing in real-world settings.
Cross-domain gaze estimation is more challenging, as it
relies on gaze feature extracted from tiny eyeball regions on
the face images. In fact, a number of domain adaption methods have been proposed for other computer vision tasks, e.g.,
object recognition (Ghifary, Kleijn, and Zhang 2014). For
cross-domain gaze estimation, Liu et al. proposed the first
plug-and-play gaze adaptation framework (PnP-GA), which
is an ensemble of networks that learn collaboratively with
the guidance of outliers (Liu et al. 2021).
At the core of the cross-domain gaze estimation is to balance the model generalization ability and over-fitting problem. On the one hand, more diversified samples are favored
so that the trained model is more generalized to different
conditions; on the other hand, more data on the same domain
may lead to over-fitting. Therefore, our goal is to disturb
the data with diverse gaze-irrelevant factors while keeping
the gaze feature consistent. We define several gaze-irrelevant
factors: identity, facial expression, illumination and tone.
In this paper, our motivation is to consider the gazeirrelevant features as unfavorable interference and disturb
the training data against them. We argue that by introducing
more diversified training data disturbed by these factors, the
gaze model fails to fit to the gaze-irrelevant factors, rather,
it only fits to the gaze-consistent features. Towards this end,
we first synthesize diversified training data based on gazeirrelevant factors using adversarial attack or data augmentation. Then we learn the gaze-consistent feature by minimizing the distance between the gaze features from disturbed
data and non-disturbed gaze features. The primary contributions of this paper are:

Gaze estimator computes the gaze direction based on face images. Most existing gaze estimation methods perform well
under within-dataset settings, but can not generalize to unseen domains. In particular, the ground-truth labels in unseen
domain are often unavailable. In this paper, we propose a new
domain generalization method based on gaze-consistent features. Our idea is to consider the gaze-irrelevant factors as
unfavorable interference and disturb the training data against
them, so that the model cannot fit to these gaze-irrelevant
factors, instead, only fits to the gaze-consistent features. To
this end, we first disturb the training data via adversarial attack or data augmentation based on the gaze-irrelevant factors, i.e., identity, expression, illumination and tone. Then we
extract the gaze-consistent features by aligning the gaze features from disturbed data with non-disturbed gaze features.
Experimental results show that our proposed method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on gaze domain generalization
task. Furthermore, our proposed method also improves domain adaption performance on gaze estimation. Our work
provides new insight on gaze domain generalization task.

Introduction
Gaze indicates where a person is looking. It has been used
in a variety of applications, such as human-computer interaction (Katsini et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2015), virtual reality (Wang, Zhao, and Lu 2022; Zhang, Wang, and Shi
2021), and saliency prediction (Xu, Sugano, and Bulling
2016). Gaze estimation techniques compute the gaze direction, which can be roughly categorized into the model-based
approaches and the appearance-based approaches. Modelbased approaches usually require dedicated devices, i.e., eye
trackers, while appearance-based approaches only use inexpensive webcams and their performance is also relatively
poor (Lu et al. 2011, 2014; Zhang et al. 2017a).
With the advances of machine learning techniques,
appearance-based gaze estimation has achieved significant progress (Zhang et al. 2017a; Cheng et al. 2020a).
Appearance-based gaze estimation approaches usually use
hand-crafted gaze features (Lu et al. 2011, 2014) or features
extracted using deep learning models (Zhang et al. 2017a;

• We propose a generalized gaze estimator that learns the
gaze direction from gaze-consistent features for gaze domain generalization task. We first disturb the training
data based on gaze-irrelevant factors (identity, facial expression, illumination and tone), and then extract the
gaze-consistent features to learn the gaze direction.

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3027

