The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

BridgeTower: Building Bridges between Encoders
in Vision-Language Representation Learning
†

†

Xiao Xu1, 2 * , Chenfei Wu2 , Shachar Rosenman3 , Vasudev Lal3 , Wanxiang Che1 , Nan Duan2
1

Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval, Harbin Institute of Technology
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Intel Labs, Cognitive Computing Research
{xxu,car}@ir.hit.edu.cn, {chenfei.wu,nanduan}@microsoft.com, {shachar.rosenman,vasudev.lal}@intel.com
Abstract
Vision-Language (VL) models with the T WO -T OWER architecture have dominated visual-language representation learning in recent years. Current VL models either use lightweight
uni-modal encoders and learn to extract, align and fuse both
modalities simultaneously in a deep cross-modal encoder, or
feed the last-layer uni-modal representations from the deep
pre-trained uni-modal encoders into the top cross-modal encoder. Both approaches potentially restrict vision-language
representation learning and limit model performance. In this
paper, we propose B RIDGE T OWER, which introduces multiple bridge layers that build a connection between the top
layers of uni-modal encoders and each layer of the crossmodal encoder. This enables effective bottom-up cross-modal
alignment and fusion between visual and textual representations of different semantic levels of pre-trained uni-modal
encoders in the cross-modal encoder. Pre-trained with only
4M images, B RIDGE T OWER achieves state-of-the-art performance on various downstream vision-language tasks. In particular, on the VQAv2 test-std set, B RIDGE T OWER achieves
an accuracy of 78.73%, outperforming the previous state-ofthe-art model M ETER by 1.09% with the same pre-training
data and almost negligible additional parameters and computational costs. Notably, when further scaling the model,
B RIDGE T OWER achieves an accuracy of 81.15%, surpassing models that are pre-trained on orders-of-magnitude larger
datasets. Code and checkpoints are available at https://github.
com/microsoft/BridgeTower.

1

Introduction

Vision-Language (VL) tasks aim to perceive, comprehend
and fuse both visual and textual information in our complex
multi-modal world and then produce cross-modal representations to address difficult cross-modal challenges, such as
visual question answering, visual entailment, and image-text
retrieval (Goyal et al. 2017; Xie et al. 2019; Young et al.
2014). Recently, by pre-training on large-scale image-text
pairs, cross-modal representations have been improved considerably (Su et al. 2020; Lu et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020;
Zhang et al. 2021; Radford et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021c; Li
et al. 2021a; Dou et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022b; Alayrac et al.
2022). Many elaborate Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP)
* Contribution during internship at Microsoft. † Contact Person

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10637

objectives are proposed for mining cross-modal knowledge
from image-text pairs, such as Masked Language Modeling
(MLM) and Image-Text Matching (ITM).
Most existing VL models can be unified into the T WO T OWER architecture, which consists of a visual encoder, a
textual encoder, and a cross-modal encoder. The models differ in the design of the three encoders. Benefiting from the
rapid progress and prominent performance of Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) on various vision
tasks, recent VL models can adopt ViT as a cross-modal or
visual encoder without using region features from heavy and
time-consuming pre-trained object detectors.
ViLT (Kim, Son, and Kim 2021) adopts linear projection
and word embedding as lightweight uni-modal encoders, and
uses ViT as the cross-modal encoder to extract, align and
fuse the features of both modalities simultaneously. While
parameter-efficient, it may be difficult for ViLT to learn intraand cross-modal interactions concurrently, and thus its performance lags behind state-of-the-art performance on downstream VL tasks. M ETER (Dou et al. 2022) uses ViT and
RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019b) as pre-trained uni-modal encoders and feeds the last-layer uni-modal representations
directly into the top cross-modal encoder. Although M ETER
achieves performance competitive with the previous regionbased state-of-the-art model VinVL (Zhang et al. 2021), it
ignores and wastes different levels of semantic knowledge
contained in different layers of pre-trained uni-modal encoders. Furthermore, the abstract representations from the
last layer of pre-trained uni-modal encoders could be challenging for the top cross-modal encoder to learn cross-modal
alignment and fusion (Lu et al. 2019; Tan and Bansal 2019).
It has been demonstrated that different layers encode different types of information in both vision (Zeiler and Fergus
2014; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; Du et al. 2020; Raghu et al.
2021; Naseer et al. 2021) and language models (Peters et al.
2018b; Liu et al. 2019a; Jawahar, Sagot, and Seddah 2019).
Dosovitskiy et al. (2021) and Raghu et al. (2021) find that
lower layers of ViT attend both locally and globally, while
higher layers primarily incorporate global information. Jawahar, Sagot, and Seddah (2019) find that the intermediate
layers of BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) encode a rich hierarchy
of linguistic information, starting with surface features at the
bottom, syntactic features in the middle, and then semantic
features at the top. Therefore, it makes perfect sense to utilize

