The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Epistemic Disjunctive Datalog for Querying Knowledge Bases
Gianluca Cima, Marco Console, Maurizio Lenzerini, Antonella Poggi
Sapienza University of Rome
{cima, console, lenzerini, poggi}@diag.uniroma1.it

Abstract

with the hope of recovering decidability, if not tractability.
Unions of conjunctive two-way regular path queries (Bienvenu, Ortiz, and Simkus 2015), UCQ with limited inequalities (Cima, Lenzerini, and Poggi 2020) and EQL-Lite (Calvanese et al. 2007a) are successful examples of such attempts. Each of them, however, lacks features of the others.
The goal of this work is to present a novel query language
for KBs, called DataKlog, whose queries can use recursion,
inequalities, negation, and an epistemic operator on top of
UCQ without falling into undecidability. This new language
allows for rules of the forms used in the Disjunctive Datalog family (Eiter, Gottlob, and Mannilla 1997), limiting their
interaction with KBs through the use of a modal epistemic
operator K. In this way, only facts that are known to be true
in every model of the queried KB interact with the recursive part of the query, thus overcoming the drawbacks of
less restricted languages. Although simple, this idea defines
a query language for KBs with several interesting features:
1. DataKlog can define a powerful form of navigational
queries even when the (typically SPARQL) end-point
used to access the KB does not explicitly allow them. In
KBs structured as knowledge graphs (Hogan et al. 2021),
this feature can be crucial for computing the transitive
closure of relevant relations (e.g., subset-of ), thus enabling meta-querying, i.e., queries mixing instance-based
and schema-based traversal of paths in the graph.
2. By using an epistemic operator, our language can distinguish between what is known to be true for some elements and what is known to be true for some known
elements. As we show later, this seemingly simple mechanism enables to express queries that are provably not
expressible in Disjunctive Datalog and its variants.
3. Combining the epistemic operator with the use of negation, our language can capture expressive classes of
queries without falling into undecidability. For example, adding a stratified form of negation to positive rules
is sufficient to express various types of non-monotonic
queries and the whole class of first-order queries over the
certain facts extracted from the knowledge base.
We now illustrate some of the basic characteristics of
DataKlog via an example. Let a portion of a KB (in DL
notation) supporting health care personnel be:

The Datalog query language can express several powerful recursive properties, often crucial in real-world scenarios. While answering such queries is feasible over relational
databases, the picture changes dramatically when data is enriched with intensional knowledge. It is indeed well-known
that answering Datalog queries is undecidable already over
lightweight knowledge bases (KBs) of the DL-Lite family.
To overcome this issue, we propose a new query language
based on Disjunctive Datalog rules combined with a modal
epistemic operator. Rules in this language interact with the
queried KB exclusively via the epistemic operator, thus extracting only the information true in every model of the KB.
This form of interaction is crucial for not falling into undecidability. The contribution provided by this paper is threefold.
First, we illustrate the syntax and the semantics of the novel
query language. Second, we study the expressive power of
different fragments of our new language and compare it with
Disjunctive Datalog and its variants. Third, we outline the
precise data complexity of answering queries in our new language over KBs expressed in various well-known formalisms.

Introduction
The query language that has received the most attention for
querying knowledge bases (KBs) is (unions of) conjunctive queries ((U)CQ), i.e., the existential positive fragment
of first-order logic. There are, however, several interesting
scenarios where UCQs fail to express relevant information
needs. For example, having some form of negation, including inequality, is of great importance in the context of data
quality checking (Console and Lenzerini 2020). Another notable example is navigational queries, i.e., queries based on
singling out paths in a graph or characterized by some form
of recursion, as in Datalog. In the literature, there are several
studies on adding such features to UCQs. Unfortunately, the
results show that, as soon as we try to extend the UCQ class
with either unlimited recursion or uncontrolled use of inequalities/negation, we get undecidability of query answering already for lightweight KBs of the DL-Lite family (Levy
and Rousset 1998; Calvanese and Rosati 2003; GutiérrezBasulto et al. 2015). Other studies tried to explore limited
versions of recursion and negation to be added to UCQ,
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

∃hasInfected v Pat, ∃hasInfected− v Pat,
6280

