The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

GLUECons: A Generic Benchmark for Learning under Constraints
Hossein Rajaby Faghihi1 , Aliakbar Nafar1 , Chen Zheng1 , Roshanak Mirzaee1 , Yue Zhang1 ,
Andrzej Uszok2 , Alexander Wan3* , Tanawan Premsri1 , Dan Roth4 , and Parisa Kordjamshidi1
1
Michigan State University
Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition
3
University of California Berkeley
4
University of Pennsylvania
{rajabyfa, nafarali, zhengc12, mirzaeem, zhan1624, premsrit, kordjams}@msu.com,
auszok@ihmc.org, alexwan@berkeley.edu, danroth@seas.upenn.edu
2

Abstract

et al. 2020; Mirzaee et al. 2021a). This is especially a major
concern when interpretability is required (Mathews 2019),
or there are security concerns over applications relying on
the decisions of DNNs (Brundage et al. 2020).

Recent research has shown that integrating domain knowledge into deep learning architectures is effective; It helps reduce the amount of required data, improves the accuracy of
the models’ decisions, and improves the interpretability of
models. However, the research community lacks a convened
benchmark for systematically evaluating knowledge integration methods. In this work, we create a benchmark that is a
collection of nine tasks in the domains of natural language
processing and computer vision. In all cases, we model external knowledge as constraints, specify the sources of the constraints for each task, and implement various models that use
these constraints. We report the results of these models using
a new set of extended evaluation criteria in addition to the
task performances for a more in-depth analysis. This effort
provides a framework for a more comprehensive and systematic comparison of constraint integration techniques and for
identifying related research challenges. It will facilitate further research for alleviating some problems of state-of-the-art
neural models.

1

Knowledge Integration Solution To address these challenges, one direction that the prior research has investigated
is neuro-symbolic approaches as a way to exploit both symbolic reasoning and sub-symbolic learning. Here, we focus
on a subset of these approaches for the integration of external knowledge in deep learning. Knowledge can be represented through various formalisms such as logic rules (Hu
et al. 2016; Nandwani, Pathak, and Singla 2019), Knowledge graphs (Zheng and Kordjamshidi 2022), Context-free
grammars (Deutsch, Upadhyay, and Roth 2019), Algebraic
equations (Stewart and Ermon 2017), or probabilistic relations (Constantinou, Fenton, and Neil 2016). A more detailed investigation of available sources of knowledge and
techniques to integrate them with DNNs is surveyed in (von
Rueden et al. 2019; Dash et al. 2022). Although integrating
knowledge into DNNs is done in many different forms, we
focus on explicit knowledge about the latent and/or output
variables. More specifically, we consider the type of knowledge that can be represented as declarative constraints imposed (in a soft or hard way) on the models’ predictions,
during training or at inference time. The term knowledge
integration is used in the scope of this assumption in the remainder of this paper.

Introduction

Deep Learning Shortcomings Recent advancements in machine learning are proven very effective in solving realworld problems in various areas, such as vision and language. However, there are still remaining challenges. First,
machine learning models mostly fail to perform well on
complex tasks where reasoning is crucial (Schubotz et al.
2018) while human performance does not drop as much
when more steps of reasoning are required. Second, deep
neural networks (DNNs) are known to be data-hungry, making them struggle on tasks where the annotated data is
scarce (Li, Wang, and Yu 2020; Zoph et al. 2016). Third,
models often provide results that are inconsistent (Li et al.
2019; Gardner et al. 2020) even when they perform well
on the task. Prior research has shown that even large pretrained language models performing well on a specific task
may suffer from inconsistent decisions and indicate unreliability when attacked under adversarial examples and specialized test sets that evaluate their logical consistency (Gardner

Hurdle of Knowledge Integration Unfortunately, most
prior research on knowledge integration has only focused
on evaluating their proposed method compared to baseline DNN architectures that ignore the knowledge. Consequently, despite each method providing evidence of its effectiveness (Hu et al. 2016; Nandwani, Pathak, and Singla
2019), there is no comprehensive analysis that can provide a
better understanding of the use cases, advantages, and disadvantages of methods, especially when compared with each
other. The lack of such analysis has made it hard to apply
these approaches to a more diverse set of tasks by a broader
community and provide a clear comparison with existing
methods. We mainly attribute this to three factors: 1) the
lack of a standard benchmark with systematic baselines, 2)
the difficulty of finding appropriate tasks where constraints

* Summer Intern at Michigan State University
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9552

