The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FedMDFG: Federated Learning with Multi-Gradient Descent and Fair Guidance
Zibin Pan1,2 , Shuyi Wang1,2 , Chi Li1 , Haijin Wang1 , Xiaoying Tang∗1,2,3 , Junhua Zhao∗1,2
1

The School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
2
The Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
3
The Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Future Networks of Intelligence
zibinpan@link.cuhk.edu.cn, shuyiwang@link.cuhk.edu.cn, chili@link.cuhk.edu.cn, haijinwang@link.cuhk.edu.cn,
tangxiaoying@cuhk.edu.cn, zhaojunhua@cuhk.edu.cn
Abstract
Fairness has been considered as a critical problem in federated learning (FL). In this work, we analyze two direct
causes of unfairness in FL - an unfair direction and an improper step size when updating the model. To solve these issues, we introduce an effective way to measure fairness of
the model through the cosine similarity, and then propose a
federated multiple gradient descent algorithm with fair guidance (FedMDFG) to drive the model fairer. We first convert
FL into a multi-objective optimization problem (MOP) and
design an advanced multiple gradient descent algorithm to
calculate a fair descent direction by adding a fair-driven objective to MOP. A low-communication-cost line search strategy is then designed to find a better step size for the model
update. We further show the theoretical analysis on how it can
enhance fairness and guarantee the convergence. Finally, extensive experiments in several FL scenarios verify that FedMDFG is robust and outperforms the SOTA FL algorithms
in convergence and fairness. The source code is available at
https://github.com/zibinpan/FedMDFG.

1

Figure 1: Directions obtained by FedMDFG and three previous gradient-based methods. g1 , g2 , and g3 are local gradients. All possible common descent directions lie in the gray
and yellow areas. The yellow area depicts all possible fair
descent directions. The directions out of the gray area will
cause a performance reduction for some clients.

to mitigate the local gradient conflicts among clients by gradient projection, but it cannot ensure to prevent of local performance reduction in the case of more than two clients;
FedMGDA+ (Hu et al. 2022) designs a constraint multiple
gradient descent algorithm to find a common descent direction for all clients. However, it’s difficult to tune the hyperparameter of the method to achieve its goal.
In contrast to previous studies, we observe that the use
of an unfair direction and an incorrect step size when updating the model are two direct causes of fairness violation.
First and foremost, for convex problems, if the FL method
finds a direction d that conflicts with some clients’ gradients
gi , i.e., ∃i, −dgi < 0 (Wang et al. 2021), the model accuracy
will suffer reductions for these clients whatever any step size
is taken. Thus, the model will become more unfair. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 2 (b), Even if the direction is fair, a
step size that is too large can undermine fairness.
To address the aforementioned issues, we propose a Federated Multi-Gradient Descent with Fair Guidance (FedMDFG) algorithm to find a fair descent direction as well
as a proper step size for training the global FL model. To
the best of our knowledge, FedMDFG is the first one that
can determine a fair descent direction, which can not only
lead to increase model performance on each client but also
drive the model fairer. Fig. 1 shows that FedMDFG can discover a fair descent direction compared with some previous

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a significant machine learning methodology where clients can utilize their
local data to train a global model collaboratively without
sharing data (McMahan et al. 2017). Since the global model
includes significantly more local data for training, it’s anticipated to have a strong generalization and perform as well as
possible in all clients. Unfortunately, it’s a huge challenge
to train a global model that treats every client fairly (i.e.,
increasing the uniformity of performance across clients (Li
et al. 2021b)) for many reasons, such as the data is frequently
heterogeneous on clients both in terms of distribution and
size, the partial selection at each communication round (Cho
et al. 2020), and client dropping out (Abay et al. 2020).
Many prior techniques have been proposed to improve
fairness in FL. For instance, q-FFL (Li et al. 2020c) employs a fair resource allocation mechanism; AFL (Mohri,
Sivek, and Suresh 2019) tries to protect the client with the
worst performance, but it only works when there are few
clients (Wang et al. 2021). FedFV (Wang et al. 2021) aims
∗

Xiaoying Tang and Junhua Zhao are corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9364

