The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning to Shape Rewards Using a Game of Two Partners
David Mguni†,1 , Taher Jafferjee1 , Jianhong Wang2 , Nicolas Perez-Nieves3 ,
Wenbin Song6 , Feifei Tong1 , Matthew E. Taylor4,5 , Tianpei Yang4,5 , Zipeng Dai1 ,
Hui Chen7 , Jiangcheng Zhu1 , Kun Shao1 , Jun Wang7 , Yaodong Yang†,8
1

Huawei R&D
University of Manchester, UK
3
Imperial College London, UK
4
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
5
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute, Edmonton, Canada
6
Shanghai Tech University, China
7
University College London, UK
8
Peking University, Beijing, China
2

Abstract
Reward shaping (RS) is a powerful method in reinforcement
learning (RL) for overcoming the problem of sparse or uninformative rewards. However, RS typically relies on manually engineered shaping-reward functions whose construction is timeconsuming and error-prone. It also requires domain knowledge
which runs contrary to the goal of autonomous learning. We
introduce Reinforcement Learning Optimising Shaping Algorithm (ROSA), an automated reward shaping framework in
which the shaping-reward function is constructed in a Markov
game between two agents. A reward-shaping agent (Shaper)
uses switching controls to determine which states to add shaping rewards for more efficient learning while the other agent
(Controller) learns the optimal policy for the task using these
shaped rewards. We prove that ROSA, which adopts existing
RL algorithms, learns to construct a shaping-reward function
that is beneficial to the task thus ensuring efficient convergence to high-performance policies. We demonstrate ROSA’s
properties in three didactic experiments and show its superior
performance against state-of-the-art RS algorithms in challenging sparse reward environments.

Introduction
Despite the notable success of RL in a variety of domains,
enabling RL algorithms to learn successfully in numerous
real-world tasks remains a challenge (Wang et al. 2021). A
key obstacle to the success of RL algorithms is that sparse
reward signals can hinder agent learning (Charlesworth and
Montana 2020). In many settings of interest such as physical
tasks and video games, rich informative signals of the agent’s
performance are not readily available (Hosu and Rebedea
2016). For example, in the video game Super Mario (Shao
et al. 2019), the agent must perform sequences of hundreds
of actions while receiving no rewards for it to successfully
complete its task. In this setting, the infrequent feedback of
the agent’s performance leads to RL algorithms requiring
large numbers of samples (and high expense) for solving
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Corresponding authors <davidmguni@hotmail.com>
<yaoodong.yang@pku.edu.cn>.

11604

problems (Hosu and Rebedea 2016). Therefore, there is a
need for RL techniques to solve such problems efficiently.
Reward shaping (RS) is a tool to introduce additional rewards, known as shaping rewards, to supplement the environmental reward. These rewards can encourage exploration and
insert structural knowledge in the absence of informative environment rewards thereby significantly improving learning
outcomes (Devlin, Kudenko, and Grześ 2011). RS algorithms
often assume hand-crafted and domain-specific shaping
functions, constructed by subject matter experts, which runs
contrary to the aim of autonomous learning. Moreover, poor
choices of shaping rewards can worsen the agent’s performance (Devlin and Kudenko 2011). To resolve these issues,
a useful shaping reward must be obtained autonomously.
We develop a framework that autonomously constructs
shaping rewards during learning. ROSA introduces an additional RL agent, the Shaper, that adaptively learns to construct shaping rewards by observing Controller , while Controller learns to solve its task. This generates tailored shaping
rewards without the need for domain knowledge or manual
engineering. These shaping rewards successfully promote
effective learning, addressing this key challenge.
The resulting framework is a two-player, nonzero-sum
Markov game (MG) (Shoham and Leyton-Brown 2008) —
an extension of Markov decision process (MDP) that involves two independent learners with distinct objectives. In
our framework, the two agents have distinct learning agendas but cooperate to achieve the Controller’s objective. An
integral component of ROSA is a novel combination of RL
and switching controls (Mguni et al. 2022; Bayraktar and
Egami 2010; Mguni 2018). This enables Shaper to quickly
determine useful states to learn to add in shaping rewards
(i.e., states where adding shaping rewards improves the Controller’s performance) but disregard other states. In contrast
Controller must learn actions for every state. This leads to
the Shaper quickly finding shaping rewards that guide the
Controller’s learning process toward optimal trajectories (and
away from suboptimal trajectories, as in Experiment 1).
This approach tackles multiple obstacles. First, a new agent
(Shaper) learns while the Controller is training while avoid-

