The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Anytime User Engagement Prediction in Information Cascades
for Arbitrary Observation Periods
Akshay Aravamudan , Xi Zhang, Georgios C. Anagnostopoulos
Department of Computer Engineering & Sciences, Florida Institute of Technology, Melbourne, FL, USA.
aaravamudan2014@my.fit.edu, zhang2012@my.fit.edu, georgio@fit.edu

Abstract

works that seek to identify the timings and identity of the
next user to engage the cascade such as (Islam et al. 2018;
Yang et al. 2018; Cao et al. 2017; Lamprier 2019).
Popularity prediction in the literature has primarily been
approached via the use of a generative or a discriminative
objective (Zhou et al. 2021). Generative works model popularity using temporal point processes. This includes either using a univariate temporal point process to represent
the dynamics of the process (by disregarding user identities) (Chen and Tan 2018) or a multivariate point process
(Gomez-Rodriguez, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf 2011; GomezRodriguez, Leskovec, and Krause 2012; Farajtabar et al.
2015) that takes into consideration complex user-level interactions. The benefit of such an approach is that it provides interpretable models of the underlying information
diffusion mechanism and, at the same time, enabling us to
produce cascade size counts for varying prediction time intervals and/or forecast horizons in a principled way. However, they oftentimes provide lackluster performance on account of generative models not being trained for prediction
(Mishra, Rizoiu, and Xie 2016; Zhou et al. 2021; Cao et al.
2017).
On the other hand, works with discriminative/predictive
objectives aim solely to produce counts and may not necessarily be interested in discovering the underlying dynamics of the process. While some works do attempt to imbue
point process based assumptions (Cao et al. 2017), most
of them extract handcrafted features from information cascades for prediction. Recent developments in the realm of
recurrent and graph neural networks have facilitated the
development of popularity prediction models that consider
user interactions as well. In specific, the successes of deep
learning models in processing multi-modal information such
as graph structure, user, and topic information have shown
great promise in improving performance (Wang, Zhou, and
Kong 2020). A shortcoming of these models is that, while
they allow for user-level analysis and produce satisfactory
results, they often require training a model per observation
period [0, tc ] and/or forecast horizon (tc , ∆t] while not being easily interpretable.
In this work, we bridge the divide by developing a single user-level model across all censoring times and forecast horizons called DANTE (Discriminative probabilistic
ANytime user Engagement prediction). We continue to use

Predicting user engagement – whether a user will engage in
a given information cascade – is an important problem in the
context of social media, as it is useful to online marketing
and misinformation mitigation just to name a few major applications. Based on split population multi-variate survival
processes, we develop a discriminative approach that, unlike
prior works, leads to a single model for predicting whether individual users of an information network will engage a given
cascade for arbitrary forecast horizons and observation periods. Being probabilistic in nature, this model retains the interpretability of its generative counterpart and renders count
prediction intervals in a disciplined manner. Our results indicate that our model is highly competitive, if not superior, to
current approaches, when compared over varying observed
cascade histories and forecast horizons.

Introduction
As of late, the study of information diffusion across the Internet has been an active field of research. An information
cascade – the propagation trace of a piece of information
shared among users/agents of a communication network –
forms as a result of users engaging a particular piece of content. An important problem is that of predicting whether or
not a user will engage a given information cascade. User
engagement prediction garners benefits to those who have
a vested interest in knowing whether content will become
popular/viral over time, especially within the realm of social media. A few other examples include marketing companies promoting product adoption (Bei, Chen, and Linchi
2011), political campaigns leveraging public opinion (Farajtabar et al. 2016), and even social media companies engaged
in content moderation and rumor control (Chen et al. 2022;
Farajtabar et al. 2017).
While the terms information diffusion prediction and user
engagement prediction fall under the broader umbrella of
(content) popularity prediction, there have been various interpretations within existing works. In this work, we refer to
the latter as the task of predicting the number of new users
engaging a specified information cascade – by reacting to or
resharing content at least once – for a given observation period and forecast horizon. This is functionally distinct from
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4999

