The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Dual Memory Units with Uncertainty Regulation for Weakly Supervised
Video Anomaly Detection
Hang Zhou, Junqing Yu* , Wei Yang *
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
{henrryzh, yjqing, weiyangcs}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

abnormal instance
normal instance
uncertainty regulation
normal instance
normal memory banks
abnormal memory banks
uncertainty margin
ground truth(abnormal)
anomaly prediction

Learning discriminative features for effectively separating
abnormal events from normality is crucial for weakly supervised video anomaly detection (WS-VAD) tasks. Existing approaches, both video and segment-level label oriented,
mainly focus on extracting representations for anomaly data
while neglecting the implication of normal data. We observe
that such a scheme is sub-optimal, i.e., for better distinguishing anomaly one needs to understand what is a normal state,
and may yield a higher false alarm rate. To address this issue,
we propose an Uncertainty Regulated Dual Memory Units
(UR-DMU) model to learn both the representations of normal data and discriminative features of abnormal data. To be
specific, inspired by the traditional global and local structure
on graph convolutional networks, we introduce a Global and
Local Multi-Head Self Attention (GL-MHSA) module for the
Transformer network to obtain more expressive embeddings
for capturing associations in videos. Then, we use two memory banks, one additional abnormal memory for tackling hard
samples, to store and separate abnormal and normal prototypes and maximize the margins between the two representations. Finally, we propose an uncertainty learning scheme
to learn the normal data latent space, that is robust to noise
from camera switching, object changing, scene transforming,
etc. Extensive experiments on XD-Violence and UCF-Crime
datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms the stateof-the-art methods by a sizable margin.

Ours

Time

RTFM
HL-Net
V-MIL

Figure 1: We use two memory banks to store normal and
anomaly instances respectively, both memory banks attract
close instances. The normal space is regulated to be a Gaussian distribution, while no additional regulation applied for
anomaly feature space. Such a strategy can tackle the hard
samples better, the bottom curve shows prediction results of
a part of the video “Black.Hawk.Down”.
Ilse, Tomczak, and Welling 2018). MIL-based anomaly detection methods consider each video as a bag, where abnormal videos are defined as positive and normal videos
as negative. Meanwhile, anomaly snippets are presented
as positive instances in positive bags, and normal snippets
are negative instances. MIL-based methods then learn the
instance-level labels from video bags by selecting top-K instances as abnormal according to discriminative representations (Zhang, Qing, and Miao 2019; Zhu and Newsam 2019;
Wu et al. 2021; Wu and Liu 2021).
Notably, MIST (Feng, Hong, and Zheng 2021) develops
a two-stage self-training procedure by generating pseudo labels using MIL approaches and emphasizing anomalous regions with a self-guided attention boosted feature encoder.
RTFM (Tian et al. 2021) uses a feature magnitude learning function to recognise the positive instances, effectively
improving the robustness of the MIL approach. Nevertheless, existing weakly supervised approaches focus on learning discriminative features for anomalous instances, while
neglecting the implication of normal data, and hence yield

Introduction
Video anomaly detection (VAD) aims to identify the time
window of abnormal events in untrimmed videos (Lu, Shi,
and Jia 2013; Liu et al. 2018; Sultani, Chen, and Shah 2018;
Wu et al. 2020), and has beneficial applications in the context of intelligent video surveillance. Yet collecting finegrained anomaly videos for training are arduous, weakly supervised approaches, which assign one label, i.e., normal or
abnormal, for each panoptic video, have been gaining popularity and achieving state-of-the-art performances (Zhong
et al. 2019; Zaheer et al. 2020; Tian et al. 2021). Following
weakly supervised setup, multiple instances learning (MIL)
is one of the most effective strategies (Wang et al. 2018b;
* indicates co-corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3769

