The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Mean-Shifted Contrastive Loss for Anomaly Detection
Tal Reiss, Yedid Hoshen
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

Abstract

recent methods use self-supervised features to detect anomalies. Unfortunately, anomaly detection datasets are typically
small and do not include labeled anomalous samples, resulting in weak features. To overcome this issue, many previous
methods suggested incorporating the use of generic, external datasets (e.g. ImageNet). As such supervision is often
found off-the-shelf and does not require any further annotation, this does not present extra costs. External datasets have
been used in two major ways. The first is outlier exposure
(OE), which amounts to using an external dataset to simulate anomalies. Supervised techniques can then be used for
anomaly detection. Although very effective, OE can completely fail when the anomalies are more similar to the normal data than to the OE dataset.
The alternative approach, that we will follow here, advocates for pre-training representations on generic, external
datasets and transferring them to the anomaly detection task.
(Reiss et al. 2021) found that even a simple kNN anomaly
detection classifier based on ImageNet pre-trained representation already outperforms nearly all self-supervised methods. Furthermore, fine-tuning the pre-trained features on the
normal training data can result in significant performance
improvements. Although it may appear natural that this can
simply be done by initializing standard anomaly detection
techniques with the pre-trained features, it is quite challenging. PANDA (Reiss et al. 2021) combined the DeepSVDD
objective (Ruff et al. 2018) with pre-trained features. However, as contrastive learning approaches typically perform
better than the SVDD objective, we hypothesize that combining pre-trained features with contrastive methods would
achieve the best of both worlds.
We begin with the surprising result that standard contrastive methods, initialized with pre-trained weights, do not
improve anomaly detection accuracy at all. An analysis of
the learning dynamics reveals that this occurs as the standard contrastive loss is poorly suited for data that are concentrated in a compact subspace (which the normal data under strong pre-trained features are). We propose an alternative objective, the Mean-Shifted Contrastive (MSC) loss.
The MSC loss is found to achieve better One-Class Classification (OCC) performance than the center loss (used in
DeepSVDD and PANDA) and sets a new anomaly detection
state-of-the-art. Our contributions:

Deep anomaly detection methods learn representations that
separate between normal and anomalous images. Although
self-supervised representation learning is commonly used,
small dataset sizes limit its effectiveness. It was previously
shown that utilizing external, generic datasets (e.g. ImageNet
classification) can significantly improve anomaly detection
performance. One approach is outlier exposure, which fails
when the external datasets do not resemble the anomalies.
We take the approach of transferring representations pretrained on external datasets for anomaly detection. Anomaly
detection performance can be significantly improved by finetuning the pre-trained representations on the normal training images. In this paper, we first demonstrate and analyze
that contrastive learning, the most popular self-supervised
learning paradigm cannot be naively applied to pre-trained
features. The reason is that pre-trained feature initialization
causes poor conditioning for standard contrastive objectives,
resulting in bad optimization dynamics. Based on our analysis, we provide a modified contrastive objective, the MeanShifted Contrastive Loss. Our method is highly effective
and achieves a new state-of-the-art anomaly detection performance including 98.6% ROC-AUC on the CIFAR-10 dataset.

1

Introduction

Anomaly detection is a fundamental task for intelligent
agents and has broad applications for scientific and industrial tasks. Due to the significance of the task, many efforts have been focused on automatic anomaly detection,
particularly on statistical and machine learning methods. A
common paradigm used by many anomaly detection methods is estimating the probability density function (PDF) of
the data, given a training set of normal samples. New samples are then predicted to be normal if they are likely under
the estimator, while low-likelihood samples are predicted
to be anomalous. The quality of the density estimators is
closely related to the quality of features used to represent the
data. Classical methods used k-means, k-nearest-neighbors
(kNN), or Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) on raw features, however, this often results in poor estimators on highdimensional data such as images.
One way to improve PDF estimators for high-dimensional
data is by representing them using effective features. Many
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. We analyze the standard contrastive loss for fine-tuning
2155

