The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Reachability Games Modulo Theories with a Bounded Safety Player*
Marco Faella1 , Gennaro Parlato2
1

University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy
2
University of Molise, Pesche, Italy
m.faella@unina.it, gennaro.parlato@unimol.it

Abstract

only a finite but often also a compact representation of the
system. Logical formulas, for example, can compactly define the set of transitions of programs, or the transition functions of robots moving on an infinite grid. For this reason,
computing the winning strategy of logic games is essential
for solving relevant real-world problems, such as those related to software verification and synthesis, robotics, etc.
Our paper assumes that the components of the game are
multi-sorted first-order formulas. Specifically, we consider
quantifier-free formulas that are supported by modern SMT
solvers.
The problem of finding the winner of a logical game
is undecidable in general. Rice’s theorem states that all
non-trivial semantic properties of programs are undecidable.
Since we can easily model a program with logical formulas and use them as the transition function for one of the
players, it is easy to see that even the problem of determining the winner of a logical game is undecidable. It follows
that it is not possible to have an algorithmic solution that
terminates for all games, and any sound technique, like the
one we propose, will fail to terminate on some instances.
Among the approaches proposed in the literature, three are
closely related to ours, as they also target logical reachability games. Beyene et al. (2014) reduce such games to a system of constrained Horn clauses (CHCs) extended with existential quantifiers, with the aid of a user-provided strategy
template. Farzan and Kincaid (2018) focus on games whose
rules can be expressed in linear arithmetic and present an algorithm that considers increasingly longer bounded-horizon
versions of the game, until either the reachability player wins
or the winning strategy of the safety player can be generalized to the original infinite-horizon game. Finally, Craig interpolation is used by Baier et al. (2021) to propose a method
using subgoals, which are slices of the game a reachability
player must traverse to reach the target.
Our study introduces a special form of logical reachability
games, which allows us to model various relevant real-world
problems, in which the safety player has a bounded number
of moves from all game configurations, whereas the reachability player has no such limitation. For example, consider
the Cinderella-Stepmother game, that we use as a running
example throughout the paper. Here, the two players share

Solving reachability games is a fundamental problem for the
analysis, verification, and synthesis of reactive systems. We
consider logical reachability games modulo theories (in short,
GMTs), i.e., infinite-state games whose rules are defined by
logical formulas over a multi-sorted first-order theory. Our
games have an asymmetric constraint: the safety player has
at most k possible moves from each game configuration,
whereas the reachability player has no such limitation. Even
though determining the winner of such a GMT is undecidable, it can be reduced to the well-studied problem of checking the satisfiability of a system of constrained Horn clauses
(CHCs), for which many off-the-shelf solvers have been developed. Winning strategies for GMTs can also be computed
by resorting to suitable CHC queries. We demonstrate that
GMTs can model various relevant real-world games, and that
our approach can effectively solve several problems from different domains, using Z3 as the backend CHC solver.

1

Introduction

Solving reachability games is a fundamental problem for the
analysis, verification, and synthesis of reactive systems, as
they are key tools for modeling such systems. Reachability games are turn-based games played between two players, over a finite or infinite directed graph. The nodes of the
graph represent the configurations of the system it models,
while the edges of the graph represent transitions. R EACH,
or the reachability player, aims to hit a target configuration.
In contrast, S AFE, or the safety player, has the opposite objective, i.e., to prevent R EACH from reaching a target configuration, thus keeping the system within a set of safe configurations regardless of the choices of R EACH.
In logical reachability games, the sets of initial and target configurations, and the players’ moves, are defined using
logical formulas. If a system has an enormous state space, if
not an infinite one, symbolic representations allow for not
* This work was partially supported by INDAM-GNCS 2022,
AWS 2021 Amazon Research Awards, the MUR project Future Artificial Intelligence Research (FAIR), and the MUR project ‘Innovation, digitalisation and sustainability for the diffused economy in
Central Italy’, Spoke 1 MEGHALITIC, VITALITY Ecosystem.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6330

