The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FeedFormer: Revisiting Transformer Decoder for Efficient Semantic Segmentation
Jae-hun Shim1 * , Hyunwoo Yu1 * , Kyeongbo Kong2 * , Suk-Ju Kang1†
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Sogang University, Seoul, 04017, Republic of Korea
Department of Media School, Pukyong National University, Busan, 48547, Republic of Korea
jhshim1995@sogang.ac.kr, hyunwoo137@sogang.ac.kr, kbkong@pknu.ac.kr, sjkang@sogang.ac.kr
2

Abstract

Recently, this difficulty has been largely alleviated with
the emergence of transformers. Following the significant improvement by using the transformer architectures in natural
language processing (NLP), (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) first
introduced Vision Transformer (ViT) which utilizes the pure
transformer encoder for vision tasks. Since then, many studies have been conducted to extend ViT to the field of the
semantic segmentation (Xie et al. 2021; Zheng et al. 2021;
Liu et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021; Yu and Wu 2021; Yang
et al. 2022; Jain et al. 2021). In these studies, most methods
focus only on improving the efficiency of the transformer
encoder, but only take a simple design or borrow from the
existing design for the decoder architecture. For example,
SegFormer in Figure 1 (a) shows impressive performance
by designing an efficient transformer encoder with a simple ALL-MLP decoder. However, it lacks consideration for
designing the segmentation decoder optimized for the transformer encoder structure.
Other studies include utilizing the transformer decoder
structure in vision tasks. DEtection TRansformer (Carion
et al. 2020) was the first to bring the transformer encoderdecoder structure to detection and segmentation tasks. Inspired by DETR, several works expand on DETR to employ
the transformer decoder in the task of semantic segmentation (Strudel et al. 2021; Bousselham et al. 2021; Cheng,
Schwing, and Kirillov 2021; Cheng et al. 2022). The main
difference between the feature decoder and the learnable
object query decoder in Figure 1 (a) and (b), is the use
of learnable query. General transformer decoders use classwise learnable queries to extract feature information related
to each class. Therefore, they either only use the highestlevel feature or need an additional pixel decoder to extract
the multi-scale features. Moreover, to utilize the multi-scale
features, the class-wise queries have to be decoded cumulatively for each multi-scale feature. Therefore, the feature has
to pass through the transformer decoder repetitively, which
causes large computational complexity. Our strategy is to directly use features as queries instead of class-wise learnable
queries. In other words, we replace an ALL-MLP feature decoder with the transformer decoder, as shown in Figure 1
(c). Then, which level of feature should be used as query
and key?
In the semantic segmentation task, consideration of lowlevel feature is very important because the spatial detail is

With the success of Vision Transformer (ViT) in image classification, its variants have yielded great success in many downstream vision tasks. Among those, the semantic segmentation
task has also benefited greatly from the advance of ViT variants. However, most studies of the transformer for semantic
segmentation only focus on designing efficient transformer
encoders, rarely giving attention to designing the decoder.
Several studies make attempts in using the transformer decoder as the segmentation decoder with class-wise learnable
query. Instead, we aim to directly use the encoder features
as the queries. This paper proposes the Feature Enhancing
Decoder transFormer (FeedFormer) that enhances structural
information using the transformer decoder. Our goal is to decode the high-level encoder features using the lowest-level
encoder feature. We do this by formulating high-level features
as queries, and the lowest-level feature as the key and value.
This enhances the high-level features by collecting the structural information from the lowest-level feature. Additionally,
we use a simple reformation trick of pushing the encoder
blocks to take the place of the existing self-attention module of the decoder to improve efficiency. We show the superiority of our decoder with various light-weight transformerbased decoders on popular semantic segmentation datasets.
Despite the minute computation, our model has achieved
state-of-the-art performance in the performance computation
trade-off. Our model FeedFormer-B0 surpasses SegFormerB0 with 1.8% higher mIoU and 7.1% less computation on
ADE20K, and 1.7% higher mIoU and 14.4% less computation on Cityscapes, respectively. Code will be released at:
https://github.com/jhshim1995/FeedFormer.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is one of the most fundamental computer vision tasks, and it is used extensively in many realworld applications, such as autonomous driving (Cordts
et al. 2016; Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012) and medical diagnoses (Ma et al. 2021). However, the accurate pixel-wise
prediction of the whole image is very challenging because it
requires considerations for both global and local relations.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2263

