The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Preserve Context Information for Extract-Generate
Long-Input Summarization Framework
Ruifeng Yuan1 , Zili Wang2 , Ziqiang Cao3 * , Wenjie Li1 *
1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
Xiaohongshu Inc
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Soochow University, China

Abstract

Source Text

The Extract-generate framework has been a classic approach
for text summarization. As pretrained language models struggling with long-input summarization for their high memory
cost, extract-generate framework regains researchers’ interests. However, the cost of its effectiveness in dealing with
long-input summarization is the loss of context information.
In this paper, we present a context-aware extract-generate
framework (CAEG) for long-input text summarization. It focuses on preserving both local and global context information
in an extract-generate framework with little cost, and can be
applied to most of existing extract-generate summarization
models. CAEG generates a set of context-related text spans
called context prompts for each text snippet and use them to
transfer the context information from the extractor and generator. To find such context prompts, we propose to capture the
context information based on the interpretation of the extractor, where the text spans having the highest contribution to
the extraction decision are considered as containing the richest context information. We evaluate our approach on both
long-document and long-dialogue summarization datasets:
arXiv and QMSum. The experiment results show that CAEG
achieves the-state-of-art result on QMSum and outperforms
other extract-generate based models in arXiv.

Global
Context

...

...
Extractor

...
...

Extractor

Local
Context

...

Generator

...

Generator

Global
Context

Figure 1: The extract-generate framework for long-input
summarization. The grey strips stands for text snippets such
as sentences or utterances from the source document. This
figure shows that in the extract generate summary framework, both local and global context information is lost.

Introduction
Text summarization aims to generate a concise version of
the source document while preserve its salient information.
There are mainly two types of approaches for text summarization, extractive summarization and abstractive summarization. As a combination of the two approaches, extractgenerate framework has been widely used in text summarization. It first extracts salient text snippets from the
source document with an extractor model and then compresses the extracted text as the summary with a generator
model. As pretrained language models struggling with longinput summarization due to the high memory complexity
of full self-attention, extract-generate summarization framework regains researchers’ interests.
Instead of focusing equally on the whole source document like other long-input summarization models including sparse attention transformers and hierarchical models,

the extract-generate summarization framework is based on
the assumption that only a part of salient source document is useful for the summarization. This not only makes
the framework follow the human intuition when dealing
with long input-summarization, but also allows it to handle
the summarization input at any length. Hence, the extractgenerate summarization framework achieves a success in
long-input text summarization (Pilault et al. 2020; Zhao,
Saleh, and Liu 2020; Bajaj et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021;
Mao et al. 2021). However, as shown in Figure 1, the cost of
its effectiveness in handling long-input summarization is the
loss of context information. One the one hand, there exist a
gap between the extractor and generator, where the context
information can not be transferred from the continuous rep-

* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13932

