The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Corruption-Tolerant Algorithms for Generalized Linear Models
Bhaskar Mukhoty1 * , Debojyoti Dey2 , Purushottam Kar2
1

Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
2
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India
bhaskar.mukhoty@mbzuai.ac.ae, {debojyot,purushot}@cse.iitk.ac.in

Abstract

1989). However, these techniques break down if several observed labels yi are corrupted, not just by random statistical
noise but by adversarially generated structured noise. Suppose k < n labels are corrupted i.e. for some k data points
i1 , . . . , ik , the actual label yij , j = 1, . . . , k generated by the
GLM are replaced by the adversary with corrupted ones say
ỹij . Can we still recover w∗ ? Note that the learning algorithm is unaware of the points that are corrupted.
Breakdown Point: The largest fraction α = k/n of corruptions that a learning algorithm can tolerate while still offering an estimate of w∗ with bounded error is known as its
breakdown point. This paper proposes the SVAM algorithm
that can tolerate k = Ω (n) corruptions i.e. α = Ω (1).
Adversary Models: Contamination of the training labels y1 , . . . , yn by an adversary can misguide the learning algorithm into selecting model parameters of the adversary’s choice. An adversary has to choose (1) which
labels i1 , . . . , ik to corrupt and (2) what corrupted labels
ỹi1 , . . . , ỹik to put there. Adversary models emerge based
on what information the adversary can consult while making
these choices. The oblivious adversary must make both these
choices with no access to the original data {(xi , yi )}ni=1 or
true model w∗ and thus, can only corrupt a random/fixed
subset of k labels by sampling ỹij from some predetermined
noise distribution. This is also known as the Huber noise
model. On the other hand, a fully adaptive adversary has
full access to the original data and true model while making both choices. Finally, the partially adaptive adversary
must choose the corruption locations without knowledge of
original data or true model but has full access to these while
deciding the corrupted labels. See Appendix B for details.
Contributions: This paper describes the SVAM (Sequential Variance-Altered MLE) framework that offers:
1. robust estimation with a breakdown point α = Ω (1)
against partially and fully adaptive adversaries for robust
least-squares
 √  regression and mean estimation and α =
Ω 1/ d for robust gamma regression. Prior works do not
offer any breakdown point for gamma regression.
2. exact recovery of the true model w∗ against a fullyadaptive adversary for the case of least squares regression,
3. the use of variance reduction technique (see §) in robust
learning, which is novel to the best of our knowledge,
4. extensive empirical evaluation demonstrating that despite

This paper presents SVAM (Sequential Variance-Altered
MLE), a unified framework for learning generalized linear
models under adversarial label corruption in training data.
SVAM extends to tasks such as least squares regression, logistic regression, and gamma regression, whereas many existing works on learning with label corruptions focus only on
least squares regression. SVAM is based on a novel variance
reduction technique that may be of independent interest and
works by iteratively solving weighted MLEs over variancealtered versions of the GLM objective. SVAM offers provable
model recovery guarantees superior to the state-of-the-art for
robust regression even when a constant fraction of training
labels are adversarially corrupted. SVAM also empirically
outperforms several existing problem-specific techniques for
robust regression and classification. Code for SVAM is available at https://github.com/purushottamkar/svam/

Introduction
Generalized linear models (GLMs) (Nelder and Wedderburn
1972) are effective models for a variety of discrete and continuous label spaces, allowing the prediction of binary or
count-valued labels (logistic, Poisson regression) as well as
real-valued labels (gamma, least-squares regression). Inference in a GLM involves two steps: given a feature vector
x ∈ Rd and model parameters w∗ , a canonical parameter is
generated as θ := ⟨w∗ , x⟩ then the label y is sampled from
the exponential family distribution
P [y | θ] = exp(y · θ − ψ(θ) − h(y)),
where the function h(·) is specific to the GLM and ψ(·)
is a normalization term, also known as log partition function. It is common to use a non-canonical link such as
θ := exp(⟨w∗ , x⟩) for gamma distribution. GLMs also admit vector valued label y ∈ Rn by substituting the scalar
product by inner product ⟨y, η⟩ where η := Xw∗ is the
canonical parameter and X ∈ Rn×d is the covariate matrix.
Problem Description: Given data {(xi , yi )}ni=1 generated using a known GLM but unknown model parameters
w∗ , statistically efficient techniques exist to recover a consistent estimate of the model w∗ (McCullagh and Nelder
* Work done while the author was a student at IIT Kanpur.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9243

