The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning
Leads to Higher Adversarial Susceptibility
Rohit Gupta1 , Naveed Akhtar2 , Ajmal Mian2 , Mubarak Shah1
1

Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
2
University of Western Australia
rohitg@knights.ucf.edu, {naveed.akhtar, ajmal.mian}@uwa.edu.au, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract

models in terms of adversarial robustness in image and video
classification tasks. We show that this disparity also holds
when equivalent augmentations and training schedules are
applied to both supervised and self-supervised learning.
We investigate the reasons of higher adversarial vulnerability of CSL by examining the properties of the representation space induced by the contrastive loss. As illustrated in
Fig. 1, Contrastive Learning (CL) brings similar pairs of data
closer to each other in the learned representation space, and
repels away the dissimilar pairs. In supervised CL, positive
and negative pairs can be formed using known labels. For
the self-supervised case, typically an instance in the dataset
is treated as a negative for every other instance, and positives
for an instance are generated using data augmentation.
Wang and Isola (2020) highlighted two key characteristics
of CSL representation. (a) Alignment: positive pairs formed
by data augmentation of a single instance are closer in the
feature space, and (b) uniformity: a property that induces
uniform distribution of instances in the representation space
by repelling all other instances away from the anchor instance. The latter can be understood as an application of the
principle of maximum entropy (Jaynes 1957) (colloquially
referred to as Occam’s Razor). Since class information about
the instances is not available in self-supervised learning, it
preserves maximum information about the data in the representation by inducing a uniform distribution of the training instances. Typically CSL representation lies on an ndimensional hyper-sphere. As per the uniformity property,
instances in the training dataset are roughly uniformly distributed over the surface of the hyper-sphere (Fig. 1b). However, this is sub-optimal from the perspective of adversarial
robustness as this results in instances being close to the class
boundaries and class clusters being spread out in the feature
space. Contrastingly, in supervised learning, since the class
labels are known, we can choose to only repel the instances
from other classes to obtain tightly clustered classes in the
feature space, achieving higher adversarial robustness.
A solution to this problem is to identify instance pairs in
the unlabelled training data that belong to the same class and
avoid using them as negative pairs for the contrastive loss.
However, doing so is not trivial because data labels are unavailable in self–supervised learning. We propose an Adaptive False Negative Cancellation (Adaptive FNC) method
that improves CSL training by gradually sifting out the

Contrastive self-supervised learning (CSL) has managed to
match or surpass the performance of supervised learning in
image and video classification. However, it is still largely unknown if the nature of the representations induced by the two
learning paradigms is similar. We investigate this under the
lens of adversarial robustness. Our analysis of the problem
reveals that CSL has intrinsically higher sensitivity to perturbations over supervised learning. We identify the uniform
distribution of data representation over a unit hypersphere in
the CSL representation space as the key contributor to this
phenomenon. We establish that this is a result of the presence of false negative pairs in the training process, which increases model sensitivity to input perturbations. Our finding
is supported by extensive experiments for image and video
classification using adversarial perturbations and other input
corruptions. We devise a strategy to detect and remove false
negative pairs that is simple, yet effective in improving model
robustness with CSL training. We close up to 68% of the robustness gap between CSL and its supervised counterpart. Finally, we contribute to adversarial learning by incorporating
our method in CSL. We demonstrate an average gain of about
5% over two different state-of-the-art methods in this domain.

Introduction
Contrastive Self-supervised Learning (CSL) (Chen et al.
2020a) is a widely adopted technique of self-supervised
training of visual models (Radford et al. 2021), (Chen, Xie,
and He 2021). It allows pre-training on unlabelled largescale data prior to task-specific finetuning of the model.
Since state-of-the-art CSL models in computer vision are
performing equally well as the supervised models on popular benchmark datasets such as ImageNet, and make similar errors (Geirhos et al. 2020), it is a common perception
that CSL models learn similar representations as their supervised counterparts.
In this work, we scrutinize the under-investigated question
of similarity between supervised and CSL representations
from the perspective of adversarial robustness. Surprisingly,
our findings do not align well with the prevailing belief that
both model types admit representations of similar nature. We
find that CSL models are considerably inferior to supervised
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14838

