The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

RINK: Reader-Inherited Evidence Reranker for Table-and-Text Open Domain
Question Answering
Eunhwan Park1 , Sung-Min Lee1 , Daeryong Seo3 , Seonhoon Kim2 * , Inho Kang3 , Seung-Hoon Na1†
1

Jeonbuk National University
2
Coupang
3
Naver Corporation
{judepark, cap1232, nash}@jbnu.ac.kr, sekim625@coupang.com, {daeryong.seo, once.ihkang}@navercorp.com
Abstract

The existing approaches for table-and-text ODQA are primarily based on a Retrieval-Reader pipeline, in which the
retrieval module first finds a set of relevant “heterogenous”
evidences and the reader module then generates an answer
using a decoder layer that includes the retrieved evidences as
an additional input. In contrast to textual ODQA, the multimodality is a challenging issue in table-and-text ODQA,
requiring the retrieval and reasoning components to be involved with a strong interaction across different types of
evidence (i.e., textual, or tabular content). For the retrieval
step in table-and-text ODQA, early fusion has been widely
used to efficiently handle multimodality (Chen et al. 2021),
by defining a fusion block as the basic retrieval unit, which is
obtained by combining table cells with their related passages
and differs from the retrieval based on a single block that
searches tabular or textual blocks separately. Despite its effectiveness over the use of single blocks, the collection size
of fusion blocks becomes readily huge because of its combinatorial nature, being considerably larger than the separate
sizes of table cells and passages, rendering the retrieval process non-trivial1 .
To improve the retrieval performance for table-and-text
ODQA, this paper extensively incorporates a “reranker”
module for fusion block retrieval, thereby initially exploring
the framework of Retriever-Reranker-Reader for table-andtext ODQA, described as follows:

Most approaches used in open-domain question answering
on hybrid data that comprises both tabular-and-textual contents are based on a Retrieval-Reader pipeline in which the
retrieval module finds relevant “heterogenous” evidence for
a given question and the reader module generates an answer from the retrieved evidence. In this paper, we present
a Retriever-Reranker-Reader framework by newly proposing a Reader-INherited evidence reranKer (RINK) where a
reranker module is designed by finetuning the reader’s neural architecture based on a simple prompting method. Our
underlying assumption of reusing the reader’s module for
the reranker is that the reader’s ability to generating an answer from evidence contains the knowledge required for the
reranking, because the reranker needs to “read” in-depth a
question and evidences more carefully and elaborately than
a baseline retriever. Furthermore, we present a simple and
effective pretraining method by extensively deploying the
commonly used data augmentation methods of cell corruption and cell reordering based on the pretraining tasks –
tabular-and-textual entailment and cross-modal masked language modeling. Experimental results on OTT-QA, a largescale table-and-text open-domain question answering dataset,
show that the proposed RINK armed with our pretraining
procedure makes improvements over the baseline reranking
method and leads to state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction

1. Reader-INherited evidence reranKer (RINK): In particular, we propose a novel type of reranker, referred to as
RINK, in which the reranker module is inherited from the
reader module with the same architecture and performs a
binary classification based on a prompting method, enabling us to maximally share the reader’s parameters for
the reranker and to apply multi-task learning or transfer
learning. The key property of RINK is that the reranker
is based on a set-level reranking, in which the reranker
is first applied to sampled sets of blocks, and then the
resulting set-level evidences are aggregated to compute

Open-domain question answering (ODQA) is a task that
aims to find an answer to a given question, which explicitly
requires the “retrieval” step for searching relevant knowledge. Going beyond the classical “textual” ODQA, recent
studies have addressed multi-modal ODQA that additionally
retrieves and reads other types of knowledge such as images
and tabular contents, raising new challenges due to its heterogeneous type of data. Among the variants of multi-modal
ODQA tasks, this paper addresses table-and-text ODQA,
which uses heterogeneous data of tabular and textual contents as real-world knowledge for ODQA, as introduced in
the OTT-QA benchmark of (Chen et al. 2021).

1
The initial retrieval performance reported in the OTT-QA
dataset is only about only about 52.4% in terms of HITS@4K
(Chen et al. 2021), which is considerably smaller than those of textual ODQA reported in the work of (Asai et al. 2020), which shows
about 93% in terms of Paragraph Recall, although the evaluation
metrics are not the same.

* Work done at NAVER.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13446

