The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Meta-Learning for Simple Regret Minimization
Javad Azizi1 , Branislav Kveton2 , Mohammad Ghavamzadeh3 , Sumeet Katariya2
1

University of Southern California
2
Amazon
3
Google Research
azizim@usc.edu, bkveton@amazon.com, ghavamza@google.com, katsumee@amazon.com

Abstract

click rates on ads is limited, or a hyper-parameter tuning task
has only a limited amount of resources (Alieva, Cutkosky,
and Das 2021). Meta-learning can result in more efficient
exploration when the learning agent solves similar tasks over
time.
To understand the benefits of meta-learning, consider the
following example. Repeated A/B tests are conducted on a
website to improve customer engagement. Suppose that the
designers always propose a variety of website designs to test.
However, dark designs tend to perform better than light ones,
and thus a lot of customer traffic is repeatedly wasted to discover the same pattern. One solution to reducing waste is that
the designers to stop proposing light designs. However, these
designs are sometimes better. A more principled solution is
to automatically adapt the prior P∗ in A/B tests to promote
dark designs unless proved otherwise by evidence. This is
the key idea in the proposed solution in this work.
We make the following contributions. First, we propose
a general meta-learning framework for fixed-horizon SRM
in Section 2. While several recent papers studied this problem in the cumulative regret setting (Bastani, Simchi-Levi,
and Zhu 2019; Cella, Lazaric, and Pontil 2020; Kveton et al.
2021; Basu et al. 2021; Simchowitz et al. 2021), this work
is the first application of meta-learning to SRM. We develop
general Bayesian and frequentist algorithms for this problem
in Sections 3 and 4. Second, we show that our Bayesian algorithm, which has access to a prior over the meta-parameters
√
of P∗ , has meta simple regret Õ(m/ n) over m bandit tasks
with horizon n. Our frequentist algorithm is more general
because it does not need a prior distribution over the metaparameters. However, we show that its meta simple regret is
√
√
Õ( mn+m/ n), and thus, worse than that of the Bayesian
algorithm. In Section 4.2, we present a lower bound showing
that this is unimprovable in general. Third, we instantiate both
algorithms in multi-armed and linear bandits in Section 5.
These instances highlight the trade-offs of the Bayesian and
frequentist approaches, a provably lower regret versus more
generality. Finally, we complement our theory with experiments (Section 7), which show the benefits of meta-learning
and confirm that the Bayesian approaches are superior whenever implementable.
Some of our contributions are of independent interest. For
instance, our analysis of the meta SRM algorithms is based on
a general reduction from cumulative regret minimization in

We develop a meta-learning framework for simple regret minimization in bandits. In this framework, a learning agent interacts with a sequence of bandit tasks, which are sampled
i.i.d. from an unknown prior distribution, and learns its metaparameters to perform better on future tasks. We propose the
first Bayesian and frequentist meta-learning algorithms for
this setting. The Bayesian algorithm has access to a prior distribution over the meta-parameters and its meta simple regret
√
over m bandit tasks with horizon n is mere Õ(m/ n). On
the other hand, the meta simple regret of the frequentist al√
√
gorithm is Õ( mn + m/ n). While its regret is worse, the
frequentist algorithm is more general because it does not need
a prior distribution over the meta-parameters. It can also be
analyzed in more settings. We instantiate our algorithms for
several classes of bandit problems. Our algorithms are general
and we complement our theory by evaluating them empirically
in several environments.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of simple regret minimization (SRM) in
a fixed-horizon (budget) setting (Audibert and Bubeck 2010;
Kaufmann, Cappé, and Garivier 2016). The learning agent
interacts sequentially with m such tasks, where each task has
a horizon of n rounds. The tasks are sampled i.i.d. from a
prior distribution P∗ , which makes them similar. We study a
meta-learning (Thrun 1996, 1998; Baxter 1998, 2000) variant
of the problem, where the prior distribution P∗ is unknown,
and the learning agent aims to learn it to reduce its regret on
future tasks.
This problem is motivated by practical applications,
such as online advertising, recommender systems, hyperparameter tuning, and drug repurposing (Hoffman, Shahriari,
and Freitas 2014; Mason et al. 2020; Réda, Kaufmann, and
Delahaye-Duriez 2021; Alieva, Cutkosky, and Das 2021),
where bandit models are popular due to their simplicity and
efficient algorithms. These applications include a test phase
separated from the commercialization phase, and one aims at
minimizing the regret of the commercialized product (simple
regret) rather than the cumulative regret in the test phase
(Audibert and Bubeck 2010). In all of these, the exploration
phase is limited by a fixed horizon: the budget for estimating
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6709

