The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Eliminating the Impossible, Whatever Remains Must Be True:
On Extracting and Applying Background Knowledge in the Context of Formal
Explanations
Jinqiang Yu1,4 , Alexey Ignatiev1 , Peter J. Stuckey1,4 , Nina Narodytska2 , Joao Marques-Silva3
1

Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
2
VMWare Research, Palo Alto, USA
3
IRIT, CNRS, Toulouse, France
4
ARC Training Centre in OPTIMA, Melbourne, Australia
{jinqiang.yu,alexey.ignatiev,peter.stuckey}@monash.edu, nnarodytska@vmware.com, joao.marques-silva@irit.fr

plainability are known to suffer from a number of fundamental explanation quality issues (Narodytska et al. 2019;
Ignatiev, Narodytska, and Marques-Silva 2019c; Camburu
et al. 2019; Ignatiev 2020), including the existence of outof-distribution attacks (Slack et al. 2020). A promising alternative is formal explainability where explanations are computed as prime implicants of the decision function associated
with ML predictions (Shih, Choi, and Darwiche 2018). Formal explanations have also been related with abductive reasoning (Ignatiev, Narodytska, and Marques-Silva 2019a,b).
Although provably correct and minimal, formal explanations have a few limitations. To provide provable correctness
guarantees, formal approaches have to take into account the
complete feature space assuming that the features are independent and uniformly distributed (Wäldchen et al. 2021).
This makes a formal reasoner check all the combinations of
feature values, including those that realistically can never
appear in practice. This leads to unnecessarily long explanations that are hard for a human decision maker to interpret.
Motivated by this limitation, our work focuses on computing both abductive and contrastive formal explanations making use of background knowledge, and makes the following
contributions. First, given a training data, we propose an efficient generic approach to extracting background knowledge
in the form of highly accurate if-then rules, building on a recent formal method for learning decision sets (Ignatiev et al.
2021). Second, we propose a novel approach to computing
formal explanations subject to background knowledge, independent of the nature of the background knowledge. Third,
we prove theoretically that the use of background knowledge positively affects the quality of both abductive and contrastive explanations, thus, helping to build trust in the underlying AI systems. Finally, motivated by (Ignatiev 2020),
we argue that background knowledge helps one assess the
correctness of heuristic ML explainers more accurately since
it blocks impossible combinations of features values.

Abstract
The rise of AI methods to make predictions and decisions has
led to a pressing need for more explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) methods. One common approach for XAI is to
produce a post-hoc explanation, explaining why a black box
ML model made a certain prediction. Formal approaches to
post-hoc explanations provide succinct reasons for why a prediction was made, as well as why not another prediction was
made. But these approaches assume that features are independent and uniformly distributed. While this means that “why”
explanations are correct, they may be longer than required.
It also means the “why not” explanations may be suspect as
the counterexamples they rely on may not be meaningful. In
this paper, we show how one can apply background knowledge to give more succinct “why” formal explanations, that
are presumably easier to interpret by humans, and give more
accurate “why not” explanations. In addition, we show how
to use existing rule induction techniques to efficiently extract
background information from a dataset.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed rapid advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) algorithms revolutionizing all aspects of human lives (LeCun, Bengio, and
Hinton 2015; ACM 2018). An ever growing range of practical applications of AI and ML, on the one hand, and a number of critical issues observed in modern AI systems (e.g.
decision bias (Angwin et al. 2016) and brittleness (Szegedy
et al. 2014)), on the other hand, gave rise to the quickly advancing area of theory and practice of Explainable AI (XAI).
Several major approaches to XAI exist. Besides tackling XAI through computing interpretable ML models directly (Rudin 2019), or through the use of interpretable
models for approximating complex black-box ML models (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016), the most prominent
approach to XAI is to compute post-hoc explanations to ML
predictions on demand (Lundberg and Lee 2017; Ribeiro,
Singh, and Guestrin 2018). Prior work distinguishes posthoc (abductive) explanations answering a “why?” question
and (contrastive) explanations targeting a “why not?” question (Miller 2019). Heuristic approaches to post-hoc ex-

2

Preliminaries

SAT and MaxSAT. Definitions standard in propositional
satisfiability (SAT) and maximum satisfiability (MaxSAT)
solving are assumed (Biere et al. 2021). SAT and MaxSAT
formulas are assumed to be propositional. A propositional

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4123

