The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Properties of Position Matrices and Their Elections
Niclas Boehmer1 , Jin-Yi Cai2 , Piotr Faliszewski3 , Austen Z. Fan2 , Łukasz Janeczko3 ,
Andrzej Kaczmarczyk3 , Tomasz W ˛
as3, 4
1

Algorithmics and Computational Complexity, Technische Universität Berlin
2
University of Wisconsin-Madison
3
AGH University
4
Pennsylvania State University
niclas.boehmer@tu-berlin.de, jyc@cs.wisc.edu, faliszew@agh.edu.pl, afan@cs.wisc.edu, ljaneczk@agh.edu.pl,
andrzej.kaczmarczyk@agh.edu.pl, twas@psu.edu
Abstract

identical position matrices and in a map are placed on top
of each other. We want to evaluate to what extent this issue
constitutes a problem for maps of elections.
The second motivation for our studies is that position matrices are natural counterparts of weighted majority relations, which specify for each pair of candidates how many
voters prefer one to the other. While weighted majority relations provide sufficient information to determine winners of
many Condorcet-consistent voting rules,1 position matrices
provide the information needed by positional scoring rules
(i.e., rules where each voter gives each candidate a number of points that depends on this candidate’s position in his
or her ranking). Together with Condorcet-consistent rules,
positional scoring rules are among the most widely studied
single-winner voting rules. While weighted majority relations are commonly studied and analyzed (even as early as
in the classic theorem of McGarvey (1953)), position matrices have not been studied as carefully.
Our contributions regard three main issues. First, we ask
how similar are elections that have the same position matrix.
To this end, we would like to sample elections with a given
position matrix uniformly at random. Unfortunately, doing
so appears to be challenging. In particular, a natural sampling algorithm requires the ability to count elections that
generate a given position matrix, and we show that doing so
is #P-complete. While, formally, there may exist a different
approach, perhaps providing only an approximately uniform
distribution, finding it is likely to require significant effort
(indeed, researchers have been trying to solve related sampling problems for quite a while, without final success as of
now; see, e.g., the works of Jacobson and Matthews (1996)
and Hong and Miklós (2021)). We design a simpler sampling
algorithm, without hard guarantees on the distribution, and
use it to evaluate how different two elections with a given
position matrix can be. The algorithm, albeit not central to
our study, might be of independent interest when considering sampling various preference distributions (Regenwetter
et al. 2006; Tideman and Plassmann 2012; Allen et al. 2017).

We study the properties of elections that have a given position matrix (in such elections each candidate is ranked on
each position by a number of voters specified in the matrix).
We show that counting elections that generate a given position matrix is #P-complete. Consequently, sampling such
elections uniformly at random seems challenging and we propose a simpler algorithm, without hard guarantees. Next, we
consider the problem of testing if a given matrix can be implemented by an election with a certain structure (such as singlepeakedness or group-separability). Finally, we consider the
problem of checking if a given position matrix can be implemented by an election with a Condorcet winner. We complement our theoretical findings with experiments.

1

Introduction

Studies of voting and elections are at the core of computational social choice (Brandt et al. 2016). An (ordinal) election is represented by a set of candidates and a collection of
voters who rank the candidates from the most to the least
appealing one. Such preferences are sometimes shown in an
aggregate form as a position matrix, which specifies for each
candidate the number of voters that rank him or her on each
possible position. Motivated by the connection of position
matrices to the so-called maps of elections, and their similarity to weighted majority relations, we study the properties
of elections with a given position matrix.
The idea of a map of elections, introduced by Szufa et al.
(2020) and Boehmer et al. (2021b), is to collect a set of elections, compute the distances between them, and embed the
elections as points in the plane, so that the Euclidean distance between points resembles the distance between the
respective elections. Such maps are useful because nearby
elections seem to have similar properties (such as, e.g., running times of winner determination algorithms, scores of
winning candidates, etc.; see, e.g., the works of Szufa et al.
(2020), Boehmer et al. (2021a), and Boehmer and Schaar
(2022)). However, there is a catch. The positionwise distance, which is commonly used in these maps, views elections with the same position matrix as identical. Hence there
might exist very different elections that, nonetheless, have

1
Rules that can be computed using only the weighted majority relation are called C2 by Fishburn (1977); see also the
overview of Zwicker (2015). A Condorcet winner is preferred to
every other candidate by a majority of voters. Condorcet-consistent
rules always select Condorcet winners when they exist. Some nonCondorcet-consistent rules are also C2 (e.g., the Borda rule).

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5507

