The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robust Video Portrait Reenactment via Personalized Representation Quantization
Kaisiyuan Wang1 , Changcheng Liang2 , Hang Zhou3 * , Jiaxiang Tang4 , Qianyi Wu5 , Dongliang He3 ,
Zhibin Hong3 , Jingtuo Liu3 , Errui Ding3 , Ziwei Liu6 , Jingdong Wang3
1

The University of Sydney
2
Xidian University
3
Baidu Inc.
4
Peking University
5
Monash University
6
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
kaisiyuan.wang@sydney.edu.au, ccliang xd@163.com, tjx@pku.edu.cn, qianyi.wu@monash.edu,
{zhouhang09, hedongliang01, liujingtuo, dingerrui, wangjingdong}@baidu.com,
Zhib.hong@gmail.com, zwliu.hust@gmail.com
Abstract

2019; Gafni et al. 2021; Guo et al. 2021) for driving photorealistic video portraits. The problem is mostly formulated
as synthesizing textures according to the geometry or semantic guidance provided by the input driving signals.
Previous works can be divided into two categories: 1)
GAN-based methods where the geometry guidance is either rendered 3D faces or landmarks. A certain studies (Kim
et al. 2018, 2019; Lahiri et al. 2021; Thies et al. 2020; Li
et al. 2021) leverage rendered 3D faces (Blanz and Vetter
1999) and Generative Adversarial Networks. Their facial
parts are rendered to be realistic, but the torso and interior
teeth depend completely on generative models. Differently,
Live Speech Portraits (LSP) (Lu, Chai, and Cao 2021) verifies that landmarks projected on 2D space can be directly
mapped to talking portraits with GANs, but their results
are unstable. 2) Volume render-based methods. Recently,
NeRF (Mildenhall et al. 2020) and other volume rendering
approaches (Gafni et al. 2021; Guo et al. 2021; Zheng et al.
2022; Grassal et al. 2022) have shown success in producing
portrait avatars. However, these methods require tedious preprocessing and are extremely time-consuming when building a single subject.
Moreover, the robustness of previous methods on in-thewild monocular videos, which are the most common data
sources, is not thoroughly considered. GAN-based methods
build a direct mapping between the driving signals and targets. Their synthesized texture is strongly coupled with geometry guidance, which inevitably results in undesirable artifacts when processing unseen driving signals (e.g., novel
poses, different scales, and distorted signals). Meanwhile,
NeRF-based methods are also sensitive to input driving signals, where a slight subject movement or inaccurate camera
pose estimation may lead to the degradation of the generation quality. Therefore, how to synthesize robust and photorealistic portrait videos remains a challenge.
To cope with these issues, we present a novel framework named Video Portrait via Non-local Quantization
Modeling (VPNQ), which achieves robust and high-fidelity
video portrait reenactment even under challenging scenarios. The task is to drive a target portrait with an arbitrary portrait video. Our key insight is to learn position-

While progress has been made in the field of portrait reenactment, the problem of how to produce high-fidelity and robust
videos remains. Recent studies normally find it challenging to
handle rarely seen target poses due to the limitation of source
data. This paper proposes the Video Portrait via Non-local
Quantization Modeling (VPNQ) framework, which produces
pose- and disturbance-robust reenactable video portraits. Our
key insight is to learn position-invariant quantized local patch
representations, then build a mapping between simple driving signals and local textures with non-local spatial-temporal
modeling. Specifically, instead of learning a universal quantized codebook, we identify that a personalized one can be
trained to preserve desired position-invariant local details.
Then, a simple representation of projected landmarks can be
used as sufficient driving signals to avoid 3D rendering. In the
following, we employ a carefully designed Spatio-Temporal
Transformer to predict reasonable and temporally consistent
quantized tokens from the driving signal. The predicted codes
can be decoded back to robust and high-quality videos. Comprehensive experiments have been conducted to validate the
effectiveness of our approach.

Introduction
Synthesizing and driving video portraits aims to animate the
target portrait with similar movements to the driving video,
which enables applications in video editing, filmmaking, visual dubbing and digital human creation. Though several
studies pursue vivid talking heads from only one or a few
samples (Zakharov et al. 2019; Siarohin et al. 2019; Zakharov et al. 2020; Wang, Mallya, and Liu 2021; Zhou et al.
2019; Wang et al. 2022; Ji et al. 2022; Doukas, Zafeiriou,
and Sharmanska 2020; Zhou et al. 2021), they tend to create visible distortions and identity drift, which makes their
results less realistic and not applicable in most real-world
applications. On the other hand, researchers seek personspecific modeling (Suwajanakorn, Seitz, and KemelmacherShlizerman 2017; Kim et al. 2018; Ji et al. 2021; Kim et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2564

