The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Cross-Category Highlight Detection via Feature Decomposition and Modality
Alignment
Zhenduo Zhang
Platform Technology Department, OVBU, PCG, Tencent, China
ericzdzhang@163.com

Abstract

source video category with supervision) to another one unlabeled target domain (the unsupervised target video category). The main issue of the proposed problem setting is that
the highlight detector can be trained on only one specific
category and transferred to other categories, which cannot
fully utilize the annotations of the training data containing
many video categories. In fact, it is a waste of resources for
precious labeling data. Besides, when adopting the highlight
detector in the actual scenario, it is hard and time-consuming
to seek the best source categories for training.
Motivated by the weaknesses of the above approaches, we
aim to overcome the poor transferability of a highlight detection model and fully utilize all the annotated training data
to further promote the highlight detector’s performance. The
video category can be seen as the biased attribute in video
highlight detection, and the highlight estimation should be
bias-independent to guarantee transferability. It is feasible to
remove the category bias and obtain a category-independent
highlight feature representation to promote transferability.
Hence, we propose a paradigm to treat the CC-VHD as a
problem of learning category-independent highlight feature
representation, using annotated video segments of all categories, instead of treating it in an Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (UDA) way.
To implement this paradigm, we propose a novel module
named Multi-task Feature Decomposition Branch(MFDB),
which disentangles video features into two independent
components: highlight-related component and categoryrelated component. The MFDB module jointly conducts
three tasks: label prediction, cyclic feature reconstruction,
and adversarial feature reconstruction, to guarantee the compactness and independence of feature decomposition.
Previous works have done many works in exploring how
to fuse the information from different modalities to promote
the highlight detection (Hong et al. 2020; Badamdorj et al.
2021), while they rarely take the alignment of multi-modal
features into consideration. The audio encoder and visual encoder in this task are usually pretrained from different video
sources, and their feature spaces may be far away from each
other. ALBEF (Li et al. 2021) and CLIP2TV (Gao et al.
2021) show that aligning different modalities before fusion
will promote the performance of video retrieval and other
downstream tasks, such as VQA and NLVR. This motivates
us to align the visual and audio modalities to one aligned

Learning an autonomous highlight video detector with good
transferability across video categories, called Cross-Category
Video Highlight Detection(CC-VHD), is crucial for the practical application on video-based media platforms. To tackle
this problem, we first propose a framework that treats the CCVHD as learning category-independent highlight feature representation. Under this framework, we propose a novel module, named Multi-task Feature Decomposition Branch which
jointly conducts label prediction, cyclic feature reconstruction, and adversarial feature reconstruction to decompose the
video features into two independent components: highlightrelated component and category-related component. Besides,
we propose to align the visual and audio modalities to one
aligned feature space before conducting modality fusion,
which has not been considered in previous works. Finally,
the extensive experimental results on three challenging public
benchmarks validate the efficacy of our paradigm and the superiority over the existing state-of-the-art approaches to video
highlight detection.

Introduction
Video highlight detection, which aims to automatically detect attractive moments within a video, has been a research hotspot in recent years. Video highlight detection
has many downstream applications, including video summarization, video recommendation, and video editing. Despite the great successes in this field, the existing methods generally focused on training a highlight detector for a
specific video category (e.g., surfing, skiing, parkour, etc.)
while ignoring the transferability of a highlight detection
model across different video categories (Gygli, Song, and
Cao 2016; Hong et al. 2020; Badamdorj et al. 2021; Wei
et al. 2022). The problem of learning a highlight detector
with good transferability across video categories is called
Cross-Category Video Highlight Detection(CC-VHD). The
most related work in promoting the transferability of highlight detection is the work DL-VHD (Xu et al. 2021), treating the CC-VHD in an Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
(UDA) (Pan and Yang 2010) way in which one adapts the
knowledge learned from one labeled source domain (the
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3525

