The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Supervised Image Local Forgery Detection by JPEG Compression Trace
Xiuli Bi, Wuqing Yan, Bo Liu, Bin Xiao* , Weisheng Li, Xinbo Gao
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Chongqing 400065, China
{bixl, boliu, xiaobin, liws, gaoxb}@cqupt.edu.cn, s210201122@stu.cqupt.edu.cn

Abstract
For image local forgery detection, the existing methods require a large amount of labeled data for training, and most
of them cannot detect multiple types of forgery simultaneously. In this paper, we firstly analyzed the JPEG compression traces which are mainly caused by different JPEG compression chains, and designed a trace extractor to learn such
traces. Then, we utilized the trace extractor as the backbone
and trained self-supervised to strengthen the discrimination
ability of learned traces. With its benefits, regions with different JPEG compression chains can easily be distinguished
within a forged image. Furthermore, our method does not rely
on a large amount of training data, and even does not require
any forged images for training. Experiments show that the
proposed method can detect image local forgery on different datasets without re-training, and keep stable performance
over various types of image local forgery.

(a) Source image (b) Forgery image (c) Ground truth

(d) Noiseprint

(e) Mantra

(f) Park

(g) CAT-Net

(h) Proposed

(i) Cropping

(j) Park

(k) CAT-Net

(l) Proposed

Figure 1: An example of local forgery and corresponding
localization results of four types of detection methods.

Introduction

within the same image. Hence, the characteristics of the tampered regions are similar to the non-tampered regions. Various existing methods are explored to extract the similarity
from image blocks, key points or the network-learned features (Li and Zhou 2018; Wu, Abd-Almageed, and Natarajan 2018; Zhong and Pun 2019; Zhu et al. 2020; Bilal et al.
2021). For object removal, after removing the target, the left
blank region will be filled by an inpainting algorithm. Based
on the research on the inpainting algorithm, many effective
detection methods have been proposed (Liang et al. 2015;
Li, Luo, and Huang 2017; Zhang et al. 2018; Li and Huang
2019; Wang, Niu, and Wang 2021). Excluding the detection methods for a specific local forgery, there are also welldesigned algorithms that can detect multiple local forgeries,
such as Mantra (Wu, AbdAlmageed, and Natarajan 2019),
Noiseprint (Cozzolino and Verdoliva 2019), and so on (Zhou
et al. 2018; Bappy et al. 2019; Rao and Ni 2021).
According to the summarization of requested images
through the forensic website over two years (Park et al.
2018), the JPEG format was found to be the most requested
(77.95%), followed by PNG (20.67%). Therefore, more and
more researchers focus on the forensics of JPEG images.
For local forgery detection in JPEG images, most methods
mentioned above perform poorly or even fail, as shown in
Figure 1. (d-e). The reason is that JPEG compression is a
lossy compression, and the tampering traces will disappear

In recent years, researchers have proposed many methods to
verify the integrity and authenticity of digital images. Image forgery detection is to judge whether an image has been
forged or not without any prior knowledge, which can be
divided into two categories according to the forgery scope:
global forgery detection and local forgery detection. The
former mainly detects whether an image is manipulated by
some image operations such as contrast enhancement, image filtering, and image compression or not. The latter is to
detect whether the content of an image is changed. The local
forgery mainly includes copy-move, splicing, and object removal. In this paper, we focused on local forgery detection.
Splicing is the most common local forgery, which usually
cuts out objects from one or more other images and then
pastes them onto the target image. For the splicing detection
and location, because the tampered and un-tampered regions
are from different sources, that can be detected by finding
the distinction between them (Bappy et al. 2017; Bondi et al.
2017; Bunk et al. 2017; Liu and Pun 2018; Bi et al. 2019;
Mayer and Stamm 2019). A copy-move forgery denotes an
image where part of its content has been copied and pasted
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

232

