The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Representation with Incomplete Votes
Daniel Halpern, Gregory Kehne, Ariel D. Procaccia, Jamie Tucker-Foltz and Manuel Wüthrich
Harvard University

Abstract

democratizing insights in live, flexible conversations with up
to 1,000 people at the same time.”3
The key idea underlying both systems is simple
and broadly applicable: Participants can submit free-text
comments about the discussion topic at hand and choose
to agree or disagree with others’ comments presented to
them by the platform. An essential part of the process is
the aggregation of these opinions toward an “understanding
of what large groups of people think.” Polis, for instance,
displays a list of comments that received the most support
among participants to whom they were shown. But this
aggregation method may fail to represent minority groups,
even those that are very large: if 51% of participants agree
with one set of comments, while 49% of participants agree
with another set of comments, only comments from the
first set will appear on this list. Polis has recognized this
problem and sought to mitigate it by employing a second,
more elaborate procedure (Small et al. 2021).4 While this
procedure has produced interesting results in practice, it
does not guarantee summarizations that are representative
of the discussion in a rigorous sense.
In this paper, we reexamine opinion aggregation in
systems such as Polis and Remesh through the lens of
computational social choice (Brandt et al. 2016). We observe
that selecting a subset of comments based on agreements
and disagreements is equivalent to electing a committee
based on approval votes. From this viewpoint, the primary
aggregation method used by Polis corresponds to classical
approval voting (AV). There is substantial work — starting
with the paper of Aziz et al. (2017) — on approval-based
committee elections that seeks to avoid the shortcomings
of AV by guaranteeing that the selected committee satisfies
fairness notions. To define one such notion (which is not
satisfied by AV), note that if the size of the committee is k
and the number of voters is n, a subset of n/k voters is large
enough to demand a seat on the committee if they agree on at
least one candidate. This intuition is captured by a property
called justified representation (JR), which guarantees that
every such subset of voters has an approved candidate on

Platforms for online civic participation rely heavily on
methods for condensing thousands of comments into a
relevant handful, based on whether participants agree or
disagree with them. These methods should guarantee fair
representation of the participants, as their outcomes may
affect the health of the conversation and inform impactful
downstream decisions. To that end, we draw on the
literature on approval-based committee elections. Our setting
is novel in that the approval votes are incomplete since
participants will typically not vote on all comments. We
prove that this complication renders non-adaptive algorithms
impractical in terms of the amount of information they must
gather. Therefore, we develop an adaptive algorithm that
uses information more efficiently by presenting incoming
participants with statements that appear promising based on
votes by previous participants. We prove that this method
satisfies commonly used notions of fair representation, even
when participants only vote on a small fraction of comments.
Finally, an empirical evaluation using real data shows that
the proposed algorithm provides representative outcomes in
practice.

1

Introduction

A recent surge of interest in empowering citizens through
online civic participation has spurred the development of
a number of platforms (Salganik and Levy 2015; Ito et al.
2020; Shibata et al. 2019; Fishkin et al. 2019; Aragón
et al. 2017; Iandoli, Klein, and Zollo 2009). A particularly
successful example is Polis (Small et al. 2021),1 an opensource “system for gathering, analyzing, and understanding
what large groups of people think in their own words.” It has
been widely used by local and national government agencies
around the world. Most notably, it is the basis of vTaiwan, a
system commissioned by the government of Taiwan, whose
participatory process — involving thousands of ordinary
citizens — has led to new regulation of ride-sharing services
and financial technology. A similar (albeit commercial)
system called Remesh2 allows users to “save resources by

3

See also consider.it, citizens.is, make.org, kialo.com.
sThe idea is to find clusters of participants with similar
opinions and then ensure that each cluster is represented by
comments that distinguish it from the others.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://pol.is
2
https://www.remesh.ai

4

5657

