The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Symphony in the Latent Space: Provably Integrating High-Dimensional Techniques
with Non-linear Machine Learning Models
Qiong Wu1 * , Jian Li2 , Zhenming Liu1 , Yanhua Li3 , Mihai Cucuringu4,5
1

College of William & Mary
2
Tsinghua University
3
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
4
University of Oxford
5
The Alan Turing Institute
Abstract
This paper revisits building machine learning algorithms that
involve interactions between entities, such as those between
financial assets in an actively managed portfolio, or interactions between users in a social network. Our goal is to forecast
the future evolution of ensembles of multivariate time series
in such applications (e.g., the future return of a financial asset
or the future popularity of a Twitter account). Designing ML
algorithms for such systems requires addressing the challenges
of high-dimensional interactions and non-linearity. Existing
approaches usually adopt an ad-hoc approach to integrating
high-dimensional techniques into non-linear models and recent studies have shown these approaches have questionable
efficacy in time-evolving interacting systems.
To this end, we propose a novel framework, which we dub as
the additive influence model. Under our modeling assumption, we show that it is possible to decouple the learning of
high-dimensional interactions from the learning of non-linear
feature interactions. To learn the high-dimensional interactions, we leverage kernel-based techniques, with provable
guarantees, to embed the entities in a low-dimensional latent
space. To learn the non-linear feature-response interactions,
we generalize prominent machine learning techniques, including designing a new statistically sound non-parametric method
and an ensemble learning algorithm optimized for vector regressions. Extensive experiments on two common applications demonstrate that our new algorithms deliver significantly
stronger forecasting power compared to standard and recently
proposed methods.

Introduction
We revisit the problem of building machine learning algorithms that involve interactions between entities, such as
those between users and items in a recommendation system,
or between financial assets in an actively managed portfolio,
or between populations in different counties in a diseasespreading process. Our proposed forecasting model uses information available up to time t to predict yt+1,i , the future
behavior of entity i at time t + 1 (e.g., the future price of
stock i at time t + 1), for a total number of d entities (Laptev
et al. 2017; Farhangi et al. 2022). Designing such models has
* Currently working at AT&T Labs.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10361

proven remarkably difficult, as one needs to circumvent two
main challenges that require often incompatible solutions.
1. Cross-entity interaction: high-dimensionality. In many
ensembles of multivariate time series systems, it is often the
case that the current state of one entity could potentially impact the future state of another. When considering the equity
market as an example, Amazon’s disclosure of its revenue
change in cloud services could indicate that the revenues of
other cloud providers (e.g., competitors) could also change.
The interaction is high-dimensional because the total possible number of interactions is usually much larger than the
number of available observations. For example, in a portfolio
of 3,000 stocks, the total number of potential links between
pairs of stocks is 3, 000 × 3, 000 ≈ 107 , but we often have
only 2,500 data points (e.g., 10 years of daily data), and
thus capturing the cross-entity interactions becomes a very
challenging problem.
2. Feature-response interactions: non-linearity. Linear
models are usually insufficient to characterize the relationship between the response/label and the available information
(features), thus techniques beyond simple linear regressions
are heavily needed. For example, in a financial context, economic productivity is non-linear in temperature for most
countries; similarly, electricity consumption is a nonlinear
function of temperature, and modeling this relationship is
crucial for pricing electricity derivative contracts. As shown
in Fig. 1(a), the existing relevant learning models can be
categorized into the following two groups.
1. Provable cross-entity models (CEM) for highdimensionality.
Cross-entity models solve a vector
regression problem yt+1 = f (xt ) + ξt , to forecast the future
behavior of all entities, where yt+1 ≜ (yt+1,1 , . . . , yt+1,d ),
and xt denotes the features of all entities, constructed from
their historical data. Since the features of one entity can be
used to predict the future behavior of another, CEMs have
stronger expressive and predictive power. CEMs are both
computationally and statistically challenging because we
need to solve the “high-dimensional” (overparametrized)
problem and mathematically understand the root cause of the
overfitting. Extensive research has been undertaken to design
regularization techniques (Chen, Dong, and Chan 2013; Wu
et al. 2021) to address the issue, and most algorithms in this
category are linear and have theoretical guarantees.

