The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Zero-Shot Assistance in Sequential Decision Problems
Sebastiaan De Peuter1 , Samuel Kaski1,2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland
Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
sebastiaan.depeuter@aalto.fi, samuel.kaski@aalto.fi

a

Abstract

a'

We consider the problem of creating assistants that can help
agents solve new sequential decision problems, assuming the
agent is not able to specify the reward function explicitly to
the assistant. Instead of acting in place of the agent as in current automation-based approaches, we give the assistant an
advisory role and keep the agent in the loop as the main decision maker. The difficulty is that we must account for potential biases of the agent which may cause it to seemingly irrationally reject advice. To do this we introduce a novel formalization of assistance that models these biases, allowing the
assistant to infer and adapt to them. We then introduce a new
method for planning the assistant’s actions which can scale
to large decision making problems. We show experimentally
that our approach adapts to these agent biases, and results
in higher cumulative reward for the agent than automationbased alternatives. Lastly, we show that an approach combining advice and automation outperforms advice alone at the
cost of losing some safety guarantees.

assistant

ENV

agent

s
Figure 1: In zero-shot assistance an assistant helps an agent
solve a problem without initially knowing the agent’s reward
function. We propose an assistant which helps the agent primarily by advising it, leaving the agent in direct control of
its environment. In every time step the assistant gives new
advice a′ , appropriate for the current state, based on its inference of the agent’s reward function and potential biases.
When acting the agent incorporates the advice into its own
decision making. The assistant observes both the action a
taken by the agent and the new state of the environment s,
and uses this to infer the agent’s reward function and biases.

Introduction

We seek to create assistants which can assist agents in
solving these types of decision problems. Although the assistant is technically an agent, to avoid confusion we will
always refer to it as the assistant and will only use the term
agent to refer to the agent being assisted. We think of the
agent as an online decision maker who can be assisted in
their decision making. The goal for the assistant is to increase the quality of the agent’s decisions, measured by cumulative reward, relative to the agent’s effort. There are two
things the assistant does not know a-priori about the agent:
the agent’s reward function, and any biases that may cause
the agent to deviate from optimal behaviour. Although the
agent knows its reward function, it has never solved its problem before – ruling out inferring the reward function from
prior observations – and is not able to provide an explicit
description of the reward function. Similarly, biases are not
something an agent is aware of, and thus are not something
it can communicate to the assistant. To assist, the assistant
must infer both during the episode. Therefore, we call this
zero-shot assistance. Zero-shot assistance is closely related
to zero-shot coordination (Hu et al. 2020), though in the latter the reward function is known to all participants.
We introduce AI-Advised Decision-making (AIAD). In
AIAD an assistant helps an agent primarily by giving ad-

In this paper we consider the problem of assisting agents
in tackling sequential decision problems which they have
never encountered before. Human decision makers are routinely faced with this problem. Take for example engineering design (Rao 2019), where one looks to find or construct
the best possible design within a space of designs that are
feasible. Every design problem is new: each time an architect builds a house it is for different clients. Although the
problem is novel to the agent, we can assume that it already
knows how to solve it in principle, though not optimally. An
architect does not need to re-learn architecture when designing a new house, but can apply their general knowledge and
experience to this new design problem.
These design problems can be thought of as singleepisode decision problems: they consist of a sequence of decisions, each changing or elaborating a design in some way.
Once a satisfactory design has been found, the episode terminates. The decisions are driven by a goal, which can be
encoded as a reward function, known only to the agent. This
goal is usually tacit and complex, meaning that the agent is
unable to provide an accurate explicit description of it.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11551

