The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

An Efficient Deep Reinforcement Learning Algorithm for Solving Imperfect
Information Extensive-Form Games
Linjian Meng1 , Zhenxing Ge1 , Pinzhuo Tian2 , Bo An3 , Yang Gao1 *
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{menglinjian, zhenxingge}@smail.nju.edu.cn, pinzhuo@shu.edu.cn, boan@ntu.edu.sg, gaoy@nju.edu.cn
Abstract

To learn NE in IIEFGs, one of the most powerful methods is the counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich et al. 2007) algorithm. CFR is a special case of the
Follow-The-Regularized-Leader (FTRL) (Shalev-Shwartz
and Singer 2007) algorithm which utilizes the FD dilated
distance generating function (FD dilated DGF) (Liu et al.
2022). CFR learns NE by iteratively traversing the entire
game and minimizing the regret on each information set (infoset). Due to the large-scale state space in most real-world
scenarios, it is impossible to traverse the entire game tree
and use tables to represent strategies. To sidestep the issue,
many neural variants of CFR have been proposed (Brown
et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019; Gruslys et al. 2020; Hennes et al.
2020; Steinberger, Lerer, and Brown 2020; Fu et al. 2021;
McAleer et al. 2022). At each time, they estimate the counterfactual regrets and update the strategy using the estimated
regrets. Then, they approximates the new strategy via neural
networks. However, each approximation incurs an approximation error. Since the counterfactual regrets at iteration t
are estimated with the agent’s previous approximated strategies, these errors accumulate. Due to this accumulated approximation error, these methods have poor performance.
The counterfactual regrets are related to the FD dilated DGF.
Unfortunately, the FD dilated DGF at iteration t is dependent
on the agent’s past strategies, which is the essential reason
why the neural variants of CFR suffer from such accumulated approximation error.

One of the most popular methods for learning Nash equilibrium (NE) in large-scale imperfect information extensiveform games (IIEFGs) is the neural variants of counterfactual
regret minimization (CFR). CFR is a special case of FollowThe-Regularized-Leader (FTRL). At each iteration, the neural variants of CFR update the agent’s strategy via the estimated counterfactual regrets. Then, they use neural networks
to approximate the new strategy, which incurs an approximation error. These approximation errors will accumulate since
the counterfactual regrets at iteration t are estimated using
the agent’s past approximated strategies. Such accumulated
approximation error causes poor performance. To address
this accumulated approximation error, we propose a novel
FTRL algorithm called FTRL-ORW, which does not utilize
the agent’s past strategies to pick the next iteration strategy.
More importantly, FTRL-ORW can update its strategy via the
trajectories sampled from the game, which is suitable to solve
large-scale IIEFGs since sampling multiple actions for each
information set is too expensive in such games. However, it
remains unclear which algorithm to use to compute the next
iteration strategy for FTRL-ORW when only such sampled
trajectories are revealed at iteration t. To address this problem and scale FTRL-ORW to large-scale games, we provide
a model-free method called Deep FTRL-ORW, which computes the next iteration strategy using model-free Maximum
Entropy Deep Reinforcement Learning. Experimental results
on two-player zero-sum IIEFGs show that Deep FTRL-ORW
significantly outperforms existing model-free neural methods
and OS-MCCFR.

To address the accumulated approximation error, we propose to combine neural networks with FTRL cases whose
DGF at iteration t is independent of the agent’s previous
strategies. To achieve this goal, we provide our first key
contribution – a novel DGF called Opponent Related Dilated DGF (ORD-DGF), which is unrelated to the agent’s
past strategies. More importantly, the value of ORD-DGF
for a strategy can be estimated via the trajectories sampled from the game. It allows the FTRL with ORD-DGF
(FTRL-ORW) algorithm to update its strategy via such sampled trajectories. This property enables FTRL-ORW to be
suitable for solving large-scale games since sampling multiple actions for each information set is too expensive in
such games. However, it remains unclear how to compute
the next iteration strategy for FTRL-ORW if we only obtain such sampled trajectories at iteration t. To address this
problem and scale FTRL-ORW to large-scale games, we

Introduction
Imperfect information extensive-form games (IIEFGs) are a
standard class of games that can model multiple agents, imperfect information, and random events. IIEFGs have been
widely used for modeling real-world situations, such as
medical treatment (Sandholm 2015), security games (Lisỳ,
Davis, and Bowling 2016), cybersecurity games (Chen et al.
2017), and recreational games (Brown and Sandholm 2018,
2019). For these games, the common goal is to find Nash
equilibrium (NE) since it prescribes a notion of rational behavior in which no player can benefit from deviating unilaterally from the equilibrium.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5823

