The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Adversarial Word Dilution as Text Data Augmentation in Low-Resource Regime
Junfan Chen1 , Richong Zhang1,2 * , Zheyan Luo1 , Chunming Hu1,2 , Yongyi Mao3
1

SKLSDE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
3
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
chenjf@act.buaa.edu.cn, zhangrc@act.buaa.edu.cn, akamya@buaa.edu.cn, hucm@buaa.edu.cn, ymao@uottawa.ca

Abstract

It's a good film with exquisite acting
swap
replacement

Data augmentation is widely used in text classification, especially in the low-resource regime where a few examples for
each class are available during training. Despite the success,
generating data augmentations as hard positive examples that
may increase their effectiveness is under-explored. This paper proposes an Adversarial Word Dilution (AWD) method
that can generate hard positive examples as text data augmentations to train the low-resource text classification model
efficiently. Our idea of augmenting the text data is to dilute
the embedding of strong positive words by weighted mixing
with unknown-word embedding, making the augmented inputs hard to be recognized as positive by the classification
model. We adversarially learn the dilution weights through a
constrained min-max optimization process with the guidance
of the labels. Empirical studies on three benchmark datasets
show that AWD can generate more effective data augmentations and outperform the state-of-the-art text data augmentation methods. The additional analysis demonstrates that the
data augmentations generated by AWD are interpretable and
can flexibly extend to new examples without further training.

It’s a good movie that acts exquisitely
perturbation

interpretability
hard example

interpretability
loss
hard example
gradient

Figure 1: Illustration of contextual augmentation and representational augmentation (taking adversarial data augmentation as an example). The upper and lower part of the figure
respectively show an example of contextual augmentation
and the process of adversarial data augmentation. Contextual augmentation is interpretable but may not generate hard
positive examples. Adversarial data augmentation can generate hard positive examples but is short of interpretability.

Introduction
Training effective text classification models often relies on
sufficient precisely labeled data. However, it is common in
some real-world scenarios that collecting plenty of valid text
data is difficult, e.g., requiring considerable effort from human annotators. Enabling the model to learn efficiently with
limited resources therefore becomes a practical need and
hotspot in the industry and research communities. For example, text classification in few-shot learning that trains on
small tasks composed of a few examples and tests on new
tasks of unseen classes (Yu et al. 2018; Geng et al. 2019;
Chen et al. 2022), semi-supervised learning that provides
a few labeled texts and plenty of unlabeled texts for training (Miyato, Dai, and Goodfellow 2017; Xie et al. 2020;
Lee, Ko, and Han 2021) and the low-resource regime that
also provides a few labeled texts in training but no unlabeled texts available (Wei and Zou 2019; Wu et al. 2022).
Data augmentation is widely used in these tasks to increase
data size and boost training and is often evaluated in the lowresource regime, which we will focus on in this paper.

Text data augmentation is challenged by the discrete nature and complex semantics of texts. Despite the challenges,
two branches of textual data augmentation techniques have
been explored and demonstrated effective: contextual augmentation and representational augmentation. The contextual augmentation methods augment the texts by replacing,
inserting, deleting or swapping words (Kolomiyets, Bethard,
and Moens 2011; Wang and Yang 2015; Artetxe et al. 2018;
Gao et al. 2019; Wei and Zou 2019; Miao et al. 2020), or
paraphrasing the original texts (Edunov et al. 2018; Chen
et al. 2019; Kumar et al. 2019; Dopierre, Gravier, and
Logerais 2021). For example, in the upper part of Figure
1, given the text “It’s a good movie that acts exquisitely,”
one of its contextual augmentations may be “It’s a good film
with exquisite acting.” The contextual augmentations are semantically interpretable because the modifications are expected to keep semantic consistency with the original texts.
However, such heuristic modifications may produce simple
data augmentations that bring little improvements or even
degraded performance (Zhang, Zhao, and LeCun 2015).

* Corresponding author: zhangrc@act.buaa.edu.cn
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12626

