The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Unsupervised Legal Evidence Retrieval via Contrastive Learning with
Approximate Aggregated Positive
Feng Yao1 , Jingyuan Zhang2 * , Yating Zhang2 , Xiaozhong Liu3 ,
Changlong Sun2 , Yun Liu1* , Weixing Shen1*
1

School of Law, Institute for AI and Law, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
3
Worcester Polytechnic Institute, MA, USA
yaof20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, weishi.zjy@alibaba-inc.cn
{liuyun89, wxshen}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

... The defendant Guo XX then cut a knife toward the neck of
the victim Wang XX ... Guo fled the scene after the crime ...

Verifying the facts alleged by prosecutors before the trial requires the judges to retrieve evidence within the massive materials accompanied. Existing Legal AI applications often assume the facts are already determined and fail to notice the
difficulty of reconstructing them. To build practical Legal AI
applications and free judges from the manual searching work,
we introduce the task of Legal Evidence Retrieval, which
aims to automatically retrieve precise fact-related verbal evidence within a single case. We formulate the task in a dense
retrieval paradigm and jointly learn the contrastive representations and alignments between facts and evidence. To avoid
tedious annotations, we construct an approximated positive
vector for a given fact by aggregating a set of evidence from
the same case. An entropy-based denoising technique is further applied to mitigate the impact of false positive samples.
We train our models on tens of thousands of unlabeled cases
and evaluate them on a labeled dataset containing 919 cases
and 4, 336 queries. Experimental results indicate that our approach is effective and outperforms other state-of-the-art representation and retrieval models. The dataset and code are
available at https://github.com/yaof20/LER.

1

Prosecutor

Evidence linked with fact 1

Evidence linked with fact 2

... I used my left hand to take
out the kitchen knife and then
cut at his neck ...
Defendant

... I was stunned, he let me
go, then I ran away ...

... He rushed to me and used
the knife to slash twice at the
back of my head and neck ...

... I told the man to leave
so that my son would not
fight with him ...

... Guo XX pulled out a knife
and hacked a men on the left
side of his neck ...

... He let Guo XX leave
quickly, Guo XX
apologized and left ...

Victim

Witness

Figure 1: The way judges linked the facts written by the
prosecutor with the verbal evidence from multiple resources.
Facts and evidence in the same color are relevant to each
other. The highlighted evidence contradicts the facts above.

Specifically, we focus on the retrieval of sentence-level verbal evidence in criminal cases, where there tend to be multiple participants of different roles involved and their narratives are in various styles, making LER a challenging yet
practical Legal AI task. Figure 1 shows an example of how
the judge linked the prosecuted facts with the verbal evidence from different parties. Some pieces of the facts can
be simultaneously mentioned by the defendant, victim, and
witness. Therefore, the task of LER can be formulated to retrieve the relevant evidence by querying with any piece of
the prosecuted facts or verbal evidence. The former type of
query can help the judges find the fact-relevant evidence and
verify the authenticity of the prosecuted facts, and the latter
can be useful to identify the underlying conflicts between
relevant evidence. By convention, the prosecutors have to
summarize the testimony from different litigants and restate
the facts in a formal document before the court. Therefore,
there exists a certain semantic gap between the prosecuted
facts and the verbal evidence, which distinguishes LER from
the traditional retrieval problem that can be well-handled by
the conventional models utilizing word co-occurrence between the queries and candidates.

Introduction

Linking each fact with the relevant evidence is an essential
step for the judge to make findings of fact, and it is the precondition of application of law and the foundation of legal
judgment. In judicial practice, the facts and evidence for the
same case tend to be submitted in separate files and are not
linked with each other, which may cost the judges a lot of
time to retrieve relevant evidence to validate the authenticity
of each fact. Though tremendous advances have been made
in Legal AI, such as Legal Information Extraction (Chen
et al. 2020; Yao et al. 2022), Legal Case Retrieval (Ma et al.
2021, 2022) and Legal Judgment Prediction (Zhong et al.
2018), little attention has been paid to evidence-related research and most existing works assume the facts determined
by the judges, ignoring the expensive cost behind it.
In this work, we introduce the task of Legal Evidence
Retrieval (LER), which aims to automatically retrieve the
relevant evidence given a fact description within a case.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4783

