The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Long-Tail Cross Modal Hashing
Zijun Gao1,2 , Jun Wang2, * , Guoxian Yu1,2 , Zhongmin Yan1,2 , Carlotta Domeniconi3 , Jinglin Zhang4
1
School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
SDU-NTU Joint Centre for AI Research, Shandong University, Jinan, China
3
Department of Computer Science, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA
4
School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan, China
zjgao@mail.sdu.edu.cn, {kingjun, gxyu, yzm}@sdu.edu.cn, carlotta@cs.gmu.edu, jinglin.zhang@sdu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

2017; Yu et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2019b) to more faithfully
capture the proximity between multi-modality data to induce hash codes. However, almost all of them are trained
and tested on hand-crafted balanced datasets, while imbalanced datasets with long tail labels are more prevalence in
real-world. Some recent studies (Chen et al. 2021; Cui et al.
2019) have reported that the imbalanced nature of real-world
data greatly compromises the retrieval performance.
Real-world samples typically have a skewed distribution
with long-tail labels, which means that a few labels (a.k.a.
head labels) annotate to many samples, while the other labels (a.k.a. tail labels) have a large quantity but each of them
is only annotated to several samples (Liu et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2021). It is a challenging task to train a general model
from such distribution, because the head labels gain most
of the attention while the tail ones are underestimated. Another inevitable problem of long-tail hashing is the ambiguity of the generated binary codes. Due to the dimension
reduction, information loss is unavoidable. In this case, hash
codes learned from data-poor tail labels more lack the discrimination, which seriously confuses the retrieval results.
Several efforts have been made toward long-tail singlemodal hashing via knowledge transfer (Liu et al. 2020) and
information augmentation (Chu et al. 2020; Wang et al.
2020b; Kou et al. 2022). LEAP (Liu et al. 2020) augments
each instance of tail labels with certain disturbances in the
deep representation space to provide higher intra-class variation to tail labels. OLTR (Liu et al. 2019c) and LTHNet
(Chen et al. 2021) propose a meta embedding module to
transfer knowledge from head labels to tail ones. In addition,
these long-tail hashing methods cannot be directly adapted
for multi-modal data, due to the complex interplay between
tail labels and heterogeneous data modalities. The head labels can be easily represented by the commonality of multiple modalities, but the tail labels are often represented by
individuality of a particular modality. For example, in the
left part of Figure 1, tail label ‘Hawaii’ can only be read
out from the text-modality. On the other hand, head label
‘Sea’ can be consolidated from the commonality of image
and text modality, and head label ’Island’ comes from the
image modality alone. From this example, we can conclude
that both the individuality and commonality should be used
for effective CMH on long-tail data, which also account for
the complex interplay between head/tail labels and multi-

Existing Cross Modal Hashing (CMH) methods are mainly
designed for balanced data, while imbalanced data with longtail distribution is more general in real-world. Several longtail hashing methods have been proposed but they can not
adapt for multi-modal data, due to the complex interplay
between labels and individuality and commonality information of multi-modal data. Furthermore, CMH methods mostly
mine the commonality of multi-modal data to learn hash
codes, which may override tail labels encoded by the individuality of respective modalities. In this paper, we propose
LtCMH (Long-tail CMH) to handle imbalanced multi-modal
data. LtCMH firstly adopts auto-encoders to mine the individuality and commonality of different modalities by minimizing the dependency between the individuality of respective modalities and by enhancing the commonality of these
modalities. Then it dynamically combines the individuality
and commonality with direct features extracted from respective modalities to create meta features that enrich the representation of tail labels, and binaries meta features to generate
hash codes. LtCMH significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
baselines on long-tail datasets and holds a better (or comparable) performance on datasets with balanced labels.

Introduction
Hashing aims to map high-dimensional data into a series
of low-dimensional binary codes while preserving the data
proximity in the original space. The binary codes can be
computed in a constant time and economically stored, which
meets the need of large-scale data retrieval. In real-world
applications, we often want to retrieval data from multiple
modalities. For example, when we input key words to information retrieval systems, we expect the systems can efficiently find out related news/images/videos from database.
Hence, many cross-modal hashing (CMH) methods have
been proposed to deal with such tasks (Wang et al. 2016;
Jiang and Li 2017; Yu et al. 2022a; Liu et al. 2019a).
Most CMH methods aim to find a low-dimensional shared
subspace to eliminate the modality heterogeneity and to
quantify the similarity between samples across modalities.
More advanced methods leverage extra knowledge (i.e., labels, manifold structure, neighbors coherence) (Jiang and Li
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7642

