The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Semantic Alignment with Global Modality Reconstruction for
Video-Language Pre-training towards Retrieval
†

†

Mingchao Li1,2,* , Xiaoming Shi3 , Haitao Leng2, , Wei Zhou2 , Hai-Tao Zheng4,5, , Kuncai Zhang2
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Alibaba Group
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
4
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory
mingchaoli.lmc@gmail.com, {heiqie.lht, fayi.zw, kuncai.zkc}@alibaba-inc.com
shixiaoming@pjlab.org.cn, zheng.haitao@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Video-language pre-training for text-based video retrieval
tasks is vitally important. Previous pre-training methods suffer from semantic misalignments. The reason is that these
methods ignore sequence alignments but focus on critical token alignment. To alleviate the problem, we propose a videolanguage pre-training framework, termed video-language
pre-training For lEarning sEmantic aLignments (F EEL), to
learn semantic alignments at the sequence level. Specifically,
the global modality reconstruction and the cross-modal selfcontrasting method are utilized to learn the alignments at the
sequence level better. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of F EEL on text-based video retrieval
and text-based video corpus moment retrieval.

soldierisislaying
lying down
aasoldier
(a)

yeah it's been a while since I've battled chickens
while I was fixing mowers but we're gonna do
that today give you guys some entertainment
today have a Toro lawnmower

Introduction
Text-based video retrieval tasks, including text-based video
retrieval (Luo et al. 2020; Zhu and Yang 2020; Li et al.
2020) and text-based video corpus moment retrieval (Li
et al. 2020) have shown significant potential and alluring
technological value. Thanks to the ability of cross-modality
alignments, video-language pre-training shows effectiveness
on these retrieval tasks (Wang et al. 2022b; Huang et al.
2022). Cross-modal alignment is the key challenge in learning video-language pre-training.
Previous pre-training methods learn cross-modality alignments in two manners. Matching tasks are widely used for
cross-modality alignments, such as using the special token
[CLS] for binary classification with a cross-modal Transformer (Sun et al. 2019b; Zhu and Yang 2020; Luo et al.
2020) and contrastive learning between video and language
with two unimodal Transformers (Miech et al. 2019, 2020;
Ging et al. 2020; Patrick et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2021b; Wang
et al. 2022b). Besides, reconstruction tasks (Li et al. 2020;
Xu et al. 2021a; Luo et al. 2020) also prove their effectiveness in learning cross-modality alignments.

(b)

distinguish
between
and aonwoman
laying
Figure 1: (a)
showsa asoldier
case oflaying
alignment
important
to- while a sol
kens but not on the video sequence. (b) shows a case of a
not wholly aligned video-language pair. The aligned objects
are marked in red, and the misaligned objects are marked
in blue. The narration words “battled chickens” are irrelevant to the visual content, while the important visual objects
“stool” and “signboards” are not described by the words.

Despite the promising performances, previous methods
suffer from semantic misalignments (the information expressed by video and language is inconsistent at the semantic
level) in downstream tasks. The reason is that previous methods focus on major information but ignore secondary information. Secondary information includes verbs (Hendricks
and Nematzadeh 2021) and secondary objective concepts
(e.g., position, size) (Salin et al. 2022). Secondary information unalignment leads to semantic unalignment in downstream tasks. For example, in Figure 1 (a), previous models
align “a soldier is laying down” with the wrong video due to

* Part of work done during an internship at Alibaba Group.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1377

