The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Submodular Maximization under the Intersection of
Matroid and Knapsack Constraints
Yu-Ran Gu, Chao Bian, Chao Qian
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{guyr, bianc, qianc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

the k-matroid by local search requiring poly(n) · exp(k, ϵ)
running time, where n is the problem size and ϵ > 0.
These studies mainly focus on submodular maximization
under one kind of constraint, while real-world problems
often deal with multiple constraints simultaneously, e.g.,
movie recommendation under cardinality and rating constraints (Mirzasoleiman, Badanidiyuru, and Karbasi 2016),
and Twitter text summarization under cardinality and date
constraints (Badanidiyuru et al. 2020).
For submodular maximization under matroid and knapsack constraints, Chekuri, Vondrák, and Zenklusen (2010)
proposed an algorithm which achieves a (k/0.19 + ϵ)approximation for k-matroid and m-knapsack constraints
with the time complexity of poly(n) · exp(k, m, ϵ), which,
however, may be unacceptable. Mirzasoleiman, Badanidiyuru, and Karbasi (2016) developed the first practical algorithm, FANTOM, offering a ((1 + ϵ)(1 + 1/k)(2k +
2m + 1))-approximation for the intersection of the very
general k-system and m-knapsack constraints with Õ(n2 /ϵ)
oracle calls. For the sake of simplicity, we ignore polylogarithmic factors by using the Õ notation. More recently, Feldman, Harshaw, and Karbasi (2020) designed
DENSITYSEARCHSGS based on the simultaneous greedy
algorithmic framework to solve this problem, which
achieves
an approximation ratio of (1 + ϵ)(k + 2m) +
√
O( k + m) with Õ(n/ϵ) oracle calls. √
The approximation
ratio becomes (1 + ϵ)(k + 2m) + O( m) for the intersection of k-extendible and m-knapsack constraints and
(1 + ϵ)(k + 2m + 1) for a monotone objective function,
where k-extendible is a subclass of k-system.
Note that the constraints (i.e., k-system) considered in
previous studies may be so general that the proposed algorithms may not perform well under some important subclasses of these constraints. In this paper, we consider the
(not necessarily monotone) submodular maximization problem under the intersection of k-matroid and m-knapsack
constraints, which arises in numerous applications, e.g., vertex cover (Delong et al. 2012), weighted max-cut (Feldman,
Harshaw, and Karbasi 2017; Haba et al. 2020), video summarization (Gygli, Grabner, and Gool 2015; Feldman, Karbasi, and Kazemi 2018), image summarization and revenue
maximization (Mirzasoleiman, Badanidiyuru, and Karbasi
2016). We propose a Simultaneous and Partial enumeRation
cOnstrained sUbmodular maximizaTion algorithm, called

Abstract
Submodular maximization arises in many applications, and
has attracted a lot of research attentions from various areas
such as artificial intelligence, finance and operations research.
Previous studies mainly consider only one kind of constraint,
while many real-world problems often involve several constraints. In this paper, we consider the problem of submodular
maximization under the intersection of two commonly used
constraints, i.e., k-matroid constraint and m-knapsack constraint, and propose a new algorithm SPROUT by incorporating partial enumeration into the simultaneous greedy framework. We prove that SPROUT can achieve a polynomial-time
approximation guarantee better than the state-of-the-art algorithms. Then, we introduce the random enumeration and
smooth techniques into SPROUT to improve its efficiency, resulting in the SPROUT++ algorithm, which can keep a similar approximation guarantee. Experiments on the applications
of movie recommendation and weighted max-cut demonstrate the superiority of SPROUT++ in practice.

Introduction
Submodular maximization, i.e., maximization of a set function which satisfies the diminishing returns property under
some constraints, arises in many applications, e.g., influence maximization (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003;
Qian et al. 2018), data summarization (Lin and Bilmes
2011; Sipos et al. 2012; Dasgupta, Kumar, and Ravi 2013),
sparse regression (Das and Kempe 2011; Qian, Yu, and Zhou
2015), sensor placement (Krause and Guestrin 2005), adversarial attack (Liu et al. 2021), and human assisted learning (De et al. 2020; Liu, Mu, and Qian 2023). This problem
is generally NP-hard, and the design of polynomial-time approximation algorithms has attracted much attention.
The pioneering work of Nemhauser, Wolsey, and Fisher
(1978) and Fisher, Nemhauser, and Wolsey (1978) revealed
the good performance of the classic greedy algorithm which
achieves an approximation ratio of (1 − 1/e)−1 under the
cardinality constraint and a (k + 1)-approximation under
the more general k-matroid constraint when maximizing a
monotone submodular function. When the objective function is non-monotone, Lee, Sviridenko, and Vondrák (2010)
provided a (k + 1 + 1/(k − 1) + ϵ)-approximation for
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3959

