The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

M3 AE: Multimodal Representation Learning for Brain Tumor Segmentation with
Missing Modalities
†

Hong Liu1,2,* , Dong Wei2,* , Donghuan Lu2 , Jinghan Sun2,3 , Liansheng Wang1, , Yefeng Zheng2
1

School of informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
Tencent Jarvis Lab, Tencent Healthcare (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China
3
School of Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
{liuhong,jhsun}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, lswang@xmu.edu.cn, {donwei,caleblu,yefengzheng}@tencent.com,
2

Multimodal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) provides
complementary information for sub-region analysis of brain
tumors. Plenty of methods have been proposed for automatic
brain tumor segmentation using four common MRI modalities and achieved remarkable performance. In practice, however, it is common to have one or more modalities missing
due to image corruption, artifacts, acquisition protocols, allergy to contrast agents, or simply cost. In this work, we propose a novel two-stage framework for brain tumor segmentation with missing modalities. In the first stage, a multimodal
masked autoencoder (M3 AE) is proposed, where both random modalities (i.e., modality dropout) and random patches
of the remaining modalities are masked for a reconstruction task, for self-supervised learning of robust multimodal
representations against missing modalities. To this end, we
name our framework M3 AE. Meanwhile, we employ model
inversion to optimize a representative full-modal image at
marginal extra cost, which will be used to substitute for the
missing modalities and boost performance during inference.
Then in the second stage, a memory-efficient self distillation is proposed to distill knowledge between heterogenous
missing-modal situations while fine-tuning the model for supervised segmentation. Our M3 AE belongs to the ‘catchall’ genre where a single model can be applied to all possible subsets of modalities, thus is economic for both training
and deployment. Extensive experiments on BraTS 2018 and
2020 datasets demonstrate its superior performance to existing state-of-the-art methods with missing modalities, as well
as the efficacy of its components. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/ccarliu/m3ae.

T1c

T1

T2

(b)

GT

(c)
DSC (%)

(a) FLAIR

Abstract

𝐌 𝟑 𝐀𝐄
72
66

60

ACN
RFNet
SMU-Net

HVED
22

25

Figure 1: (a) Example images of the four modalities in
BraTS 2018, of which one or more may be missing in
practice (e.g., T1 here in red box). (b) Corresponding tumor regions: blue: edema; yellow: enhancing tumor; green:
necrotic and non-enhancing tumor core. (c) Deployment
model size (in millions with log2 scale) and mean Dice similarity scores (DSCs) across all missing-modal situations on
BraTS 2018 test split; circle size indicates GFLOPS. Compared to four up-to-date methods, our M3 AE achieves the
best performance with a compact and efficient model.

refer to MRI sequences as modalities) are commonly used to
provide complementary information and support sub-region
analysis: T1-weighted (T1), contrast enhanced T1-weighted
(T1c), T2-weighted (T2), and T2 fluid attenuation inversion
recovery (FLAIR), where the first two highlight tumor core
and the last two highlight peritumoral edema (Figs. 1(a) and
(b)). In recent years, deep learning methods have greatly advanced the state of the art of brain tumor segmentation with
multimodal MRI (Chen et al. 2020; Chen, Ding, and Liu
2019; Ding et al. 2020; Myronenko 2018; Zhou et al. 2020).
However, these methods were optimized for the ideal scenario where the full set of all modalities are present. While in
practice, scenarios of missing one or more modalities commonly occur due to image corruption, artifacts, acquisition
protocols, allergy to contrast agents, or simply cost.
To accommodate the practical scenarios of missing
modalities, lots of efforts have been made. A naive approach
is to train a ‘dedicated’ model for each possible subset of
modalities. For better performance, the co-training strategy (Blum and Mitchell 1998) was often incorporated to distill knowledge from full-modal to missing-modal networks
(Azad, Khosravi, and Merhof 2022; Chen et al. 2021; Hu
et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021b). Despite their decent performance, the dedicated models were time-costly to train and
space-costly to deploy, as 2N − 1 models were needed for

Introduction
Segmentation and associated volume quantification of heterogeneous histological sub-regions are of great value to
the diagnosis/prognosis, therapy planning, and follow-up of
brain tumors (Bakas et al. 2018). Multi-parametric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the current standard of
care for clinical imaging diagnosis of brain tumors (Iv et al.
2018). Specifically, four MRI modalities (in this work, we
* These authors contributed equally; H. Liu contributed to this

work during an internship at Tencent.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1657

