The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Proportional Decisions in Perpetual Voting
Martin Lackner1 and Jan Maly2
1

2

TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
ILLC, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
lackner@dbai.tuwien.ac.at, j.f.maly@uva.nl

Abstract

perpetual voting rules that aim to achieve a fairer outcome
over time as well as basic axioms that formalize desirable
properties in the perpetual setting. However, as of now, it
was unclear which perpetual rules provide proportional outcomes, i.e., outcomes that reflect the opinions of both large
and small groups in a proportional fashion.
Our main goal in this paper is to close this gap and study
proportionality in the setting of perpetual voting. This is
more difficult than, e.g., proportionality in multi-winner voting (Aziz et al. 2017; Sánchez-Fernández et al. 2017) due to
the sequential and dynamic nature of perpetual voting. The
main technical difficulty is that voters’ preferences (and the
set of alternatives) are different each round. Additionally,
the online character of perpetual voting prohibits standard
methods of (offline) optimization. Despite these obstacles,
proportionality is clearly desirable in perpetual voting as it
strikes a balance between majoritarian decisions (ignoring
minorities) and consensus-based decision (which may result
in disproportional power for individuals).
Our starting point, however, is a much more modest
desideratum of voting rules: ideally, they should be simple
to explain and understand. Thus, we consider two classes
of particularly simple perpetual voting rules: win-based
and loss-based weighted approval methods (WAMs). Both
classes have the advantage of a rather simple definition
based on voter weights, which are modified depending on
whether a decision was in favour of the voter. Importantly,
we require that the magnitude of a change in voter weights
is not depending on other voters, i.e., it is always apparent to
voters how an outcome influences their weight. We start our
analysis by considering two axioms from Lackner (2020):
(i) bounded dry spells guarantee each voter a satisfying outcome on a regular basis, and (ii) simple proportionality is
a weak proportionality requirement. Our results show that
no voting rule in these two classes can satisfy bounded dry
spells. In addition, we characterize all voting rules that satisfy simple proportionality.
This sets the stage for our analysis of proportionality. We
introduce two proportionality axioms in the perpetual setting: lower and upper quota for closed groups. In contrast
to simple proportionality, these axioms are applicable in dynamic settings with changing preferences. Our first result is
a negative one: while some win-based WAMs satisfy simple
proportionality, none of them satisfies one of the stronger

Perpetual voting is a framework for long-term collective decision making. In this framework, we consider a sequence
of subsequent approval-based elections and try to achieve a
fair overall outcome. To achieve fairness over time, perpetual voting rules take the history of previous decisions into
account and identify voters that were dissatisfied with previous decisions. In this paper, we look at perpetual voting rules
from an axiomatic perspective. First, we define two classes
of perpetual voting rules that are particularly easy to explain
to voters and we explore the bounds imposed by this simplicity. Second, we study proportionality in the perpetual setting
and identify two rules with strong proportionality guarantees.
However, both rules yield different guarantees and we prove
them to be incompatible with each other.

Introduction
In many voting scenarios, a group of voters, for example a
committee or working group, has to make several decisions
at different points in time. If standard voting rules are used
(such as approval, Borda, plurality, etc.), it may happen that
a majority dictates all decisions while some voters disagree
with every outcome. This can lead to unrepresentative results and, eventually, to dissatisfied voters dropping out of
the decision process. Such situations are particularly undesirable if participation in the process is valued highly and
if no extreme views are present in the electorate. If a group
of colleagues has to regularly agree on a meeting time, it
is not acceptable if always the same colleague has to compromise. Similarly, if a committee of volunteers in a sports
club is tasked with the organization of a party, no committee
member’s opinion should be completely ignored.
Perpetual voting, recently introduced by Lackner (2020),
is a formalism for tackling these types of long-term decision making processes. From a formal point of view, a perpetual voting instance is a sequence of approval-based elections where each decision has to be made ‘online’, i.e., in
the knowledge of past decisions but without information
about future elections. Perpetual voting rules are deterministic, resolute functions that take perpetual voting instances
as input and that output a winning alternative for the current decision to be made. Lackner (2020) introduced several
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5722

