The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Normalizing Flow Ensembles for Rich Aleatoric and Epistemic Uncertainty
Modeling
Lucas Berry, David Meger
McGill University, Centre for Intelligent Machines, Montreal, Canada
lucas.berry@mail.mcgill.ca

Abstract

nonlinear stochastic dynamics often in high dimensions. To
further complicate the problem of dynamics modeling, data
collection for many robot systems can be prohibitively expensive. Therefore, an active learning framework is usually
adopted to iteratively collect data in order to most efficiently
improve a model. In order to apply such a framework, ensembles have been employed to capture epistemic uncertainty for deep learning models (Gal, Islam, and Ghahramani
2017).
In this paper, we utilize NFs’ ability to capture rich
aleatoric uncertainty and extend such models to epistemic
uncertainty estimation with ensembles. We then use our NF
models to tackle epistemic uncertainty for regression tasks.
The contributions of this work are as follows:

In this work, we demonstrate how to reliably estimate epistemic uncertainty while maintaining the flexibility needed to
capture complicated aleatoric distributions. To this end, we
propose an ensemble of Normalizing Flows (NF), which are
state-of-the-art in modeling aleatoric uncertainty. The ensembles are created via sets of fixed dropout masks, making them
less expensive than creating separate NF models. We demonstrate how to leverage the unique structure of NFs, base distributions, to estimate aleatoric uncertainty without relying on
samples, provide a comprehensive set of baselines, and derive
unbiased estimates for differential entropy. The methods were
applied to a variety of experiments, commonly used to benchmark aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty estimation: 1D sinusoidal data, 2D windy grid-world (Wet Chicken), Pendulum,
and Hopper. In these experiments, we setup an active learning framework and evaluate each model’s capability at measuring aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty. The results show
the advantages of using NF ensembles in capturing complicated aleatoric while maintaining accurate epistemic uncertainty estimates.

• We develop two methods for estimating uncertainty for
NFs, derive unbiased estimates for said models, and
leverage the base distribution to reduce the sampling burden on the estimation of uncertainty.
• We leverage memory-efficient ensembling by creating
ensembles via fixed dropout masks and apply them to
NFs.

Introduction

• We demonstrate the usefulness of uncertainty estimation on an array of previously proposed benchmarks (Depeweg et al. 2018) and novel settings for active learning
problems.

One common decomposition of uncertainty is aleatoric and
epistemic (Hora 1996; Der Kiureghian and Ditlevsen 2009;
Hüllermeier and Waegeman 2021). Aleatoric uncertainty
refers to the inherent randomness in the outcome of an experiment, while epistemic uncertainty can be described as
ignorance or a lack of knowledge. The important distinction between the two is that epistemic uncertainty can be
reduced by the acquisition of more data while aleatoric cannot. Our goal in this paper is to learn aleatoric distributions
in high dimensions, with arbitrary distributional form, while
also tracking epistemic uncertainty due to non-uniform data
sampling.
Normalizing Flows (NFs) have been shown to be effective
at capturing highly expressive aleatoric uncertainty with little prior knowledge (Kingma and Dhariwal 2018; Rezende
and Mohamed 2015). This is done by transforming a base
distribution via a series of nonlinear bijective mappings, and
can model complex heteroscedastic and multi-modal noise.
Robotic systems display such noise, as robots interact with

Problem Statement
K
Given a dataset D = {xi , yi }N
and
i=1 , where xi ∈ R
D
yi ∈ R , we wish to approximate the conditional probability pY |X (y|x). Our models therefore take as input x and
output the approximate conditional probability density function, pY |X (y|x) = fθ (y, x), where θ is a set of parameters to
be learned. In the experiments that follow, the ground truth
distribution, pY |X (y|x), is not assumed homoscedastic nor
do we put restrictions on its shape.
In order to capture uncertainty, we utilize the information based criteria proposed in Houlsby et al. (2011) to
estimate uncertainty. Let H(·) denote the differential entropy of a random variable, H(X) = E [− log(pX (x))], and
W ∼ p(w) index different models in a Bayesian framework
or an ensemble. Then one can define epistemic uncertainty,
I(y ∗ , W ), as the difference of total, H(y ∗ |x∗ ), and aleatoric,

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6806

