The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Diversity Maximization in the Presence of Outliers
Daichi Amagata
Osaka University
amagata.daichi@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Given a set X of n points in a metric space, the problem of
diversity maximization is to extract a set S of k points from
X so that the diversity of S is maximized. This problem is
essential in AI-related fields, such as web search, databases,
recommender systems, and data mining. Although there have
been extensive studies of this problem, these studies assume
that X is clean. This usually does not hold, because realworld datasets usually contain outliers. The state-of-the-art
algorithm for the diversity maximization problem is based
on furthest point retrieval, which is too sensitive to outliers.
We therefore address the problem of diversity maximization
with outliers and propose two algorithms with performance
guarantee. The first algorithm runs in O((k + z)n) time,
guarantees 21 -approximation, and returns no outliers, where
z is the number of outliers. The second algorithm runs in
1
O(kz) time (which is independent of n), guarantees 6(1+ϵ)
approximation, and returns no outliers with constant probability. We conduct experiments on real datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our algorithms.

1

(a) Max-Min diversification (b) Max-Sum diversification

Figure 1: Difference between Max-Min and Max-Sum diversification (k = 10). Triangles are selected as solutions.

Given a set S of k points in X, the diversity of S is usually evaluated by an objective function. The most frequently
used objective functions are Max-Min and Max-Sum. Given
X and k, the Max-Min diversification problem is to select k
points in X so that the minimum distance between any two
distinct points in a solution set S is maximized. The MaxSum diversification problem is to select k points in X so that
the sum of the distances between all two distinct points in S
is maximized. Figure 1 compares the k = 10 points (colored
triangles) selected by the Max-Min and Max-Sum diversification problems. Figure 1(b) illustrates that the Max-Sum
diversification problem returns S having similar points. On
the other hand, Figure 1(a) illustrates that the result set obtained by the Max-Min diversification problem is distributed
uniformly in the data space. This result is better as a summary of a given dataset, so this paper considers Max-Min as
objective function.
Due to the effectiveness of the Max-Min diversification
problem, there exist extensive works on this problem (and
its variants) (Addanki et al. 2022; Aghamolaei, Farhadi,
and Zarrabi-Zadeh 2015; Borassi et al. 2019; Drosou and
Pitoura 2014; Erkut, Ülküsal, and Yenicerioğlu 1994; Indyk et al. 2014; Moumoulidou, McGregor, and Meliou
2021; Ravi, Rosenkrantz, and Tayi 1994; Wang, Fabbri,
and Mathioudakis 2022). Because this problem is NP-hard,
these works devised error-bounded approximation algorithms. The state-of-the-art algorithm for the Max-Min diversification problem is GMM. (Section 2.2 introduces this

Introduction

Given a set X of n points in a metric space, the problem of
diversity maximization is to extract a set S of k points from
X so that the diversity of S (or dissimilarity between the
k points in S) is maximized. This is an important problem
in AI-related fields, such as web search (Ceccarello, Pietracaprina, and Pucci 2018), databases (Agarwal, Sintos, and
Steiger 2020), recommender systems (Hirata et al. 2022),
and data mining (Bauckhage, Sifa, and Wrobel 2020). In the
above applications, the sizes of datasets are growing, as we
have many sources that generate data. Because of this, analysis of these large datasets and/or building machine-learning
models on them often face a challenge of efficiency. Extracting a summary, i.e., a set of representative points, from a
given dataset is a promising approach to overcoming this
challenge, and the diversity maximization problem can output such a summary (Ceccarello, Pietracaprina, and Pucci
2020; Moumoulidou, McGregor, and Meliou 2021; Zadeh
et al. 2017). This is because it can control the summary size,
i.e., k, and the summary preserves the diversity of (or the
information on) a given dataset as much as possible.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12338

