The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Social Bias Meets Data Bias:
The Impacts of Labeling and Measurement Errors on Fairness Criteria
Yiqiao Liao1 , Parinaz Naghizadeh2
1
2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio State University
{liao.489, naghizadeh.1}@osu.edu

Abstract

Despite the rising interest in this approach to developing
fair algorithms, existing fairness criteria have been largely
proposed and evaluated assuming access to unbiased training data. However, existing datasets are often themselves
statistically biased due to biases or errors made during data
collection, labeling, feature measurement, etc (Blum and
Stangl 2020; Fogliato, Chouldechova, and G’Sell 2020; Jiang
and Nachum 2020; Kallus and Zhou 2018; Wick, Tristan et al.
2019). Any machine learning algorithm is inevitably only as
good as the data it is trained on, and so attempts to attain a
desired notion of fairness can be thwarted by biases in the
training dataset.
Our work identifies the impacts of statistical data biases on
the efficacy of existing fairness criteria in addressing social
biases. In particular, as we show both analytically and numerically, existing fairness criteria differ considerably in their
robustness against different forms of statistical biases in the
training data. Although fairness criteria are generally chosen
under normative considerations in practice, our results show
that naively applying fairness constraints can lead to more
severe unfairness when data bias exists. Thus, understanding
how fairness criteria react to different forms of data bias can
serve as a critical guideline when choosing among existing
fairness criteria, or when proposing new criteria.

Although many fairness criteria have been proposed to ensure
that machine learning algorithms do not exhibit or amplify our
existing social biases, these algorithms are trained on datasets
that can themselves be statistically biased. In this paper, we
investigate the robustness of existing (demographic) fairness
criteria when the algorithm is trained on biased data. We consider two forms of dataset bias: errors by prior decision makers
in the labeling process, and errors in the measurement of the
features of disadvantaged individuals. We analytically show
that some constraints (such as Demographic Parity) can remain
robust when facing certain statistical biases, while others (such
as Equalized Odds) are significantly violated if trained on biased data. We provide numerical experiments based on three
real-world datasets (the FICO, Adult, and German credit score
datasets) supporting our analytical findings. While fairness
criteria are primarily chosen under normative considerations
in practice, our results show that naively applying a fairness
constraint can lead to not only a loss in utility for the decision
maker, but more severe unfairness when data bias exists. Thus,
understanding how fairness criteria react to different forms
of data bias presents a critical guideline for choosing among
existing fairness criteria, or for proposing new criteria, when
available datasets may be biased.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms are being adopted widely in areas ranging from recommendation systems and ad-display, to
hiring, loan approvals, and determining recidivism in courts.
Despite their potential benefits, these algorithms can still exhibit or amplify existing societal biases (Angwin et al. 2016;
Obermeyer et al. 2019; Lambrecht and Tucker 2019). This is
referred to as algorithmic (social) bias or unfairness, as the
algorithm makes decisions in favor or against individuals in a
way that is inconsistent or discriminatory across groups with
different social identities (e.g., race, gender). A commonly
proposed method for assessing and preventing these forms
of unfairness is through fairness criteria (e.g, equality of opportunity, equalized odds, or demographic parity) (Mehrabi
et al. 2021; Barocas, Hardt, and Narayanan 2017). These
criteria typically require the algorithm to make decisions in a
way that (approximately) equalizes a statistical measure (e.g.,
selection rate, true positive rate) between different groups.

Overview of our findings and contributions. Formally,
we consider a setting in which a firm makes binary decisions
(accept/reject) on agents from two demographic groups a and
b, with b denoting the disadvantaged group. We assume the
training data is statistically biased as a prior decision maker
has made errors when either assessing the true qualification
state (label) of individuals or when measuring their features.
The firm selects its decision rule based on this biased data, potentially subject to one of four fairness criteria: Demographic
Parity (DP), True/False Positive Rate Parity (TPR/FPR), or
Equalized Odds (EO). Our main findings and contributions
are summarized below.
(1) Some fairness criteria are more robust than others. We
first analytically show (Proposition 1) that some existing fairness criteria (namely, DP and TPR) are more robust against
labeling errors in the disadvantaged group compared to others
(FPR and EO). That is, perhaps surprisingly, despite being
trained on biased data, the resulting DP/TPR-constrained decision rules continue to satisfy the desired DP/TPR fairness

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8764

