The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CRIN: Rotation-Invariant Point Cloud Analysis and Rotation Estimation
via Centrifugal Reference Frame
Yujing Lou1 , Zelin Ye1 , Yang You1 ,
Nianjuan Jiang2 , Jiangbo Lu2 , Weiming Wang1 , Lizhuang Ma1 * , Cewu Lu1 *
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
SmartMore
{louyujing, h e r o, qq456cvb, wangweiming, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn, ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn,
{jnianjuan, jiangbo.lu}@gmail.com

Abstract

excess of rotation augmentation also brings unbearable computation consumption. In contrast, a rotation-invariant representation of an object is much more convenient and efficient.
Therefore, seeking a novel representation for 3D objects invariant to 3D rotations is necessary.
Traditional methods (Rusu, Blodow, and Beetz 2009;
Tombari, Salti, and Di Stefano 2010) develop hand-crafted
descriptors to represent local geometries. They utilize local
geometric measurements invariant to rotations, e.g., relative
distances and angles used in Point Pair Features (Drost et al.
2010; Deng, Birdal, and Ilic 2018b,a). However, they only
focus on local geometries and ignore the global relationship.
Spherical CNNs (Cohen et al. 2018; Esteves et al. 2018)
first explore rotation-equivariant feature extraction. They
discretize the 3D rotation group SO(3) on a unit sphere, extract the features for independent rotations and fuse them for
global rotation-invariant features. Nevertheless, insufficient
computation resources limit the resolution on the sphere,
leading to an inaccurate rotation division and a considerable
performance decline. Deep learning methods further explore
the rotation invariance of point clouds. RINet (Zhang et al.
2019), ClusterNet(Chen et al. 2019), PR-invNet (Yu et al.
2020) and SGMNet (Xu et al. 2021) exploit various combinations of low-level geometric measurements to replace
the original coordinates of input points. Though invariant
to rotations, these measurements lose essential geometric
relationships from the original data. Besides, some methods (Gojcic et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019) build local reference frames (LRFs) by the geometric center, barycenter, etc.
RI-GCN (Kim, Park, and Han 2020) builds LRFs by PCA of
local points to transform point clouds into rotation-invariant
representations. Unfortunately, these LRFs are sensitive to
the distribution and density of points, which is not robust
enough. Li et al. (Li et al. 2021) achieve rotation invariance
by removing the ambiguity of PCA-based canonical poses,
while still requiring 24 known rotations as the prior.
To address the issues mentioned before, we propose Centrifugal Rotation-Invariant Network. Concretely, we first introduce the Centrifugal Reference Frame (CRF), a rotationinvariant representation of point clouds. A CRF is based on
two polar CRFs (PCRFs). The PCRF has two essential properties. First, it turns a rotation in SO(3) to a basic rotation

Various recent methods attempt to implement rotationinvariant 3D deep learning by replacing the input coordinates
of points with relative distances and angles. Due to the incompleteness of these low-level features, they have to undertake the expense of losing global information. In this paper,
we propose the CRIN, namely Centrifugal Rotation-Invariant
Network. CRIN directly takes the coordinates of points as
input and transforms local points into rotation-invariant representations via centrifugal reference frames. Aided by centrifugal reference frames, each point corresponds to a discrete
rotation so that the information of rotations can be implicitly stored in point features. Unfortunately, discrete points are
far from describing the whole rotation space. We further introduce a continuous distribution for 3D rotations based on
points. Furthermore, we propose an attention-based downsampling strategy to sample points invariant to rotations. A
relation module is adopted at last for reinforcing the longrange dependencies between sampled points and predicts the
anchor point for unsupervised rotation estimation. Extensive
experiments show that our method achieves rotation invariance, accurately estimates the object rotation, and obtains
state-of-the-art results on rotation-augmented classification
and part segmentation. Ablation studies validate the effectiveness of the network design.

Introduction
Deep learning on point cloud has achieved tremendous development in recent years. Methods like PointNet(Qi et al.
2017a), PointNet++ (Qi et al. 2017b) and PointCNN (Li
et al. 2018) are the pioneers for processing point cloud and
obtain several achievements. However, most of these methods heavily rely on the alignment of input data. They always fail to generalize to unseen rotations, as the 3D object
datasets (Chang et al. 2015; Mo et al. 2019; Yi et al. 2016)
for training always keep the objects aligned canonically. Besides, a performance decline exists after applying data augmentation since rotations are impossible to enumerate. An
* Lizhuang Ma and Cewu Lu are the corresponding authors.
Cewu Lu is the member of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
and Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1817

