The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CDMA: A Practical Cross-Device Federated Learning Algorithm for General
Minimax Problems
Jiahao Xie1 , Chao Zhang* 2 , Zebang Shen3 , Weijie Liu4,1 , Hui Qian1,5
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Advanced Technology Institute, Zhejiang University
3
ETH Zürich
4
Qiushi Academy for Advanced Studies, Zhejiang University
5
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
xiejh@zju.edu.cn, zczju@zju.edu.cn, zebang.shen@inf.ethz.ch, westonhunter@zju.edu.cn, qianhui@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

2020; Yuan et al. 2021; Deng and Mahdavi 2021). Generally, these federated learning algorithms optimize a global
minimax problem over multiple clients (data sources) under
the coordination of a central server without transferring any
client’s private data (Kairouz et al. 2019), which helps protect data privacy. Besides, the local update strategy (i.e., performing multiple local update steps on clients before communicating with the server) is usually adopted in each training round of these algorithms to save communication efforts,
which makes them scalable to large-scale problems.

Minimax problems arise in a wide range of important applications including robust adversarial learning and Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) training. Recently, algorithms for minimax problems in the Federated Learning (FL)
paradigm have received considerable interest. Existing federated algorithms for general minimax problems require the
full aggregation (i.e., aggregation of local model information from all clients) in each training round. Thus, they are
inapplicable to an important setting of FL known as the
cross-device setting, which involves numerous unreliable mobile/IoT devices. In this paper, we develop the first practical algorithm named CDMA for general minimax problems
in the cross-device FL setting. CDMA is based on a StartImmediately-With-Enough-Responses mechanism, in which
the server first signals a subset of clients to perform local
computation and then starts to aggregate the local results
reported by clients once it receives responses from enough
clients in each round. With this mechanism, CDMA is resilient to the low client availability. In addition, CDMA is
incorporated with a lightweight global correction in the local
update steps of clients, which mitigates the impact of slow
network connections. We establish theoretical guarantees of
CDMA under different choices of hyperparameters and conduct experiments on AUC maximization, robust adversarial
network training, and GAN training tasks. Theoretical and
experimental results demonstrate the efficiency of CDMA.

Despite that existing federated minimax algorithms have
achieved success in certain applications, there is a lack of
practical algorithms for general minimax problems in an important FL setting, known as the cross-device setting. In this
setting, the clients are numerous (up to 1010 (Kairouz et al.
2019)) unreliable mobile/IoT devices with relatively slow
network connections. Actually, most existing federated minimax algorithms are designed for another setting known as
the cross-silo setting (Reisizadeh et al. 2020; Rasouli, Sun,
and Rajagopal 2020; Beznosikov, Samokhin, and Gasnikov
2020; Hou et al. 2021; Guo et al. 2020; Yuan et al. 2021;
Deng and Mahdavi 2021; Sharma et al. 2022; Sun and Wei
2022), where the clients are a relatively small number of
organizations or data centers with reliable network connections (Kairouz et al. 2019). Compared with the cross-silo setting, it is generally more challenging to solve a problem in
the cross-device setting due to the low client availability and
relatively slow network connections (Kairouz et al. 2019).
Mohri, Sivek, and Suresh (2019) and Deng, Kamani, and
Mahdavi (2020) investigate a special constrained problem,
where the objective function is linear w.r.t. the dual variable, and propose two cross-device federated minimax algorithms. However, these algorithms heavily rely on the linear
structure, which makes them infeasible to general minimax
problems including AUC maximization, robust adversarial
learning, and GAN training.

Introduction
During the last few years, minimax problems have found a
surge of important applications such as AUC (area under the
ROC curve) maximization (Ying, Wen, and Lyu 2016; Liu
et al. 2020a), robust adversarial learning (Madry et al. 2018),
and Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) (Goodfellow
et al. 2014). Recently, distributed minimax algorithms in
the Federated Learning (FL) paradigm have drawn significant attention due to the increasing concern of data privacy and the rapid growth of data volume (Mohri, Sivek, and
Suresh 2019; Deng, Kamani, and Mahdavi 2020; Reisizadeh
et al. 2020; Rasouli, Sun, and Rajagopal 2020; Beznosikov,
Samokhin, and Gasnikov 2020; Hou et al. 2021; Guo et al.

In this paper, we develop the first practical federated algorithm named Cross-Device Minimax Averaging (CDMA)
that applies to general minimax problems in the crossdevice setting. Each training round of CDMA consists of
two phases: (i) the gradient collection phase and (ii) the parameter update phase. In the first phase, the server sends the
global model parameters to a subset of clients, and aggre-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10481

