The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Neural Architecture Search for Wide Spectrum Adversarial Robustness
Zhi Cheng1 * , Yanxi Li1 , Minjing Dong1 , Xiu Su1 , Shan You2 , Chang Xu1 *
1

School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
2
SenseTime Research
{zche6824, yali0722, mdon0736, xisu5992}@uni.sydney.edu.au, youshan@sensetime.com, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
One major limitation of CNNs is that they are vulnerable to
adversarial attacks. Currently, adversarial robustness in neural networks is commonly optimized with respect to a small
pre-selected adversarial noise strength, causing them to have
potentially limited performance when under attack by larger
adversarial noises in real-world scenarios. In this research,
we aim to find Neural Architectures that have improved
robustness on a wide range of adversarial noise strengths
through Neural Architecture Search. In detail, we propose a
lightweight Adversarial Noise Estimator to reduce the high
cost of generating adversarial noise with respect to different
strengths. Besides, we construct an Efficient Wide Spectrum
Searcher to reduce the cost of adjusting network architecture
with the large adversarial validation set during the search.
With the two components proposed, the number of adversarial noise strengths searched can be increased significantly
while having a limited increase in search time. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets such as CIFAR and ImageNet demonstrate that with a significantly richer search signal in robustness, our method can find architectures with improved overall robustness while having a limited impact on
natural accuracy and around 40% reduction in search time
compared with the naive approach of searching. Codes available at: https://github.com/zhicheng2T0/Wsr-NAS.git

Figure 1: Robust accuracy comparison at different adversarial noise strengths between RobNet-large(Guo et al. 2020)
(6.9M parameters, clean accuracy 78.6%) and the proposed
WsrNet-Robust(4.5M parameters, clean accuracy 78.4%).

Kolter 2019; Lütjens, Everett, and How 2019; Li et al. 2019;
Lécuyer et al. 2019). Currently, a few pioneering works have
also attempted to address the adversarial robustness limitation of CNNs in the perspective of Neural Architecture
Search (Guo et al. 2020; Dong et al. 2020; Mok et al. 2021;
Hosseini, Yang, and Xie 2021; Sun et al. 2023).
However, a common limitation of the existing research is
that the robustness of the networks is commonly optimized
on a pre-selected small adversarial noise strength, causing
there to be a potentially limited performance when under
stronger attacks at some larger unseen strengths (as in Fig.
1), leaving the networks vulnerable to adversarial attack under real-world scenarios.
Currently, there are limited works that deal with the issue of simultaneously improving network robustness under
different adversarial noise strengths. From the perspective
of training, the only existing method (Song et al. 2018) requires simultaneously training multiple networks that have
good adversarial robustness at different ranges of adversarial noise strengths. With the different networks, a more robust combined decision can be made. We argue the design
would not only bring a considerable increase in model size
but also brings a considerable increase in the computational
cost when training and testing the network.
In this research, we aim to address the limitations in the
existing research by finding Neural Architectures with wide
spectrum adversarial robustness (WsrNets). When trained
with the commonly used adversarial training techniques (i.e.
TRADES (Zhang et al. 2019) or PGD (Madry et al. 2019)),
on a single model without having a significant increase in
model parameters (opposing to the multiple models trained

Introduction
With the tremendous success of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (He et al. 2015; Szegedy et al. 2016; Howard
et al. 2017; Cai et al. 2017), more and more CNNs are applied in security-sensitive settings. However, CNNs have
a major limitation where they are vulnerable under adversarial attack (Madry et al. 2019; Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2014; Dong et al. 2018), a small and targeted noise
can mislead the network. To deal with such a limitation,
various robust training techniques have been proposed for
CNNs (Madry et al. 2019; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2014; Zhang et al. 2019; Shafahi et al. 2019; Wong, Rice,
and Kolter 2020; Zhang et al. 2020). Moreover, there also
exists a class of techniques which train networks to gain
performance guarantees when the adversarial noise strength
is under a certain strength limit (Cohen, Rosenfeld, and
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

442

