The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MA-GCL: Model Augmentation Tricks for Graph Contrastive Learning
Xumeng Gong, Cheng Yang* , Chuan Shi
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Xumeng1141@bupt.edu.cn,yangcheng@bupt.edu.cn, shichuan@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

learning, dubbed as graph contrastive learning (GCL) (You
et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2021; Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020;
Zhu et al. 2020; Qiu et al. 2020; Suresh et al. 2021). GCL approaches have achieved competitive performance on various
graph benchmarks compared to the counterpart trained with
ground-truth labels.
However, generating data augmentations on graphs is more
challenging than that on images. Theories on contrastive
learning (Tian et al. 2020) show that good contrastive views
should be diverse while keeping the task-relevant information
untouched. In computer vision area, we have strong prior
knowledge on how to significantly augment an image without
changing its labels (e.g., rotation or shift). While in graph
learning area, dropping a single edge could possibly destroy
a key connection (e.g., an important chemical bond) related
to downstream tasks. Nevertheless, most existing graph data
augmentation (GDA) techniques (e.g., node or edge dropping)
choose to randomly perturb the graph topology (Velickovic
et al. 2019; You et al. 2020; Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020;
Zhu et al. 2020; Qiu et al. 2020) as contrastive views.
We argue that existing GDA techniques are in a dilemma:
the perturbations that preserve sufficient task-relevant information cannot generate diverse enough augmentations to
filter out noises. Moreover, previous GCL methods employ
two view encoders with exactly the same neural architecture
and tied parameters1 , which further harms the diversity of
augmented views. Though some recent GCL methods generate augmentations in a heuristic (Zhu, Sun, and Koniusz
2021) or adversarial (You et al. 2021; Suresh et al. 2021) way,
they still use two view encoders with identical architectures
and fail to fully address this problem. Besides, a very recent
work (Xia et al. 2022) proposes to perturb model parameters instead of graph inputs as augmentations. Note that the
function of encoded semantics with respect to model parameters is rather complex. Hence the parameter perturbation
drawn from a simple distribution (e.g., Gaussian distribution)
may harm the semantics in encoded representations. We will
empirically validate our motivation in experiments.
In this work, we propose a novel paradigm for GCL to
address the above limitations, named as MA-GCL (Model

Contrastive learning (CL), which can extract the information
shared between different contrastive views, has become a popular paradigm for vision representation learning. Inspired by
the success in computer vision, recent work introduces CL
into graph modeling, dubbed as graph contrastive learning
(GCL). However, generating contrastive views in graphs is
more challenging than that in images, since we have little prior
knowledge on how to significantly augment a graph without
changing its labels. We argue that typical data augmentation
techniques (e.g., edge dropping) in GCL cannot generate diverse enough contrastive views to filter out noises. Moreover,
previous GCL methods employ two view encoders with exactly the same neural architecture and tied parameters, which
further harms the diversity of augmented views. To address
this limitation, we propose a novel paradigm named model
augmented GCL (MA-GCL), which will focus on manipulating the architectures of view encoders instead of perturbing
graph inputs. Specifically, we present three easy-to-implement
model augmentation tricks for GCL, namely asymmetric, random and shuffling, which can respectively help alleviate highfrequency noises, enrich training instances and bring safer
augmentations. All three tricks are compatible with typical
data augmentations. Experimental results show that MA-GCL
can achieve state-of-the-art performance on node classification benchmarks by applying the three tricks on a simple base
model. Extensive studies also validate our motivation and
the effectiveness of each trick. (Code, data and appendix are
available at https://github.com/GXM1141/MA-GCL. )

Introduction
Contrastive learning (CL) has emerged as a promising
paradigm for unsupervised vision representation learning (Chen et al. 2020; He et al. 2020; Grill et al. 2020; Van den
Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018; Hjelm et al. 2019). In short, typical CL methods will generate two views of the same sample
by data augmentations, and then maximize the similarity between their encoded representations. In this way, CL can
extract the information shared between different views (Tian
et al. 2020), and thereby alleviate the task-irrelevant noises
that only appear in a single view. Recently, CL is also introduced to graph domain for unsupervised graph representation

1

Though some work (Thakoor et al. 2021; Xia et al. 2022) employs momentum update and hence makes two view encoders not
entirely the same, we argue that such difference is not enough.

* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4284

