The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ADEPT: A DEbiasing PrompT Framework
Ke Yang1 , Charles Yu2 , Yi R. Fung2 , Manling Li2 , Heng Ji2
1
Tsinghua University
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
yang-k19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{ctyu2,yifung2,manling2,hengji}@illinois.edu
2

Abstract

document. As more powerful NLP models have been developed, many real-world tasks have been automated by the application of these NLP systems. However, a great number of
fields and tasks have a high demand for fairness and equality: legal information extraction (Rabelo et al. 2022), resume
filtering (Abdollahnejad, Kalman, and Far 2021), and general language assistants (Askell et al. 2021) to name a few.
Unfortunately, in the pursuit of the most competitive results,
folks often blindly apply PLMs, leading to strong performance with the unseen cost of introducing bias into the process. An ideal NLP tool’s decision or choice should not impose harms on a person based on their background (Blodgett et al. 2020), but many studies (Caliskan, Bryson, and
Narayanan 2017; Mayfield et al. 2019) have found that biases exist and occur throughout the NLP lifecycle. Thus, it
is increasingly important that PLMs can be debiased to enable applications that may be inadvertently influenced by the
PLM’s implicit stereotypes.
Debiasing, if treated as a special case of downstream
tasks, can be tackled through finetuning. Typically, a finetuning debiasing method puts forward specific loss terms
to guide a PLM to remove biases in itself (Kaneko and
Bollegala 2021). Prompt tuning (Li and Liang 2021; Liu
et al. 2021b; Lester, Al-Rfou, and Constant 2021) is one
of the more promising methods for transfer learning with
large PLMs these days, and its general success (Raffel
et al. 2020) suggests applications toward debiasing as well.
Prompt tuning, whose role is similar to that of finetuning,
refers to freezing all the parameters of the original PLM and
only training an additional section of parameters (called a
“prompt”) for the downstream tasks. Here, a prompt is a set
of tokens, often added as a prefix to the input for the task,
that act as task-specific complementary information.
All PLM debiasing methods must overcome a major hurdle of “imbalance.” Methods that are imbalanced do not adequately balance eliminating biases in a PLM while maintaining its representation ability. Some existing methods are
prone to be destructive, whether destructive refers to decreasing a word/sentence embedding’s projection on a linear
bias subspace (Liang et al. 2020), or refers to completely removing the semantic meanings of attribute words (e.g., man,
male; and woman, female) from all neutral words (e.g., engineer, scientist; and teacher, librarian) (Kaneko and Bollegala 2021). If a debiasing framework focuses only on the

Several exisiting approaches have proven that finetuning is an
applicable approach for debiasing contextualized word embeddings. Similarly, discrete prompts with semantic meanings have shown to be effective in debiasing tasks. With unfixed mathematical representation at the token level, continuous prompts usually surpass discrete ones at providing
a pre-trained language model (PLM) with additional taskspecific information. Despite this, relatively few efforts have
been made to debias PLMs by prompt tuning with continuous prompts compared to its discrete counterpart. Furthermore, for most debiasing methods that alter a PLM’s original parameters, a major problem is the need to not only decrease the bias in the PLM, but also ensure that the PLM does
not lose its representation ability. Finetuning methods typically have a hard time maintaining this balance, as they tend
to aggressively remove meanings of attribute words (like the
words developing our concepts of “male” and “female” for
gender), which also leads to an unstable and unpredictable
training process. In this paper, we propose ADEPT, a method
to debias PLMs using prompt tuning while maintaining the
delicate balance between removing biases and ensuring representation ability1 . To achieve this, we propose a new training criterion inspired by manifold learning and equip it with
an explicit debiasing term to optimize prompt tuning. In addition, we conduct several experiments with regard to the reliability, quality, and quantity of a previously proposed attribute
training corpus in order to obtain a clearer prototype of a certain attribute, which indicates the attribute’s position and relative distances to other words on the manifold. We evaluate
ADEPT on several widely acknowledged debiasing benchmarks and downstream tasks, and find that it achieves competitive results while maintaining (and in some cases even
improving) the PLM’s representation ability. We further visualize words’ correlation before and after debiasing a PLM,
and give some possible explanations for the visible effects.

Introduction
Natural Language Processing (NLP) tools are widely used
today to perform reasoning and prediction by efficiently condensing the semantic meanings of a token, a sentence or a
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The code and data are publicly available at https://github.com/
EmpathYang/ADEPT.

10780

