The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

READ: Large-Scale Neural Scene Rendering for Autonomous Driving
Zhuopeng Li1 , Lu Li1 , Jianke Zhu1,2*
1

2

Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, China
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies
{lizhuopeng, lu.lee, jkzhu}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
With the development of advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS) and autonomous vehicles, conducting experiments in various scenarios becomes an urgent need. Although having been capable of synthesizing photo-realistic
street scenes, conventional image-to-image translation methods cannot produce coherent scenes due to the lack of 3D
information. In this paper, a large-scale neural rendering
method is proposed to synthesize the autonomous driving
scene (READ), which makes it possible to generate largescale driving scenes in real time on a PC through a variety
of sampling schemes. In order to effectively represent driving scenarios, we propose an ω − net rendering network to
learn neural descriptors from sparse point clouds. Our model
can not only synthesize photo-realistic driving scenes but
also stitch and edit them. The promising experimental results
show that our model performs well in large-scale driving scenarios.

Figure 1: Given the input point clouds, our proposed approach synthesizes photo-realistic driving scenes from different views. Both Instant NGP and ADOP cannot deal with
the regions with sparse point cloud, including sky, moving
objects, and distant areas, where the synthesized novel views
tend to be blurry with large artifacts.

Introduction
Synthesizing free-view photo-realistic images is an important task in computer vision and robotics. Especially, the
synthetic large-scale street views are essential to a series of
real-world applications, including autonomous driving (Kim
et al. 2013), robot simulation (Dosovitskiy et al. 2017). As
illustrated in Fig. 1, the objective of neural scene rendering
is to synthesize the 3D scene from a moving camera, where
the user can browse the street scenery from different views
and conduct experiments through automatic driving simulation. In addition, it is able to generate multi-view images to
provide data for robotic tasks.
With the development of autonomous driving, it is challenging to conduct experiments in various driving scenarios. Due to the complicated geographic locations, varying
surroundings, and road conditions, it is usually difficult to
simulate outdoor environments. Additionally, it is hard to
model some unexpected traffic scenarios, such as car accidents, where the simulators can help to reduce the reality
gap. However, the data generated by the widely used simulator like CARLA (Dosovitskiy et al. 2017) is far different from the real world using the conventional rendering

pipeline.
The image-to-image translation-based methods (Gao
et al. 2020; Tang, Bai, and Sebe 2020) synthesize the street
views with semantic labels by learning the mapping between
source images and targets. Despite generating the encouraging street scene, there exist some large artifacts and incoherent textures. Moreover, the synthesized image has only
a single view that cannot provide the rich multi-view traffic
conditions for autonomous vehicles. This hinders them from
a large number of real-world applications.
Recently, Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) based methods (Zhang et al. 2021; Niemeyer and Geiger 2021; Mildenhall et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021) achieve promising results
in synthesizing the photo-realistic scenes with multi-view.
As suggested in (Deng et al. 2022), they cannot produce reasonable results with only a few input views, which typically
happens in the driving scenario with the objects appearing
in only a few frames. Moreover, the NeRF-based methods
mainly render either the interiors or objects. They have difficulty synthesizing the large-scale driving scenes with the
complicated environment, where the large artifacts occur in
the closed-up views and surroundings. To tackle this prob-

* corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1522

