The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Class Overwhelms: Mutual Conditional Blended-Target Domain Adaptation
Pengcheng Xu1 , Boyu Wang1, 2 * , Charles Ling1
1

Western University, London, ON N6A 5B7, Canada
Vector Institute, Toronto, ON M5G 1M1, Canada
pxu67@uwo.ca, bwang@csd.uwo.ca, charles.ling@uwo.ca
2

Abstract

analysis of BTDA and discuss limitations of current methods due to these essential issues. Finally, we discuss that domain labels are not directly necessary for BTDA and propose
the category-oriented mutual conditional domain adaptation
(MCDA), which also generalizes to common settings.
There are two practical issues for distributional alignment
in BTDA: 1)Diverse styles and textures of blended targets.
2)Label shift of various targets. These induced our key observation that categorical feature space in BTDA is hybrid
and unstructured as shown in Figure 1. Features of different classes in the blended targets are pervasive and do not
form a well-clustered structure. To analyze it, we conduct
t-SNE for feature space under BTDA in the left. Besides,
we also uniformly sample and calculate K nearest neighbors
(KNN) of each class center under STDA and BTDA. The result in the middle shows that the number of samples within
the same class in STDA is more than that of BTDA. This indicates that the cluster structure of BTDA is not well formed
compared to STDA which corresponds to the hybrid categorical feature space in t-SNE visualization. This weakens
the cluster assumption (Chapelle and Zien 2005) that serves
as the necessary condition of many adaptation methods (Tachet des Combes et al. 2020; Shu et al. 2018; Tang, Chen,
and Jia 2020; Yang et al. 2021). Further, it motivates our analytical perspective from both categorical distribution shift
and biased classifier for BTDA.
Current UDA methods yield sub-optimal performance
in BTDA due to these. Concretely, methods based on the
covariate shift assumption and aligning marginal distributions (Tzeng et al. 2017; Ganin and Lempitsky 2015; Shen
et al. 2018) are inevitable to increase the joint error of optimal hypotheses under the label shift (Wu et al. 2019; Tachet des Combes et al. 2020). BTDA worsens the situation with diverse target domains and more serious imbalance and label shift issues. Some theories further propose
conditional alignment formulation to avoid the joint error
issue. (Tachet des Combes et al. 2020; Jiang et al. 2020) implicitly align conditional distribution by aligning reweighted
marginal distributions that still need cluster assumption.
Other methods use the target pseudo labels to model and
align conditional distributions through class centroids (Pan
et al. 2019; Tanwisuth et al. 2021; Singh 2021), task-oriented
classifiers (Zhang et al. 2019; Saito et al. 2019), and the
conditional discriminator (Long et al. 2018). These effec-

Current methods of blended targets domain adaptation
(BTDA) usually infer or consider domain label information
but underemphasize hybrid categorical feature structures of
targets, which yields limited performance, especially under
the label distribution shift. We demonstrate that domain labels
are not directly necessary for BTDA if categorical distributions of various domains are sufficiently aligned even facing
the imbalance of domains and the label distribution shift of
classes. However, we observe that the cluster assumption in
BTDA does not comprehensively hold. The hybrid categorical feature space hinders the modeling of categorical distributions and the generation of reliable pseudo labels for categorical alignment. To address these, we propose a categorical domain discriminator guided by uncertainty to explicitly model
and directly align categorical distributions P (Z|Y ). Simultaneously, we utilize the low-level features to augment the
single source features with diverse target styles to rectify the
biased classifier P (Y |Z) among diverse targets. Such a mutual conditional alignment of P (Z|Y ) and P (Y |Z) forms a
mutual reinforced mechanism. Our approach outperforms the
state-of-the-art in BTDA even compared with methods utilizing domain labels, especially under the label distribution
shift, and in single target DA on DomainNet.

Introduction
Deep learning suffers a serious performance drop under the
distribution shift (Ben-David et al. 2006). Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is proposed to adapt a source model
to a new unlabeled target domain. Most UDA research considers the adaptation from single or multiple sources to a
single target (STDA). However, in reality, the target domain
can be diverse and include various styles and textures, and
the distribution of each class also varies from each target.
These steer us to consider a practical yet challenging setting termed as blended targets domain adaptation (BTDA):
1)Adaptation is conducted from one single source to multiple targets. 2)Neither domain labels nor class labels are
available on targets and the model should perform well on
each target. 3)Label distributions of different targets can be
different (label shift). In the following, we first present the
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3036

