The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

3D Assembly Completion
Weihao Wang, Rufeng Zhang, Mingyu You* , Hongjun Zhou, Bin He
College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 201804 China
{wwhtju,myyou,zhouhongjun,hebin}@tongji.edu.cn, cxrfzhang@foxmail.com

Abstract

broken toy, or in general, finishing an incomplete assembly
somehow remains unexplored yet. It is a fundamental but
essential task in human-robot and multi-agent cooperative
assembly. Take as an example the robot cooperates with
humans in assembling a complex IKEA furniture. Rather
than replacing humans to complete the work, it will be more
welcome to assist with the assembly. On the multi-agent
assembly line, human-like cooperation requires the agent to
take over various work-in-process assemblies which are halfassembled by other agents, and try to finish the assembly in
its power. With such an ability, maintenance can be a piece
of cake, e.g., to repair a broken chair that lacks a leg, and the
dream of Andrew will soon come true.
Despite its great significance, it is a challenging task to finish an incomplete assembly without any instruction manual
or external guidance. Unlike 3D part assembly, which focuses on inter-part relation modeling, the robot needs a more
detailed comprehension of the incomplete structure and infer
part-to-structure relationships for the candidate parts. Moreover, for a particular missing part, the toolkit may contain
multiple confusing candidates that are similar in geometry
but distinct in functionality (i.e., invalid for assembly), which
can interfere with the correct selection. This issue can be
further exacerbated when multiple parts are missing.
To tackle this issue, we propose 3D assembly completion,
a novel task that aims to single out the correct missing parts
from a toolkit of candidates and predict the 6-DoF poses to
complete the assembly. To this end, we propose a framework
named FiT, for Finishing the incomplete 3D assembly with
Transformer. We model the incomplete assembly into memories with the encoder and take the candidate parts modeled by
the decoder as queries to interact with memories, completing
multiple tasks of candidate classification and pose prediction.
During training, we design bipartite part matching to designate a unique candidate for each missing part, avoiding the
conflict of multiple correct candidates in the toolkit. We also
propose symmetric transformation consistency to approximate stability optimization for generating more stable and
practical assemblies.
We design two standard toolkits for reasonable evaluation
and comparison, namely the original toolkit and the blended
toolkit. They contain candidate parts of different numbers,
geometry, and thus difficulties. We conduct extensive experiments both qualitatively and quantitatively to demonstrate

Automatic assembly is a promising research topic in 3D computer vision and robotics. Existing works focus on generating
assembly (e.g., IKEA furniture) from scratch with a set of
parts, namely 3D part assembly. In practice, there are higher
demands for the robot to take over and finish an incomplete
assembly (e.g., a half-assembled IKEA furniture) with an offthe-shelf toolkit, especially in human-robot and multi-agent
collaborations. Compared to 3D part assembly, it is more complicated in nature and remains unexplored yet. The robot must
understand the incomplete structure, infer what parts are missing, single out the correct parts from the toolkit and finally,
assemble them with appropriate poses to finish the incomplete
assembly. Geometrically similar parts in the toolkit can interfere, and this problem will be exacerbated with more missing
parts. To tackle this issue, we propose a novel task called 3D
assembly completion. Given an incomplete assembly, it aims
to find its missing parts from a toolkit and predict the 6-DoF
poses to make the assembly complete. To this end, we propose
FiT, a framework for Finishing the incomplete 3D assembly
with Transformer. We employ the encoder to model the incomplete assembly into memories. Candidate parts interact
with memories in a memory-query paradigm for final candidate classification and pose prediction. Bipartite part matching
and symmetric transformation consistency are embedded to
refine the completion. For reasonable evaluation and further
reference, we design two standard toolkits of different difficulty, containing different compositions of candidate parts. We
conduct extensive comparisons with several baseline methods
and ablation studies, demonstrating the effectiveness of the
proposed method.

Introduction
Automatic assembly is a desirable capability of intelligent
robot. Everyone dreams of owning Andrew, the android in
Bicentennial Man, that can not only assemble a new Lego
as your birthday surprise but also maintain your beloved toy
which is broken, to mend your broken heart.
At present, for a robot, assembling a Lego or even furniture
is coming true. Existing works have enabled the robot with
the ability to assemble a set of parts into a whole from scratch,
namely 3D part assembly (Zhan et al. 2020). Maintaining a
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2663

