The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Ballot Length in Instant Runoff Voting
Kiran Tomlinson1 , Johan Ugander2 , Jon Kleinberg1
1

Cornell University
Stanford University
kt@cs.cornell.edu, jugander@stanford.edu, kleinberg@cornell.edu
2

Abstract

saves money compared to holding separate runoff elections (FairVote 2022; Lewyn 2012). Many local elections
in the United States use IRV, including in Minneapolis, San
Fransisco, Oakland, Santa Fe, and New York City, as well as
statewide elections in Maine and Alaska. IRV is also used in
other countries, including Australia and Ireland.
However, IRV has vocal opponents who believe it to
be too confusing for voters (Langan 2004; Saltsman and
Paxton 2021), leading to outright bans on the use of IRV
in Florida (Florida Legislature 2022) and Tennessee (Tennessee Legislature 2022). One particular issue critics point
to is the complexity of a ballot that asks voters to rank every candidate, especially when the number of candidates is
large. One official tasked with running Utah’s first IRV election raised this as her primary concern after the election:
My concerns with the current RCV law are that we
would recommend the number of rankings be limited
to three or five instead of an unlimited number based
on the number of candidates. So although you can list
as many candidates as file on the ballot, I think it is a
bit confusing to voters [...] For instance, in Minneapolis they rank three. In St. Paul, they rank five. They
don’t usually have them rank as many candidates as
there are. (Swensen 2021, Salt Lake County Clerk)
Indeed, many municipalities have different numbers of ranking slots on their IRV ballots, what we call ballot length:
Oakland uses three, Alaska four, and New York City five.
The count goes on: ballot length six would have been mandated by the failed 2019 Ranked Choice Voting Act proposing IRV for US Congressional elections (US Congress
2019). In Maine, voters can rank all of the candidates—
even if there are 15 of them. In fact, plurality voting can
be viewed as IRV with ballot length one: losing candidates
are repeatedly “eliminated” (without redistribution) until the
candidate with a plurality is declared the winner.
While making ballots shorter does make them simpler, it
also strays from a goal of IRV: allowing voters to express
their complete preferences over the candidates. Critics of
IRV also raise concerns about ballot exhaustion during the
IRV algorithm, where all candidates ranked by a voter have
been eliminated and that vote no longer contributes to subsequent tallies (Burnett and Kogan 2015).1 Ballot length is

Instant runoff voting (IRV) is an increasingly-popular alternative to traditional plurality voting in which voters submit
rankings over the candidates rather than single votes. In practice, elections using IRV often restrict the ballot length, the
number of candidates a voter is allowed to rank on their
ballot. We theoretically and empirically analyze how ballot
length can influence the outcome of an election, given fixed
voter preferences. We show that there exist preference profiles over k candidates such that up to k − 1 different candidates win at different ballot lengths. We derive exact lower
bounds on the number of voters required for such profiles
and provide a construction matching the lower bound for
unrestricted voter preferences. Additionally, we characterize
which sequences of winners are possible over ballot lengths
and provide explicit profile constructions achieving any feasible winner sequence. We also examine how classic preference restrictions influence our results—for instance, singlepeakedness makes √
k − 1 different winners impossible but still
allows at least Ω( k). Finally, we analyze a collection of
168 real-world elections, where we truncate rankings to simulate shorter ballots. We find that shorter ballots could have
changed the outcome in one quarter of these elections. Our
results highlight ballot length as a consequential degree of
freedom in the design of IRV elections.

Introduction
Instant runoff voting (IRV) has grown in popularity over
the last two decades as an alternative to plurality voting
for governmental and organizational elections. Also referred
to as ranked choice voting (RCV), single transferrable vote
(STV), alternative vote, preferential voting, or the Hare
method, IRV allows voters to submit rankings over the candidates rather than voting for a single option. IRV determines a winner from these rankings by repeatedly eliminating the candidate who has the fewest ballots ranking them
first; the ballots that listed this eliminated candidate first
have their votes reallocated to the next candidate on their
list. This process continues, repeatedly eliminating candidates, until only one is left—the winner.
Proponents of IRV argue that it allows voters to report
their full preferences, mitigates vote-splitting when similar candidates run, encourages civility in campaigning, and
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5841

In plurality, any vote not cast for the winner is “exhausted.”

