The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Zero-Cost Operation Scoring in Differentiable Architecture Search
Lichuan Xiang1 * , Łukasz Dudziak2 * , Mohamed S. Abdelfattah3 *
Thomas Chau2 , Nicholas D. Lane2,4 , Hongkai Wen1,2
1
University of Warwick, UK
Samsung AI Center Cambridge, UK
3
Cornell University, USA
4
University of Cambridge, UK
{l.xiang.2, hongkai.wen}@warwick.ac.uk
{l.dudziak, thomas.chau, nic.lane}@samsung.com
mohamed@cornell.edu
2

Abstract
We formalize and analyze a fundamental component of differentiable neural architecture search (NAS): local “operation scoring” at each operation choice. We view existing
operation scoring functions as inexact proxies for accuracy,
and we find that they perform poorly when analyzed empirically on NAS benchmarks. From this perspective, we introduce a novel perturbation-based zero-cost operation scoring (Zero-Cost-PT) approach, which utilizes zero-cost proxies that were recently studied in multi-trial NAS but degrade significantly on larger search spaces, typical for differentiable NAS. We conduct a thorough empirical evaluation on a number of NAS benchmarks and large search
spaces, from NAS-Bench-201, NAS-Bench-1Shot1, NASBench-Macro, to DARTS-like and MobileNet-like spaces,
showing significant improvements in both search time and
accuracy. On the ImageNet classification task on the DARTS
search space, our approach improved accuracy compared to
the best current training-free methods (TE-NAS) while being over 10× faster (total searching time 25 minutes on a
single GPU), and observed significantly better transferability on architectures searched on the CIFAR-10 dataset with
an accuracy increase of 1.8 pp. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/zerocostptnas/zerocost operation score.

Introduction
One of the biggest problems in neural architecture search
(NAS) is the computational cost – even training a single deep
network can require enormous computational resources, and
many NAS methods need to train tens, if not hundreds, of networks in order to converge to a good architecture (Real et al.
2019; Luo et al. 2018; Dudziak et al. 2020). A related problem concerns search space size—a larger NAS search space
would typically contain better architectures but requires a
longer searching time (Real et al. 2019). Differentiable architecture search (DARTS) was first proposed to tackle those
challenges, showcasing promising results when searching
for a network in a set of over 1018 possible variations (Liu,
Simonyan, and Yang 2019). Unfortunately, DARTS has significant robustness issues, as demonstrated through many
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10453

recent works (Zela et al. 2020; Shu, Wang, and Cai 2020;
Yu et al. 2020). It also requires a careful selection of hyperparameters, making it somewhat difficult to adapt to a new
task. Recently, (Wang et al. 2021) showed that operation
selection in DARTS based on the magnitude of architectural parameters (α) is fundamentally wrong and will always
simply select skip connections over other more meaningful
operations. They proposed an alternative operation selection
method based on perturbation, where the importance of an
operation is determined by the decrease of the supernet’s validation accuracy when it is removed. Then the most important
operations are selected by exhaustively comparing them with
other alternatives on each single edge of the supernet until
the final architecture is found.
In a parallel line of work that aims to speed up NAS, proxies are often used instead of training accuracy to quickly obtain an indication of performance without expensive full training for each searched model. Conventional proxies typically
consist of a reduced form of training with fewer epochs, less
data or a smaller DNN architecture (Zhou et al. 2020). Most
recently, zero-cost proxies, which are extreme types of NAS
proxies that do not require any training, have gained interest
with empirically outperforming conventional training-based
proxies and deliver outstanding results on common NAS
benchmarks (Abdelfattah et al. 2021; Mellor et al. 2021).
However, their efficient usage on a large search space, typical
for differentiable NAS, has been shown to be more challenging and remains an open problem (Mellor et al. 2021).
The objective of our paper is to shed some light onto the
implicit proxies that are used for operation scoring in differentiable NAS, and to discover new proxies in this setting that
have the potential of improving both search speed and quality.
We decompose differentiable NAS into its two constituent
parts: (1) supernet training and (2) operation scoring. We
focus on the second component and formalize the concept
of “operation scoring” that happens during local operation
selection at each edge in a supernet. Through this lens, we are
able to empirically compare the efficacy of existing differentiable NAS operation scoring functions. We find that existing
methods act as a proxy for accuracy and perform poorly on
NAS benchmarks. Consequently, we propose new operation
scoring functions based on zero-cost proxies that outperform

