The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Meta-Reinforcement Learning Based on Self-Supervised Task Representation
Learning
Mingyang Wang1 , Zhenshan Bing1 , Xiangtong Yao1 , Shuai Wang2 ,
Huang Kai3, 4 , Hang Su5 , Chenguang Yang6 , * Alois Knoll1
1

Department of Informatics, Technical University Munich,
2
Tencent Robotics X Lab,
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University,
4
Shenzhen Institute, Sun Yat-Sen University
5
Dipartimento di Elettronica, Politecnico di Milano,
6
Bristol Robotics Laboratory, University of the West of England
mingyang.wang@tum.de, bing@in.tum.de, xiangtong.yao@tum.de, shuaiwanghit@gmail.com,
hang.su@polimi.it, cyang@ieee.org, huangk36@mail.sysu.edu.cn, knoll@in.tum.de
Abstract

cess by learning a prior model from a set of related training
tasks and quickly adapt to unseen tasks during testing.
However, most existing meta-RL studies are severely
confined to narrow task distributions that are parametric
and stationary, let alone taking into consideration out-ofdistribution (OOD) test tasks. In prior works (Finn, Abbeel,
and Levine 2017; Stadie et al. 2018; Nichol and Schulman
2018; Rothfuss et al. 2019; Duan et al. 2016; Gupta et al.
2018; Rakelly et al. 2019; Fakoor et al. 2019; Humplik
et al. 2019; Li, Yang, and Luo 2020; Zintgraf et al. 2020,
2021), task distributions only involve parametric variations,
e.g., simulated robots can adapt to reach a new goal velocity after being trained on a set of different goal velocities
previously. It is therefore unreasonable to expect generalization to a completely new control task, e.g., reaching a
specified goal position. To extend the meta-RL adaptation
to qualitatively distinct tasks, training tasks should also include such non-parametric variability in which task differences cannot be expressed only using continuous parameters. Also, humans can quickly adapt their behavior to unexpected changes and perturbations, we expect the meta-RL
algorithm to be broadly useful in non-stationary scenarios
where the task may vary at any time step and exhibit strong
generalization robustness for out-of-distribution tasks.
As a promising approach to tackling the meta-RL problem, context-based meta-RL (Duan et al. 2016; Rakelly et al.
2019; Fakoor et al. 2019; Humplik et al. 2019; Zintgraf et al.
2020; Guo, Wu, and Lee 2022) extracts salient information
from past experience and generates latent representations on
which the policy is then conditioned. However, representing
tasks on broad task distributions poses new challenges to the
model as more complex relationships and dependencies between tasks must be captured. Existing studies (Rakelly et al.
2019; Zintgraf et al. 2020; Fakoor et al. 2019; Li, Yang, and
Luo 2020) often uses a single-component Gaussian for task
representation which is inadequate in such complex cases.
Furthermore, current meta-RL algorithms suffer from
sample inefficiency due to on-policy optimization (Finn,
Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Stadie et al. 2018; Nichol and
Schulman 2018; Rothfuss et al. 2019; Duan et al. 2016;

Meta-reinforcement learning enables artificial agents to learn
from related training tasks and adapt to new tasks efficiently with minimal interaction data. However, most existing research is still limited to narrow task distributions that
are parametric and stationary, and does not consider outof-distribution tasks during the evaluation, thus, restricting
its application. In this paper, we propose MoSS, a contextbased Meta-reinforcement learning algorithm based on SelfSupervised task representation learning to address this challenge.We extend meta-RL to broad non-parametric task distributions which have never been explored before, and also
achieve state-of-the-art results in non-stationary and out-ofdistribution tasks. Specifically, MoSS consists of a task inference module and a policy module. We utilize the Gaussian
mixture model for task representation to imitate the parametric and non-parametric task variations. Additionally, our online adaptation strategy enables the agent to react at the first
sight of a task change, thus being applicable in non-stationary
tasks. MoSS also exhibits strong generalization robustness in
out-of-distributions tasks which benefits from the reliable and
robust task representation. The policy is built on top of an offpolicy RL algorithm and the entire network is trained completely off-policy to ensure high sample efficiency. On MuJoCo and Meta-World benchmarks, MoSS outperforms prior
works in terms of asymptotic performance, sample efficiency
(3-50x faster), adaptation efficiency, and generalization robustness on broad and diverse task distributions.

Introduction
Modern deep reinforcement learning (RL) has made significant progress in learning complex behavior (Mnih et al.
2015; Silver et al. 2016, 2017; Bing et al. 2021a). However,
they typically do not transfer learned skills to other tasks, require to re-train the policy for new tasks. In contrast, humans
can learn new skills efficiently using prior knowledge and
experience. Motivated by this, meta-reinforcement learning
(meta-RL) was developed to mimic the human learning pro* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10157

