The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Networked Restless Bandits with Positive Externalities
Christine Herlihy, John P. Dickerson
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland, College Park
College Park, MD, USA
cherlihy@umd.edu, johnd@umd.edu

Abstract

bandit setting in which arms are both restless and embedded within a directed graph. We then present a graph-aware,
Whittle-based heuristic algorithm that is constrained rewardmaximizing in this setting. Our core contributions include:

Restless multi-armed bandits are often used to model budgetconstrained resource allocation tasks where receipt of the
resource is associated with an increased probability of a favorable state transition. Prior work assumes that individual
arms only benefit if they receive the resource directly. However, many allocation tasks occur within communities and
can be characterized by positive externalities that allow arms
to derive partial benefit when their neighbor(s) receive the
resource. We thus introduce networked restless bandits, a
novel multi-armed bandit setting in which arms are both restless and embedded within a directed graph. We then present
G RETA, a graph-aware, Whittle index-based heuristic algorithm that can be used to efficiently construct a constrained
reward-maximizing action vector at each timestep. Our empirical results demonstrate that G RETA outperforms comparison policies across a range of hyperparameter values
and graph topologies. Code and appendices are available at
https://github.com/crherlihy/networked restless bandits.

1

(i) Our networked restless bandit model, which lets us represent topological relationships between arms, and associate arm i’s receipt of a pull with positive externalities
for its neighbors.
(ii) G RETA, a graph-aware, Whittle index-based heuristic
algorithm that lets us efficiently construct a constrained
reward-maximizing mapping from arms to actions at
each timestep.
(iii) Empirical results which demonstrate that G RETA outperforms comparison policies across a range of hyperparameter values and graph topologies.

1.1

Introduction

We study the planning task of allocating budget-constrained
indivisible resources so as to maximize the expected amount
of time that members of a cohort will spend in a desirable
state (e.g., adherent to a prescribed exercise regimen). Restless multi-arm bandits (RMABs) are well-suited for such
tasks, as they represent each individual as a Markov decision process (MDP) whose stochastic state transitions are
governed by an action-dependent transition function.
Conventionally, an arm must receive the resource at time
t to derive any benefit from it, where benefit takes the form
of an increased probability of transitioning to the desirable
state at time t + 1 (i.e., relative to non-receipt). However,
many resource allocation tasks occur within communities
and can be characterized by positive externalities that allow
arms to derive partial, indirect benefit when their neighbor(s)
receive the resource. We consider chronic disease management programs as a motivating example. These programs
often combine resource-constrained physician support with
less cost-intensive, more scalable peer support to encourage
participants to make lifestyle modifications. To this end, we
introduce networked restless bandits, a novel multi-armed
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11997

Related Work

Restless bandits: The restless multi-armed bandit (RMAB)
framework was introduced by Whittle (1988) as a way to
model the sequential allocation of a budget-constrained, indivisible resource over a population of N dynamic arms,
where: (1) at most k ≪ n arms can receive the resource (i.e.,
a pull) at any given timestep; and (2) the state of each arm
evolves over time, regardless of whether or not it is pulled.
We provide a formal description in Section 2.1.
Indexability: In the general case, it is PSPACE-hard to
pre-compute the optimal policy for a given cohort of restless
arms (Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis 1994). However, as conjectured by Whittle (1988) and proven by Weber and Weiss
(1990), when each arm is indexable, a tractable solution exists that is provably asymptotically optimal: we can decouple
the arms and consider a Lagrangian relaxation of the original
problem. In this context, the Whittle index can be thought
of as the infimum subsidy required to make an arm indifferent between a pull and passivity, given its current state.
Whittle-index based policies use these index values to rank
arms when selecting which k arms to pull.
Proving indexability can be difficult and often requires the
problem instance to satisfy specific structural properties, such
as the optimality of threshold policies (Liu and Zhao 2010).
Additionally, much of the foundational work in this space
focuses on the two-action setting, and cannot be directly
extended to the multi-action setting that we consider.

