The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Formally Verified Solution Methods for Markov Decision Processes
Maximilian Schäffeler1 , Mohammad Abdulaziz1,2
1

Technische Universität München, Germany
King’s College London, United Kingdom
maximilian.schaeffeler@tum.de, mohammad.abdulaziz@kcl.ac.uk
2

Abstract

A methodology with notable success in developing provably correct software involves the use of interactive theorem provers (ITPs). Success stories of the use of ITPs to
develop trustworthy software include a formally verified OS
kernel (Klein et al. 2009), a verified compiler for C (Leroy
2009), and verified implementations of a multitude of algorithms (Nipkow, Eberl, and Haslbeck 2020).
In this work, we study the application of ITPs to the development of trustworthy software for reasoning about and
solving MDPs using iterative methods. However, using ITPs
to develop verified implementations of these iterative methods brings its own particular set of challenges, compared
to developing other types of verified algorithms. First, at a
mathematical level, formal proofs of correctness of MDP
solving algorithms in ITPs need a combination of diverse
and significantly non-trivial formal mathematical libraries
and concepts, e.g. probabilities, limits, (co)recursion, and
probabilistic transition systems. Second, at an implementation level, multiple challenges exist, e.g. should the algorithm be implemented imperatively or functionally, what
kind of implementation of numerics should be used, etc.
Last, an even bigger challenge is the overall architecture of
the verified system: should it be a verified implementation of
an iterative method, or should we use an unverified system to
perform the computation and produce a certificate, which is
later validated using a formally verified certificate checker.
In addressing those challenges, multiple factors play in,
like the feasibility of the verification, the reusability of the
results, and the efficiency or practicality of the verified implementation. Although previous authors (Vajjha et al. 2021;
Chevallier and Fleuriot 2021) have addressed the problem of
verifying iterative methods for MDPs using ITPs, all of them
focused on the abstract mathematical challenges.
In this paper, we comprehensively tackle all three challenges. At the abstract mathematical level, using the ITP Isabelle/HOL (Nipkow, Paulson, and Wenzel 2002) and following the exposition of Puterman (Puterman 1994), we develop a general formalization of MDPs with rewards. Based
on that, we first formally prove correct the backward induction algorithm for finite-horizon MDPs. Second, for infinitehorizon problems, we model four fundamental iterationbased methods in Isabelle/HOL, namely, value iteration, policy iteration, modified policy iteration, and splitting-based
methods. We prove the correctness of all methods against

We formally verify executable algorithms for solving Markov
decision processes (MDPs) in the interactive theorem prover
Isabelle/HOL. We build on existing formalizations of probability theory to analyze the expected total reward criterion on
finite and infinite-horizon problems. Our developments formalize the Bellman equation and give conditions under which
optimal policies exist. Based on this analysis, we verify dynamic programming algorithms to solve tabular MDPs. We
evaluate the formally verified implementations experimentally on standard problems, compare them with state-of-theart systems, and show that they are practical.

Introduction
Despite the impressive advances in the capabilities of different types of AI systems, it is becoming clear that one
major hurdle to their wide adoption is the lack of trustworthiness of these systems. This has prompted researchers to
study techniques to boost the trustworthiness of AI systems
in different areas, like machine learning (Selsam, Liang, and
Dill 2017; Katz et al. 2017), planning (Abdulaziz, Gretton, and Norrish 2019; Abdulaziz and Lammich 2018), and
model-checking (Esparza et al. 2013). However, one of the
areas of AI where there is still a lot to be done regarding trustworthiness is software for solving Markov decision
processes (MDPs). MDPs are models for systems where
a decision-maker selects actions with random outcomes to
maximize long-term rewards. Such systems with uncertainty
occur in wide-ranging areas, e.g. planning, reinforcement
learning, model checking, and operations research. Depending on the area, the questions one asks about the model
might be different, e.g. in planning the aim might be to find a
policy that chooses an action for a robot in every state, with
some optimality guarantees on the accrued rewards, while
in model-checking the aim might be, for instance, to find
what the expected delays of a real-time system are. Furthermore, a lot of safety-critical systems could be modeled as
MDPs, e.g. a policy (aka strategy) could be used to navigate an autonomous vehicle. Like with other AI systems, for
such applications, it is strongly desirable to have trustworthy
programs to reason about and solve MDPs.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15073

