The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Achieving Zero Constraint Violation for Constrained Reinforcement Learning via
Conservative Natural Policy Gradient Primal-Dual Algorithm
Qinbo Bai1 , Armit Singh Bedi2 , Vaneet Aggarwal1
1

Purdue University
University of Maryland
bai113@purdue.edu, University of Maryland, vaneet@purdue.edu
2

Abstract

comparisons). The main performance metric here is the sample complexity, which is the number of samples required to
achieve ϵ-optimal objective and ϵ-constraint violation. However, there doesn’t exist literature which gives zero violation
gurantee on large state and action space. Hence, we ask this
question: “Is it possible to achieve zero constraint violations
for CMDP problems in large state action spaces while solving in a model free manner?”
We answer this question in an affirmative sense in this
work. We proposed a novel Conservative Natural Policy
Gradient Primal Dual Algorithm (C-NPG-PDA) in this paper. We utilize a novel idea of conservative constraints to
policy gradient algorithms and establish convergence guarantees of global optima for general policy parametrization.
Our contributions are summarized as follows.

We consider the problem of constrained Markov decision process (CMDP) in continuous state actions spaces where the
goal is to maximize the expected cumulative reward subject to some constraints. We propose a novel Conservative
Natural Policy Gradient Primal Dual Algorithm (CNPGPD)
to achieve zero constraint violation while achieving state of
the art convergence results for the objective value function.
For general policy parametrization, we prove convergence of
value function to global optimal upto an approximation error
due to restricted policy class. We improve the sample complexity of existing constrained NPGPD algorithm. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first work to establish zero constraint violation with Natural policy gradient style algorithms
for infinite horizon discounted CMDPs. We demonstrate the
merits of proposed algorithm via experimental evaluations.

• We propose a Natural Policy Gradient algorithm which
achieves zero constraint violation for constrained
MDPs in large state and action space. The proposed
algorithm also converges to the neighborhood of the
global optima with general parametrization. It is challenging to establish the zero violation result with general parametrization due to the lack of strong duality, and
hence we perform a novel analysis to establish a bound
between the conservative and original problems.
• We show that even if we don’t utilize the conservative
idea (proposed in this work),
 we
 are able to improve the

Introduction
Reinforcement learning problem is formulated as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) and can be solved using different
algorithms in the literature (Sutton 1988). To deal with the
scalability issue to the the large state and action spaces, policy parametrization is widely used (Ding et al. 2020; Xu,
Liang, and Lan 2021; Agarwal et al. 2020). The problem becomes challenging when we have constraints and is called
constrained MDPs (CMDPs). The problem is popular across
various application domains such as robotics, communications, computer vision, autonomous driving, etc. (Arulkumaran et al. 2017; Kiran et al. 2021). Mathematically, the
problem is sequential in nature, agent observes the state,
takes an action, and then transitions to next state. Further, an
agent also needs to satisfy a set of constraints as well such
as safety constraints, power constraints and maneuver constraints. CMDPs are challenging to solve specially in large
state action spaces (Ding et al. 2020; Xu, Liang, and Lan
2021) which is the focus of our work.
The constraint violations could be catastrophic in applications such as in power systems (Vu et al. 2020) or autonomous vehicle control (Wen et al. 2020). In the literature, various algorithms are proposed to solve CMDP in
large actions spaces in a model free manner (See Table 1 for

sample complexity from O ϵ16 (Ding et al. 2020)[The 
orem 3] to O ϵ14 . To achieve this, we utilize the first or-

der stationary result from (Liu et al. 2020) to bound the
NPG update direction. However, due to the introduction
of the constraint and the Lagrange function, the update
of the Lagrange multiplier needs to be considered in the
analysis.
• We perform initial proof of concepts experiments of the
proposed algorithm with a random CMDP model and
validate the convergence of the objective, with zero constraint violations.
1
The detailed dependence on (1−γ) is not shown in the original
paper.
2
In (Xu, Liang, and Lan 2021), the authors used a two layer

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6737

