The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Rethinking Data Augmentation for Single-Source Domain Generalization
in Medical Image Segmentation
Zixian Su* 1, 2 , Kai Yao* 1, 2 , Xi Yang2† , Kaizhu Huang3† , Qiufeng Wang2 , Jie Sun2
1

2

University of Liverpool, Liverpool, the United Kingdom
School of Advanced Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University (XJTLU), Suzhou, China
3
Data Science Research Center, Duke Kunshan University, Kunshan, China
kaizhu.huang@dukekunshan.edu.cn, xi.yang01@xjtlu.edu.cn
Abstract

Single-source domain generalization (SDG) in medical image segmentation is a challenging yet essential task as domain
shifts are quite common among clinical image datasets. Previous attempts most conduct global-only/random augmentation. Their augmented samples are usually insufficient in diversity and informativeness, thus failing to cover the possible
target domain distribution. In this paper, we rethink the data
augmentation strategy for SDG in medical image segmentation. Motivated by the class-level representation invariance
and style mutability of medical images, we hypothesize that
unseen target data can be sampled from a linear combination
of C (the class number) random variables, where each variable follows a location-scale distribution at the class level.
Accordingly, data augmented can be readily made by sampling the random variables through a general form. On the
empirical front, we implement such strategy with constrained
Bézier transformation on both global and local (i.e. classlevel) regions, which can largely increase the augmentation
diversity. A Saliency-balancing Fusion mechanism is further
proposed to enrich the informativeness by engaging the gradient information, guiding augmentation with proper orientation and magnitude. As an important contribution, we prove
theoretically that our proposed augmentation can lead to an
upper bound of the generalization risk on the unseen target
domain, thus confirming our hypothesis. Combining the two
strategies, our Saliency-balancing Location-scale Augmentation (SLAug) exceeds the state-of-the-art works by a large
margin in two challenging SDG tasks. Code is available at
https://github.com/Kaiseem/SLAug.

LV

LK

Figure 1: Conceptual overview of our motivation. (a) Different domain images and partial enlarged views (colormap
surface). (b) Box-plot of class-specific intensity value distribution across the overall domains of CT&MRI.

ods either use extra data (e.g. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (Chen et al. 2019)) or require the diversity of the training data (e.g. Multi-source Domain Generalization (Wang
et al. 2020)). In this paper, we consider a more challenging but practical setting: single-source domain generalization (SDG) in medical images. This task aims to learn a
generalizable and robust predictive model on the related but
different target domain with only single source domain data.
The key to this problem lies in increasing the diversity and
informativeness of the training data, i.e., data augmentation.
Although previous augmentation methods have led to impressive results in generalization tasks, they suffer from
the following limitations in medical image segmentation:
1) Global-only augmentation performing transformation on
the whole image limits the diversity of augmented images.
2) Random augmentation considers no constraint on the
distribution of the augmented samples, which may lead to
over-generalization and cause performance degradation. 3)
General-task-specific augmentation specially designed for
natural image is restricted from medical image tasks, such as
weather augmentation (Volk et al. 2019) for automatic driving. These limitations naturally motivate us to think: How
to improve augmentation in medical image segmentation?
Meanwhile, by looking into medical image segmentation,

Introduction
Despite the success of deep learning applications in medical image analysis (Valanarasu et al. 2021; Yao et al. 2022;
Milletari, Navab, and Ahmadi 2016), many approaches are
known to be data-driven and non-robust. However, it is often the case that the testing data exists distribution shift with
the training data in terms of many factors, such as imaging
protocol, device vendors and patient populations.
Many efforts have been made to alleviate the abovementioned distribution shift problem. Generally, these meth* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2366

