The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Spatio-Temporal Neural Structural Causal Models for Bike Flow Prediction
Pan Deng1 , Yu Zhao1 * , Junting Liu1 , Xiaofeng Jia2 , Mulan Wang1
1

Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China.
Beijing Big Data Centre, Beijing, 100024, China.
{pandeng, iyzhao, liujunting, wangmulan}@buaa.edu.cn, jiaxf@jxj.beijing.gov.cn
2

Abstract
As a representative of public transportation, the fundamental
issue of managing bike-sharing systems is bike flow prediction. Recent methods overemphasize the spatio-temporal correlations in the data, ignoring the effects of contextual conditions on the transportation system and the inter-regional timevarying causality. In addition, due to the disturbance of incomplete observations in the data, random contextual conditions lead to spurious correlations between data and features,
making the prediction of the model ineffective in special scenarios. To overcome this issue, we propose a Spatio-Temporal
Neural Structure Causal Model(STNSCM) from the perspective of causality. First, we build a causal graph to describe
the traffic prediction, and further analyze the causal relationship between the input data, contextual conditions, spatiotemporal states, and prediction results. Second, we propose
to apply the frontdoor criterion to eliminate confounding biases in the feature extraction process. Finally, we propose
a counterfactual representation reasoning module to extrapolate the spatio-temporal state under the factual scenario to
future counterfactual scenarios to improve the prediction performance. Experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate
the superior performance of our model, especially its resistance to fluctuations caused by the external environment. The
source code and data will be released.

Figure 1: The change process of bike flow from the perspective of causality.

Bike usage patterns and spatio-temporal dependencies between regions are affected by external conditions (e.g. time
factors and weather information). As shown in Fig.1(b), the
time factors and weather may greatly restrict bike usage in
each region, and weekdays and weekends may cause completely different spatio-temporal dependencies. Traditional
traffic flow prediction models based on multi-source data
usually simply integrate time and weather into the model
through the fully connected layer(Li et al. 2019; Liang et al.
2021; Sun et al. 2020). More input information cannot improve the prediction ability of the model. Instead, it will introduce a large number of confounding factors and extract
spurious correlations in observations(Liu et al. 2021), resulting in the decline of model performance.
We build a causal graph to describe the bike flow prediction, and further analyze it from a causal perspective. We formulate the causalities among bike flow Xt , contextual condition Ct , spatio-temporal states Ht , and predicted target
Yt+1 . As shown in Fig. 1(a), directed edges denote causal
relationships between nodes. The spatio-temporal state Ht
represents the intrinsic trend of bicycle demand under the
current contextual conditions. The contextual condition Ct ,
as a common cause, affects Xt and the spatio-temporal state
Ht . Bike-sharing systems are susceptible to external contextual conditions, so bike flow prediction must take contextual conditions into account. However, due to the limita-

Introduction
Bike-Sharing systems have been widely deployed in urban
public transportation due to their convenience and environmental friendliness in recent years. As a representative of
Intelligent Transportation System (ITS), one of the key concerns is the effective allocation of bike-sharing resources to
enhance the quality of system service. However, due to the
high frequency and randomness of bike usage throughout
the city, the stations often get imbalanced over time. The
bike-sharing system always has some congested and hungry
stations, leading to a significant number of unsatisfied customers. Therefore, it is necessary to accurately predict the
bike flow in each commuting area. According to the prediction results of bike flow, it can be repositioned in advance to
prevent excessive demand at the station, which is an urgent
need for bike-sharing system operators.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4242

