The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Edge Structure Learning via Low Rank Residuals for Robust Image Classification
Xiang-Jun Shen1 , Stanley Ebhohimhen Abhadiomhen1,2 , Yang Yang1 , Zhifeng Liu1* , Sirui Tian3
1

School of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, JiangSu University, JiangSu, 212013, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Nigeria, Nsukka, Nigeria
3
Department of Electronic Engineering, School of Electronic and Optical Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, 210094, China
xjshen@ujs.edu.cn, stanley.abhadiomhen@unn.edu.ng, yyoung@ujs.edu.cn,
liuzf@ujs.edu.cn, Tiansirui@njust.edu.cn
Abstract

Traditional low-rank methods overlook residuals as corruptions, but we discovered that low-rank residuals actually keep
image edges together with corrupt components. Therefore,
filtering out such structural information could hamper the discriminative details in images, especially in heavy corruptions.
In order to address this limitation, this paper proposes a novel
method named ESL-LRR, which preserves image edges by
finding image projections from low-rank residuals. Specifically, our approach is built in a manifold learning framework
where residuals are regarded as another view of image data.
Edge preserved image projections are then pursued using a
dynamic affinity graph regularization to capture the more accurate similarity between residuals while suppressing the influence of corrupt ones. With this adaptive approach, the proposed method can also find image intrinsic low-rank representation, and much discriminative edge preserved projections. As a result, a new classification strategy is introduced,
aligning both modalities to enhance accuracy. Experiments
are conducted on several benchmark image datasets, including MNIST, LFW, and COIL100. The results show that the
proposed method has clear advantages over compared stateof-the-art (SOTA) methods, such as Low-Rank Embedding
(LRE), Low-Rank Preserving Projection via Graph Regularized Reconstruction (LRPP GRR), and Feature Selective Projection (FSP) with more than 2% improvement, particularly
in corrupted cases.

1

Figure 1: The left image in each row is the original data, the
middle is the low rank part while the right one is the residual
part. Our goal is to preserve those discriminative edges by
finding robust image projections from low-rank residuals.

ever, LRR lacks feature extraction functionality. As a result,
it cannot be used directly for linear dimensionality reduction (LDR). Although some LDR approaches exist such as
classical PCA (Belhumeur, Hespanha, and Kriegman 1997)
and Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA)(Turk and Pentland
1991), they are not robust and therefore unable to preserve
the geometrical structure of data in the projected subspace.
Motivated by the above challenges, many methods have
been proposed recently incorporating LDR into LRR (LRR
and LDR), mainly for learning image subspace representation. Notably, Low-Rank Embedding (LRE) (Wong et al.
2017) tries to uncover the inherent relationship in data for
robust feature extraction. Low-Rank Sparse Preserving Projections (LSPP) (Xie et al. 2018) focuses on enhancing accuracy in corrupted data. Sparse Low-Rank Preserving Projection (SLRPP) (Liu et al. 2019) combines LRE and PCA
models; an L1 -norm is further imposed on the low-rank
representation to capture the local structure of data simultaneously. Similarly, to improve interpretability, Low-Rank
Preserving Projection via Graph Regularized Reconstruction
(LRPP GRR) (Wen et al. 2019) applies a graph constraint
and a sparse constraint to data reconstruction error and data
projection, respectively. Feature Selective Projection (FSP)
(Tang et al. 2020) was subsequently introduced to ensure
a selective feature projection by merging LRR, feature extraction, and feature selection in a unified model. The more
current methods, Double Low-Rank Representation (DLRRPD) (Fu et al. 2021) and Robust Clustering with LowRank Linear Embedding (RCLR) (Zhou et al. 2022) exploits
global and local geometrical structures of data together using projection distance penalty and local property preservation, respectively. Despite the promising performances of

Introduction

As real-world images often contain redundant and corrupt
features, such as noise and occlusion, their high dimensionality nature not only puts a huge computational burden on
machine learning algorithms but also makes interpretation
very difficult. Hence several efforts have been made over
the years to overcome these limitations. Recent study (Parsons, Haque, and Liu 2004) indicates that multiple low dimensional subspaces can be leveraged to characterize high
dimensional data. Consequently, Low-Rank Representation
(LRR) (Liu et al. 2010, 2013) was proposed to learn low
dimensional subspaces corresponding to a given high dimensional data. LRR excels in capturing the global structure of data and can also remedy the influence of corruption (Zhang et al. 2019; Abhadiomhen et al. 2021). HowCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2236

