The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SwinRDM: Integrate SwinRNN with Diffusion Model towards High-Resolution
and High-Quality Weather Forecasting
Lei Chen* , Fei Du* , Yuan Hu, Zhibin Wang, Fan Wang
Alibaba Group
{fanjiang.cl, dufei.df, lavender.hy, zhibin.waz, fan.w}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

Rasp, and Thuerey 2022; de Witt et al. 2020) are constructed to enable a thorough comparison of different methods. Among them, WeatherBench (Rasp et al. 2020) is one
of the widely used benchmarks, which is constructed by regridding the ERA5 reanalysis dataset (Hersbach et al. 2020)
from 0.25◦ resolution to three different resolutions (i.e.,
5.625◦ , 2.8125◦ and 1.40625◦ ). It focuses on the mediumrange global prediction of a few key variables at lead times
of up to 5 days. Several works have tried to improve the prediction performance on WeatherBench (Rasp and Thuerey
2021; Weyn, Durran, and Caruana 2020; Hu et al. 2022).
Among them, SwinVRNN (Hu et al. 2022) achieves the
best performance by integrating a variational recurrent neural network (SwinRNN) with a feature perturbation module.
Although these works have achieved great success in
global weather forecasting, their methods are built on lowresolution (usually lower than 1◦ ) data. The largest resolution of WeatherBench is 1.40625◦ , corresponding to a
128 × 256 pixels grid. And the distance between every two
pixels is larger than 100km, which is too coarse for a forecasting model to capture the fine-scale dynamics (Pathak
et al. 2022). (Keisler 2022) builds a graph neural network
(GNN) to forecast global weather on the 1-degree scale. It
shows comparable performance on wind and relative humidity to the IFS. However, its resolution is still relatively low.
FourCastNet (Pathak et al. 2022) trains an Adaptive Fourier
Neural Operator (AFNO) model directly at 0.25◦ resolution
ERA5 dataset, which achieves comparable performance to
the IFS at short-range lead times and can resolve many important small-scale phenomena. However, there still exists
a performance gap between data-driven models and the IFS
at lead times of up to 5 days, especially on representative
variables such as Z500 and T850.
In this paper, we focus on building a global weather forecasting model at 0.25◦ resolution and propose a SwinRDM
model by integrating an improved SwinRNN (Hu et al.
2022) with a diffusion-based super-resolution model. Since
SwinRNN achieves superior performance at low resolution,
we employ it as our base model. We experimentally analyze
the SwinRNN model and build an improved version named
SwinRNN+ by replacing the multi-scale network with a
single-scale design and adding a feature aggregation layer.
Our SwinRNN+ achieves higher performance than IFS on
all key variables at lead times of up to 5 days at 1.40625◦

Data-driven medium-range weather forecasting has attracted
much attention in recent years. However, the forecasting accuracy at high resolution is unsatisfactory currently. Pursuing high-resolution and high-quality weather forecasting,
we develop a data-driven model SwinRDM which integrates an improved version of SwinRNN with a diffusion
model. SwinRDM performs predictions at 0.25-degree resolution and achieves superior forecasting accuracy to IFS
(Integrated Forecast System), the state-of-the-art operational
NWP model, on representative atmospheric variables including 500 hPa geopotential (Z500), 850 hPa temperature
(T850), 2-m temperature (T2M), and total precipitation (TP),
at lead times of up to 5 days. We propose to leverage a twostep strategy to achieve high-resolution predictions at 0.25degree considering the trade-off between computation memory and forecasting accuracy. Recurrent predictions for future
atmospheric fields are firstly performed at 1.40625-degree
resolution, and then a diffusion-based super-resolution model
is leveraged to recover the high spatial resolution and finerscale atmospheric details. SwinRDM pushes forward the performance and potential of data-driven models for a large margin towards operational applications.

Introduction
Accurate weather forecasting is beneficial to human beings
in several areas such as agriculture, energy, and public transportation. Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) has long
been adopted for weather forecasting. It has been improved
by better physics parameterization techniques and highquality atmospheric observations in the past few decades.
However, this approach requires huge amounts of computing power, which may limit its application in industry.
With the development of machine learning (ML), especially deep learning (DL) techniques, many studies are employing data-driven DL methods to forecast atmospheric
variables. The purely data-driven DL models are often orders of magnitude faster than the NWP model. However,
the performance of current DL models is unsatisfactory currently. To facilitate the development of data-driven weather
forecasting, some benchmarks (Rasp et al. 2020; Garg,
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

322

