The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Variable-Based Calibration for Machine Learning Classifiers
Markelle Kelly, Padhraic Smyth
University of California, Irvine
kmarke@uci.edu, smyth@ics.uci.edu

Abstract

learn a mapping from the original model’s class probabilities
to calibrated probabilities, often with a relatively simple onedimensional mapping (e.g., Platt (1999); Kull, Filho, and
Flach (2017); Kumar, Liang, and Ma (2019)). These methods
have been shown to generally improve the the empirical
calibration error of a model, as commonly measured by the
expected calibration error (ECE).
However, as we show in this paper, aggregate measures
of score-based calibration error such as ECE can hide significant systematic miscalibration in other dimensions of a
model’s performance. To address this issue we introduce the
notion of variable-based calibration to better understand how
the calibration error of a model can vary as a function of a
variable of interest, such as an input variable to the model
or some other metadata variable. We focus in particular in
this paper on real-valued variables. For example, in prediction problems involving individuals (e.g., credit-scoring or
medical diagnosis) one such variable could be Age. Detecting
systematic miscalibration is important for problems such as
assessing the fairness of a model, for instance detecting that
a model is significantly overconfident for some age ranges
and underconfident for others.
As an illustrative example, consider a simple classifier
trained to predict the presence of cardiovascular disease1 .
After the application of Platt scaling, a standard post-hoc
calibration method, this model attains a relatively low ECE
of 0.74%. This low ECE is reflected in the reliability diagram
shown in Figure 1a, which shows near-perfect alignment with
the diagonal. If a user of this model were to only consider
aggregate metrics such as ECE, they might reasonably conclude that the model is generally well-calibrated. However,
evaluating model error and predicted error with respect to
the variable Patient Age reveals an undesirable and systematic miscalibration pattern with respect to this variable, as
illustrated in Figure 1b: the model is underconfident by upwards of five percentage points for younger patients, and is
significantly overconfident for older patients.
In this paper, we systematically investigate variable-based
calibration for classification models, from both theoretical
and empirical perspectives. In particular, our contributions
are as follows:

The deployment of machine learning classifiers in high-stakes
domains requires well-calibrated confidence scores for model
predictions. In this paper we introduce the notion of variablebased calibration to characterize calibration properties of a
model with respect to a variable of interest, generalizing traditional score-based metrics such as expected calibration error
(ECE). In particular, we find that models with near-perfect
ECE can exhibit significant miscalibration as a function of
features of the data. We demonstrate this phenomenon both
theoretically and in practice on multiple well-known datasets,
and show that it can persist after the application of existing calibration methods. To mitigate this issue, we propose strategies
for detection, visualization, and quantification of variablebased calibration error. We then examine the limitations of
current score-based calibration methods and explore potential
modifications. Finally, we discuss the implications of these
findings, emphasizing that an understanding of calibration beyond simple aggregate measures is crucial for endeavors such
as fairness and model interpretability.

1

Introduction

Predictive models built by machine learning algorithms are
increasingly informing decisions across high-stakes applications such as medicine (Rajkomar, Dean, and Kohane
2019), employment (Chalfin et al. 2016), and criminal justice
(Završnik 2021). There is also broad recent interest in developing systems where humans and machine learning models
collaborate to make predictions and decisions (Kleinberg et al.
2018; Bansal et al. 2021; De et al. 2021; Steyvers et al. 2022).
A critical aspect of using model predictions in such contexts
is calibration. In particular, in order to trust the predictions
from a machine learning classifier, these predictions must be
accompanied by well-calibrated confidence scores.
In practice, however, it has been well-documented that
machine learning classifiers such as deep neural networks
can produce poorly-calibrated class probabilities (Guo et al.
2017; Vaicenavicius et al. 2019; Ovadia et al. 2019). As a
result, a variety of calibration methods have been developed,
which aim to ensure that a model’s confidence (or score)
matches its true accuracy. A widely used approach is post-hoc
calibration: methods which use a separate labeled dataset to

1
https://www.kaggle.com/sulianova/cardiovascular-diseasedataset

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8211

