The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Open-Vocabulary Multi-Label Classification via Multi-Modal Knowledge Transfer
Sunan He1,2,3 * † , Taian Guo3 * , Tao Dai1‡ , Ruizhi Qiao3 , Xiujun Shu3 , Bo Ren3 , Shu-Tao Xia2,4
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
3
YouTu Lab, Tencent
4
Research Center of Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory
hsn20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {taianguo, ruizhiqiao, xiujunshu, timren}@tencent.com
daitao.edu@gmail.com, xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Horse

Flower

Black

White

Unseen
Word Label
Cat

Dog

Unseen
Text Label
Black Dog
White Dog

●●●●○○○○

Cosine Similarity

Cosine Similarity
■■■■
□□□□

■■■■□□□□
□□

Image
Encoder

Avg

Seen Label

Real-world recognition system often encounters the challenge of unseen labels. To identify such unseen labels, multilabel zero-shot learning (ML-ZSL) focuses on transferring
knowledge by a pre-trained textual label embedding (e.g.,
GloVe). However, such methods only exploit single-modal
knowledge from a language model, while ignoring the rich
semantic information inherent in image-text pairs. Instead, recently developed open-vocabulary (OV) based methods succeed in exploiting such information of image-text pairs in object detection, and achieve impressive performance. Inspired
by the success of OV-based methods, we propose a novel
open-vocabulary framework, named multi-modal knowledge
transfer (MKT), for multi-label classification. Specifically,
our method exploits multi-modal knowledge of image-text
pairs based on a vision and language pre-training (VLP)
model. To facilitate transferring the image-text matching ability of VLP model, knowledge distillation is employed to guarantee the consistency of image and label embeddings, along
with prompt tuning to further update the label embeddings.
To further enable the recognition of multiple objects, a simple but effective two-stream module is developed to capture
both local and global features. Extensive experimental results
show that our method significantly outperforms state-of-theart methods on public benchmark datasets.

●●●●○○○○

■□
■□

Abstract

■■■■□□

Image
Encoder
(Student)

VLP
Image
Encoder
(Teacher)

Glove
▲▲▲▲
△△

VLP
Text
Encoder
▲▲▲▲
△△△△

Prediction

Horse [ ] Cat
[ ]
[■]
Flower [ ] Dog
White [■] White Dog [■]
Black [■] Black Dog [ ]

[ ]
Horse [ ] Cat
[■]
Flower [ ] Dog
White [■] White Dog [ ]
Black [■] Black Dog [■]

(a) Label Type

(b) ML-ZSL

(c) MKT (OV)

▲△△ Label-Text ■□□ Label-Emb ●○○ Pred-Score ■ Correct ■ Wrong Prediction

Figure 1: The overall framework of the classic multi-label
zero-shot learning (ML-ZSL), and our multi-modal knowledge transfer (MTK) method. (b) ML-ZSL only exploits
single-modal knowledge of language-based models (e.g.,
Glove), and may fail to recognize unseen text labels (e.g.,
‘Black Dog’). (c) Instead, our MKT succeeds in predicting
it by jointly exploring multi-modal knowledge of vision and
language pre-training (VLP) models. (Best viewed in color.)

Introduction
Multi-label recognition, which aims to recognize all the relevant labels in an image, is a fundamental task in computer
vision applications, such as scene understanding, surveillance systems and self-driving cars. In real-world applications, multi-label recognition systems should learn tens of
thousands of labels, locate them in images, and even deal
with many unseen labels. To date, classic multi-label classification methods trained and tested with seen labels are far
from fulfilling the requirements for real applications, where
plenty of unseen labels exist.

To identify the unseen labels in an image, many multilabel zero-shot learning (ML-ZSL) methods (Huynh and Elhamifar 2020; Gupta et al. 2021; Ben-Cohen et al. 2021;
Narayan et al. 2021) have been recently developed by transferring knowledge between seen and unseen labels. However, most existing methods (Zhang, Gong, and Shah 2016;
Huynh and Elhamifar 2020; Gupta et al. 2021; Ben-Cohen
et al. 2021; Narayan et al. 2021) contain two main issues.
First, these methods solely exploit single-modal knowledge
by a pre-trained textual label embeddings like GloVe (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014) (as shown in Figure 1
(b)), while ignoring the visual semantic image-text pair information. Second, although such textual label embeddings
(e.g., GloVe) handle word labels (e.g., label of ‘cat’) well,
they cannot be easily extended to text labels (e.g., label of

* These authors contributed equally.
†

This work was done during an internship at Tencent.
Corresponding author: Tao Dai
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

808

