The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Neural TSP Solver with Progressive Distillation
Dongxiang Zhang1 , Ziyang Xiao1 , Yuan Wang2 * , Mingli Song1 , Gang Chen1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
School of Business, Singapore University of Social Sciences
{zhangdongxiang,22021206,brooksong,cg}@zju.edu.cn, wangyuan@suss.edu.sg

Abstract

on devising effective search space exploration strategies and
achieve promising results with affordable computation cost.
Recently, the adoption of encoder-decoder models to
solve TSP has shed new light into this classic topic of
combinatorial optimization. The design principle is that the
encoder is used for effective feature extraction from input,
and a solution in the form of a sequence of cities is generated
iteratively by the decoder. In this way, the expensive search
space exploration is avoided and the complexity of a TSP
solver becomes polynomial to the problem size. A solution
can then be returned instantly for real-time decision making.
Such desirable property has attracted researchers’ attention
and various models have been proposed (Vinyals, Fortunato,
and Jaitly 2015; Bello et al. 2017; Nazari et al. 2018;
Deudon et al. 2018; Kool, van Hoof, and Welling 2019; Ma
et al. 2019; Peng, Choi, and Xu 2021; Luo et al. 2022).
Despite the encouraging achievement, the current encoderdecoder models still fail to conquer large-scale instances
with hundreds of cities, in which the training process
exhibits patterns of high complexity and slow convergence.
Furthermore, the reward estimated from the final cost of
sampled solutions is heavily delayed and may not be a
reliable signal to guide action selection. In our offline
experiments for TSP100, it roughly requires more than 20
million training samples and 50 hours for these models to
start getting converged.
To alleviate the issue of high training barrier, we propose
a novel progressive distillation framework which adopts
curriculum learning to train TSP samples in increasing
order of TSP problem size. In the meanwhile, the trained
small models are used as teacher network to guide action selection when training large models. In this way,
we can progressively distill high-level knowledge from
small models to large models, via a distillation loss to
minimize the difference between the teacher and student
networks. Finally, to accelerate training speed, we propose
a Delaunary-graph based action mask to exclude cities far
away from the current decision context, and a new attentionbased decoder to reduce decoding cost. Experiments results
establish clear advantages of our approach over existing
encoder-decoder models. We also examine its usefulness as
an initial solution generator for state-of-the-art TSP solvers.
The results show that with a better starting point, their
probability of obtaining the optimal solution can be further

Travelling salesman problem (TSP) is NP-Hard with exponential search space. Recently, the adoption of encoderdecoder models as neural TSP solvers has emerged as
an attractive topic because they can instantly obtain nearoptimal results for small-scale instances. Nevertheless, their
training efficiency and solution quality degrade dramatically
when dealing with large-scale problems. To address the
issue, we propose a novel progressive distillation framework,
by adopting curriculum learning to train TSP samples in
increasing order of their problem size and progressively
distilling high-level knowledge from small models to large
models via a distillation loss. In other words, the trained
small models are used as the teacher network to guide action
selection when training large models. To accelerate training
speed, we also propose a Delaunary-graph based action mask
and a new attention-based decoder to reduce decoding cost.
Experimental results show that our approach establishes clear
advantages over existing encoder-decoder models in terms
of training effectiveness and solution quality. In addition, we
validate its usefulness as an initial solution generator for the
state-of-the-art TSP solvers, whose probability of obtaining
the optimal solution can be further improved in such a hybrid
manner.

Introduction
Travelling salesman problem (TSP) determines the shortest
circuit passing through n given cities whose pair distance
is known in advance, and requires that each city is visited
exactly once. As a classical combinatorial optimization
problem, TSP has been intensively studied for decades.
When the problem size is small, TSP can be easily solved
to derive exact solutions (Laporte 1992). In large-scale
problems, exact approaches fail to tackle the exponential
search space and approximate methods are adopted so as
to achieve a satisfactory solution with acceptable running
time. As reviewed in (Laporte 1992; Bektas 2006), there
have emerged an enormous number of heuristic algorithms
that trade optimality for efficiency, such as genetic algorithm, simulated annealing, tabu search, adaptive largeneighborhood search and ant colony optimization. They rely
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12147

