The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Finding Good Partial Assignments during Restart-Based
Branch and Bound Search
Hongbo Li1 and Jimmy H.M. Lee2
1

2

School of Information Science and Technology, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
lihb905@nenu.edu.cn, jlee@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

different restart runs (Boussemart et al. 2004; Michel and
Van Hentenryck 2012; Li, Yin, and Li 2021). Recently, Frequent Pattern Mining-based Search (FPMS) (Li et al. 2020)
is proposed to find good subtrees for solving COPs. It makes
BBS directly zoom into a promising sub-search-space by
running a pre-processing phase using frequent pattern mining on high quality sampled solutions. However, FPMS is
suitable for only loosely constrained problems. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to find good initial partial
assignments for general COPs. The approach discovers good
partial assignments as search entrances that can be extended
to high quality or even optimal solutions. The partial assignments are updated as the current best solution evolves, so
that the approach is naturally incorporated with restart techniques to explore different sub-search-space specified by the
partial assignments. Our idea is based on a simple premise.
Given two feasible solutions S1 and S2 , where S1 is considered better than S2 . If a solution is a set of variable assignments, then S1 \ S2 contains the assignments that makes
S1 better. In our approach, the best solution at each restart
run is always added to the front of a queue. The pairwise
difference of adjacent solutions in the queue are extracted to
form the basis of the good sub-search-space to jumpstart the
next restart run. In case a run fails to find a solution within
the restart limit, the partial assignment is cut by half and
a larger sub-search-space will be explored. The procedure
repeats until either a new solution is found or the partial
assignment is empty and the default search strategy takes
over. Extensive experimentation with the MiniZinc benchmark suite demonstrates that our approach significantly improves the performance of the state of the art search strategy
for a black-box COP solver. Our method is able to find better
solutions and prove optimality for more instances.

Restart-based Branch-and-Bound Search (BBS) is a standard algorithm for solving Constraint Optimization Problems
(COPs). In this paper, we propose an approach to find good
partial assignments to jumpstart search at each restart for general COPs, which are identified by comparing different best
solutions found in different restart runs. We consider information extracted from historical solutions to evaluate the quality of the partial assignments. Thus the good partial assignments are dynamically updated as the current best solution
evolves. Our approach makes restart-based BBS explore different promising sub-search-spaces to find high-quality solutions. Experiments on the MiniZinc benchmark suite show
how our approach brings significant improvements to a blackbox COP solver equipped with the state of the art search techniques. Our method finds better solutions and proves optimality for more instances.

Introduction
Constraint Programming (CP) is a powerful paradigm
for solving discrete combinatorial optimization problems.
Restart-based depth-first Branch-and-Bound Search (BBS)
is a standard algorithm used in black-box constraint solvers
to solve Constraint Optimization Problems (COPs). Due to
the NP-hard characteristic of general COP, search heuristics (Michel and Van Hentenryck 2012; Palmieri and Perez
2018; Demirovic, Chu, and Stuckey 2018; Fages and
Prud’Homme 2017) play an important role in BBS. An efficient search heuristic may find a high quality or even an
optimal solution quickly. Besides search heuristics, exploring a good sub-search-space containing high quality solutions first will speed up the finding of an optimal solution.
However, as far as we know, there exists no approach that
can always find a sub-search-space containing optimal solutions for general COPs before solving the problems. To
avoid search being trapped in a bad sub-search-space, the
restart technique (Gomes, Selman, and Kautz 1998) helps
BBS explore different sub-search-space and has been a necessary component in modern black-box COP solvers.
Finding good search entrance for general COPs is not
easy. Restart techniques usually help BBS switch search entrances by utilizing the heuristic information accumulated in

Background
Constraint Optimization Problem
A Constraint Optimization Problem (COP) P is a 4-tuple
P = ⟨X , D, C, F⟩, where X is a set of variables, the domain dom(x) ∈ D specifies the set of possible values for
each x ∈ X , C is a set of constraints and F is an objective
function. Each constraint c ∈ C specifies the allowed combinations of values for a subset of variables. An assignment A
to variables X ⊆ X is a set of instantiations of the form x/v,

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4035

