The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Machines of Finite Depth: Towards a Formalization of Neural Networks
Pietro Vertechi∗ , Mattia G. Bergomi∗
pietro.vertechi@protonmail.com, mattiagbergomi@gmail.com

Abstract

which has led to a number of advances, e.g., (Innes et al.
2019; Rackauckas et al. 2020; Zubov et al. 2021). Unfortunately, this approach has several drawbacks, some practical and some theoretical. On the practical side, it becomes
difficult to optimize the runtime of the forward and backward pass of an automatically-differentiated, complex, unstructured code. From a theoretical perspective, the space
of models becomes somewhat ill-defined, as it is now the
space of all differentiable codes—not a structured mathematical space. A well-behaved smooth space of neural networks would be invaluable for automated differentiable architecture search (Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2018). Furthermore, a well-defined notion of neural network would greatly
simplify sharing models as precise mathematical quantities
rather than differentiable code written in a particular framework.
Our ambition is to establish a unified framework for deep
learning, in which deep feedforward and recurrent neural
networks, with or without shortcut connections, are defined
in terms of a unique layer, which we will refer to as a parametric machine. This approach allows for extremely simplified flows for designing neural architectures, where a small
set of hyperparameters determines the whole architecture.
By virtue of their precise mathematical definition, parametric machines will be language-agnostic and independent of
automatic differentiation engines. Computational efficiency,
in particular in terms of efficient gradient computation, is
granted by the mathematical framework.
The theoretical framework of parametric machines (Vertechi and Bergomi 2020) unifies seemingly
disparate architectures, designed for structured or unstructured data, with or without recurrent or shortcut connections.
We provide theorems ensuring that 1. under the assumption
of finite depth, the output of a machine can be computed
efficiently; 2. complex architectures with shortcuts can
be built by adding together machines of depth one, thus
generalizing neural networks at any level of granularity
(neuron, layer, or entire network); 3. backpropagating from
output to input space is again a machine computation and
has a computational cost comparable to the forward pass.
In addition to the theoretical framework, we implement
the input-output computations of parametric machines,
as well as their derivatives, in the Julia programming
language (Bezanson et al. 2017) (both on CPU and GPU).

We provide a unifying framework where artificial neural networks and their architectures can be formally described as
particular cases of a general mathematical construction—
machines of finite depth. Unlike neural networks, machines
have a precise definition, from which several properties follow naturally. Machines of finite depth are modular (they can
be combined), efficiently computable, and differentiable. The
backward pass of a machine is again a machine and can be
computed without overhead using the same procedure as the
forward pass. We prove this statement theoretically and practically, via a unified implementation that generalizes several
classical architectures—dense, convolutional, and recurrent
neural networks with a rich shortcut structure—and their respective backpropagation rules.

1

Introduction

The notion of artificial neural network has become more
and more ill-defined over time. Unlike the initial definitions (Rumelhart 1986), which could be easily formalized as
directed graphs, modern neural networks can have the most
diverse structures and do not obey a precise mathematical
definition.
Defining a deep neural network is a practical question,
which must be addressed by all deep learning software libraries. Broadly, two solutions have been proposed. The
simplest approach defines a deep neural network as a stack
of pre-built layers. The user can select among a large variety
of pre-existing layers and utilize them as building blocks.
This approach—domain-specific language—simplifies the
end-user’s mental load and leads to computationally efficient models. Unfortunately, the building-block-based approach can quickly become limiting and prevent users from
exploring more innovative architectures (Barham and Isard
2019). At the opposite end of the spectrum, differentiable
programming (Wang et al. 2018) posits that every code is
a model, provided that it can be differentiated by an automatic differentiation engine (Frostig, Johnson, and Leary
2018; Innes et al. 2019; Moses and Churavy 2020; Paszke
et al. 2017, 2021; Saeta and Shabalin 2021; van Merrienboer et al. 2018). This is certainly a promising direction,
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10061

