The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SlideVQA: A Dataset for Document Visual Question Answering on Multiple
Images
Ryota Tanaka, Kyosuke Nishida, Kosuke Nishida, Taku Hasegawa, Itsumi Saito, Kuniko Saito
NTT Human Informatics Laboratories, NTT Corporation
{ryouta.tanaka.rg, kyosuke.nishida.rx, kosuke.nishida.ap, taku.hasegawa.ps, itsumi.saito.df, kuniko.saito.ku}@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract

to reason about document layout, textual content, and visual
elements (Mathew, Karatzas, and Jawahar 2021; Tanaka,
Nishida, and Yoshida 2021; Mathew et al. 2022). When
the primary content in a document is text (e.g., e-mails
and forms) and the task is to understand it on the basis of
its layout information, state-of-the-art models have already
achieved nearly human-level performance (Xu et al. 2021;
Powalski et al. 2021). On the other hand, challenges remain
when it comes to handling diverse real-world documents.
First and foremost is that current models are not capable of
performing reasoning across multiple images since the existing datasets focus on testing reasoning ability on a single
image. Moreover, compared with humans, document VQA
models still have trouble understanding documents that contain visual elements and understanding questions that require numerical reasoning (Mathew et al. 2022).
To address the above challenges, we introduce a new document VQA dataset1 , SlideVQA, for tasks wherein given a
slide deck composed of multiple slide images and a corresponding question, a system selects a set of evidence images and answers the question. Slide decks are one of the
most efficient document types that arrange visual and textual
elements for communication. As shown in Figure 1, SlideVQA requires complex reasoning over slide images, including single-hop, multi-hop, and numerical reasoning. These
reasoning skills play essential roles in MRC tasks (Yang
et al. 2018; Dua et al. 2019).
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

Visual question answering on document images that contain textual, visual, and layout information, called document
VQA, has received much attention recently. Although many
datasets have been proposed for developing document VQA
systems, most of the existing datasets focus on understanding the content relationships within a single image and not
across multiple images. In this study, we propose a new multiimage document VQA dataset, SlideVQA, containing 2.6k+
slide decks composed of 52k+ slide images and 14.5k questions about a slide deck. SlideVQA requires complex reasoning, including single-hop, multi-hop, and numerical reasoning, and also provides annotated arithmetic expressions
of numerical answers for enhancing the ability of numerical
reasoning. Moreover, we developed a new end-to-end document VQA model that treats evidence selection and question
answering in a unified sequence-to-sequence format. Experiments on SlideVQA show that our model outperformed existing state-of-the-art QA models, but that it still has a large
gap behind human performance. We believe that our dataset
will facilitate research on document VQA.

Introduction
Building intelligent agents that can read and comprehend
real-world documents, such as webpages, office documents,
lecture slides, etc., has been a long-standing goal of artificial
intelligence. To achieve this goal, machine reading comprehension (MRC), a central task in natural language understanding, has been intensively studied. The typical definition of the MRC task is quite simple, wherein given a short
natural language text as a context and a question about it,
a machine reads the text and then answers the question by
extracting a span from the text (Rajpurkar et al. 2016; Rajpurkar, Jia, and Liang 2018). However, this definition is far
from real-world applications, such as customer service chatbots on e-commerce websites (Cui et al. 2017) and assistant systems for reading professional literature (Hong et al.
2019), in that the context is composed entirely of text, with
no graphical elements.
To this end, visual question answering on document images (document VQA) has received much attention. It is a
challenging vision and language task that requires methods

• We introduce a novel task and dataset, SlideVQA,
wherein to answer its questions, a machine has to read
and comprehend a slide deck composed of multiple
images. It is the largest multi-image document VQA
dataset containing 2.6k+ slide decks (each consisting of
20 slides) and 14.5k questions. It also provides bounding boxes around textual and visual elements for understanding document layout and arithmetic expressions for
numerical reasoning.
• We developed a Multi-Modal Multi-image Document
VQA model, M3D, to jointly perform evidence selection
and question answering tasks and to enhance numerical
reasoning by generating arithmetic expressions.
1
Our dataset and codes are publicly available at https://github.
com/nttmdlab-nlp/SlideVQA

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13636

