The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Orders Are Unwanted: Dynamic Deep Graph Convolutional Network for
Personality Detection
Tao Yang1* , Jinghao Deng1* , Xiaojun Quan1† , Qifan Wang2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
2
Meta AI
{yangt225, dengjh27}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, quanxj3@mail.sysu.edu.cn, wqfcr@fb.com

Abstract
S vs. N

Predicting personality traits based on online posts has emerged
as an important task in many fields such as social network
analysis. One of the challenges of this task is assembling information from various posts into an overall profile for each
user. While many previous solutions simply concatenate the
posts into a long document and then encode the document
by sequential or hierarchical models, they introduce unwarranted orders for the posts, which may mislead the models. In
this paper, we propose a dynamic deep graph convolutional
network (D-DGCN) to overcome the above limitation. Specifically, we design a learn-to-connect approach that adopts a
dynamic multi-hop structure instead of a deterministic structure, and combine it with a DGCN module to automatically
learn the connections between posts. The modules of post
encoder, learn-to-connect, and DGCN are jointly trained in
an end-to-end manner. Experimental results on the Kaggle
and Pandora datasets show the superior performance of DDGCN to state-of-the-art baselines. Our code is available at
https://github.com/djz233/D-DGCN.

I vs. E
Social Media Posts

Personality Detection Model

MBTI

T vs. F

P vs. J
MBTI Personality Traits

Figure 1: An example of personality detection for MBTI. The
input are multiple social media posts from a single user and
the output are her/his personality traits along dimensions of
Introversion vs. Extroversion, Sensing vs. iNtuition, Think
vs. Feeling, and Perception vs. Judging.

Introduction
Text-based personality detection is an emerging task in computational psycho-linguistics and affective computing (Jiang,
Zhang, and Choi 2019). The objective is to identify one’s
personality traits based on the texts she/he creates. Personality detection contributes meaningful cues to explaining an
individual’s behavior, emotion, and motivation (Mehta et al.
2019; Zhang, Peng, and Winkler 2019). The availability of a
tremendous amount of social media posts containing users’
digital traces provides rich data sources for this task and
has aroused the interest of NLP and psychology researchers
(Cui and Qi 2017; Xue et al. 2018; Keh, Cheng et al. 2019;
Amirhosseini and Kazemian 2020; Lynn, Balasubramanian,
and Schwartz 2020).
The taxonomy of personality is generally defined along
different dimensions. Figure 1 shows an example of personality detection in the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI)
taxonomy (Myers-Briggs 1991). Although it can be naturally
regarded as a multi-label classification task, personality detection has new challenges. First, the input of this task is not
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13896

a single document but a set of posts, which are usually topicagnostic short documents. Second, not every post necessarily
contains personality clues, so the key is how to piece together
useful information in different posts into a representative
user profile. These posts can be arbitrarily merged into a long
document and encoded sequentially (Jiang, Zhang, and Choi
2019; Zhou et al. 2019), or they can be encoded separately
and then aggregated into a user representation by hierarchical
networks (Lynn, Balasubramanian, and Schwartz 2020; Xue
et al. 2018). In either case, however, orders are introduced
among the posts. Intuitively, these posts should work complementarily to build the user personality profile rather than
treated sequentially or hierarchically.
The graph is a natural structure to represent the posts in an
unordered way, whereas it tends to be non-trivial to predefine
the implicit personality-aware connections between posts
as previous work of graph neural networks. In this paper,
we propose a novel graph-based post fusion model, namely
dynamic deep graph convolutional network (D-DGCN), to
address the above issues. D-DGCN builds a graph to represent the posts of a user, in which each post is represented as
a node and initialized by the embedding from a pre-trained
language model such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2018). A special
node denoting the user is also added to facilitate personality classification. Moreover, considering that the connection
between two nodes is not established deterministically, and
inspired by GraphMask (Schlichtkrull, De Cao, and Titov

