The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Effective Open Intent Classification with K-center Contrastive Learning and
Adjustable Decision Boundary
Xiaokang Liu1 * , Jianquan Li2 * , Jingjing Mu2 , Min Yang3† , Ruifeng Xu4 , Benyou Wang5,6
1

China Automotive Technology and Research Center Co., Ltd.
2
Beijing Ultrapower Software Co.,Ltd.
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
5
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
6
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
liuxiaokang1@catarc.ac.cn, {lijianquan2,mujingjing}@ultrapower.com.cn, min.yang@siat.ac.cn,
xuruifeng@hit.edu.cn,wangbenyou@cuhk.edu.cn
Abstract
Open intent classification, which aims to correctly classify
the known intents into their corresponding classes while identifying the new unknown (open) intents, is an essential but
challenging task in dialogue systems. In this paper, we introduce novel K-center contrastive learning and adjustable
decision boundary learning (CLAB) to improve the effectiveness of open intent classification. First, we pre-train a feature
encoder on the labeled training instances, which transfers
knowledge from known intents to unknown intents. Specifically, we devise a K-center contrastive learning algorithm to
learn discriminative and balanced intent features, improving
the generalization of the model for recognizing open intents.
Second, we devise an adjustable decision boundary learning
method with expanding and shrinking (ADBES) to determine
the suitable decision conditions. Concretely, we learn a decision boundary for each known intent class, which consists of
a decision center and the radius of the decision boundary. We
then expand the radius of the decision boundary to accommodate more in-class instances if the out-of-class instances are
far from the decision boundary; otherwise, we shrink the radius of the decision boundary. Extensive experiments on three
benchmark datasets clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method for open intent classification. For reproducibility,
we submit the code at: https://github.com/lxk00/CLAP

Introduction
Intent classification is an essential task in dialogue systems by
categorizing input sequences into pre-defined intent classes.
It is usually formulated as a supervised classification problem. Recently, superior classification performance has been
achieved by deep neural networks (Bendale and Boult 2016;
Hendrycks and Gimpel 2016), where sufficient labeled training data is provided during model training. However, these
methods make a closed world assumption which is impractical for real-world applications, and cannot deal with the
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Min Yang is corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13291

previously unseen intent classes (Ryu et al. 2017; Zheng,
Chen, and Huang 2020).
Open intent classification, which aims to correctly classify the known intents into their corresponding classes while
identifying the unknown intents as the “open intent”, improves customer satisfaction by reducing false-positive errors, making the intent classification more challenging. Early
studies employ SVM to reject unseen class examples (Tax
and Duin 2004; Rifkin and Klautau 2004; Jain, Scheirer, and
Boult 2014) based on feature engineering which is laborintensive. Recently, there are several works being proposed
to detect open intents by learning a decision boundary of
each known intent in the similarity space (Bendale and Boult
2016; Hendrycks and Gimpel 2016; Shu, Xu, and Liu 2017).
Among them, ADB (Zhang, Xu, and Lin 2021) is a representative open intent classification method, which learns the
adaptive spherical decision boundary for each known class
with the aid of a pre-trained text encoder.
Despite the noticeable progress of previous works, there
are still several challenges for open intent classification,
which are not addressed well in prior studies. First, the superior performance of standard supervised learning is highly
dependent on the quality and balance of the training labels.
The noisy and unbalanced training data may significantly
degrade the generalization performance of deep models on
out-of-distribution intents. Although KCL (Kang et al. 2020)
combined the strengths of supervised learning and contrastive
learning to learn representations that were both discriminative and balanced, it merely shortens the distance between
the anchor sample and the other positive samples, but ignores
the distances among the chosen positive samples. To address
this limitation, we learn more robust representations by incorporating instance-level semantic discriminativeness into
representation learning via contrastive learning. Concretely,
we propose a K-center contrastive learning (KCCL) method
to learn more robust and balanced text representations. Different from the general supervised contrastive loss, our KCCL
method encourages each positive instance to move in the direction of the other K positive instances so that each positive
instance moves towards the center of the positive samples, re-

