The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

c-NTPP: Learning Cluster-Aware Neural Temporal Point Process
Fangyu Ding1 , Junchi Yan1∗ , Haiyang Wang2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering and MOE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Ant Group, Hangzhou, China
{arthur 99, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn, chixi.why@mybank.cn

Abstract

Günnemann 2020), and attention mechanisms including the
Transformer (Zhang et al. 2020; Zuo et al. 2020). On the
other hand, a decoder is used to model the probability distribution of the occurrence time and type of the next event.
In this paper, we tend to make an (arguable) observation
that many real-world event data often show inherent sparsity
in terms of correlation or causality over the events, which
can also be recognized from the event clustering perspective i.e. the correlations are within each cluster. Certainly,
such observation has been also implicitly or explicitly used
in literature. For example, the classic and widely adopted
Hawkes process (Hawkes 1971) (also known as the selfexciting process) often uses a fast time decay kernel e.g. exponential kernel to model the dynamics of event sequence,
which in fact exhibits a sparse influence on the current event
from the history events. In practice, the sequence data is often not segmented based on the detection of large time intervals and subsequences, which also leads to sparse dependencies among events. In fact, sparsity is a ubiquitous nature
in many areas, and it also has been widely adopted as an inductive bias not only to fit the data but also to mitigate the
illness of model learning as a regularizer (Zhou, Zha, and
Song 2013). Despite the recent efforts to such sparsity correlation pattern in the domain of time series (contrastively
in the discrete time domain) with deep networks (Li et al.
2019; Zhou et al. 2021) especially for the Autoformer (Xu
et al. 2021) that leverages a decomposition method based
on the Auto-Correlation mechanism, little attention has been
paid to event data, especially from the NTPP perspective. In
fact, the currently dominant backbones used in NTPP like
RNN (Du et al. 2016) or Transformer (Zuo et al. 2020) provide no tailored scheme to capture the sparsity (if there is).
To capture the possible clustering of event influence, we
propose a novel representation learning framework for event
sequence, namely Cluster-Aware Neural Temporal Point
Process (c-NTPP). We decompose an event sequence into
different little correlated clustered subsequences in the manner of sequential variational inference (Chung et al. 2015). A
discrete sequential variational autoencoder (SVAE) is leveraged to infer the latent cluster each event belongs to through
its encoder and decompose the event sequence into different clusters. As for the SVAE decoder part, with the latent
clusters inferred, we formulate the probabilistic model for
the decomposed temporal point process (DTPP) which is an

Event sequences in continuous time space are ubiquitous
across applications and have been intensively studied with
both classic temporal point process (TPP) and its recent deep
network variants. This work is motivated by an observation
that many of event data exhibit inherent clustering patterns
in terms of the sparse correlation among events, while such
characteristics are seldom explicitly considered in existing
neural TPP models whereby the history encoders are often
embodied by RNNs or Transformers. In this work, we propose a c-NTPP (Cluster-Aware Neural Temporal Point Process) model, which leverages a sequential variational autoencoder framework to infer the latent cluster each event belongs
to in the sequence. Specially, a novel event-clustered attention
mechanism is devised to learn each cluster and then aggregate them together to obtain the final representation for each
event. Extensive experiments show that c-NTPP achieves superior performance on both real-world and synthetic datasets,
and it can also uncover the underlying clustering correlations.

1

Introduction

Temporal point process (TPP) (Rubin 1972; Hawkes 1971)
has been a popular and principled tool for modeling and predicting event sequence data in continuous time space, e.g.
user behavior sequences on social media platforms (Zhou,
Zha, and Song 2013), asset management (Yan et al. 2013),
personalized healthcare records (Choi et al. 2015), high frequency financial transactions (Bacry and Muzy 2014) and
earthquake records (Ogata 1998). Inside the event sequence,
various types of asynchronous events often exhibit complex dependencies on their history (Wu et al. 2018), making
events modeling even challenging.
With the development of deep learning, the so-called
neural temporal point process (NTPP) models (Xiao et al.
2017b,a) have been intensively devised for their high capacity for complex event sequence modeling. Popular neural backbones for sequential data are used in NTPP which
often serve as encoders to capture the history, e.g. the recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Du et al. 2016; Mei and
Eisner 2017; Omi, Aihara et al. 2019; Shchur, Biloš, and
∗
Correspondence author is Junchi Yan who is also affiliated
with Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7369

