The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PINAT: A Permutation INvariance Augmented Transformer for NAS Predictor
Shun Lu1, 2 , Yu Hu1,2 * , Peihao Wang3 , Yan Han3 , Jianchao Tan4 , Jixiang Li4 , Sen Yang5 , Ji Liu6
1

Research Center for Intelligent Computing Systems, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Texas at Austin
4
Kuaishou Technology.
5
Snap Inc.
6
Meta Platforms, Inc.
{lushun19s, huyu}@ict.ac.cn, {peihaowang, yh9442}@utexas.edu, {jianchaotan, lijixiang}@kuaishou.com,
syang3@snap.com, ji.liu.uwisc@gmail.com
Abstract

Most predictor-based methods usually train a performance predictor with a proxy dataset, i.e. architectureaccuracy pairs as the training dataset. By utilizing the pretrained predictor, the performance of arbitrary network architectures in the same search space can be directly queried,
thus greatly facilitating the search process. As architectures
are represented by discrete encodings, most predictor-based
methods first embed the discrete data into a continuous latent space and then excavate useful features to model the
mapping relationship. Therefore, how to effectively encode
the discrete architecture becomes essential.
Moreover, in our scenarios, when permuting the operation
matrix and adjacency matrix, we can get the same graphs,
which can be referred to as the graph isomorphism (GI) (Leman and Weisfeiler 1968). Generally, how to enable the permutation invariance properties for the input graph features to
let our predictor recognize such architecture graph isomorphism becomes another challenge.
Previous works have proposed the sequence-based
scheme and the graph-based methods to address this issue in
the NAS predictor scenario. The former is encoding computation flow of graph instead of the graph itself, and the latter
is usually taking a GNN with a kind of isomorphism property to process architecture graph data directly, for example,
Graph Isomorphism Networks (Xu et al. 2018). However,
both methods suffer from the poor encoding abilities and
still struggle to handle architecture permutation invariance.
In this paper, we aim to design a more powerful NAS
predictor while behaving permutation invariance for architectural isomorphism. Several recent NAS predictor works
(Yan et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2021) have proven the effectiveness of self-attention in encoding architectures with global
permutation invariance, which can output the same results
when permuting the inputs. And PINE (Gui et al. 2021) proposed a partial permutation invariance embedding method
by modeling the dependence of each node to its neighbors,
and achieved promising results on various tasks. Inspired by
the novel combination of the global and the local attention
in previous works (Chen et al. 2021a; Raghu et al. 2021),
we propose to combine the partial and global permutation
invariance properties together, to excavate more representative features for input graph data.

Time-consuming performance evaluation is the bottleneck
of traditional Neural Architecture Search (NAS) methods.
Predictor-based NAS can speed up performance evaluation
by directly predicting performance, rather than training a
large number of sub-models and then validating their performance. Most predictor-based NAS approaches use a proxy
dataset to train model-based predictors efficiently but suffer
from performance degradation and generalization problems.
We attribute these problems to the poor abilities of existing
predictors to character the sub-models’ structure, specifically
the topology information extraction and the node feature representation of the input graph data. To address these problems, we propose a Transformer-like NAS predictor PINAT,
consisting of a partial Permutation INvariance Augmentation
module serving as both token embedding layer and attention head, as well as a Laplacian matrix to be the positional
encoding. Our design produces more representative features
of the encoded architecture and outperforms state-of-the-art
NAS predictors on six search spaces: NAS-Bench-101, NASBench-201, DARTS, ProxylessNAS, PPI, and ModelNet. The
code is available at https://github.com/ShunLu91/PINAT.

Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS) has made great progress
in many domains by automatically designing effective architectures. One of the key factors behind these progress is
the innovation of efficient search methods, such as one-shot
methods (Bender et al. 2018; Dong and Yang 2019; Guo
et al. 2020; Chu et al. 2021b), differentiable methods (Liu
et al. 2019a; Xie et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2019; Chu et al.
2020), and predictor-based methods (Liu et al. 2018; Luo
et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019; Shi et al. 2020). In particular,
predictor-based methods are promising as they can learn an
accurate mapping from the architecture’s representation to
its corresponding performance in a pre-defined search space
with only a few training samples, and thus significantly improving NAS efficiency.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8957

