The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fairness and Welfare Quantification for Regret in Multi-Armed Bandits
Siddharth Barman1 , Arindam Khan1 , Arnab Maiti2 , Ayush Sawarni1
1

Indian Institute of Science
University of Washington
barman@iisc.ac.in, arindamkhan@iisc.ac.in, maitiarnab9@gmail.com, ayushsawarni@iisc.ac.in
2

Abstract

making under uncertainty. In this framework, a decision
maker (online algorithm) has sample access to k distributions (arms), which are a priori unknown. For T rounds, the
online algorithm sequentially selects an arm and receives a
reward drawn independently from the arm-specific distribution. Here, ex ante, the optimal solution would be to select,
in every round, the arm with the maximum mean. However,
since the statistical properties of the arms are unknown, the
algorithm accrues—in the T rounds—expected rewards that
are not necessarily the optimal. The construct of regret captures this sub-optimality and, hence, serves as a key performance metric for algorithms. A bit more formally, regret is
defined as the difference between the optimal mean (among
the arms) and the algorithm’s performance.
Two standard forms of regret are average (cumulative)
regret (Lattimore, Lattimore, and Reid 2016) and instantaneous (simple) regret (Slivkins 2019). Specifically, average
regret considers the difference between the optimal mean
and the average (arithmetic mean) of the expected rewards
accumulated by the algorithm. Hence, in average regret the
algorithm’s performance is quantified as the arithmetic mean
of the expected rewards it accumulates in the T rounds.
Complementarily, in simple regret the algorithm’s performance is equated to its expected reward precisely in the T th
round, i.e., the algorithm’s performance is gauged only after
(T − 1) rounds.
We build upon these two formulations with a welfarist
perspective. To appreciate the relevance of this perspective
in the MAB context, consider settings in which the algorithm’s rewards correspond to values that are distributed
across a population of T agents. In particular, one can revisit
the classic motivating example of clinical trials (Thompson
1933): in each round t ∈ {1, . . . , T } the decision maker
(online algorithm) administers one of the k drugs to the tth
patient. The observed reward in round t is the selected drug’s
efficacy for patient t. Hence, in average regret one equates
the algorithm’s performance as the (average) social welfare
across the T patients. It is pertinent to note that maximizing social welfare (equivalently, minimizing average regret)
might not induce a fair outcome. The social welfare can in
fact be high even if the drugs are inconsiderately tested on
an initial set of patients. By contrast, in instantaneous regret,
the algorithm’s performance maps to the egalitarian (Rawlsian) welfare (which is a well-studied fairness criterion) but

We extend the notion of regret with a welfarist perspective.
Focussing on the classic multi-armed bandit (MAB) framework, the current work quantifies the performance of bandit algorithms by applying a fundamental welfare function,
namely the Nash social welfare (NSW) function. This corresponds to equating algorithm’s performance to the geometric mean of its expected rewards and leads us to the study
of Nash regret, defined as the difference between the—a priori unknown—optimal mean (among the arms) and the algorithm’s performance. Since NSW is known to satisfy fairness
axioms, our approach complements the utilitarian considerations of average (cumulative) regret, wherein the algorithm is
evaluated via the arithmetic mean of its expected rewards.
This work develops an algorithm that,
 horizon of
qgiven the
k log T
, here k deplay T , achieves a Nash regret of O
T
notes the number of arms in the MAB instance. Since, for any
algorithm, the Nash regret is at least as much as its average
regret (the AM-GM inequality), the known lower bound on
average regret holds for Nash regret as well. Therefore, our
Nash regret guarantee is essentially tight. In addition, we develop
with a Nash regret guarantee of
qan anytime algorithm

k log T
O
log T .
T

1

Introduction

Regret minimization is a pre-eminent objective in the study
of decision making under uncertainty. Indeed, regret is
a central notion in multi-armed bandits (Lattimore and
Szepesvári 2020), reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto
2018), game theory (Young 2004), decision theory (Peterson
2017), and causal inference (Lattimore, Lattimore, and Reid
2016). The current work extends the formulation of regret
with a welfarist perspective. In particular, we quantify the
performance of a decision maker by applying a fundamental welfare function—namely the Nash social welfare—and
study Nash regret, defined as the difference between the (a
priori unknown) optimum and the decision maker’s performance. We obtain essentially tight upper bounds for Nash
regret in the classic multi-armed bandit (MAB) framework.
Recall that the MAB framework provides an encapsulating abstraction for settings that entail sequential decision
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6762

