The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Exploratory Inference Learning for Scribble Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Chunawei Zhou, Zhen Cui* , Chunyan Xu, Cao Han, Jian Yang*
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education,
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China.
{cwzhou, zhen.cui, cyx, hancao_work, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

to relieve the inconsistency of segmentation maps and the
uncertainty of prediction results, Pan et al. (Pan et al. 2021)
proposed the uncertainty reduction on neural representation
to produce confident results, and a self-supervision way on
the neural eigen-space for consistent outputs. To better utilize
the topological structures between different semantic regions,
Tang et al. (Tang et al. 2018a,b) employed the classic dense
CRF (Adams, Baek, and Davis 2010), and graph cuts to constrain the optimization for more stable segmentation. The
most current methods, including the recent works (Lin et al.
2016; Xu et al. 2021b), referred to generating the constant
pseudo labels of some unknown regions by extending from
initial scribbles, and then fine-tuned the segmentation model
on the estimated constant labels as well as the ground-truth
scribbles. Although these methods above have made great
advances, they still suffer from insufficient exploration on
unannotated regions while paying more attention to the exploitation of label/pseudo-label samples.

Scribble supervised semantic segmentation has achieved great
advances in pseudo label exploitation, yet suffers insufficient
label exploration for the mass of unannotated regions. In this
work, we propose a novel exploratory inference learning (EIL)
framework, which facilitates efficient probing on unlabeled
pixels and promotes selecting confident candidates for boosting the evolved segmentation. The exploration of unannotated
regions is formulated as an iterative decision-making process,
where a policy searcher learns to infer in the unknown space
and the reward to the exploratory policy is based on a contrastive measurement of candidates. In particular, we devise
the contrastive reward with the intra-class attraction and the
inter-class repulsion in the feature space w.r.t the pseudo labels. The unlabeled exploration and the labeled exploitation
are jointly balanced to improve the segmentation, and framed
in a close-looping end-to-end network. Comprehensive evaluations on the benchmark datasets (PASCAL VOC 2012 and
PASCAL Context) demonstrate the superiority of our proposed EIL when compared with other state-of-the-art methods
for the scribble-supervised semantic segmentation problem.

To address the above issue, in this work, we propose a
novel exploratory inference learning (EIL) framework to perform label propagation through exploratory inference policies
for boosting the evolved segmentation. Specifically, the exploratory label inference learning is formulated as a sequential decision-making problem by designing a policy searcher
for label exploration and a policy assessor for inference evaluation. The label exploration of the policy takes account
of three aspects of attributes: pixel-level features, semantic
probabilities, and historical states, which are framed in a
unified encoder-decoder fully convolutional network to be
learned. Hereby, the next estimated state of pseudo labels
is mainly decided by the exploratory policy, with scribble
structures as the auxiliary constraint. To assess the reliability
of label inference, the rewards (or returns) of the searched
inference policies are derived from the variations of states
during the segmentation evolution process. In particular, we
devise a contrastive critic with the intra-class attraction and
the inter-class repulsion in the feature space w.r.t the pseudo
labels. The segmenter update and exploratory inference optimization are finally integrated into a unified framework to
be optimized alternately. Resorting to the powerful exploration on unlabeled regions as well as the exploitation of
labels/pseudo-labels, hereby, the starting scribble-annotated
seeds could be progressively diffused to those distant unknown regions. Experimental results demonstrate that our

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task that serves
many other tasks like multi-task learning (Cui et al. 2022;
Zhou et al. 2020), intelligent video analysis (Xu et al. 2021a;
Zhou et al. 2021; Lv et al. 2021) etc. But it requires great
laboring costs to obtain precise annotations in particular massive accurate boundary contours to train a good segmenter.
To relieve the annotation burdens, the scribble-supervised
semantic segmentation is supported by some flexible lines to
train a segmenter. The scribble-supervised annotations can
essentially promote segmenter learning in contrast to the fully
unsupervised mode. Even so, the challenge of using a few
scribble signals is to achieve as much precision as possible,
up to the cap of the fully supervised case.
Toward the aim, several previous works have been developed to attempt to extremely exploit sparse semantic annotations. Wang et al. (Wang et al. 2019) introduced a pre-trained
edge detection network to estimate outstretched boundaries
of the scribbles to refine the segmentation result. In order
* Zhen Cui and Jian Yang are the corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3760

