The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DyRRen: A Dynamic Retriever-Reranker-Generator Model for Numerical
Reasoning over Tabular and Textual Data
Xiao Li, Yin Zhu, Sichen Liu, Jiangzhou Ju, Yuzhong Qu, Gong Cheng*
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{xiaoli.nju, yinzhu, sichenliu, jujiangzhou}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {yzqu,gcheng}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

Context

Numerical reasoning over hybrid data containing tables and
long texts has recently received research attention from the
AI community. To generate an executable reasoning program
consisting of math and table operations to answer a question,
state-of-the-art methods use a retriever-generator pipeline.
However, their retrieval results are static, while different generation steps may rely on different sentences. To attend to the
retrieved information that is relevant to each generation step,
in this paper, we propose DyRRen, an extended retrieverreranker-generator framework where each generation step is
enhanced by a dynamic reranking of retrieved sentences. It
outperforms existing baselines on the FinQA dataset.

1

Table

𝑻%

third-party sales

𝑻&

…

2015

2014

$ 1802 $ 1882 $ 2021
…

…

…

Sentence 𝑫𝟏 Third-party sales for this segment improved 27% in
2015 compared with 2014, …
…
Sentence 𝑫𝟐 Third-party sales for the engineered products and
solutions segment improved 7% in 2016 compared with 2015, …
Sentence 𝑫𝟑 The transportation and construction solutions
segment produces products that are used mostly in …
Question
Considering the years 2015-2016, how bigger is the
growth of the third-party sales for the engineered products and
solutions segment in comparison with the transportation and
construction solutions one?

Introduction

Numerical reasoning has drawn much attention in machine
reading comprehension tasks. Previous datasets on numerical reasoning like DROP (Dua et al. 2019) mainly focus on
simple calculations and comparisons. Recently in this field,
more complicated arithmetic expression generation takes an
important part, especially in the context of financial reports.
Recognized datasets like FinQA (Chen et al. 2021b) and
TAT-QA (Zhu et al. 2021) involve hybrid question answering (QA), i.e., QA over information represented in heterogenous forms including tables and texts.
To acquire an answer by numerical reasoning, a standard
method is to generate an arithmetic expression from structured tables and unstructured sentences. For instance, Figure 1 shows an example in FinQA. The context includes a
table describing sales records in different years, and several
sentences stating relevant financial information. According
to the question, one needs to determine arithmetic operators
MINUS and DIVIDE, and select their arguments from either
tables or sentences to generate the correct arithmetic expression and calculate the answer. In some cases, an argument of
an arithmetic expression (e.g., #0 in Figure 1) could be the
result of some former expression.

1.1

2016

Header

𝑻𝟏
Arithmetic Expression

𝑻𝟐

⋯

𝑫𝟏

𝑫𝟐a 𝑫𝟑

⋯

MINUS (1802, 1882), DIVIDE (#0, 1882), MINUS (7%, #1)

Figure 1: A question sampled from the FinQA dataset.

triever filters the most relevant information as the input to the
generator which then predicts expressions using operators
predefined in a domain specific language (DSL) and numbers extracted from the input. FinQANet (Chen et al. 2021b)
is one such state-of-the-art method. Its retriever converts a
table into sentences. Then a BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) binary classifier is applied to identify relevant sentences, based
on which an encoder-decoder model is implemented to generate an arithmetic expression. Encoders can be BERT or
RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019) which are both encoder-only
models. The hidden layer output of an LSTM (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber 1997) is used to predict expression tokens.
We observe the following limitations of FinQANet.
First, in FinQANet’s generator, retrieved sentences are
concatenated into a long sequence and inputted into the encoder, from which different numbers are extracted at different generation steps. Existing models have difficulty in
locating the correct number from a long sequence. For example, when generating the argument “7%” in Figure 1,
the generator should pay exclusive attention to the unique

Existing Methods and Limitations

Intuitively, the generation of an arithmetic expression can be
divided into two modules: Retriever and Generator. The re* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13139

