The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Combining Adversaries with Anti-adversaries in Training
Xiaoling Zhou, Nan Yang, Ou Wu *
Center for Applied Mathematics, Tianjin University, China
{xiaolingzhou, yny, wuou}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

recent literature. Zhang et al. (2019) decomposed the robust
error into the natural and boundary errors. They developed
a new method, namely, TRADES, to obtain a better tradeoff between standard generalization and robustness. Wang
et al. (2020) proposed a misclassification-aware adversarial
training method to focus on the misclassified examples.
In addition to the design of new methods, theoretical studies have been conducted to explore the effectiveness and
ineffectiveness of adversarial training (Bai and Luo 2021).
Yang et al. (2020) concluded that existing adversarial methods cannot achieve an ideal tradeoff between accuracy and
robustness due to the insufficient smoothness (Xie et al.
2020) and generalization properties of classifiers trained by
these methods. They pointed out that customized optimization methods or better network architectures should be proposed. Xu et al. (2021) revealed that adversarial training
introduces severe unfairness between different categories.
Thus, they developed a new method that sets varied perturbation bounds for each class, resulting in better fairness. Different from these studies, we conjectured that one possible
reason leading to unsatisfied tradeoff and fairness is that not
all training samples should be perturbed adversarially. For
instance, adversaries of noisy samples may harm the model
performance (Uesato et al. 2019), and these samples should
be perturbed in the anti-adversarial direction to reduce their
negative influence on model optimization. Zhu et al. (2021)
re-annotated pseudo labels for possible noisy samples before
generating adversaries for them. The generated adversaries
are actually perturbed anti-adversarially in binary classification tasks. In this study, samples with anti-adversarial perturbations are called anti-adversaries1 (xat-adv )

Adversarial training is an effective learning technique to improve the robustness of deep neural networks. In this study,
the influence of adversarial training on deep learning models
in terms of fairness, robustness, and generalization is theoretically investigated under more general perturbation scope
that different samples can have different perturbation directions (the adversarial and anti-adversarial directions) and varied perturbation bounds. Our theoretical explorations suggest that the combination of adversaries and anti-adversaries
(samples with anti-adversarial perturbations) in training can
be more effective in achieving better fairness between classes
and a better tradeoff between robustness and generalization
in some typical learning scenarios (e.g., noisy label learning
and imbalance learning) compared with standard adversarial
training. On the basis of our theoretical findings, a more general learning objective that combines adversaries and antiadversaries with varied bounds on each training sample is
presented. Meta learning is utilized to optimize the combination weights. Experiments on benchmark datasets under different learning scenarios verify our theoretical findings and
the effectiveness of the proposed methodology.

Introduction
Apart from the standard generalization error (also known as
natural error), robust generalization error (also known as robust error) has received great attention in recent years. A
deep neural network with a low robust error can cope well
with adversarial attacks. Adversarial training is an effective
technique to reduce the robust error of a model (Wong, Rice,
and Kolter 2020; Bai and Luo 2021). Given a model f (·) and
a sample x associated with a label y, classical adversarial
training methods (Madry et al. 2018; Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2014) first generate an adversary (i.e., adversarial example) xadv for x with the following optimization:
xadv = x + arg max ℓ(f (x + δ), y),
∥δ∥≤ϵ

xat-adv = x + arg min ℓ(f (x + δ), y).
∥δ∥≤ϵ

(2)

This study conducts a comprehensive theoretical analysis of adversarial training in the presence of two different
perturbation directions (adversarial and anti-adversarial) and
varied bounds. Several typical learning scenarios are considered, including classes with different learning difficulties, imbalance learning, and noisy label learning. Our theoretical findings reveal that the perturbation directions and

(1)

where ℓ(·, ·) is a loss function, δ is the perturbation term, and
ϵ is the perturbation bound. Adversaries are then leveraged
as the training data to learn a more robust model. A number
of variations for adversarial training have been proposed in

1

The anti-adversary defined by Alfarra et al. (2022) is different from ours. They utilize anti-adversaries to deal with attacks,
whereas we aim to improve robustness, accuracy, and fairness.

* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11435

