The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On the Challenges of using Reinforcement Learning in Precision Drug Dosing:
Delay and Prolongedness of Action Effects
Sumana Basu1,2 , Marc-André Legault1,2 , Adriana Romero-Soriano1,2,3 , Doina Precup1,2
1

McGill University
2
Mila
3
Meta AI
sumana.basu@mail.mcgill.ca, marc-andre.legault@mcgill.ca, adriana.romsor@gmail.com, dprecup@cs.mcgill.ca
Abstract
Drug dosing is an important application of AI, which can
be formulated as a Reinforcement Learning (RL) problem.
In this paper, we identify two major challenges of using RL
for drug dosing: delayed and prolonged effects of administering medications, which break the Markov assumption of
the RL framework. We focus on prolongedness and define
PAE-POMDP (Prolonged Action Effect-Partially Observable
Markov Decision Process), a subclass of POMDPs in which
the Markov assumption does not hold specifically due to prolonged effects of actions. Motivated by the pharmacology literature, we propose a simple and effective approach to converting drug dosing PAE-POMDPs into MDPs, enabling the
use of the existing RL algorithms to solve such problems.
We validate the proposed approach on a toy task, and a
challenging glucose control task, for which we devise a
clinically-inspired reward function. Our results demonstrate
that: (1) the proposed method to restore the Markov assumption leads to significant improvements over a vanilla
baseline; (2) the approach is competitive with recurrent
policies which may inherently capture the prolonged effect
of actions; (3) it is remarkably more time and memory
efficient than the recurrent baseline and hence more suitable
for real-time dosing control systems; and (4) it exhibits
favourable qualitative behavior in our policy analysis.

Figure 1: Delayed and prolonged effects of drugs. Drug is
only administered at the first step, but no immediate effect
is observed. After the initial delay, the initial dose keeps
altering the patient status for a while, even in the absence of
additional dosage. The duration of delay and prolongedness
is individual specific.
vidual characteristics, and developing algorithmic solutions
for drug dosing is a contribution towards that broader goal.
Reinforcement learning (RL) offers a framework to account for individual characteristics and automatically derive
personalized treatment policies in line with the objective of
precision medicine (Ribba et al. 2020). However, RL-based
algorithms cannot be applied off-the-shelf to tackle precision dosing since all drugs are known to have a delayed
and prolonged effect from the point of medication (Holford
2018) (see Figure 1). The delay is attributed to the time it
takes for the drug to distribute to the target site, bind to the
receptor and finally to change physiological substances before its response can be observed. This can vary between
minutes to hours or even longer (Holford 2018). The prolongedness is due to individual variation in pharmacokinetics (Vogenberg, Barash, and Pursel 2010). In this delayed
and prolonged action effects scenario, the future depends
on the previous drug dosages and their effect, and therefore the Markov assumption usually made by RL algorithms
no longer holds. Although RL has been applied to address
drug dosing problems such as controlling glucose levels for
closed loop artificial pancreas (Tejedor, Woldaregay, and
Godtliebsen 2020), the violation of the Markov assumption
is in this case not only problematic from an RL research perspective, but also from a safety perspective, as ignoring the
delayed and prolonged effects of a drug can lead to drug
overdosing related toxicity (Guengerich 2011).

Introduction
Drug dosing plays an important role in human health–
e.g. individuals with type 1 diabetes require regular insulin
injections to manage their blood glucose levels, intensive
care patients require continuous monitoring and administration of drugs, optimal doses of anaesthesia are required
during operative procedures, etc. Optimal drug dosing is
most important in cases where the therapeutic window is
narrow, meaning that small deviations from the therapeutic
range of drug concentration may lead to serious clinical
complications (FDA 2015; Maxfield and Zineh 2021). These
problems are compounded by idiosyncratic differences in
the dynamics of drug absorption, distribution, metabolism or
excretion (collectively referred to as pharmacokinetics) and
drug sensitivity. Therefore, one important goal of precision
medicine is to tailor patient care while accounting for indi-

Contributions. In this paper, we identify prolongedness
and delay as fundamental roadblocks to using RL in precision drug dosing, and focus on addressing the former. To

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14102

