The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Phrase-Level Temporal Relationship Mining for Temporal Sentence Localization
Minghang Zheng1 , Sizhe Li1 , Qingchao Chen2 , Yuxin Peng1,3 , Yang Liu1,4 *
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
National Institute of Health Data Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI, Beijing, China
{minghang, lisizhe, qingchao.chen, pengyuxin, yangliu}@pku.edu.cn
Video:

Abstract
Sentence-level query:
Query: A man puts on gloves and then clean the snow
A man puts on gloves and then clean the snow

In this paper, we address the problem of video temporal sentence localization, which aims to localize a target moment
from videos according to a given language query. We observe
that existing models suffer from a sheer performance drop
when dealing with simple phrases contained in the sentence.
It reveals the limitation that existing models only capture the
annotation bias of the datasets but lack sufficient understanding of the semantic phrases in the query. To address this problem, we propose a phrase-level Temporal Relationship Mining (TRM) framework employing the temporal relationship
relevant to the phrase and the whole sentence to have a better
understanding of each semantic entity in the sentence. Specifically, we use phrase-level predictions to refine the sentencelevel prediction, and use Multiple Instance Learning to improve the quality of phrase-level predictions. We also exploit
the consistency and exclusiveness constraints of phrase-level
and sentence-level predictions to regularize the training process, thus alleviating the ambiguity of each phrase prediction.
The proposed approach sheds light on how machines can understand detailed phrases in a sentence and their compositions in their generality rather than learning the annotation biases. Experiments on the ActivityNet Captions and CharadesSTA datasets show the effectiveness of our method on both
phrase and sentence temporal localization and enable better
model interpretability and generalization when dealing with
unseen compositions of seen concepts. Code can be found at
https://github.com/minghangz/TRM.

Query: query:
Puts on
Phrase-level
Puts on
Query: Gloves

Gloves
Query: Clean
Snow
Query: Snow

Exclusiveness

Consistency

Exclusiveness

(a) Sentence and phrase level prediction.
70
50
30
10

60.67 57.03

60.48

78.25

38.41 33.13

Existing model
Sentence
Verb phrase

Ours
Noun phrase

(b) Performance on Charades-STA (IoU@0.3).

Figure 1: (a) The sentence-level (in green) and phrase-level
(in blue) prediction. We make two assumptions about the
relationship between phrases and sentences: 1) Consistency:
for each phrase, the phrase-level prediction should overlap
the sentence ground truth (in green); 2) Exclusivity: for each
video clip that does not intersect with sentence ground truth
(in red), at least one phrase’s prediction does not overlap it.
(b) shows the evaluation results of the existing model (Wang
et al. 2021b) and our method on the Charades-STA (R@1,
IoU=0.3) when using sentences or phrases as queries.

Introduction
Video temporal sentence localization has become an important research problem due to its potential for a wide range of
practical applications, requiring intelligent systems to identify the start and end timestamps of segments (i.e., moments)
with respect to any given language queries in an untrimmed
video. Using free-form natural language as queries allows
users to freely search for interesting content without being
restricted to pre-defined classes, which makes sentence localization have greater application potential. The model is
expected to understand the visual and language concepts and
their compositions to achieve robust performance.

Fully supervised approaches have made steady progress
in the last decades when the queries are complete sentences.
However, human-generated queries ‘in the wild’ vary a lot
in terms of specificity, we expect models to deal with both
complete sentences (the query marked in green in Fig. 1(a))
and short phrases (the query marked in blue in Fig. 1(a)) to
be competent for real-world applications. However, we empirically observe that even the most recent open-source models learned by using sentence annotations lack the capability
to deal with the phrase-level query, as shown in Fig. 1(b).
We evaluate the existing method (Wang et al. 2021b) on the

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3669

