The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PateGail: A Privacy-Preserving Mobility Trajectory Generator
with Imitation Learning
Huandong Wang1 , Changzheng Gao1 , Yuchen Wu2 , Depeng Jin1 , Lina Yao3 , Yong Li1
1

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, China
2
Carnegie Mellon University, USA
3
CSIRO’s Data61 and University of New South Wales, USA
{wanghuandong,liyong07}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Trajectory-based Applications

Abstract

Mobility
Prediction

Generating human mobility trajectories is of great importance
to solve the lack of large-scale trajectory data in numerous
applications, which is caused by privacy concerns. However,
existing mobility trajectory generation methods still require
real-world human trajectories centrally collected as the training data, where there exists an inescapable risk of privacy
leakage. To overcome this limitation, in this paper, we propose PateGail, a privacy-preserving imitation learning model
to generate mobility trajectories, which utilizes the powerful
generative adversary imitation learning model to simulate the
decision-making process of humans. Further, in order to protect user privacy, we train this model collectively based on
decentralized mobility data stored in user devices, where personal discriminators are trained locally to distinguish and reward the real and generated human trajectories. In the training
process, only the generated trajectories and their rewards obtained based on personal discriminators are shared between
the server and devices, whose privacy is further preserved
by our proposed perturbation mechanisms with theoretical
proof to satisfy differential privacy. Further, to better model
the human decision-making process, we propose a novel aggregation mechanism of the rewards obtained from personal
discriminators. We theoretically prove that under the reward
obtained based on the aggregation mechanism, our proposed
model maximizes the lower bound of the discounted total rewards of users. Extensive experiments show that the trajectories generated by our model are able to resemble real-world
trajectories in terms of five key statistical metrics, outperforming state-of-the-art algorithms by over 48.03%. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the synthetic trajectories are able
to efficiently support practical applications, including mobility prediction and location recommendation.

Location
RecSys

Server

Site
Selection

Generated Trajectories

Trajectory-based Applications

Mobility
Prediction

Location
RecSys

Server

Site
Selection

Generated Trajectories
cycle

Centralized Collection

Device

Device

(a)

Device

Device

Upload Rewards Download Data

Device

Device

Device

Device

(b)

Figure 1: Illustration of (a) existing trajectory generator and
our proposed (b) federated trajectory generator.

the city, and thus provide important guidance to the transportation system planning (Feng, Bai, and Xu 2019). However, the utilization of real-world mobility trajectories leads
to a growing privacy concern, since sensitive information of
users can be leaked from their trajectories, e.g., which places
they have visited and who they have met. Thus, it is hard
to obtain a large-scale human mobility trajectory dataset
to support numerous downstream applications. Under these
circumstances, simulating human mobility behavior to produce realistic and high-quality mobility trajectory data becomes an important task for downstream applications, and
has drawn much attention from both academia and industry.
Numerous existing approaches have been proposed
to generate mobility trajectories by utilizing powerful
deep learning techniques including variational autoencoder
(VAE) (Huang et al. 2019), and generative adversarial network (GAN) (Feng et al. 2018; Ouyang et al. 2018; Kulkarni et al. 2018; Liu, Chen, and Andris 2018), etc. However, as shown in Figure 1(a), these methods still require
a number of real-world human trajectories centrally collected as the training data, where there exists the risk of
privacy leakage. The rising paradigm of federated learning
has provided a promising solution to this problem, which is
a distributed machine learning framework with the goal of
training machine learning models based on data distributed
across multiple devices and protecting users’ privacy at the
same time. Federated learning has shown success in a num-

Introduction
Human mobility trajectory data is instrumental for a large
number of applications. For example, for the mobile Internet
service providers, based on mobility trajectories, the movement and communication process of mobile users can be
simulated to implement a reliable and efficient performance
evaluation of the mobile networks (Hess et al. 2016). For
the government, mobility trajectories can characterize the
travel demand of the population and the traffic condition of
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14539

