The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Adversarial Robust Deep Reinforcement Learning Requires Redefining
Robustness
Ezgi Korkmaz

Abstract

existence of such perturbations (Madry et al. 2018; Tramèr
et al. 2018; Goodfellow, Shelens, and Szegedy 2015; Xie
and Yuille 2020).
As image classification suffered from this vulnerability
towards worst-case distributional shift in the input, a series
of work conducted in deep reinforcement learning showed
that deep neural policies are also susceptible to specifically
crafted imperceptible perturbations (Huang et al. 2017; Kos
and Song 2017; Pattanaik et al. 2018; Yen-Chen et al. 2017;
Korkmaz 2020; Sun et al. 2020; Korkmaz 2021b). While one
line of work put effort on exploring these vulnerabilities in
deep neural policies, another line in parallel focused on making them robust and reliable via adversarial training (Pinto
et al. 2017; Mandlekar et al. 2017; Gleave et al. 2020).
While adversarial perturbations and adversarial training
provide a notion of robustness for trained deep neural policies, in this paper we approach the resilience problem of
deep reinforcement learning from a wider perspective, and
propose to investigate the deep neural policy manifold along
high-sensitivity directions. Along this line we essentially
seek answers for the following questions:
• How can we probe the deep neural policy decision
boundary with policy-independent high-sensitivity directions innate to the MDP within the perceptual similarity
bound?
• Is it possible to affect the state-of-the-art deep reinforcement learning policy performance trained in highdimensional state representation MDPs with policyindependent high-sensitivity directions intrinsic to the
MDP?
• What are the effects of state-of-the-art certified adversarial training on the robustness of the policy compared to straightforward vanilla training when policyindependent high-sensitivity directions are present?
Thus, to be able answer these questions, in this work we focus on the notion of robustness for deep reinforcement learning policies and make the following contributions:
• We introduce policy-independent high-sensitivity directions innate to the MDP, and probe the deep reinforcement learning manifold via these policy-independent directions.
• We run multiple experiments in the Arcade Learning
Environment (ALE) in various games with high di-

Learning from raw high dimensional data via interaction with
a given environment has been effectively achieved through
the utilization of deep neural networks. Yet the observed
degradation in policy performance caused by imperceptible
worst-case policy dependent translations along high sensitivity directions (i.e. adversarial perturbations) raises concerns
on the robustness of deep reinforcement learning policies. In
our paper, we show that these high sensitivity directions do
not lie only along particular worst-case directions, but rather
are more abundant in the deep neural policy landscape and
can be found via more natural means in a black-box setting. Furthermore, we show that vanilla training techniques
intriguingly result in learning more robust policies compared
to the policies learnt via the state-of-the-art adversarial training techniques. We believe our work lays out intriguing properties of the deep reinforcement learning policy manifold and
our results can help to build robust and generalizable deep
reinforcement learning policies.

1

Introduction

Following the initial work of Mnih et al. (2015), the use
of deep neural networks as function approximators in reinforcement learning has led to a dramatic increase in the capabilities of reinforcement learning policies (Schulman et al.
2017; Vinyals et al. 2019; Schrittwieser et al. 2020). In particular, these developments allow for the direct learning of
strong policies from raw, high-dimensional inputs (i.e. visual observations). With the successes of these new methods
come new challenges regarding the robustness and generalization capabilities of deep reinforcement learning agents.
Initially, Szegedy et al. (2014) showed that specifically
crafted imperceptible perturbations can lead to misclassification in image classification. After this initial work a new
research area emerged to investigate the abilities of deep
neural networks against specifically crafted adversarial examples. While various works studied many different ways to
compute these examples (Carlini and Wagner 2017; Madry
et al. 2018; Goodfellow, Shelens, and Szegedy 2015; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016), several works focused
on studying ways to increase the robustness against such
specifically crafted perturbations, based on training with the
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8369

