The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AVCAffe: A Large Scale Audio-Visual Dataset of Cognitive Load and Affect for
Remote Work
Pritam Sarkar1, 2 , Aaron Posen1 , Ali Etemad1
1

Queen’s University, Canada
2
Vector Institute
{pritam.sarkar, jordan.posen, ali.etemad}@queensu.ca

Abstract
We introduce AVCAffe, the first Audio-Visual dataset consisting of Cognitive load and Affect attributes. We record AVCAffe by simulating remote work scenarios over a videoconferencing platform, where subjects collaborate to complete a number of cognitively engaging tasks. AVCAffe is the
largest originally collected (not collected from the Internet)
affective dataset in English language. We recruit 106 participants from 18 different countries of origin, spanning an age
range of 18 to 57 years old, with a balanced male-female ratio. AVCAffe comprises a total of 108 hours of video, equivalent to more than 58, 000 clips along with task-based selfreported ground truth labels for arousal, valence, and cognitive load attributes such as mental demand, temporal demand,
effort, and a few others. We believe AVCAffe would be a
challenging benchmark for the deep learning research community given the inherent difficulty of classifying affect and
cognitive load in particular. Moreover, our dataset fills an existing timely gap by facilitating the creation of learning systems for better self-management of remote work meetings,
and further study of hypotheses regarding the impact of remote work on cognitive load and affective states.

1

Open
Discussion

Lighten
the Mood

Diapix

Montclair
Map

Lost at
the Sea

Reading
Multi-task
Comprehension

Figure 1: Sample representative frames of AVCAffe during
different tasks.

In order to better understand and manage the impact of
remote work meetings on individuals, it is necessary to design and develop tools capable of quantifying factors such
as cognitive load and affect in relevant settings. A key ingredient for developing such systems is the availability of
related datasets along with ground-truth information, which
could be used by machine learning and deep learning algorithms for training purposes. Throughout the literature, a
large number of affective computing datasets (Kossaifi et al.
2019; Busso et al. 2008; Ringeval et al. 2013; Correa et al.
2018; Valstar et al. 2013) have been made available, which
can indeed be used to partially address the need in this area
by capturing arousal, valence, and other emotion-related factors. Affective computing (Picard 2000), which is an area
that aims to investigate methods and algorithms for detection
(Sarkar et al. 2019; Kollias et al. 2017; Sarkar and Etemad
2020a,b), quantification (Kollias and Zafeiriou 2020, 2021),
and generation of emotions (Kollias and Zafeiriou 2018;
Kollias et al. 2020), has witnessed a surge in terms of methods and performances as a direct result of the progress in
deep neural networks (Sarkar et al. 2019; Sarkar and Etemad
2020a,b; Kollias et al. 2017; Kollias and Zafeiriou 2020,
2021). Nonetheless, there are currently no available datasets
directed toward understanding users in remote work settings.
Moreover, there are currently no audio-visual datasets that
target cognitive load along side affective states.
In this paper we attempt to tackle this shortcoming by de-

Introduction

Remote work, also referred to as ‘work from home’, has recently become the predominant employment paradigm for
many individuals in different sectors. Dictated partially by
the recent COVID-19 pandemic, and facilitated through advancements in connectivity, business communication chat
platforms, and video-conferencing tools, remote work is the
new reality of work for millions across the world. While this
new paradigm of work has a number of advantages such as
enabling social distancing and flexible hours, it brings about
a number of challenges that were less common in in-person
work environments. For instance, studies have shown that
remote work settings could contribute to increased cognitive load and fatigues in individuals due to the following
(Bennett et al. 2021; Fauville et al. 2021; Riedl 2021): (i)
back-to-back work-related meetings with minimal physical
mobility in-between, (ii) the inability to effectively perceive
and transmit non-verbal expressive cues, (iii) the need to apply intense focus on the screen with minimal variation.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

76

