The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Online Tuning for Offline Decentralized Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Jiechuan Jiang, Zongqing Lu†
School of Computer Science, Peking University
{jiechuan.jiang, zongqing.lu}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

There is no assumption on the data collection policies and
the relationship between the datasets of agents.
However, from the perspective of an individual agent, the
transition dynamics depend on the policies of other agents
and will change as other agents improve their policies (Foerster et al. 2017). Since the learned policies of other agents
are inconsistent with their behavior policies for data collection, the transition dynamics in execution are different from
the transition dynamics in the dataset, which will cause extrapolation error, i.e., the error in value estimate incurred
by the mismatch between the experience distribution of the
learned policy and the dataset (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup
2019). The extrapolation error makes the agent underestimate or overestimate state values, which leads to uncoordinated low-performing policies (Jiang and Lu 2021).
One way to reduce the extrapolation error caused by the
mismatch of transition dynamics is to bridge offline training and online tuning. However, since both deploying new
policies and interacting with the environment are costly and
risky, we should consider the deployment efficiency (the
number of deployments) and sample efficiency (the number of interactions) in the collection of online experiences
(Matsushima et al. 2021). Due to the efficiency requirement,
the collected online experiences can be very limited. Thus,
it is insufficient to tune the policies of agents merely using
the online data, and the small online dataset may also cause
overfitting. To increase data efficiency, it is better to additionally exploit offline data for online tuning. However, uniformly sampling from the merged offline and online experiences (Nair et al. 2020) cannot address the transition mismatch problem. Therefore, it is necessary to correct the transition dynamics in the offline data to make it close to the online transition dynamics. Nevertheless, the requirement of
efficiency also means it is infeasible to accurately estimate
the real transition dynamics from the limited online experiences, thus explicit correction is impractical.
In this paper, we introduce a simple yet effective method
to correct the transition dynamics of offline data for online
tuning, without explicitly modeling the transition dynamics.
When sampling a transition from the offline experiences, we
first search for the best-matched transition in the online experiences, which has the minimum state-action distance to
the sampled transition. Then, we compute the next-state distance between the sampled transition and the best-matched

Offline reinforcement learning could learn effective policies
from a fixed dataset, which is promising for real-world applications. However, in offline decentralized multi-agent reinforcement learning, due to the discrepancy between the behavior policy and learned policy, the transition dynamics in
offline experiences do not accord with the transition dynamics in online execution, which creates severe errors in value
estimates, leading to uncoordinated low-performing policies.
One way to overcome this problem is to bridge offline training and online tuning. However, considering both deployment efficiency and sample efficiency, we could only collect
very limited online experiences, making it insufficient to use
merely online data for updating the agent policy. To utilize
both offline and online experiences to tune the policies of
agents, we introduce online transition correction (OTC) to
implicitly correct the offline transition dynamics by modifying sampling probabilities. We design two types of distances,
i.e., embedding-based and value-based distance, to measure
the similarity between transitions, and further propose an
adaptive rank-based prioritization to sample transitions according to the transition similarity. OTC is simple yet effective to increase data efficiency and improve agent policies in
online tuning. Empirically, OTC outperforms baselines in a
variety of tasks.

Introduction
In fully decentralized multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) (de Witt et al. 2020a; Su et al. 2022; Jiang and
Lu 2022; Su and Lu 2022), agents interact with the environment to obtain individual experiences and independently
improve the policies to maximize the shared rewards. Due
to the scalability and robustness, fully decentralized learning shows great potential in solving real-world cooperative
tasks. However, in many industrial applications, continuously interacting with the environment to collect the experiences for learning is costly and risky, e.g., autonomous
driving. To overcome this challenge, offline decentralized
MARL (Jiang and Lu 2021) lets each agent learn its policy from a fixed dataset of experiences without interacting
with the environment. The dataset of each agent contains
the individual action instead of the joint action of all agents.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8050

