The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Seq2Seq Surrogates of Epidemic Models to Facilitate Bayesian Inference
Giovanni Charles1 , Timothy M. Wolock1 , Peter Winskill1 , Azra Ghani1 , Samir Bhatt* 2 , Seth
Flaxman3
1

Imperial College London
University of Copenhagen
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
s.bhatt@ic.ac.uk
2

Abstract

exposure to three species of infectious mosquito, immunity and a variety of interventions. This model is invaluable
for projecting the effects of policy on malaria prevalence
, for example, (Winskill et al. 2017), projected the effects
of a 44% funding cut from a major global donor. Unfortunately, run times for a single parameter set can take several minutes making it unsuitable for parameter inference
where large numbers of repeated function evaluations are
required. (Griffin, Ferguson, and Ghani 2014) later showed
that a faster, reduced surrogate model can be used to infer
these parameters. This surrogate made simplifying assumptions, such as the effects of seasonality and existing interventions being negligible. The observed data had to be carefully
curated to minimise those effects. In contrast to a surrogate
where a researcher arbitrarily chooses how to reduce model
complexity for inference, we will introduce a deep learning
solution.
Recent work has demonstrated the utility of learned surrogate models reducing the computational cost of simulation
(Cameron et al. 2015; McKinley et al. 2018; Reiker et al.
2021). Data-driven methods could potentially learn more expressive, surrogates which allow researchers to relax their
assumptions in parameter inference and use a wider range
of data sets. (Cameron et al. 2015) proposed a functional regression method to map the functional space between model
parameters and outputs using a library of pre-computed outputs. As the input space becomes large, more sophisticated
methods have been employed to explore the sub-spaces most
useful for the parameter inference task at hand, as reviewed
by (McKinley et al. 2018). (Reiker et al. 2021) showed that
a Bayesian optimisation workflow is effective in performing
parameter inference on IBM outputs. They proposed training a surrogate and simultaneously performing inference,
adaptively sampling parameter sets for training the surrogate which reduce the surrogate’s predictive uncertainty in
regions of the input space which are proximal to the best-fit
parameters.
However none of the above approaches have developed
surrogates designed for sequential inputs. Many epidemiological models use sequences as input, such as transmissibility (Rahimi, Chen, and Gandomi 2021), intervention usage
(Griffin, Ferguson, and Ghani 2014) and contact matrices
(Watson et al. 2022), and produce sequential outputs such as
prevalence trajectories. This format makes them amenable

Epidemic models are powerful tools in understanding infectious disease. However, as they increase in size and complexity, they can quickly become computationally intractable.
Recent progress in modelling methodology has shown that
surrogate models can be used to emulate complex epidemic
models with a high-dimensional parameter space. We show
that deep sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) models can serve
as accurate surrogates for complex epidemic models with sequence based model parameters, effectively replicating seasonal and long-term transmission dynamics. Once trained,
our surrogate can predict scenarios a several thousand times
faster than the original model, making them ideal for policy exploration. We demonstrate that replacing a traditional
epidemic model with a learned simulator facilitates robust
Bayesian inference.

1

Introduction

Epidemic models are an essential tool in the study of infectious disease dynamics (Eaton et al. 2019; World Health Organization 2021; Djaafara et al. 2021). By modelling new
infections as a function of current infections, they leverage the fundamental dynamics to predict epidemic trajectories accurately with relatively few parameters. Recently,
they have risen to unprecedented public prominence through
their use during the SARS-CoV-2 (coronavirus) pandemic
(Birrell et al. 2021).
In most cases, we do not observe these dynamics or model
parameters directly, so we must infer them from what data
we do measure (e.g. deaths, positive tests, etc.). In order to
produce a set of predictions, we need to infer the unknown
parameters in the model, a process that quickly becomes infeasible at the scale needed for methods like Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo (HMC) (Neal 2011) for even moderately complex models. Further, because the current state of the model
is a function of all past states, complex correlation structures can arise between time-varying parameters, making
sampling difficult.
(Griffin et al. 2010) proposed an epidemiologically motivated Individual-Based Model (IBM) of malaria transmission. It simulates infection at an individual-level based on
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14170

