The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Target-Aware Tracking with Long-Term Context Attention
1,2 *

Canlong Zhang

Kaijie He1
, Sheng Xie1 , Zhixin Li1,2 , Zhiwen Wang3

1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Guangxi Normal University, China
2
Guangxi Key Lab of Multi-source Information Mining and Security, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Guangxi University of Science and Technology, China
hekaijie123@outlook.com, clzhang@gxnu.edu.cn
Abstract

TATrack-L
(Ours)

85.0

TrackingNet

Most deep trackers still follow the guidance of the siamese
paradigms and use a template that contains only the target
without any contextual information, which makes it difficult for the tracker to cope with large appearance changes,
rapid target movement, and attraction from similar objects.
To alleviate the above problem, we propose a long-term context attention (LCA) module that can perform extensive information fusion on the target and its context from longterm frames, and calculate the target correlation while enhancing target features. The complete contextual information contains the location of the target as well as the state
around the target. LCA uses the target state from the previous frame to exclude the interference of similar objects
and complex backgrounds, thus accurately locating the target
and enabling the tracker to obtain higher robustness and regression accuracy. By embedding the LCA module in Transformer, we build a powerful online tracker with a targetaware backbone, termed as TATrack. In addition, we propose a dynamic online update algorithm based on the classification confidence of historical information without additional calculation burden. Our tracker achieves state-ofthe-art performance on multiple benchmarks, with 71.1%
AUC, 89.3% NP, and 73.0% AO on LaSOT, TrackingNet,
and GOT-10k. The code and trained models are available on
https://github.com/hekaijie123/TATrack.

TATrack-B
(Ours)
83.5

MixFormer
82.6
82.5
82.0
81.5
81.4
81.2

SwinTrack-B

STARKST101
TransT

64.9

ToMP-101
ToMP-50

67.1 67.6 67.9 68.5

69.4 69.6

71.1

LaSOT

Figure 1: Comparison with other advanced trackers on
TrackingNet and LaSOT benchmarks.

and have some drawback as follows: (1) Due to insufficient
appearance information, using target template without any
background to correlate with the search region will be diffcult to distinguish the real target from the background attractors similar to the target, and also has difficulty in coping with the severe appearance changes; (2) In tracking task,
the correlation operation is performed after the backbone
network has completely extracted the image features, but
the backbone network is originally designed for classification task, so the applicability of the feature extraction to the
tracking task is limited to a certain extent. (3) The tracker
uses only the optimal model obtained by offline training to
predict the target, and the model only knows the target appearance of the initial frame without online updated information. Such a tracker is static and it does not have any perception of the changes that occur in the target state throughout the video sequence. The static tracker lacks perception
of the continuous changes in the target and loses robustness
in long time tracking. Above drawbacks are not very prominent in simple tracking scenarios, but they will be rapidly
enlarged in complex tracking scenarios, so it is necessary
to overcome them. Inspired by above three problems, we
propose a long-term context attention mechanism that can
simultaneously accept a target template, a historical frame
and a current search frame as input in an adaptive weighted
fusion way. We embed an improved location encoder in the

Introduction
Visual target tracking is a fundamental computer vision task.
Given an initial position of any target, the tracker is required
to evaluate the target state in subsequent each frame of a
video. Tracking task faces significant challenges such as the
variable appearance, fast movement, attraction from similar
objects, etc. Siamese structure based trackers have achieved
considerable success, which realizes tracking by using twin
networks to represent the target and search image and calculating their similarity. Although the existing trackers have
become more and more complex, most of them still originate
from Siamese paradigms.
After carefully investigating the existing Siamese trackers, we found that they have more or less inherited certain simple operation from SiamFC (Bertinetto et al. 2016),
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

773

