The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Semantic Degradation-Aware Guidance for Recognition-Driven
Unsupervised Low-Light Image Enhancement
Naishan Zheng* , Jie Huang* , Man Zhou† , Zizheng Yang, Qi Zhu, Feng Zhao†
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
{nszheng, hj0117, manman, yzz6000, zqcrafts}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Low-light images suffer severe degradation of low lightness
and noise corruption, causing unsatisfactory visual quality
and visual recognition performance. To solve this problem
while meeting the unavailability of paired datasets in widerange scenarios, unsupervised low-light image enhancement
(ULLIE) techniques have been developed. However, these
methods are primarily guided to alleviate the degradation
effect on visual quality rather than semantic levels, hence
limiting their performance in visual recognition tasks. To
this end, we propose to learn a Semantic DegradationAware Guidance (SDAG) that perceives the low-light degradation effect on semantic levels in a self-supervised manner, which is further utilized to guide the ULLIE methods. The proposed SDAG utilizes the low-light degradation
factors as augmented signals to degrade the low-light images, and then capture their degradation effect on semantic levels. Specifically, our SDAG employs the subsequent
pre-trained recognition model extractor to extract semantic
representations, and then learns to self-reconstruct the enhanced low-light image and its augmented degraded images.
By constraining the relative reconstruction effect between
the original enhanced image and the augmented formats, our
SDAG learns to be aware of the degradation effect on semantic levels in a relative comparison manner. Moreover,
our SDAG is general and can be plugged into the training
paradigm of the existing ULLIE methods. Extensive experiments demonstrate its effectiveness for improving the ULLIE
approaches on the downstream recognition tasks while maintaining a competitive visual quality. Code will be available at
https://github.com/zheng980629/SDAG.

(a) Low-Light Image
(6.36/32.45%)

(b) RRDNet
(6.08/46.92%)

(c) Zero-DCE
(5.79/41.72%)

(d) Normal-Light Image
(5.22/79.70%)

(e) RRDNet-SDAG
(5.83/53.59%)

(f) Zero-DCE-SDAG
(5.56/51.43%)

Figure 1: The illustration of visual quality and visual recognition performance on the testing set of the simulated lowlight image CUB (Wah et al. 2011) dataset. The numbers in
the parentheses represent the average NIQE values and top1 accuracy evaluated on VGG16 classifier. As can be seen,
the ULLIE approaches (Zero-DCE and RRDNet) improve
the visual quality of low-light images but are insufficient for
visual recognition. In contrast, by integrating our SDAG into
these ULLIE methods, the visual recognition performance is
significantly improved while retaining the visual quality.

enhancement methods have been developed (Zhang, Zhang,
and Guo 2019; Wang et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2022). However,
most of them are designed in a supervised manner, limiting
their applications due to the lack of paired datasets in widerange scenarios.
In recent years, we have witnessed the progress of unsupervised low-light image enhancement (ULLIE) algorithms (Guo et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021) that
do not rely on paired datasets. Specifically, these approaches
enhance the quality of low-light images with lightness enhancement and noise removal, thus alleviating the degradation effect of the low-light condition. However, they are primarily devised to improve human visual perception, which
could be inadequate for downstream visual recognition tasks
(see Fig. 1).
To explain this phenomenon, it has been proved that the
degradation effect on visual recognition is often on semantic levels (Wang et al. 2020), while previous ULLIE methods cannot guarantee to reduce this effect, leading to uncovered and incomplete feature representation for recognition tasks (see Fig. 2). Previous works based on supervised
approaches solve this problem by guiding the enhancement

Introduction
Shooting images in a low-light environment often suffer
low visibility due to low lightness and noise corruption.
Degraded by these factors, the low-light images not only
experience the problem of poor human visual perception,
but also pose challenges for downstream visual recognition
tasks, such as object detection (Ren et al. 2015), face recognition (Deng et al. 2019), and image segmentation (Chen
et al. 2017). To address this issue, various low-light image
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors: F. Zhao and M. Zhou.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3678

