The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Reject Decoding via Language-Vision Models for Text-to-Image Synthesis
Fuxiang Wu1,2 , Liu Liu3 , Fusheng Hao1,2 , Fengxiang He4 , Lei Wang1, 2 , Jun Cheng∗1,2
1

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Robotics and Intelligent System,
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, CAS, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
3
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
4
JD Explore Academy, JD.com Inc., Beijing, China
{fx.wu1, fs.hao, lei.wang1,jun.cheng}@siat.ac.cn, liu.liu1@sydney.edu.au, fengxiang.f.he@gmail.com.

Abstract
Transformer-based text-to-image synthesis generates images
from abstractive textual conditions and achieves prompt results. Since transformer-based models predict visual tokens
step by step in testing, where the early error is hard to
be corrected and would be propagated. To alleviate this issue, the common practice is drawing multi-paths from the
transformer-based models and re-ranking the multi-images
decoded from multi-paths to find the best one and filter out
others. Therefore, the computing procedure of excluding images may be inefficient. To improve the effectiveness and efficiency of decoding, we exploit a reject decoding algorithm
with tiny multi-modal models to enlarge the searching space
and exclude the useless paths as early as possible. Specifically, we build tiny multi-modal models to evaluate the similarities between the partial paths and the caption at multi
scales. Then, we propose a reject decoding algorithm to exclude some lowest quality partial paths at the inner steps.
Thus, under the same computing load as the original decoding, we could search across more multi-paths to improve
the decoding efficiency and synthesizing quality. The experiments conducted on the MS-COCO dataset and large-scale
datasets show that the proposed reject decoding algorithm can
exclude the useless paths and enlarge the searching paths to
improve the synthesizing quality by consuming less time.

GroundTruth

Figure 1: The reject decoding algorithm can explore a larger
size of paths under a similar computing load and generate
better results. The green box indicates the five paths exploited in traditional decoding, and “O5” is the traditional
result. For the rejecting decoding algorithm, there are ten
paths for search and the large green circles are the active
routines. “N10” is our final result, which is better than “O5”
and outside the green box.

In text-to-image synthesis, the transformer-based methods
exploit Vector Quantized Variational AutoEncoders (VQVAE) (van den Oord, Vinyals, and Kavukcuoglu 2017) to
transform the given image into a low-dimensional image
tokens. Then, the methods model the joint distribution between the image tokens and the language tokens to predict
the image tokens in testing. In testing, the transformer-based
methods sample visual tokens from the joint distribution step
by step, which would bring much noise and suffer from error propagation. The current common practice is reranking
multi-samples drawn from the transformer with a pre-trained
multi-modal model. For example, given a caption, DALLE (Ramesh et al. 2021) generates 512 images and re-ranks
them to search for the best image, and Parti (Yu et al. 2022a)
samples 16 images for searching. Besides, many sophisticated transformer-based methods rely on large-scale models.
The parameters in DALL-E are up to 12 billion parameters,
and CogView consists of 4 billion parameters. Thus, slow
and inefficient inference may be the main bottleneck of the

Introduction
Text-to-image synthesis is a multimodal task, in which vivid
images can be generated from the given textual descriptions (Reed et al. 2016). Many models make use of the Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) to generate the images (Reed et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2018;
Zhu et al. 2019; Tao et al. 2022) and have achieved highly
promising results. However, GANs are known to have difficulty in achieving stable convergence and suffer from the
problem of mode collapse in training. Recently, many researchers have employed transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017)
to achieve significant progress in generating high-quality
images (Ding et al. 2021; Ramesh et al. 2021; Wu et al.
2022b; Yu et al. 2022a).
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
J. Cheng is the corresponding author.

2785

