The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Mixed-Variable Black-Box Optimisation Using Value Proposal Trees
Yan Zuo1 * , Vu Nguyen1 , Amir Dezfouli2 , David Alexander2 , Benjamin Ward Muir2 , Iadine Chadès2
1

Amazon
CSIRO
{ yanzuo@amazon.com, vutngn@amazon.com,
amir.dezfouli@data61.csiro.au, david.alexander@data61.csiro.au, ben.muir@csiro.au, iadine.chades@csiro.au }
2

Abstract

Algorithms

Trust
region

Categories h
selection

Continuous x | h
across categories

Many real-world optimisation problems are defined over both
categorical and continuous variables, yet efficient optimisation
methods such as Bayesian Optimisation (BO) are ill-equipped
to handle such mixed-variable search spaces. The optimisation
breadth introduced by categorical variables in the mixed-input
setting has seen recent approaches operating on local trust
regions, but these methods can be greedy in suboptimal regions
of the search space. In this paper, we adopt a holistic view
and aim to consolidate optimisation of the categorical and
continuous sub-spaces under a single acquisition metric. We
develop a tree-based method which retains a global view of the
optimisation spaces by identifying regions in the search space
with high potential candidates which we call value proposals.
Our method uses these proposals to make selections on both
the categorical and continuous components of the input. We
show that this approach significantly outperforms existing
mixed-variable optimisation approaches across several mixedvariable black-box optimisation tasks.

EXP3BO (Gopakumar et al. 2018)
BanditBO (Nguyen et al. 2020a)
CoCaBO (Ru et al. 2020)
CASM... (Wan et al. 2021)
VPT (Ours)

✓global
✓global
✓global
✗local
✓global

✗independent
✗independent
✗independent
✓jointly
✓jointly

✗non-shared
✗non-shared
✓shared
✓shared
✓shared

Table 1: Comparison with the mixed categorical-continuous
BO approaches in terms of properties and relative trade-offs.

Introduction
Bayesian optimisation (BO) has established itself as an efficient method for optimising black-box functions that are
costly to evaluate (Jones, Schonlau, and Welch 1998; Shahriari et al. 2015; Sazanovich et al. 2021; Cowen-Rivers et al.
2022). Typical BO methods model the black-box function of
interest using a surrogate statistical model (usually a Gaussian Process (GP) (Dudley 2010)), seeking out the next point
to evaluate by optimising a more tractable (typically differentiable) function called an acquisition function. The role
of the acquisition function is to balance two conflicting requirements: exploitation of the current knowledge about the
objective function and exploration to gain more knowledge
about the objective function. BO has been applied effectively to tasks that range from experimental design (Griffiths
and Hernández-Lobato 2017; Li et al. 2018; Shields et al.
2021; Deane et al. 2022) to hyperparameter search (Snoek,
Larochelle, and Adams 2012; Gardner et al. 2014; Nguyen
et al. 2020b) in machine learning models. Notably, it is often
observed that BO is particularly well-suited for applications
where the number of allowable evaluations on the objective
function is limited (Bull 2011).
*Work done while at CSIRO
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11506

However, many real world optimisation problems involve
a mixture of continuous and categorical variables in the input
space. For example, in automated machine learning applications (Hutter, Kotthoff, and Vanschoren 2019; Parker-Holder
et al. 2022) where the aim is to automatically select a machine learning model along with its corresponding optimal
hyperparameters, each model can be seen as a categorical
choice while the hyperparameters of the model can be viewed
as category-specific continuous variables. Another example
is in the chemical reaction space, where often the function
we are interested in optimising is represented by both categorical (compositional) variables and continuous (process)
variables (Zhou, Li, and Zare 2017). These scenarios pose
challenges for current BO models (particularly those using
GPs as their underlying surrogate models) which lack the
ability to deal effectively with such problems containing
multi-layered and complicated search spaces.
The mixed-input setting presents several difficulties; the
most apparent of which is that the assumption the acquisition
function is differentiable over the input space no longer holds.
This has been addressed recently in various ways ranging
from one-hot encoding of the categorical components (Snoek,
Larochelle, and Adams 2012; Golovin et al. 2017), hierarchical models (Hutter, Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2011; Bergstra
et al. 2011) and most recently, hybrid approaches utilising
Multi-Armed Bandits (MABs) (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002) and BO for handling the respective categorical and
continuous subspaces. More importantly, the complexity of
the optimisation space in mixed-input functions increases dramatically due to the introduction of categorical variables (Ru
et al. 2020; Wan et al. 2021). In the BO setting, this is further
compounded by a limited budget for evaluating the objective.
As such, recent approaches (Eriksson et al. 2019; Wan et al.
2021) have employed local trust regions to reduce the size
of the search space for making optimisation more tractable.

