The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Zero-Shot Linear Combinations of
Grounded Social Interactions with Linear Social MDPs
Ravi Tejwani1 * , Yen-Ling Kuo1∗ , Tianmin Shu2 , Bennett Stankovits1 , Dan Gutfreund3
Joshua B. Tenenbaum2 , Boris Katz1 , Andrei Barbu1
1

CSAIL & CBMM, MIT
2
BCS & CBMM, MIT
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{tejwanir,ylkuo,tshu,bstankov,jbt,boris,abarbu}@mit.edu, dgutfre@us.ibm.com
Abstract

model for social interactions and demonstrate it on a simulated robot that both has a mathematical definition for what
social interactions are, and, for the first time, defines what
linear combinations of social interactions are. This gives rise
to complex behaviors enabling the robot to have relationships
that depend on mutual goals, for example, helping an agent
achieve some goals, while being willing to exchange favors
to achieve another set of goals, while preventing the other
agent from doing something troublesome.
We make the following contributions, 1. Linear Social
MDPs, see Fig. 1, which allow robots to zero-shot carry out
combinations of social interactions that respond on the fly
as the goals of other agents change, 2. a demonstration of
Linear Social MDPs in a grid world, see Fig. 2 for an example,
and 3. validation of the resulting behaviors that humans can
recognize them as social.

Humans and animals engage in rich social interactions. It is
often theorized that a relatively small number of basic social interactions give rise to the full range of behavior observed. But
no computational theory explaining how social interactions
combine together has been proposed before. We do so here.
We take a model, the Social MDP, which is able to express a
range of social interactions, and extend it to represent linear
combinations of social interactions. Practically for robotics
applications, such models are now able to not just express that
an agent should help another agent, but to express goal-centric
social interactions. Perhaps an agent is helping someone get
dressed, but preventing them from falling, and is happy to
exchange stories in the meantime. How an agent responds
socially, should depend on what it thinks the other agent is
doing at that point in time. To encode this notion, we take
linear combinations of social interactions as defined in Social
MDPs, and compute the weights on those combinations on the
fly depending on the estimated goals of other agents. This new
model, the Linear Social MDP, enables zero-shot reasoning
about complex social interactions, provides a mathematical
basis for the long-standing intuition that social interactions
should compose, and leads to interesting new behaviors that
we validate using human observers. Complex social interactions are part of the future of intelligent agents, and having
principled mathematical models built on a foundation like
MDPs will make it possible to bring social interactions to
every robotic application.

Related Work
Most research on social robotics is carried out without a
model of what social interactions are (Sheridan 2020). We
propose a model that gives rise to complex social behaviors.
In general, we believe that mathematical models for social
interactions that are understandable from the perspective of
robotics and compose with common robotic frameworks like
MDPs, will both shed light on what social interactions are,
and bring social robotics into the mainstream.
Several types of models have been explored to enable
agents to effectively interact with one another. Inspired by
cognitive science, models based on theory of minds (Baker
and Tenenbaum 2014; Kleiman-Weiner et al. 2016; Rabinowitz et al. 2018) and Bayesian inverse planning (Baker,
Saxe, and Tenenbaum 2009; Ullman et al. 2009) are used for
goal inference. In reinforcement learning, methods like learning reward functions of other agents (Hadfield-Menell et al.
2016) and learning a latent representation of other agents’
strategies (Xie et al. 2020) are used to cooperate with another
agent. These methods mainly consider interactions that are
cooperation or conflict.
Social MDPs (Tejwani et al. 2021, 2022) similarly estimate another agent’s reward function but this estimation is
performed recursively by solving MDPs at different levels.
This recursive estimate enables a robot to perform social
interactions by considering the other agent’s social behav-

Introduction
Machines are only able to understand and reproduce a fairly
small and stilted part of the rich social behaviors that we
observe humans and animals engage in. This is in part because much of the work on social robotics is based on adhoc
approaches rather than mathematical models of social interactions, and in part because of an assumption that a relatively
small number of basis social interactions will eventually give
rise to the rich behavior we observe in the animal kingdom.
Exactly what combining social interactions together means
mathematically is left unsaid in such cases. We propose a
* Equal contribution
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

94

