The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Domain-Transfer Meta Task Design Paradigm for Few-Shot Slot Tagging
Fengyi Yang1,2,3 , Xi Zhou1,2,3 * , Yating Yang1,2,3 , Bo Ma1,2,3 , Rui Dong1,2,3 , Abibulla Atawulla1,2,3
1

Xinjiang Technical Institute of Physics & Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Urumqi 830011, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Xinjiang Laboratory of Minority Speech and Language Information Processing, Urumqi 830011, China
yangfengyi17@mails.ucas.edu.cn, {zhouxi, yangyt, mabo, dongrui}@ms.xjb.ac.cn, aibibulaatawula19@mails.ucas.ac.cn

Abstract

Source Domains

Few-shot slot tagging is an important task in dialogue systems and attracts much attention of researchers. Most previous few-shot slot tagging methods utilize meta-learning procedure for training and strive to construct a large number of
different meta tasks to simulate the testing situation of insufficient data. However, there is a widespread phenomenon of
overlap slot between two domains in slot tagging. Traditional
meta tasks ignore this special phenomenon and cannot simulate such realistic few-shot slot tagging scenarios. It violates
the basic principle of meta-learning which the meta task is
consistent with the real testing task, leading to historical information forgetting problem. In this paper, we introduce a
novel domain-transfer meta task design paradigm to tackle
this problem. We distribute a basic domain to each target domain based on the coincidence degree of slot labels between
these two domains. Unlike classic meta tasks which only rely
on small samples of target domain, our meta tasks aim to correctly infer the class of target domain query samples based
on both abundant data in basic domain and scarce data in target domain. To accomplish our meta task, we propose a Task
Adaptation Network to effectively transfer the historical information from the basic domain to the target domain. We
carry out sufficient experiments on the benchmark slot tagging dataset SNIPS and the name entity recognition dataset
NER. Results demonstrate that our proposed model outperforms previous methods and achieves the state-of-the-art performance.

Target Domain

Domain A
Domain D

Domain B

Domain C

Slot Label
Overlap Slot

Figure 1: An illustration of slot label distribution in the realistic slot tagging task. There is a widespread phenomenon of
overlap slot between two domains. This phenomenon exists
not only between the two source domains, but also between
the source domain and the target domain.

overfitting problems. Therefore, a robust model is required
in this data scarcity scenario, which can effectively learn
from limited samples. Inspired by human ability to learn
new things quickly, researchers proposed few-shot learning
(FSL) algorithms (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017; Sung
et al. 2018) to overcome the problem of lacking training
samples. Generally, few-shot learning methods utilize metalearning procedure for training and construct a series of meta
tasks which are identical to testing tasks. A meta task is constructed by sampling a small training set (support set) and
test set (query set) from rich data domains (source domains).
The objective of each meta task is to correctly classify query
set samples based on only a small amount of data. These
meta tasks are selected from different source domains, resulting in strong generalization ability of the meta-learning
model. However, the design of traditional meta tasks is not
completely suitable for few-shot slot tagging tasks. In slot
tagging, it is common for two domains to contain overlap
labels, such as time and number of people can be universal
for airline ticket booking and restaurant booking. Traditional
meta-learning models aim to minimize the loss on multiple
different meta tasks and they don’t focus on the specific label
in each meta task. In other words, these overlap labels in different domains are regarded as different labels in traditional
meta task design strategy. It violates the basic principle of

Introduction
Slot tagging, also called slot filling, is a crucial task in
human-machine dialogue systems. The purpose of slot tagging is to identify pre-defined semantic slots from utterances
and then the extracted slots are involved in downstream tasks
such as dialogue state tracking. Benefiting from the rapid
development of deep learning, slot tagging has made great
progress in recent years. Researchers have proposed a series
of effective algorithms, which usually require a large amount
of annotated data.
In reality, it is not feasible to obtain a large amount of annotated conversation data in brand-new dialogue systems. In
this situation, the data-driven methods may lead to serious
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13887

