The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

LANCER : A Lifetime-Aware News Recommender System
Hong-Kyun Bae1 , Jeewon Ahn1 , Dongwon Lee2 , Sang-Wook Kim* 1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Hanyang University, South Korea
College of Information Sciences and Technology, The Pennsylvania State University, USA
{hongkyun, dkswldnjs, wook}@hanyang.ac.kr, dongwon@psu.edu

Abstract

which has an overlapping lifetime with the news–i.e.,
limited competition.
Further, we claim that existing recommendation methods (Hu et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020; Shi et al. 2021; Tian
et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2019c; An et al. 2019; Wu et al.
2019b; Mao, Zeng, and Wong 2021) do not consider this
notion of lifetime of news. In this paper, therefore, by considering the characteristics of lifetime in a news domain, we
propose a novel approach to news recommendation, named
as Lifetime-Aware News reCommEndeR system (LANCER),
with three key ideas below.
Idea 1: Consideration of news in competition. Based on
the lifetime of news, we determine that news clicked by a
user (i.e., positive news) is more preferred than other nonclicked news (i.e., negative news) with “overlapping” lifetimes (i.e., limited competitions).
Idea 2: Confidence-based negative sampling among competing news. Among a user’s non-clicked news with overlapping lifetimes to positive news, we find truly negative
news by estimating the confidence based on their popularity. For instance, we assume that when less-popular news is
not clicked, it is more likely to be truly negative since a user
probably did not like it.
Idea 3: Consideration of remaining lifetime of news. To
curb recommending news whose lifetime has ended or is
near death, we adjust the predicted preference scores for
news by considering the amount of their remaining lifetime.
Via this adjustment, we recommend news with both highlypredicted preferences and sufficiently-remaining lifetimes
(i.e., preferred and relatively young news).
As the notion of news lifetime is orthogonal to recommendation kernels, LANCER can be independently applied to existing news recommendation models (e.g., NRMS (Wu et al.
2019c), LSTUR (An et al. 2019), NAML (Wu et al. 2019b),
and CNE-SUE (Mao, Zeng, and Wong 2021)). In the Evaluation section, we successfully demonstrate the value of
LANCER by showing that several state-of-the-art news recommendation algorithms get significantly benefited by incorporating LANCER. Our main contributions are as follows:
• Observation: We formulate the notion of lifetime in
news recommendation by identifying the period during
which the majority of clicks occur for news, and quan-

From the observation that users reading news tend to not click
outdated news, we propose the notion of ‘lifetime’ of news,
with two hypotheses: (i) news has a shorter lifetime, compared to other types of items such as movies or e-commerce
products; (ii) news only competes with other news whose lifetimes have not ended, and which has an overlapping lifetime (i.e., limited competitions). By further developing the
characteristics of the lifetime of news, then we present a
novel approach for news recommendation, namely, LifetimeAware News reCommEndeR System (LANCER) that carefully exploits the lifetime of news during training and recommendation. Using real-world news datasets (e.g., Adressa
and MIND), we successfully demonstrate that state-of-the-art
news recommendation models can get significantly benefited
by integrating the notion of lifetime and LANCER, by up to
about 40% increases in recommendation accuracy.

Introduction
In this work, we start our investigation based on recent observation such that unlike popular domains of entertainment
(e.g., Netflix) and e-commerce (e.g., Amazon), users in news
domain rarely click outdated news (Wang et al. 2018; Wu
et al. 2020). For instance, both (Wang et al. 2018) and (Wu
et al. 2020) reported that about 85% of all news in the MIND
dataset (Wu et al. 2020) had been last clicked within 48
hours from their publish times. Although there could be exceptions to this access pattern in news domain (e.g., some
Christmas news is seasonally popular for many years), we
posit that exploiting this peculiar access pattern in news
domain, in addition to collaborative filtering and contentbased modeling, could improve the accuracy of news recommendation significantly.
We first start with two hypotheses as follows:
• H1 : News has a lifetime, the duration from the birth
(i.e., initial publish time) to the death (i.e., last clicked
time), which is relatively short (i.e., hours, not weeks or
months).
• H2 : For getting clicked from a user, news only competes
with other live news, whose lifetime has not ended, and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4141

