The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Estimating Average Causal Effects from Patient Trajectories
Dennis Frauen1, 2 , Tobias Hatt3 , Valentyn Melnychuk1, 2 , Stefan Feuerriegel1, 2
1
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
3
ETH Zurich
frauen@lmu.de, thatt@ethz.ch, melnychuk@lmu.de, feuerriegel@lmu.de
2

Abstract

practice, or even unethical (e. g., medical professionals cannot withhold effective treatment to patients in need) (Robins,
Hernán, and Brumback 2000). Therefore, medical practice is
increasingly relying on observational data to study causal relationships between treatments and patient outcomes. Nowadays, electronic health records are readily available, capturing patient trajectories with high granularity, and thus providing rich observational data in medical practice (Allam
et al. 2021).
In this paper, we aim at estimating causal effects from
observational data in form of patient trajectories. Patient trajectories encode medical histories in a time-resolved manner and are thus of longitudinal form. However, estimating
causal effects from observational data is subject to challenges (Robins and Hernán 2009). The reason is that the
underlying treatment assignment mechanism is usually confounded with the patient outcomes. Another reason is that
confounders may vary over time, which introduces additional dependencies and treatment-confounder feedback.
While there are works on estimating individualized causal
effects (Lim, Alaa, and van der Schaar 2018; Bica et al.
2020; Melnychuk, Frauen, and Feuerriegel 2022a), we are
interested in average causal effects (ACEs). As such, ACEs
give the expected difference in health outcomes when applying different treatment interventions at the population level.
ACEs are important in many applications ranging from marketing to epidemiology, where policies are always based
on (sub)population effects (Varian 2016; Naimi, Cole, and
Kennedy 2017). A prominent example is public health: here,
a government might be interested in the different average effects of a stay-home order on COVID-19 spread for vaccinated vs. non-vaccinated people.
Proposed method: We propose an end-to-end deep learning model to estimate time-varying ACEs, called DeepACE.
DeepACE combines a recurrent neural network and feedforward neural networks to learn conditional expectations
of factual and counterfactual outcomes under complex nonlinear dependencies, based on which we then estimate timevarying ACEs. In DeepACE, we address time-varying confounding by leveraging the G-formula, which expresses the
ACE as a sequence of nested conditional expectations based
on observational data as. Existing methods are limited in that
these learn the nested conditional expectations separately by
performing an iterative procedure (van der Laan and Rose

In medical practice, treatments are selected based on the expected causal effects on patient outcomes. Here, the gold
standard for estimating causal effects are randomized controlled trials; however, such trials are costly and sometimes
even unethical. Instead, medical practice is increasingly interested in estimating causal effects among patient (sub)groups
from electronic health records, that is, observational data.
In this paper, we aim at estimating the average causal effect (ACE) from observational data (patient trajectories) that
are collected over time. For this, we propose DeepACE: an
end-to-end deep learning model. DeepACE leverages the iterative G-computation formula to adjust for the bias induced
by time-varying confounders. Moreover, we develop a novel
sequential targeting procedure which ensures that DeepACE
has favorable theoretical properties, i. e., is doubly robust and
asymptotically efficient. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first work that proposes an end-to-end deep learning
model tailored for estimating time-varying ACEs. We compare DeepACE in an extensive number of experiments, confirming that it achieves state-of-the-art performance. We further provide a case study for patients suffering from low back
pain to demonstrate that DeepACE generates important and
meaningful findings for clinical practice. Our work enables
practitioners to develop effective treatment recommendations
based on population effects.

Introduction
Causal effects of treatments on patient outcomes are hugely
important for decision-making in medical practice (Yazdani
and Boerwinkle 2015; Melnychuk, Frauen, and Feuerriegel
2022b). These estimates inform medical practitioners in the
expected effectiveness of treatments and thus guide treatment selection. Notwithstanding, information on causal effects is also relevant for other decision-making of other domains such as public health (Glass et al. 2013) and marketing (Varian 2016).
Causal effects can be estimated from either randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) or observational studies (Robins,
Hernán, and Brumback 2000; Frauen and Feuerriegel 2022).
Even though RCTs present the gold standard for estimating causal effects, they are often highly costly, unfeasible in
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7586

