The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Safe Numeric Action Models
Argaman Mordoch1 , Brendan Juba2 , Roni Stern1
1

Ben Gurion University in Be’er Sheva, Israel
2
Washington University in St. Louis, USA
mordocha@post.bgu.ac.il, bjuba@wustl.edu, roni.stern@gmail.com

Abstract
Powerful domain-independent planners have been developed
to solve various types of planning problems. These planners
often require a model of the acting agent’s actions, given in
some planning domain description language. Yet obtaining
such an action model is a notoriously hard task. This task is
even more challenging in mission-critical domains, where a
trial-and-error approach to learning how to act is not an option.
In such domains, the action model used to generate plans
must be safe, in the sense that plans generated with it must be
applicable and achieve their goals. Learning safe action models
for planning has been recently explored for domains in which
states are sufficiently described with Boolean variables. In this
work, we go beyond this limitation and propose the Numeric
Safe Action Model Learning (N-SAM) algorithm. N-SAM runs
in time that is polynomial in the number of observations and,
under certain conditions, is guaranteed to return safe action
models. We analyze its worst-case sample complexity, which
may be intractable for some domains. Empirically, however,
N-SAM can quickly learn a safe action model that can solve
most problems in the domain.

Introduction
Planning is the fundamental task of choosing which actions
to perform to achieve the desired outcome. An automated
domain-independent planner refers to an Artificial Intelligence (AI) capable of solving a wide range of planning
problems (Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2016). Developing
a domain-independent planner is a long-term goal of AI research. Powerful domain-independent planners have been
developed for various types of planning problems. These planners often require a model of the acting agent’s actions, given
in some planning domain description language. Many planning languages have been proposed, such as STRIPS (Fikes
and Nilsson 1971), the Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL) (Aeronautiques et al. 1998), PDDL 2.1 (Fox
and Long 2003), and RDDL (Sanner 2010). Powerful corresponding planners have been developed, such as FastForward (Hoffmann 2001) and FastDownward (Helmert 2006)
for problems given in PDDL and COLIN (Coles et al. 2009),
TLP-GP (Maris and Régnier 2008), and DiNo (Piotrowski
et al. 2016) for PDDL2.1 problems.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12079

Yet, defining an agent’s action model in these planning
languages for real-world problems is a notoriously hard task.
This modeling challenge has been acknowledged in the literature, and algorithms for learning agent action models from
observations have been proposed (Cresswell and Gregory
2011; Aineto, Celorrio, and Onaindia 2019; Yang, Wu, and
Jiang 2007; Juba, Le, and Stern 2021). Since the learned
model may differ from the domain’s actual action model, using it to plan raises two challenges: safety and completeness.
The safety risk is that the learned model may generate a plan
that cannot be applied in the domain or may not reach a state
that satisfies the problem goals. The completeness risk is that
the learned model may be too restrictive to generate plans
for solving solvable problems. This work focuses on safety,
which is crucial in mission-critical domains where a trial-anderror approach for learning how to act or online replanning
are not options. In such domains, the action model used
to generate plans must be safe, i.e., it generates plans that
are applicable and achieve their goals. Learning safe action
models for planning has been recently explored by the Safe
Action Model Learning (SAM) family of algorithms (Stern
and Juba 2017; Juba, Le, and Stern 2021; Juba and Stern
2022). These algorithms are inapplicable for numeric planning, where states include continuous state variables. The
same safety considerations have motivated work in offline
RL (Kidambi et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2020; Levine et al. 2020).
Yet planning models can be reused for various goals, in contrast to standard RL that trains to a specific reward function.
We explore the problem of learning a safe action model for
numeric planning. Specifically, we focus on problems defined
in PDDL2.1 (Fox and Long 2003), a popular language for
describing deterministic, fully observable numeric planning
problems. We prove that learning a safe action model is impossible without making assumptions about the preconditions
and effects of the agent’s actions. Then, we identify a reasonable set of assumptions in which learning a safe action model
is possible. For domains that satisfy these assumptions, we
introduce the Numeric Safe Action Model (N-SAM) learning
algorithm, which runs in time that is polynomial in the number of observations and is guaranteed to return safe action
models. Even with our assumptions, the worst-case sample
complexity of N-SAM is intractable. However, we show empirically that with fewer than 60 trajectories, N-SAM can learn
action models that can solve most of the relevant problems

