The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Set-to-Sequence Ranking-Based Concept-Aware Learning Path Recommendation
Xianyu Chen1 , Jian Shen1 , Wei Xia2 , Jiarui Jin1 , Yakun Song1 , Weinan Zhang1∗ , Weiwen Liu2 ,
Menghui Zhu1 , Ruiming Tang2 , Kai Dong3 , Dingyin Xia3 , Yong Yu1 *
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Huawei Technologies Co Ltd
{xianyujun,r ocky,jinjiarui97,ereboas,wnzhang,zerozmi7}@sjtu.edu.cn, yuyong@apex.sjtu.edu.cn
{xiawei24,liuweiwen8,tangruiming,dongkai4,xiadingyin}@huawei.com
Abstract

Shao, Guo, and Pardos 2021; Bian et al. 2019; Dwivedi,
Kant, and Bharadwaj 2018). As the latter direction is more
restricted and complex (e.g., larger search space, less available feedback), it is more challenging and is also the main
focus of this paper. Previous studies (Piaget and Duckworth

With the development of the online education system, personalized education recommendation has played an essential
role. In this paper, we focus on developing path recommendation systems that aim to generate and recommend an entire
learning path to the given user in each session. Noticing that
existing approaches fail to consider the correlations of concepts in the path, we propose a novel framework named Setto-Sequence Ranking-Based Concept-Aware Learning Path
Recommendation (SRC), which formulates the recommendation task under a set-to-sequence paradigm. Specifically,
we first design a concept-aware encoder module that can capture the correlations among the input learning concepts. The
outputs are then fed into a decoder module that sequentially
generates a path through an attention mechanism that handles correlations between the learning and target concepts.
Our recommendation policy is optimized by policy gradient. In addition, we also introduce an auxiliary module based
on knowledge tracing to enhance the model’s stability by
evaluating students’ learning effects on learning concepts.
We conduct extensive experiments on two real-world public datasets and one industrial dataset, and the experimental
results demonstrate the superiority and effectiveness of SRC.
Code now is available at https://gitee.com/mindspore/models/
tree/master/research/recommend/SRC.

D

Score:5

Test

A

Score:80

Learning Path
B
C
85
80
90

A 10
A 85
A 90
A 95
B 15
B 45
B 80
B 85
C 0
C 10
C 40
C 90
D 5
D 15
D 30
D 80
Underlying level of knowledge

:Learning Concept

D
Test

:Target Concept
:Student
A
B
C
D

Mathematical Analysis
Probability Theory
Linear Algebra
Machine Learning

Figure 1: Illustration of the student learning process to improve a student’s mastery of concept D by learning the path
composed of three concepts A, B, and C. The student is
given a test before and after the path to knowing his mastery
of D. The bottom four tables show the student’s potential
mastery of all concepts at each step, which is not accessible
during the training process. We can only know the mastery
of the current learning concept. For example, after learning
B, we know his mastery of B is 80.

Introduction
Different from providing the same learning content for all
students in each classroom session in traditional learning,
adaptive learning aims to tailor different learning objectives
to meet the individual needs of different learners (Carbonell
1970). Existing recommendation methods of learning content can be summarized into two categories: (i) Step by step,
the following learning item is recommended for students in
real-time, and the interaction of each step (i.e., students’ answers) will be integrated into the recommendation for the
next step (Liu et al. 2019; Cai, Zhang, and Dai 2019; Huang
et al. 2019). (ii) Plan a certain length of the learning path
for students at one time. The latter is because users sometimes want to know the entire learning path at the beginning
(for example, universities need to organize courses for students) (Joseph, Abraham, and Mani 2022; Chen et al. 2022;

1970; Inhelder et al. 1976; Pinar et al. 1995) reveal that cognitive structure greatly influences adaptive learning, which
includes both the relationship between items (e.g., premise
relationship and synergy relationship) and the characteristics
of students’ dynamic development with learning. Most existing methods to solve learning path planning are either based
on a knowledge graph (or some relationship between concepts) to constrain path generation (Liu et al. 2019; Shi et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2022), or based on collaborative filtering
of features to search for paths (Joseph, Abraham, and Mani
2022; Chen et al. 2022; Nabizadeh, Jorge, and Leal 2019).
However, these models can not penetrate into the important
features of the cognitive structure perfectly, and the model is
relatively simple, resulting in the path generated either with
a low degree of individuation or with a poor learning effect.
From this perspective, we argue that how to effectively mine
the correlations among concepts and the important charac-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5027

