The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Scalable Spatial Memory for Scene Rendering and Navigation
Wen-Cheng Chen1 * , Chu-Song Chen2 , Wei-Chen Chiu3 , Min-Chun Hu4†
1

National Cheng Kung University
2
National Taiwan University
3
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
4
National Tsing Hua University
wenchengchen123@gmail.com, chusong@csie.ntu.edu.tw
walon@cs.nctu.edu.tw, anitahu@cs.nthu.edu.tw
Abstract
Neural scene representation and rendering methods have
shown promise in learning the implicit form of scene structure without supervision. However, the implicit representation learned in most existing methods is non-expandable and
cannot be inferred online for novel scenes, which makes the
learned representation difficult to be applied across different reinforcement learning (RL) tasks. In this work, we introduce Scene Memory Network (SMN) to achieve online
spatial memory construction and expansion for view rendering in novel scenes. SMN models the camera projection and
back-projection as spatially aware memory control processes,
where the memory values store the information of the partial
3D area, and the memory keys indicate the position of that
area. The memory controller can learn the geometry property from observations without the camera’s intrinsic parameters and depth supervision. We further apply the memory
constructed by SMN to exploration and navigation tasks. The
experimental results reveal the generalization ability of our
proposed SMN in large-scale scene synthesis and its potential to improve the performance of spatial RL tasks.

(a) Our proposed spatially
aware memory control.

(b) Camera projection and
back-projection.

Figure 1: Comparison between our proposed memory control process with camera projection and back-projection.

extended methods of GQN (Tobin, Zaremba, and Abbeel
2019; Chen, Hu, and Chen 2021) solve the generalization
problem but its scene representation is non-expandable, and
therefore can only be applied to the scenes of small rooms.
On the other hand, Neural Radiance Field (NeRF)-based
methods (Mildenhall et al. 2020; DeVries et al. 2021) store
the information of scenes in the weights of neural network,
which is hard to be taken as the input state in RL tasks. Furthermore, the scene representation of NeRF can be updated
only via offline fine-tuning for novel scenes, making realtime scene construction demanding to achieve.
In this work, we aim to apply implicit scene representation to spatial RL tasks in large scenes. The abilities of
online inference and memory expansion are important to
this goal. Some researches combine memory augmented network with neural scene representation to achieve these two
abilities but still have their own limitations. For example,
GTM-SM (Fraccaro et al. 2018) stores each 1D image feature to a separate memory block and does not fuse the spatial
information of different observations. This design makes it
difficult for RL models to recognize the surrounding scene
structure based on the memory. Incremental Scene Synthesis (ISS) (Planche et al. 2019) adopts the recurrent network
to fuse the spatial information of different observations to a
2D structured memory, but it requires additional depth information. To solve the above shortcomings, we introduce
Scene Memory Network (SMN) with a spatially aware memory controller. The concept of SMN is shown in Fig. 1a.
It constructs memory blocks that comprise memory values
representing features of partial 3D areas and memory keys

Introduction
Inferring structure from images and reconstructing scenes
for 3D inference are basic abilities of human visual perception. These abilities play important roles in 3D spatial
tasks such as environment exploration and navigation. In recent years, neural scene representation and rendering techniques (Eslami et al. 2018; Tobin, Zaremba, and Abbeel
2019; Sitzmann et al. 2019; Sitzmann, Zollhöfer, and Wetzstein 2019; Mildenhall et al. 2020; DeVries et al. 2021;
Chen, Hu, and Chen 2021) have shown promising results
in learning implicit forms of scene structure from observation without explicit supervision. However, for large-scale
scenes, current methods construct neural scene representations which are limited in ways that make them imperfect
replacements for explicit scene structure information. For
example, Generative Query Network (GQN) (Eslami et al.
2018) uses a CNN to extract 1D scene representation, but it
has limited generalization ability for complex scenes. Some
* corresponding author.
†

corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

369

