The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SegFormer: A Topic Segmentation Model with Controllable Range of Attention
Haitao Bai, Pinghui Wang* , Ruofei Zhang, Zhou Su
MOE Key Laboratory for Intelligent Networks and Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University
haitao.bai@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, phwang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, rfzhang@gmail.com, zhousu@ieee.org

Disease:biliary atresia

Abstract
Topic segmentation aims to reveal the latent structure of a
document and divide it into multiple parts. However, current neural solutions are limited in the context modeling of
sentences and feature representation of candidate boundaries.
This causes the model to suffer from inefficient sentence context encoding and noise information interference. In this paper, we design a new text segmentation model SegFormer
with unidirectional attention blocks to better model sentence
representations. To alleviate the problem of noise information interference, SegFormer uses a novel additional context
aggregator and a topic classification loss to guide the model
to aggregate the information within the appropriate range. In
addition, SegFormer applies an iterative prediction algorithm
to search for optimal boundaries progressively. We evaluate SegFormer’s generalization ability, multilingual ability,
and application ability on multiple challenging real-world
datasets. Experiments show that our model significantly improves the performance by 7.5% on the benchmark WIKISECTION compared to several strong baselines. The application of SegFormer to a real-world dataset to separate normal
and advertisement segments in product marketing essays also
achieves superior performance in the evaluation with other
cutting-edge models.

[P1]
[B1]
[P2]
[B2]
[P3]
[B3]
[P4]
[B4]
[P5]

[T1] Symptom:
Initially, the symptoms of biliary atresia are indistinguishable...
...
This is because in biliary atresia, the liver, although diseased...
[T2] Pathophysiology:
There are three main types of extra-hepatic biliary atresia:
...
Hence, these infants get accelerated cirrhosis and march to...
[T3] Genetics:
An association between biliary atresia and the ADD3 gene...
...
Thus these infants are protected intrauterine by their maternal...
[T2] Pathophysiology:
Some cases of biliary atresia may result from exposure to...
...
There are some indications that a metabolite of certain human...
[T5] Diagnosis:
Diagnosis is made by an assessment of symptoms...
...
Further testing may include radioactive scans of the liver...

Figure 1: An essay on Wikipedia with five topic segments.
Two of the five have the same topic “Pathophysiology”.

Introduction

must be a significant semantic difference between the context above and below this sentence. As illustrated in Figure 1, the semantic difference above and below the last sentence in P1 is significant, which helps the prediction of the
segment boundary between P1 and P2. Unsupervised models such as Bayesian models (Malmasi et al. 2017) and
graph-based models (Glavaš, Nanni, and Ponzetto 2016)
have been proposed to predict segment boundaries by measuring semantic coherence between sentences. Supervised
models (Koshorek et al. 2018; Xing et al. 2020; Lukasik
et al. 2020) aim to predict labeled segment boundaries
through training neural networks. These models adopt a similar hierarchical architecture and use Recurrent Neural Network (Schuster and Paliwal 1997) or Transformer (Vaswani
et al. 2017) as their basic framework.
There are two major challenges in the text segmentation
task: (1) First, the topic segmentation model needs to get
contextual sentence embeddings because we always need to
understand the meanings of a sentence with the context. On
the other hand, the topic segmentation model also needs to

Topic segmentation aims to reveal the semantic structure of
a document by dividing a document into multiple segments,
such that divided segments are topically coherent inside,
and the boundaries indicate changes in topic (Hearst 1994;
Moens and De Busser 2001). A topic segmenter should find
the correct boundaries within the essay according to topic
changes and divide it into multiple parts. Figure 1 shows
a real essay from Wikipedia including five parts: P1, P2,
P3, P4, and P5, of which the topics are from T1 to T5, respectively. Many downstream tasks can benefit from these
structured documents, including text summarization (Xiao
and Carenini 2019), dialogue analysis (Xu, Zhao, and Zhang
2021), and information retrieval (Shtekh et al. 2018).
Multiple supervised and unsupervised models have been
proposed for topic segmentation based on the following assumption: if a sentence is at the end of a topic segment, there
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12545

