The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Training-Time Attacks against k-Nearest Neighbors
Ara Vartanian1 , Will Rosenbaum2 , Scott Alfeld2
1

University of Wisconsin–Madison
2
Amherst College
aravart@cs.wisc.edu, {wrosenbaum, salfeld}@amherst.edu

retical understanding of training-time attacks against kNN.
The primary contributions are:

Abstract
Nearest neighbor-based methods are commonly used for classification tasks and as subroutines of other data-analysis
methods. An attacker with the capability of inserting their
own data points into the training set can manipulate the
inferred nearest neighbor structure. We distill this goal to
the task of performing a training-set data insertion attack
against k-Nearest Neighbor classification (kNN). We prove
that computing an optimal training-time (a.k.a. poisoning) attack against kNN classification is NP-Hard, even when k = 1
and the attacker can insert only a single data point. We provide an anytime algorithm to perform such an attack, and a
greedy algorithm for general k and attacker budget. We provide theoretical bounds and empirically demonstrate the effectiveness and practicality of our methods on synthetic and
real-world datasets. Empirically, we find that kNN is vulnerable in practice and that dimensionality reduction is an effective defense. We conclude with a discussion of open problems
illuminated by our analysis.

1

1. We prove that computing an optimal training-time attack
against k-Nearest Neighbor classification is NP-Hard.
2. We present a dynamic programming anytime algorithm
that, if run to completion, computes an optimal singlepoint attack against kNN. Using this procedure as a subroutine, we employ and provide bounds for a greedy approach to efficiently construct an effective attack of any
size against kNN.
3. We perform an empirical investigation on a method of defense against our attack. For example, reducing the number of dimensions via PCA in the MNIST dataset decreased the attacker’s average effectiveness by as much
as 26% while increasing prediction error by less than 1%.
In Section 2, after defining the learner and threat models
for attacking kNN, we translate the attacker’s task into a geometric problem. In Section 3, we prove that computing the
optimal attack is NP-Hard, even for an attacker who targets
one class with one additional data point. In Section 4, we
present a (worst-case exponential-time) algorithm for finding the optimal single-point attack against kNN that uses dynamic programming to find successively better attacks as it
proceeds, allowing it to be used as an anytime algorithm. We
then employ a greedy algorithm to construct a data-insertion
attack of any size against kNN. We show a bound for our
greedy algorithm which is dependent on k (but independent
of the attacker’s budget). We discuss the “plug-and-play” nature of our analysis, in that any future improvements to the
single-point attacks algorithm automatically yield a better
bound for our general attack. In Section 5, we empirically
demonstrate the effectiveness and practicality of our attack
on synthetic and real world data. We then turn our attention to defense, and empirically investigate defense strategies based on dimensionality reduction. We discuss related
work in Section 6 and conclude in Section 7 with a discussion of open problems.

Introduction

Using machine learning (ML) and automated data analysis methods in practice introduces security vulnerabilities.
An attacker can assert their limited influence over the input data to manipulate the output of the learning system.
Here, we consider training-time (a.k.a. poisoning) attacks
against nearest-neighbor based classification, where the attacker perturbs data prior to learning.
k-Nearest Neighbors (kNN) is a classical non-parametric
ML algorithm, where a data point label is chosen by selecting the plurality class of its k closest neighbors in the
training set. Outside of classification, many algorithms construct a nearest neighbor graph (connecting each data point
to its closest neighbors) as a subroutine. Examples include
ISOMAP (Tenenbaum, de Silva, and Langford (2000)), persistent homology (Zhu (2013); Zhu et al. (2016)), and various spectral clustering algorithms (Luxburg (2007)).
We study neighbor-based classification as the canonical process of constructing nearest-neighbor graphs. An attacker which can affect classifications can similarly alter the
nearest-neighbor graph. We lay the foundation for a theo-

2

Problem Setup

We focus on the role of an attacker, inserting training data
so as to manipulate what is learned. A summary of notation
used in this work is presented in the appendix.

Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10053

