The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Faster Adaptive Federated Learning
Xidong Wu1 , Feihu Huang1,2 , Zhengmian Hu1 , Heng Huang1
1

2

Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
xidong wu@outlook.com, huangfeihu2018@gmail.com, huzhengmian@gmail.com, henghuanghh@gmail.com

Abstract

Karimireddy et al. 2020b), where most clients participate
in computation every round and can maintain state between
rounds. The cross-silo FL involves many practical applications, such as collaborative learning on financial data across
various corporations and stakeholders or health data across
numerous medical centers (Xu et al. 2022; Guo et al. 2022).
In this paper, we consider solving a federated learning
problem in the cross-silo setting, defined as

Federated learning has attracted increasing attention with
the emergence of distributed data. While extensive federated
learning algorithms have been proposed for the non-convex
distributed problem, federated learning in practice still faces
numerous challenges, such as the large training iterations to
converge since the sizes of models and datasets keep increasing, and the lack of adaptivity by SGD-based model updates.
Meanwhile, the study of adaptive methods in federated learning is scarce and existing works either lack a complete theoretical convergence guarantee or have slow sample complexity. In this paper, we propose an efficient adaptive algorithm (i.e., FAFED) based on the momentum-based variancereduced technique in cross-silo FL. We first explore how to
design the adaptive algorithm in the FL setting. By providing
a counter-example, we prove that a simple combination of
FL and adaptive methods could lead to divergence. More importantly, we provide a convergence analysis for our method
and prove that our algorithm is the first adaptive FL algorithm to reach the best-known samples O(ϵ−3 ) and O(ϵ−2 )
communication rounds to find an ϵ-stationary point without
large batches. The experimental results on the language modeling task and image classification task with heterogeneous
data demonstrate the efficiency of our algorithms.

N

min f (x) :=

x∈Rd

1 X
fi (x)
N i=1

(1)

where x ∈ Rd denotes the model parameter and N indicates

the number of worker nodes. fi (x) = Eξ(i) ∼Di fi x; ξ (i)
is the loss function of the ith worker node, and ξ (i) ∼ Di
denotes the samples ξ (i) drawn from distribution Di on the
ith worker node. When Di and Dj are different (i ̸= j ), it
is referred to as the heterogeneous data setting. In this paper, {Di }N
i=1 are not identical. We restrict our focus to the
non-convex problem, where the functions fi (x) and f (x),
therefore, are smooth and non-convex. On worker node i,
we have access to a stochastic gradient ∇fi (x; ξ (i) ) as an
unbiased estimation of the ith worker node’s true gradient
∇fi (x). Worker nodes collaboratively learn a global model,
but the raw data in each worker node is never shared with
the server and other worker nodes.
Although, various FL methods have been proposed
(Karimireddy et al. 2020b; Reddi et al. 2020; Hong et al.
2021; Xiong, Li, and Cai 2023), which substantially reduce
communication cost by avoiding frequent transmission between local worker nodes and the central server, it suffers
from unfavorable convergence behavior. It is caused by a
variety of factors, such as (1) client drift (Karimireddy et al.
2020b), where local client models move towards local optima instead of global optima, (2) lack of adaptivity as SGDbased update (Reddi et al. 2020), and (3) large training iterations to converge as sizes of model parameters and training
datasets keep increasing. Despite the recent advances, most
of the existing work focuses on solving client drifts (Karimireddy et al. 2020b; Khanduri et al. 2021; Xu and Huang
2022). The current federated learning framework still cannot solve all challenges.
On the other hand, we know that adaptive methods have
been widely developed and studied in non-federated settings

Introduction
Distributed training, which emerges to address the challenge
of distributed data, has attracted wide attention (Bao et al.
2022). With the improvement of computing power, the bottleneck of training speed is gradually shifting from computing capacity to communication. Therefore, federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017) was proposed as an important distributed training paradigm in large-scale machine
learning to reduce communication overhead. In the FL setting, a central server coordinates multiple worker nodes to
learn a joint model together with periodic model averaging
by leveraging the massive local data of each worker node.
The worker nodes share the computational load, and FL also
provides some level of data privacy because training data are
not directly shared or aggregated.
More recently, an increasing number of FL works focus
on addressing the cross-silo FL (i.e., FL between large institutions) problem (Xu and Huang 2022; Guo et al. 2022;
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10379

