The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

From Monopoly to Competition: Optimal Contests Prevail
Xiaotie Deng1 , Yotam Gafni2 , Ron Lavi3 , Tao Lin4 , Hongyi Ling 5
1

Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Department of Computer Science, Peking University,
2
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology,
3
University of Bath, UK,
4
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University,
5
ETH Zurich
xiaotie@pku.edu.cn, yotam.gafni@campus.technion.ac.il, ron.lavi.ac@gmail.com, tlin@g.harvard.edu, hy ling@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

Previous literature has already started to acknowledge this
issue with few models that formally studied it (e.g., (Azmat
and Möller 2009; Stouras, Erat, and Lichtendahl 2020; Deng
et al. 2022)). In particular, (Azmat and Möller 2009) conclude that, despite the competitive environment, contest designers should still choose effort-maximizing contests since
the effort aspect dominates the participation aspect. However, it is not clear how robust this conclusion really is, since
these previous papers analyze models that are restricted in
two main aspects. First, they assume that all contests have
the same total prize to offer.1 Second, and perhaps even more
important, they restrict the choice of a contest and assume
that designers choose a multiple-prize contest where contestants’ winning probabilities for each prize are determined by
a Tullock success function that is exogenous and identical
for all contest designers. Generalizing the model of (Azmat
and Möller 2009), our paper provides a more general framework and analysis of competition among multiple contests,
showing that effort still dominates participation even allowing asymmetric contest designers and general contest design
space.

We study competition among contests in a general model that
allows for an arbitrary and heterogeneous space of contest design and symmetric contestants. The goal of the contest designers is to maximize the contestants’ sum of efforts. Our
main result shows that optimal contests in the monopolistic
setting (i.e., those that maximize the sum of efforts in a model
with a single contest) form an equilibrium in the model with
competition among contests. Under a very natural assumption these contests are in fact dominant, and the equilibria
that they form are unique. Moreover, equilibria with the optimal contests are Pareto-optimal even in cases where other
equilibria emerge. In many natural cases, they also maximize
the social welfare.

1

Introduction

Many important economic and social interactions may be
viewed as contests. The designer aims to maximize her
abstract utility (e.g. workers’ productivity, sales competitions, innovative ideas for new projects, useful information
from contestants) by forming a contest, and contestants exert effort in hopes of winning a prize. The design of optimal contests is by now well understood in the monopolistic (single-contest) setting. In particular, in many cases, a
winner-takes-all contest is optimal in terms of maximizing
either the sum of contestants’ efforts or the single maximal
effort (e.g. (Barut and Kovenock 1998; Kalra and Shi 2001;
Moldovanu and Sela 2001; Terwiesch and Xu 2008; Chawla,
Hartline, and Sivan 2019)).
While most of the existing literature on contest design focuses on a monopolistic contest with an exogenously given
set of contestants, in reality, many times, there are multiple contests on a market and these contests must compete
to attract contestants, which induces a participation vs. effort trade-off. Although the optimal contest in the singlecontest setting induces maximal effort exertion after contestants choose to participate in their contests, contestants
might at the same time be discouraged from choosing the
more demanding contests. To attract contestants, it seems
helpful to design lucrative and easy contests that leave a
large fraction of the total surplus to contestants. Thus, these
two aspects appear to be contradicting.

1.1

Overview of Results and Techniques

At a high level, our competition model is composed of three
phases. In the first phase, contest designers choose their contests (and commit to them) from a class of contests available to them which could be any arbitrary class of contests.
In the second step, after seeing the contests chosen by designers, each contestant chooses (possibly in a random way)
one contest to participate in. Finally, in each contest, contestants invest effort by playing a symmetric Nash equilibrium
(which previous literature has shown to exist, see details in
Section 2). Designers aim to maximize the sum of efforts exerted in their own contests and contestants aim to maximize
the reward they receive minus their effort.
We identify two properties of contests and show as our
first main result that if every contest designer chooses a
contest that satisfies these two properties then we are at an
equilibrium. The first property, which we term Monotonically Decreasing Utility (MDU), simply says that a con1

Previous analysis substantially relies on this assumption. It
also formally assumes exactly two competing contests, although
this aspect may be more easily generalized.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5608

