The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ADMoE: Anomaly Detection with Mixture-of-Experts from Noisy Labels
Yue Zhao1 * , Guoqing Zheng2 , Subhabrata Mukherjee2 , Robert McCann2 , Ahmed Awadallah2
1

ROC-AUC (higher the better)

Abstract
Existing works on anomaly detection (AD) rely on clean labels from human annotators that are expensive to acquire
in practice. In this work, we propose a method to leverage
weak/noisy labels (e.g., risk scores generated by machine
rules for detecting malware) that are cheaper to obtain for
anomaly detection. Specifically, we propose ADMoE, the
first framework for anomaly detection algorithms to learn
from noisy labels. In a nutshell, ADMoE leverages Mixtureof-experts (MoE) architecture to encourage specialized and
scalable learning from multiple noisy sources. It captures the
similarities among noisy labels by sharing most model parameters, while encouraging specialization by building “expert” sub-networks. To further juice out the signals from
noisy labels, ADMoE uses them as input features to facilitate
expert learning. Extensive results on eight datasets (including a proprietary enterprise security dataset) demonstrate the
effectiveness of ADMoE, where it brings up to 34% performance improvement over not using it. Also, it outperforms
a total of 13 leading baselines with equivalent network parameters and FLOPS. Notably, ADMoE is model-agnostic to
enable any neural network-based detection methods to handle
noisy labels, where we showcase its results on both multiplelayer perceptron (MLP) and leading AD method DeepSAD.

1

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

XGBOD
PreNet
DevNet
DeepSAD

LGB
MLP
ADMoE+DS
ADMoE+MLP

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Noisy level (cleaner to the right)

ROC-AUC (higher the better)

Carnegie Mellon University
2
Microsoft
zhaoy@cmu.edu, {zheng, submukhe, robmccan, hassanam}@microsoft.com

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

SingleNoisy
MajorVote
HE_A
HE_M
CrowdLayer
UnionNet
ADMoE-MLP

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Noisy level (cleaner to the right)

(a) Comparison with leading AD methods (b) Comp. w/ noisy learning methods

Figure 1: Performance (ROC-AUC) comparison on Yelp
(see results on all datasets in §4.2 and 4.3), where ADMoE
outperforms two groups of baselines: (a) SOTA AD methods; (b) leading classification methods for learning from
multiple noisy sources. ADMoE enhanced DeepSAD and
MLP are denoted as AD and AM.

not tailored for AD with extreme data imbalance, and existing AD methods cannot learn from (multiple) noisy sources.
Why is it important to leverage noisy labels in AD applications? Taking malware detection as an example, it is impossible to get a large number of clean labels due to the data
sensitivity and the cost of annotation. However, often there
exists a large number of weak/noisy historical security rules
designed for detecting malware from different perspectives,
e.g., unauthorized network access and suspicious file movement, which have not been used in AD yet. Though not as
perfect as human annotations, they are valuable as they encode prior knowledge from past detection experiences. Also,
although each noisy source may be insufficient for difficult
AD tasks, learning them jointly may build competitive models as they tend to complement each other.
In this work, we propose ADMoE, (to our knowledge)
the first weakly-supervised approach for enabling anomaly
detection algorithms to learn from multiple sets of noisy
labels. In a nutshell, ADMoE enhances existing neuralnetwork-based AD algorithms by Mixture-of-experts (MoE)
network(s) (Jacobs et al. 1991; Shazeer et al. 2017), which
has a learnable gating function to activate different subnetworks (experts) based on the incoming samples and their
noisy labels. In this way, the proposed ADMoE can jointly

Introduction

Anomaly detection (AD), also known as outlier detection, is
a crucial learning task with many real-world applications, including malware detection (Nguyen et al. 2019), anti-money
laundering (Lee et al. 2020), rare-disease detection (Li et al.
2018) and so on. Although there are numerous detection algorithms (Aggarwal 2013; Pang et al. 2021; Zhao, Rossi,
and Akoglu 2021; Liu et al. 2022), existing AD methods assume the availability of (partial) labels that are clean (i.e.
without noise), and cannot learn from weak/noisy labels1 .
Simply treating noisy labels as (pseudo) clean labels leads
to biased and degraded models (Song et al. 2022). Over the
years, researchers have developed algorithms for classification and regression tasks to learn from noisy sources (Rodrigues and Pereira 2018; Guan et al. 2018; Wei et al. 2022),
which has shown great success. However, these methods are
* The project is primarily done at Microsoft Research.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We use the terms noisy and weak interchangeably.

4937

