The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MPMQA: Multimodal Question Answering on Product Manuals
Liang Zhang1 , Anwen Hu1 , Jing Zhang2 , Shuo Hu2 , Qin Jin1 *
1

School of Information, Renmin University of China
2
Samsung Research China - Beijing (SRC-B)
{zhangliang00,anwenhu,qjin}@ruc.edu.cn, {jing97.zhang,shuo.hu}@samsung.com

Abstract
Visual contents, such as illustrations and images, play a big
role in product manual understanding. Existing Product Manual Question Answering (PMQA) datasets tend to ignore visual contents and only retain textual parts. In this work, to emphasize the importance of multimodal contents, we propose a
Multimodal Product Manual Question Answering (MPMQA)
task. For each question, MPMQA requires the model not only
to process multimodal contents but also to provide multimodal answers. To support MPMQA, a large-scale dataset
PM209 is constructed with human annotations, which contains 209 product manuals from 27 well-known consumer
electronic brands. Human annotations include 6 types of semantic regions for manual contents and 22,021 pairs of question and answer. Especially, each answer consists of a textual sentence and related visual regions from manuals. Taking
into account the length of product manuals and the fact that
a question is always related to a small number of pages, MPMQA can be naturally split into two subtasks: retrieving most
related pages and then generating multimodal answers. We
further propose a unified model that can perform these two
subtasks all together and achieve comparable performance
with multiple task-specific models. The PM209 dataset is
available at https://github.com/AIM3-RUC/MPMQA.

Question: How to take a selfie in the Selfie Count Down mode?
Textual-part Answer: You should put your fingers in front on your
face as shown in the figure.
Visual-part Answer:

Figure 1: In this case, the gesture of the ’Selfie Count Down
mode’ is hard to describe using only plain text, but can be
easily delivered with an image. In the MPMQA task, each
question is answered with multimodal content: a textual-part
answer and a visual-part answer.

Introduction

web page (Chen et al. 2021; Tanaka, Nishida, and Yoshida
2021) or an infographic (Mathew et al. 2022), which are
not suitable for product manual question answering, because
product manuals always contain multiple pages and most
of the pages are irrelevant to the question. Therefore, to fill
the research gap in this area, we propose a challenging task
namely Multimodal Product Manual Question Answering
(MPMQA). It requires the model to comprehend both the
visual and the textual contents in an entire product manual
and provide a multimodal answer for a given question.
We construct a large-scale dataset named PM209 with human annotations to support the research on the MPMQA
task. It contains 22,021 QA annotations over 209 product
manuals in 27 well-known consumer electronic brands. To
support understanding of the multimodal content, we classify manual content into 6 categories (Text, Title, Product
image, Table, Illustration, and Graphic). Each question is
associated with a multimodal answer which is comprised of
two parts: a textual part in natural language sentences, and
a visual part containing regions from the manual. Table 1

Product manuals contain detailed descriptions of product
features and operating instructions. They are often so long
that it is not easy for users to efficiently find the information they are looking for. Therefore, Product Manual Question Answering (PMQA) (Nandy et al. 2021; Castelli et al.
2020) aims to build an AI agent on product manuals to conveniently answer user questions. PMQA leverages textual
information in the manual, but ignores the visual contents,
such as illustrations, tables and images, which are also important for solving user problems. As shown in Figure 1,
the textual contents are insufficient to answer the question.
In contrast, a multimodal answer containing both textual
and visual contents can answer the question more clearly
and precisely, from which users can grasp answers more effectively and efficiently. Existing Multimodal Question Answering tasks are designed to answer questions from a single
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13958

