The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Networked Anti-coordination Games Meet Graphical Dynamical Systems:
Equilibria and Convergence
Zirou Qiu1,2 , Chen Chen2 , Madhav V. Marathe1,2 , S. S. Ravi2,3 ,
Daniel J. Rosenkrantz2,3 , Richard E. Stearns2,3 , Anil Vullikanti1,2
1

Computer Science Dept., University of Virginia.
Biocomplexity Institute and Initiative, University of Virginia.
3
Computer Science Dept., University at Albany – SUNY.
{zq5au, vsakumar, marathe}@virginia.edu, {chenannie45, drosenkrantz, ssravi0, thestearns2}@gmail.com
2

Abstract

the game theory literature (Gibbons 1992). Nevertheless, in
real-world situations where agents compete for resources,
it is natural for an agent to also consider its own previous action before choosing a new action (Gibbons 1992;
Traulsen et al. 2010; Lo et al. 2006). For example, drivers
on a highway can be seen as agents in an evolutionary anticoordination game, where people switch lanes to avoid traffic. In particular, an agent’s choice of lanes in the next time
step is influenced by both its current lane and the lanes of
neighboring cars. Such considerations motivate us to investigate two decision modes: (i) self essential (SE), where each
agent considers both its previous action and the actions of
its neighbors, and (ii) self non-essential (SN), where each
agent only considers the actions of its neighbors1 .
Pure Nash equilibria (NE) are a central concept in game
theory (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2017; Nissan et al. 2007).
In evolutionary games, another key notion is the time it
takes for the best-response dynamics to reach an NE or
a limit cycle (Christodoulou, Mirrokni, and Sidiropoulos
2006; Jackson and Zenou 2015). Nevertheless, researchers
have given limited attention to efficiently finding an NE
for anti-coordination games under the SE and SN modes.
Further, to our knowledge, whether the best-response dynamics of anti-coordination games has a polynomial convergence time remains open. In this work, we close the
gap with a systematic study of the following two problems
for the synchronous and sequential games under both SE
and SN modes: (i) E QUILIBRIUM EXISTENCE / FINDING
(EQE/EQF): Does the game have an NE, and if so, can one
be found efficiently? (ii) C ONVERGENCE (C ONV ): Starting from an action profile, how fast does the best-response
dynamics converge to a limit cycle of length at most 2?
The best-response dynamics of an evolutionary anticoordination game can be specified using a threshold framework (Adam, Dahleh, and Ozdaglar 2012b). This naturally
allows us to model such a game as a graphical dynamical system (Barrett et al. 2006). In such a system, at every time step, each vertex uses its local function to compute
its state in the next time step. To model anti-coordination
games, the domain is Boolean, and the local functions are
inverted-threshold functions whereby each vertex u is as-

Evolutionary anti-coordination games on networks capture
real-world strategic situations such as traffic routing and market competition. Two key problems concerning evolutionary
games are the existence of a pure Nash equilibrium (NE) and
the convergence time. In this work, we study these two problems for anti-coordination games under sequential and synchronous update schemes. For each update scheme, we examine two decision modes based on whether an agent considers its own previous action (self essential) or not (self nonessential) in choosing its next action. Using a relationship between games and dynamical systems, we show that for both
update schemes, finding an NE can be done efficiently under
the self non-essential mode but is computationally intractable
under the self essential mode. We then identify special cases
for which an NE can be obtained efficiently. For convergence
time, we show that the dynamics converges in a polynomial
number of steps under the synchronous scheme; for the sequential scheme, the convergence time is polynomial only
under the self non-essential mode. Through experiments, we
empirically examine the convergence time and the equilibria
for both synthetic and real-world networks.

1

Introduction

Evolutionary anti-coordination (AC) games have been
widely used to model real-world strategic situations such as
product marketing (Linde, Sonnemans, and Tuinstra 2014),
balanced traffic routing (Galib and Moser 2011), and social competition (Bramoullé 2007). In the networked version of such a game, vertices are agents (players), and edges
are interactions between agents. At each time step, agents
make new decisions based on the decisions of their neighbors (Young 2015). Specifically, under the best-response dynamics of an anti-coordination game with binary actions,
each agent maximizes its utility at the current time step by
choosing a particular action (i.e., 0 or 1) if and only if a
sufficient number of its neighbors chose the opposite action at the previous step (Ramazi, Riehl, and Cao 2016).
There are two main types of update schemes for evolutionary games: agents either choose actions synchronously or sequentially (Adam, Dahleh, and Ozdaglar 2012a).
The decision mode where each agent only considers its
neighbors’ actions in making its decisions is common in

1
The word “essential” is based on the term “essential variable”
used in the context of Boolean functions (Salomaa 1963).

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11663

