The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Differentially Private Learning with Per-Sample Adaptive Clipping
Tianyu Xia4 , Shuheng Shen5 , Su Yao1,* , Xinyi Fu5 , Ke Xu2,3,* , Xiaolong Xu5 , Xing Fu5
1

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), Tsinghua University
2
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tsinghua University
3
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing
4
School of Software & Microelectronics, Peking University
5
Tiansuan Lab, Ant Group
xiatainyu@stu.pku.edu.cn, {yaosu, xuke}@tsinghua.edu.cn, {shuheng.ssh, fxy122992, yiyin.xxl, zicai.fx }@antgroup.com
Abstract

differential attacks. Specifically, the iteration of DP-SGD at
xt is:

Privacy in AI remains a topic that draws attention from researchers and the general public in recent years. As one way
to implement privacy-preserving AI, differentially private
learning is a framework that enables AI models to use differential privacy (DP). To achieve DP in the learning process,
existing algorithms typically limit the magnitude of gradients
with a constant clipping, which requires carefully tuned due
to its significant impact on model performance. As a solution
to this issue, latest works NSGD and Auto-S innovatively propose to use normalization instead of clipping to avoid hyperparameter tuning. However, normalization-based approaches
like NSGD and Auto-S rely on a monotonic weight function,
which imposes excessive weight on small gradient samples
and introduces extra deviation to the update. In this paper, we
propose a Differentially Private Per-Sample Adaptive Clipping (DP-PSAC) algorithm based on a non-monotonic adaptive weight function, which guarantees privacy without the
typical hyperparameter tuning process of using a constant
clipping while significantly reducing the deviation between
the update and true batch-averaged gradient. We provide a
rigorous theoretical convergence analysis and show that with
convergence rate at the same order, the proposed algorithm
achieves a lower non-vanishing bound, which is maintained
over training iterations, compared with NSGD/Auto-S. In addition, through extensive experimental evaluation, we show
that DP-PSAC outperforms or matches the state-of-the-art
methods on multiple main-stream vision and language tasks.

ηt
xt+1 = xt −
|Bt |

X
i∈Bt


gt,i min

!

C
2 2
, 1 + N (0, C σ ) ,
∥gt,i ∥

where ηt is the learning rate, Bt is the random batch and σ is
the standard deviation of Gaussian noise. Despite its considerable success, DP-SGD with constant clipping suffers from
the following issues:
• The performance of the final model, as Kurakin et al.
(2022) noted, will be significantly impacted by an incorrect C. It is really challenging to tune C.
• The search for C itself incurs a extra privacy budget (Papernot and Steinke 2021).
In order to obtain an optimal clipping threshold to achieve
higher model accuracy, Andrew et al. (2021) estimated the
optimal clipping threshold through gradient quantiles, but
this introduces a bigger hyperparameter search space and a
large amount of extra computation. By using a public dataset
sampled from the private dataset or partial statistics of the
private dataset, Zhang, Ji, and Wang (2018) estimated the
optimal clipping threshold during the learning process, but
this may lead to new privacy leaking problems.
To solve the aforementioned problems, two concurrent research (Bu et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2022) proposed to replace
the clipping threshold with automatic clipping/normalizing,
i.e. g̃ = g/(∥g∥ + r), which can constrain the privacy sensitivity by normalizing all per-sample gradients to the same
magnitude, but it actually assigns different weights to samples with various gradient norms. Consequently, the batch
gradient becomes a weighted average of the per-sample gradients and the weighted gain is 1/(∥g∥+r), meaning smaller
gradients are given larger weight. As shown in Figure 2,
these techniques will increase the sample’s weighted gain
by up to 1/r times when its gradient norm moves toward 0,
where r is often set to 0.1 or a smaller value (Bu et al. 2022).
Unfortunately, as illustrated in Figure 1, we observe that in
the iterative process, small gradient samples frequently have
a tendency to be practically orthogonal or even opposite to
the true batch-averaged gradient. This means that the contribution of small gradient samples to the true batch gradient is
negligible. Thus, giving small gradient samples large weight

Introduction
Machine learning has substantially benefited from deep
learning research and implementation. Unfortunately, the
success of deep neural networks depends on a substantial
amount of high-quality data, much of which typically contain sensitive personal data, making data-driven deep models vulnerable to privacy leaks (Zhu, Liu, and Han 2019).
DP (Dwork, Roth et al. 2014) formally defines the influence
of an individual sample on the final result and provides rigorous theoretical guarantees. Differentially Private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) (Abadi et al. 2016), which
first clips each stochastic gradient gt with a predetermined
constant C to constrain the privacy sensitivity and then adds
Gaussian noise to the gradients to perturb the result, is a popularly used algorithm to defend deep learning models from
*Su Yao and Ke Xu are co-corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10444

