The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robust Temporal Smoothness in Multi-Task Learning
Menghui Zhou1 , Yu Zhang2 , Yun Yang1 , Tong Liu2 , Po Yang2
1

Deparment of Software, Yunnan University, Kunming, China
Department of Computer Science, Sheffield University, Sheffield, UK
mhzcn@mail.ynu.edu.cn, yzhang489@sheffield.ac.uk, yangyun@ynu.edu.cn, {t.liu, po.yang}@sheffield.ac.uk
2

Abstract
Multi-task learning models based on temporal smoothness assumption, in which each time point of a sequence of time
points concerns a task of prediction, assume the adjacent
tasks are similar to each other. However, the effect of outliers is not taken into account. In this paper, we show that
even only one outlier task will destroy the performance of the
entire model. To solve this problem, we propose two Robust
Temporal Smoothness (RoTS) frameworks. Compared with
the existing models based on temporal relation, our methods not only chase the temporal smoothness information, but
identify outlier tasks, however, without increasing the computational complexity. Detailed theoretical analyses are presented to evaluate the performance of our methods. Experimental results on synthetic and real-life datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of our frameworks. We also discuss several
potential specific applications and extensions of our RoTS
frameworks.

Figure 1: We decompose every wi = pi + ri . P satisfies
the temporal smoothness, R identifies the outlier tasks.

Temporal Smoothness assumption (TS). It assumes the difference between two successive tasks is relatively small and
thus chases the temporal correlation among multiple tasks.
With TS, advanced MTL benefits many applications, like
disease progression prediction, survival analysis, and keypoint tracking.
In (Nie et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2011), the authors use MTL
with TS to predict the progression of Alzheimer’s disease.
They assume the cognitive score of one patient will not fluctuate dramatically over time, and the difference of cognitive scores between two successive time points is relatively
small. So they penalize ∥wi − wi+1 ∥22 , known as Laplacian
based Temporal Smoothness assumption (LTS). In (Zhou
et al. 2022, 2012), the authors argue that LTS only focuses
on the smoothing of tasks across different time points. It is a
better way to enforce that the nearby time points have similar feature weight, so they penalize |wij − wi,j+1 | using
the famous fused Lasso (Tibshirani et al. 2005), regarded
as the Fused Lasso based Temporal Smoothness assumption
(FTS). Clearly, if FTS is satisfied, so is LTS. Similarly, in
(Emrani, McGuirk, and Xiao 2017), the authors use MTL
with TS to conduct prognosis and diagnosis of the progression of Parkinson’s disease. In (Romeo et al. 2020), the authors propose a novel spatio-temporal MTL model based on
TS to predict the progression of diabetes and its complications. Besides in the field of disease diagnosis and treatment,
(Wang, Shi, and Reddy 2020) applies TS to propose a tensor
based temporal MTL survival model.
Introducing TS into the MTL model has been shown to
improve performance and robustness, however, the signifi-

Introduction
In recent years, the temporal smoothness assumption (Wei
2006) has been used in a wide range of machine learning
applications (Wang, Shi, and Reddy 2020; Zhou et al. 2022;
Xu et al. 2021; Romeo et al. 2020; Emrani, McGuirk, and
Xiao 2017; Saha et al. 2018). They model the interactions
between a time point and its adjacent time points and thus
capture the temporal relationship to some extent. Owing to
intrinsic correlation among multiple time points, a joint analysis of multiple time points is supposed to be more effective
than analysing each time point independently. Therefore, the
idea of multi-task learning (MTL) (Shen et al. 2021; Fifty
et al. 2021; Zhang and Yang 2021) is applied to analyse multiple time points simultaneously. Specifically, existing methods (Romeo et al. 2020; Wang, Shi, and Reddy 2020; Emrani, McGuirk, and Xiao 2017; Zhao et al. 2015; Zheng and
Ni 2013) formulate the prediction of a target at a sequence of
time points as a multi-task learning problem, and each task
concerns the prediction at a time point. As shown in Figure
1, the t-th time point is treated as the t-th task wt .
The crucial challenge of MTL is to know how the tasks
are related and how to capture such complex task relation
(Zhang and Yang 2021). One common way is employing the
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11426

