The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Generating Transferable 3D Adversarial Point Cloud via
Random Perturbation Factorization
Bangyan He1, 2 , Jian Liu3 , Yiming Li4 , Siyuan Liang1, 2 ,
Jingzhi Li1, 2, * , Xiaojun Jia1, 2, * , Xiaochun Cao5
1
SKLOIS, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Ant Group, Beijing, China
4
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
5
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
{hebangyan, liangsiyuan, lijingzhi, jiaxiaojun}@iie.ac.cn, rex.lj@antgroup.com,
li-ym18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

of humans and DNNs are different. Currently, most existing
adversarial attacks (Hamdi et al. 2020; Tsai et al. 2020; Wen
et al. 2020) against 3D point clouds are under the whitebox settings, where the adversaries have complete access to
model source files. As such, they can easily generate adversarial perturbations based on the model gradients. However,
in real-world scenarios, most victim models are deployed
and the adversaries can only query the model. Accordingly,
generating transferable adversarial 3D point clouds generated using one model can also fool others is a more realistic
threat and worth further consideration.
In this paper, we revisit the transferability of adversarial 3D point clouds. Arguably, adversarial examples lying
close to the decision boundary are less transferable, for different DNNs may have relatively different boundaries. However, we can hardly regularize the distance between the adversarial example and the decision boundary to generate
more transferable examples, for the boundary is complicated
and has no analytical form. Meanwhile, we observe that
an adversarial perturbation can be randomly factorized into
two sub-perturbations, which are also likely to be adversarial perturbations. This phenomenon indicates that the subperturbations may also contain helpful information about the
decision boundaries and, therefore, can help generate more
transferable adversarial examples.
Motivated by this understanding, we propose a simple yet
effective attack to increase the transferability of adversarial 3D point clouds. Specifically, we propose to optimize
the loss of the perturbation and its sub-perturbations generated by randomized factorization instead of simply optimizing the perturbation alone. As such, the generated samples
are further away from the decision boundary and, therefore,
more transferable (as shown in Figure 1). Besides, we develop a sampling-based method that only selects one random
factorization in each iteration for efficiency. The sequential
combination of the effects of different factorizations used in
different iterations serves as a ’bagging ensemble’, ensuring effectiveness while preserving high efficiency. We hope
our work can inspire a deeper understanding of adversarial
transferability to help design more robust and secure DNNs.
In conclusion, our main contributions are three-fold:

Recent studies have demonstrated that existing deep neural networks (DNNs) on 3D point clouds are vulnerable to
adversarial examples, especially under the white-box settings where the adversaries have access to model parameters. However, adversarial 3D point clouds generated by existing white-box methods have limited transferability across
different DNN architectures. They have only minor threats
in real-world scenarios under the black-box settings where
the adversaries can only query the deployed victim model.
In this paper, we revisit the transferability of adversarial
3D point clouds. We observe that an adversarial perturbation can be randomly factorized into two sub-perturbations,
which are also likely to be adversarial perturbations. It motivates us to consider the effects of the perturbation and its
sub-perturbations simultaneously to increase the transferability for sub-perturbations also contain helpful information. In
this paper, we propose a simple yet effective attack method
to generate more transferable adversarial 3D point clouds.
Specifically, rather than simply optimizing the loss of perturbation alone, we combine it with its random factorization.
We conduct experiments on benchmark dataset, verifying our
method’s effectiveness in increasing transferability while preserving high efficiency. 1

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely adopted in
2D (Chen et al. 2018; He et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021b) and
3D vision tasks (Sung et al. 2017; Tu et al. 2020; Xie et al.
2020a). Since many applications are mission-critical, the security of DNNs is of great significance.
Recent studies revealed that DNNs designed for 3D point
clouds (Wang et al. 2020; Rao, Lu, and Zhou 2020; Xu et al.
2021) are also vulnerable to adversarial examples, similar
to that in 2D scenarios (Bai et al. 2020; Treu et al. 2021; Li
et al. 2022). This is probably because they all suffer from
the identical drawback that the decision-making processes
* Correspondence to: Jingzhi Li and Xiaojun Jia.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The code is available on https://github.com/HeBangYan/PFAttack

764

