The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Video Object of Interest Segmentation
Siyuan Zhou1 * , Chunru Zhan2 , Biao Wang2 , Tiezheng Ge2 , Yuning Jiang2 , Li Niu1†
1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Alibaba Group, Beijing, China
ssluvble@sjtu.edu.cn, {zhanchunru.zcr, eric.wb, tiezheng.gtz, mengzhu.jyn}@alibaba-inc.com, coco235000@gmail.com

Abstract
Target Image

In this work, we present a new computer vision task named
video object of interest segmentation (VOIS). Given a video
and a target image of interest, our objective is to simultaneously segment and track all objects in the video that are
relevant to the target image. This problem combines the traditional video object segmentation task with an additional
image indicating the content that users are concerned with.
Since no existing dataset is perfectly suitable for this new task,
we specifically construct a large-scale dataset called LiveVideos, which contains 2418 pairs of target images and live
videos with instance-level annotations. In addition, we propose a transformer-based method for this task. We revisit Swin
Transformer and design a dual-path structure to fuse video
and image features. Then, a transformer decoder is employed
to generate object proposals for segmentation and tracking
from the fused features. Extensive experiments on LiveVideos
dataset show the superiority of our proposed method.

1

Video Frames

Video Object of Interest Annotations

Figure 1: Illustration of video object of interest segmentation
(VOIS) with a pair of video clip and target image from LiveVideos dataset. The first row shows the target image. The next
two rows display several video frames from the video clip,
together with their corresponding VOIS annotations. Masks
of the same color across frames belong to the same object.

Introduction

Video object segmentation (VOS) (Perazzi et al. 2016; PontTuset et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2018) refers to the task of segmenting class-agnostic object(s) in a video clip. It has been
extensively studied and widely applied in various fields, like
augmented reality, autonomous driving, video editing, etc.
Current researches on VOS has two main paradigms: unsupervised VOS (Song et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019b; Zhou et al.
2020; Ren et al. 2021) and semi-supervised VOS (Caelles
et al. 2017; Perazzi et al. 2017; Voigtlaender et al. 2019a; Lin,
Qi, and Jia 2019; Bhat et al. 2020; Liang et al. 2021; Mao
et al. 2021; Seong et al. 2021; Xie et al. 2021). The former
one aims to automatically segment salient/primary objects
while the latter one needs to segment objects specified by
either human interaction or initial object annotation in the
first frame. In this work, we propose a novel paradigm under
the VOS task called Video Object of Interest Segmentation
(VOIS). Different from the previous two settings, our new
problem aims to simultaneously segment and track all objects
in the video that are relevant to a given target image according to the user’s interest, as well as requiring no additional

annotation during inference. Each target image contains a
single target object with white background. A video object
is classified as a relevant object only if it looks like the same
instance as the given target object in style, pattern, category,
and color. Note that a relevant object with geometric deformation in the video is still considered as a relevant object
w.r.t. the given target object. Figure 1 illustrates a sample
video with a target image and ground-truth annotations for
the VOIS problem. The new paradigm could facilitate typical
applications that require customized choices of objects for
segmentation. For example, in advertising live broadcasts,
the host may want to highlight the product that he/she is
displaying. Under this condition, as long as the host offered a
picture of the product in advance, the service provider could
use VOIS techniques to obtain the segmentation of relevant
products during the live broadcast, and then apply special
effects to highlight these identified products in real time.
Video object of interest segmentation is intrinsically a

* Work done during an internship at Alibaba Group.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3805

