The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Poisoning with Cerberus: Stealthy and Colluded Backdoor Attack against
Federated Learning
Xiaoting Lyu1 , Yufei Han2 , Wei Wang1 * , Jingkai Liu1 , Bin Wang3 , Jiqiang Liu1 , Xiangliang Zhang4
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Security and Privacy in Intelligent Transportation, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
2
INRIA, France
3
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Multi-dimensional Perception Technology, Application and Cybersecurity, China
4
University of Notre Dame, USA
{xiaoting.lyu, wangwei1, jingkai.liu, jqliu}@bjtu.edu.cn, yfhan.hust@gmail.com, bin wang@zju.edu.cn, xzhang33@nd.edu
Abstract

launch such backdoor attacks. The adversary can mislead the
jointly trained global model to misidentify malicious activities with the trigger signal on one hand. On the other hand,
the poisoned model works normally on other inputs without
the trigger. It is thus difficult for the FL service owners to
flag the malfunction caused by colluding backdoor attacks.
There has been a long line of efforts exploring various defensive mechanisms to prevent distributed poisoning attacks,
including backdoor attacks. These defense methods detect
anomalies in the submitted local models to mitigate potential poisoning effects (Blanchard et al. 2017; Yin et al. 2018;
Mhamdi, Guerraoui, and Rouault 2018; Pillutla, Kakade,
and Harchaoui 2019; Shejwalkar and Houmansadr 2021;
Cao et al. 2021), introduce additional random perturbations
to model parameters to gain certified robustness against the
backdoor noise (Geyer, Klein, and Nabi 2017; Sun et al.
2019; Wei et al. 2021; Xie et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2021),
down-weigh the poisoned local model updates sharing similar model parameters to mitigate colluding poisoning (Fu
et al. 2019; Fung, Yoon, and Beschastnikh 2020), and build
a voting-based defense mechanism to filter poisoned local
models (Cao, Jia, and Gong 2021; Andreina et al. 2021).
As confirmed in our empirical study, these defensive mechanisms can indeed effectively mitigate the existing backdoor
attacks. They provide a rich arsenal of robust learning solutions for service providers of FL systems.
However, our study shows that the distributed backdoor
poisoning threat against federated learning is far from being well addressed. We demonstrate that adversaries can
organize the collusion of malicious participants to easily
dodge various state-of-the-art defensive mechanisms while
successfully launching distributed backdoor attacks. The adversary achieves this goal by exploiting the fundamental assumptions of different defensive mechanisms and adjusting
the learning objectives of backdoor attacks accordingly.
Our contributions can be summarized in the following
perspectives.
1) Theoretically, we establish lower and upper bounds
on the trigger-induced local model changes for malicious
participants in general federated learning tasks. Instead
of requiring the local model parameters of different participants to be IID, we assume the gradients of the local models are bounded and Lipschitz-continuous. This assumption

Are Federated Learning (FL) systems free from backdoor
poisoning with the arsenal of various defense strategies deployed? This is an intriguing problem with significant practical implications regarding the utility of FL services. Despite the recent flourish of poisoning-resilient FL methods,
our study shows that carefully tuning the collusion between
malicious participants can minimize the trigger-induced bias
of the poisoned local model from the poison-free one, which
plays the key role in delivering stealthy backdoor attacks and
circumventing a wide spectrum of state-of-the-art defense
methods in FL. In our work, we instantiate the attack strategy
by proposing a distributed backdoor attack method, namely
Cerberus Poisoning (CerP). It jointly tunes the backdoor trigger and controls the poisoned model changes on each malicious participant to achieve a stealthy yet successful backdoor attack against a wide spectrum of defensive mechanisms
of federated learning techniques. Our extensive study on 3
large-scale benchmark datasets and 13 mainstream defensive
mechanisms confirms that Cerberus Poisoning raises a significantly severe threat to the integrity and security of federated
learning practices, regardless of the flourish of robust Federated Learning methods.

Introduction
The distributed nature of federated learning makes it vulnerable to backdoor attacks carried out by malicious participants, as unveiled in recent studies (Fung, Yoon, and
Beschastnikh 2018; Baruch, Baruch, and Goldberg 2019;
Xie et al. 2020; Bagdasaryan et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020;
Fang et al. 2020; Shejwalkar and Houmansadr 2021). Several malicious participants can collude to embed a welldesigned backdoor trigger into their local training data to
poison the global aggregated model. The perturbed global
model then misclassifies the input instances embedded with
the backdoor trigger as the target label specified by the adversary. However, the perturbed global model performs normally on clean input instances. In security-critical applications, e.g., distributed video surveillance and credit risk assessment, the adversary can compromise several local computing devices of the target federated learning system to
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9020

