The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Few-Shot Composition Learning for Image Retrieval with Prompt Tuning
Junda Wu* 1 , Rui Wang* 2 , Handong Zhao†3 , Ruiyi Zhang3
Chaochao Lu4 , Shuai Li5 , Ricardo Henao2,6
1

New York University
2
Duke University
3
Adobe Research
4
University of Cambridge
5
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
6
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
jw6466@nyu.edu, {rui.wang16, ricardo.henao}@duke.edu,
{hazhao, ruizhang}@adobe.com, cl641@cam.ac.uk, shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

and Bazzani 2020), since the query is constituted with multiple modalities (visual and language). For instance, in the first
example of Figure 1a, we expect to modify the reference image (black shoe) with the modification text ”make the black
shoe more sporty.”. The target image should be more sporty
in style, while retaining the black color. Previous works generally consider high-resource training of retrieval models in
a large scale, i.e., with a substantial amount of user generated
query-target pairs to train in a supervised manner (Vo et al.
2019; Chen, Gong, and Bazzani 2020). However, collecting
data for image retrieval with coherent query-target pairs is
usually expensive and time-consuming (Chen et al. 2021b),
since the user data may not be available in abundance, especially for composition learning that demands both the image
and text to constitute a valid query. Therefore, in this paper,
we study the problem of few-shot composition learning for
image retrieval. Specifically, we consider the scenario where
only a few query-target pairs available for training.

We study the problem of composition learning for image
retrieval, for which we learn to retrieve target images with
search queries in the form of a composition of a reference
image and a modification text that describes desired modifications of the image. Existing models of composition learning for image retrieval are generally built with large-scale
datasets, demanding extensive training samples, i.e., querytarget pairs, as supervision, which restricts their application
for the scenario of few-shot learning with only few querytarget pairs available. Recently, prompt tuning with frozen
pretrained language models has shown remarkable performance when the amount of training data is limited. Inspired
by this, we propose a prompt tuning mechanism with the
pretrained CLIP model for the task of few-shot composition
learning for image retrieval. Specifically, we regard the representation of the reference image as a trainable visual prompt,
prefixed to the embedding of the text sequence. One challenge
is to efficiently train visual prompt with few-shot samples.
To deal with this issue, we further propose a self-supervised
auxiliary task via ensuring that the reference image can retrieve itself when no modification information is given from
the text, which facilitates training for the visual prompt, while
not requiring additional annotations for query-target pairs.
Experiments on multiple benchmarks show that our proposed
model can yield superior performance when trained with only
few query-target pairs.

Recently, prompt tuning for pretrained language models
(Chen et al. 2021a,c; Liu et al. 2021b; Schick and Schütze
2020) has produced state of the art results for low-resource
down stream tasks, for which the amount of training data is
usually limited. Inspired by this, we propose a prompt tuning
mechanism based on the pretrained CLIP model (Radford
et al. 2021) for the task of few-shot composition learning for
image retrieval. Specifically, we represent the reference image and modification text as a composed query sequence, by
encoding the reference image as a trainable visual prompt,
prefixed to the embedding of the text sequence. Then, retrieval is enabled via projecting the target image and the
composed query sequence into a shared hidden space, with a
target encoder and a query encoder, respectively. We implement the target encoder with the CLIP image encoder, and
the query encoder based on the CLIP text encoder. With the
visual prompt, the vision-language information in the query
of our task can be conveniently encoded with the query encoder from the composed query sequence, as a normal text
sequence. Additionally, this allow us to leverage the pretrained knowledge from the CLIP text encoder (during query
encoding) to solve for the multi-modal interaction between

Introduction
The task of image retrieval generally involves searching for
a target image given a user specified search query (Vo et al.
2019). The query can be formulated with different modalities, e.g., images or text used as inputs in a recommendation
system. We consider the case for which the query is composed of a reference image and modification text from the
user, describing the expected modification between the reference and the target images. This scenario can be categorized as composition learning (Vo et al. 2019; Chen, Gong,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4729

