The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Generating Coherent Narratives by Learning Dynamic and Discrete Entity States
with a Contrastive Framework
Jian Guan1 , Zhenyu Yang2 , Rongsheng Zhang3 , Zhipeng Hu3 and Minlie Huang1 *
1

The CoAI group, DCST, Institute for Artificial Intelligence, State Key Lab of Intelligent Technology and Systems,
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
2
Guangdong OPPO Mobile Telecommunications Corp., Ltd.
3
Fuxi AI Lab, NetEase Inc., Hangzhou, China.
j-guan19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; yangzhenyu@oppo.com; {zhangrongsheng, zphu}@corp.netease.com;
aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Example 1: ... After Bobby is injured, the scene flashes to Bobby’s funeral.
Bobby then goes to a graveyard with the family and begins to tell of a woman
that ...

Despite advances in generating fluent texts, existing pretraining models tend to attach incoherent event sequences to involved entities when generating narratives such as stories and
news. We conjecture that such issues result from representing entities as static embeddings of superficial words, while
neglecting to model their ever-changing states, i.e., the information they carry, as the text unfolds. Therefore, we extend
the Transformer model to dynamically conduct entity state
updates and sentence realization for narrative generation. We
propose a contrastive framework to learn the state representations in a discrete space, and insert additional attention layers
into the decoder to better exploit these states. Experiments on
two narrative datasets show that our model can generate more
coherent and diverse narratives than strong baselines with the
guidance of meaningful entity states.

1

Example 2: ... The Tokyo District Court found Samsung guilty last week for
“intentionally causing serious injury to the plaintiffs by copying, copying, or
causing injury to a trademarked trademark.” The court ruled that Samsung violated the patent on all Apple’s mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPad
... Apple has been fighting the ruling since Wednesday ...

Table 1: Two examples generated by BART fine-tuned on the
Wikiplots and CNN News datasets, respectively, where conflicting events are attached to some entities (in bold). Different entity mentions are marked in different colors.

words throughout whole texts, while neglecting to model the
change of information these entities carry, i.e., their states (Ji
et al. 2017). Since the same superficial words can co-occur
with different events (and vice versa), it is necessary for generating coherent texts to model dependencies between events
and specific states instead of word embeddings. For instance,
in the first example of Table 1, after “Bobby’s funeral”, the
model should learn to update its estimate of Bobby’s state
from being alive to dead and then attach such events to him
as “lying in a coffin” instead of “going to a graveyard.” Similarly, in the second example, Apple and Samsung transit to
different states after “the court rule that Samsung violated
the patent on all Apple’s...,” and the model should attach the
event “fighting the ruling” to Samsung instead of Apple.
This work proposes a generation model that incorporates
dynamic entity states to improve coherence. We extend the
Transformer decoder to update entity states after each sentence, which then serve to guide the subsequent decoding.
We design a novel contrastive framework to learn the state
representations. Instead of conditioning on continuous state
representations for generation (Clark, Ji, and Smith 2018),
we use a set of discrete state vectors to represent entity
states, which are a natural fit for state transitions. Discrete
states also encourage effective use of the latent space, and
alleviate excessive focus on local and imperceptible details.
The contrastive framework is designed to pull the state
of an entity close to events that can be attached to the en-

Introduction

Generating open-ended texts that maintain long-range coherence is important for myriad natural language generation
applications such as narrative generation. The task requires,
given a short input, creating a text with a sequence of coherent events involving several interleaved entities (e.g., characters, organizations, locations, etc. ). As the text unfolds,
the entities encounter different events, enrich their respective information, and accordingly change readers’ expectations about them, thus playing a central role to make the text
coherent (Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein 1995). Arguably, the
ability to dynamically predict unseen events attached to different entities is indispensable for generation (Henaff et al.
2017) but has not yet been widely investigated.
Typical generative models such as BART (Lewis et al.
2020) are trained to learn co-occurrence between tokens,
which are represented as learnable embeddings. As exemplified in Table 1, BART can easily capture dependencies
between common words such as “injured” and “funeral,”
but attaches incoherent event sequences to the involved entities. We conjecture that such issues arise from representing entities as no more than static embeddings of superficial
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12836

