The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Supervised Interest Transfer Network via Prototypical Contrastive
Learning for Recommendation
Guoqiang Sun1,2 , Yibin Shen2 , Sijin Zhou2 , Xiang Chen1 , Hongyan Liu1 , Chunming Wu1 ,
Chenyi Lei2 , Xianhui Wei2 , Fei Fang2
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
2
Alibaba Group, China
{sungq, wasdnsxchen, hyliu20, wuchunming}@zju.edu.cn,
{shilou.syb, zhousijin.zsj, chenyi.lcy, xianhui.wxh, mingyi.ff}@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

Zhang, and Yang 2018) establishes cross-connections between base networks to transfer knowledge across domains.
With the rapid growth of contrastive learning in computer
vision, some methods combine it with CDR. For example,
SEMI (Lei et al. 2021) maximizes a lower bound of the mutual information between different domains. Nevertheless,
most of existing methods do not explore and exploit the interest invariance between domains. MiNet (Ouyang et al.
2020) just use the attention mechanism to associate the interest of each domain. SEMI only focuses on the transfer
of users’ individual behaviors. They both ignore the significance of the interest invariance between domains. We argue
that there exists a commonality in user interests between domains, which is beneficial for CDR.
For instance, Figure 1 shows the clicking sequences of
a user from the source domain and the target domain of a
real-life scenario. Here, the source domain is a e-commerce
platform where users can purchase products while the target
domain is a community where users can post their feelings
about the products they purchased and share their lives. In
the source domain, we can notice that the user has three interests: 1) cameras, 2) pet supplies (e.g. cat food), 3) home
furnishing supplies (e.g. chairs, tables and sofas). Also, in
the target domain, we can observe that the user has three
similar interests corresponding to the above interests: 1)
buying and using guides for cameras, 2) knowledge of pet
raising, 3) home design and decoration. We can find that the
user has the interest invariance between domains. Yet, existing methods do not explicitly learn such invariant knowledge
and transfer it between domains. We believe that model performance will achieve significant improvement if the role of
the interest invariance in cross-domain recommendation is
fully exploited.
Nonetheless, exploiting such knowledge is non-trivial,
which raises the following challenges: 1) how to extract
the knowledge of interests from each domain; 2) how to
transfer the interest invariance between domains; 3) how to
make the behaviors and interests of the user work jointly
on the model. To address such challenges, we propose Selfsupervised Interest Transfer Network (SITN), which can efficiently learn and transfer the invariance of users’ interests from different domains and allow users’ behaviors to
fully interact with the interests to obtain higher model performance. Specifically, we treat users’ sequential behavioral

Cross-domain recommendation has attracted increasing attention from industry and academia recently. However, most
existing methods do not exploit the interest invariance between domains, which would yield sub-optimal solutions.
In this paper, we propose a cross-domain recommendation
method: Self-supervised Interest Transfer Network (SITN),
which can effectively transfer invariant knowledge between
domains via prototypical contrastive learning. Specifically,
we perform two levels of cross-domain contrastive learning: 1) instance-to-instance contrastive learning, 2) instanceto-cluster contrastive learning. Not only that, we also take
into account users’ multi-granularity and multi-view interests. With this paradigm, SITN can explicitly learn the
invariant knowledge of interest clusters between domains
and accurately capture users’ intents and preferences. We
conducted extensive experiments on a public dataset and
a large-scale industrial dataset collected from one of the
world’s leading e-commerce corporations. The experimental results indicate that SITN achieves significant improvements over state-of-the-art recommendation methods. Additionally, SITN has been deployed on a micro-video recommendation platform, and the online A/B testing results further demonstrate its practical value. Supplement is available
at: https://github.com/fanqieCoffee/SITN-Supplement.

Introduction
In single-domain recommender systems, only historical interaction data in one domain are utilized to predict users’ behaviors. Earlier work like FM (Rendle 2010) considers both
first-order and second-order feature interactions to boost
performance. Some follow-up works such as DIN (Zhou
et al. 2018) and DIEN (Zhou et al. 2019) model user behavior sequences with the attention mechanism.
However, there are some critical and non-trivial issues
that the single-domain recommendation methods are difficult to address, such as cold-start and data sparsity.
Therefore, cross-domain recommendation (CDR) methods
emerged and tried to solve these issues. Specifically, these
methods aim to achieve higher performance by efficiently
utilizing and transferring knowledge among multiple domains. Many CDR methods are dedicated to establishing
connections between domains. For instance, CoNet (Hu,
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4614

