The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning towards Selective Data Augmentation for Dialogue Generation
Xiuying Chen1 * , Mingzhe Li2 * , Jiayi Zhang3 ,
Xiaoqiang Xia3 , Chen Wei3 , Jianwei Cui3 , Xin Gao1† , Xiangliang Zhang4 , Rui Yan5†
1

Computational Bioscience Research Center, KAUST
2
Ant Group
3
Xiaomi AI Lab
4
University of Notre Dame
5
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
xiuying.chen@kaust.edu.sa,limingzhe.lmz@antgroup.com

Abstract

in an adversarial style. However, we argue that in practice,
the attributes of the training cases vary, thus, not all cases
are necessary for augmentation. The augmentation of dull
responses such as “I don’t know” and noisy samples with unpaired queries and responses even brings harm to the model.
Taking one step further, we assume that whether each case
is beneficial for augmentation should be examined from two
aspects. From the generation quality aspect, the generation
model may perform relatively well in some cases, for example, the cases with safe answers. Correspondingly, it is
redundant and sometimes harmful to augment these cases
(Csaky, Purgai, and Recski 2019). Thus, we should only focus on part of the data where the model fails to adapt to
(low-quality). From the dataset attribute side, the quality of
user-generated training data varies greatly, and noisy samples frequently appear (Cai et al. 2020). Hence, we should
augment the representative cases that reflect a larger set of
their properties (representative), instead of some noisy samples that do not represent the general attribute of the whole
dataset. This is also inspired by a previous study (Schröder
and Niekler 2020), which shows that training on representative cases can increase the quality of the resulting model.
Based on this assumption, in this work, we propose
a novel Selective Data Augmentation framework, namely
SDA, to accurately select the most informative data points
from the training dataset by simultaneously considering the
generation quality and representativeness. The overview is
illustrated in Figure 1(b). The dialog selector is required to
select the samples maximizing the distance between generated responses and original responses (low-quality) while
minimizing the distance between selected samples and original samples (representative).
Concretely, we use a dual generative adversarial (DualGAN) framework to assist the dialog selector in the distance
measurement between deep feature representations. From
the generation quality side, a discriminator tries to discriminate between the generated response and the ground-truth
response, while the dialog selector aims to trick the discriminator. If the generated responses cannot fool the discriminator, then the selected samples have low quality. From the
representativeness side, we measure the distance by the re-

As it is cumbersome and expensive to acquire a huge amount
of data for training neural dialog models, data augmentation
is proposed to effectively utilize existing training samples.
However, current data augmentation techniques on the dialog generation task mostly augment all cases in the training
dataset without considering the intrinsic attributes between
different cases. We argue that not all cases are beneficial for
augmentation task, and the cases suitable for augmentation
should obey the following two attributes: (1) low-quality (the
dialog model cannot generate a high-quality response for the
case), (2) representative (the case should represent the property of the whole dataset). Herein, we explore this idea by
proposing a Selective Data Augmentation framework (SDA)
for the response generation task. SDA employs a dual adversarial network to select the lowest quality and most representative data points for augmentation in one stage. Extensive experiments conducted on two publicly available datasets, i.e.,
DailyDialog and OpenSubtitles, show that our framework can
improve the response generation performance with respect to
various metrics.

Introduction
Open-domain dialogue generation is becoming a research
hotspot in the community of natural language processing
due to its penitential applications (Li et al. 2019; Chen et al.
2021b). Generally, in the paradigm of deep neural networks,
a large quantity of training data is required for facilitating
the convergence of these models. As such, a data augmentation framework that can generate reliable training cases is
the crux of building a robust dialogue model.
As shown in Figure1(a), existing data augmentation methods for the dialog generation task mainly investigate different ways to augment all data samples without considering
their distinct attributes. For example, Hou et al. (2018) augmented each case by leveraging other cases with similar semantic meaning in the training dataset, and Li et al. (2019)
generated diversified versions for each query and response
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12673

