The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Open-Ended Diverse Solution Discovery with Regulated Behavior Patterns for
Cross-Domain Adaptation
Kang Xu, Yan Ma, Bingsheng Wei, Wei Li *
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
kangxu21@m.fudan.edu.cn, {20210860024, weibingsheng, fd liwei}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

These methods require expert knowledge to manually
specify the distribution of training environments in a trialand-error manner to involve the properties of the target
environment. In addition, the trained policy may appear to
be over-conservative due to the uncertainty in the training
environments (Yu, Liu, and Turk 2018; Xie et al. 2021).
Another category of methods trains the policy to implicitly
identify the dynamics of the target environment based on
samples collected in the target environment during training
and then encourages the policy to act optimally according
to the identified dynamics (Muratore et al. 2021; Du et al.
2021; Evans, Thankaraj, and Pinto 2022). However, rollouts
in the target environment, like the real-world system during
training, might result in catastrophic damage due to the
premature behavior of the policy.
Recent works have demonstrated that diversity-driven
policies can extrapolate to new environments through the
few-shot adaptation (Eysenbach et al. 2018; Kumar et al.
2020; Osa, Tangkaratt, and Sugiyama 2021; Parker-Holder
et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2022). While the policy population
with different behavior characteristics can generalize to
different environment variations, the learned policies may
result in potential safety problems in practical scenarios
like real-world systems, as the behaviors of the diverse
policies are unpredictable. Especially, the degree of diversity
that is necessary for the generalization may be limited.
For instance, when we aim to obtain multiple policies for
a quadruped robot that can generalize to various terrains,
what we desire might be policies with different locomotion
patterns rather than those able to roll on the ground.
However, these works train the policies without regularizing
the behavior, which might result in inadequate feasible
policies.
In this work, we take the first step towards diverse policies
with regulated behaviors for generalization. To encourage
sufficient feasible solutions for adaptation in a wide range
of downstream scenarios, we propose a novel diversity
objective based on the divergence of inverse dynamics
models T π (a|f (s), f (s′ )) under partial state information.
The partial state information is removed by utilizing a
customizable state filtration function f (s). Intuitively, the
actions impacting the remaining state information would
be discouraged from getting diversified, thus regulating the
behaviors of trained policies. Additionally, we introduce the

While Reinforcement Learning can achieve impressive
results for complex tasks, the learned policies are generally
prone to fail in downstream tasks with even minor model
mismatch or unexpected perturbations. Recent works have
demonstrated that a policy population with diverse behavior
characteristics can generalize to downstream environments
with various discrepancies. However, such policies might
result in catastrophic damage during the deployment in
practical scenarios like real-world systems due to the
unrestricted behaviors of trained policies. Furthermore,
training diverse policies without regulation of the behavior
can result in inadequate feasible policies for extrapolating
to a wide range of test conditions with dynamics shifts.
In this work, we aim to train diverse policies under
the regularization of the behavior patterns. We motivate
our paradigm by observing the inverse dynamics in the
environment with partial state information and propose
Diversity in Regulation (DiR) training diverse policies
with regulated behaviors to discover desired patterns that
benefit the generalization. Considerable empirical results on
various variations of different environments indicate that
our method attains improvements over other diversity-driven
counterparts.

Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning has exhibited wide success
in solving complex tasks, including vision-based video
games (Mnih et al. 2015; Jaderberg et al. 2019), quadruped
locomotion (Hwangbo et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2020a),
and robotic manipulation (Andrychowicz et al. 2020).
However, the policies trained in the source environments
are prone to fail in environmental variations. For example,
dynamics change, such as the damaged component of
a robot or encountering a new terrain, might lead to a
failure due to poor generalization of the agents. Thus one
significant challenge for real-world deployment of RL is the
generalization across various conditions.
One natural approach is to train a policy under a range
of dynamics in simulation (Tobin et al. 2017; Peng et al.
2018; Rajeswaran et al. 2016), and assume that the trained
policy can generalize to the specific target environment.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10585

