The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Soft Action Priors: Towards Robust Policy Transfer
Matheus Centa1 , Philippe Preux 1
1
Univ. Lille,
CNRS, UMR 9189 – CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
Inria,
Centrale Lille
{matheus.centa, philippe.preux}@inria.fr

Abstract

to distributions over actions. While other common transfer
methods for Deep RL assume that the transferred knowledge
is given in the form of trajectories (Hester et al. 2018; Nair
et al. 2018) or the underlying function approximators (Devin
et al. 2017), we assume that the transferred knowledge is the
soft action prior π0 .
In this paper, we revisit the Reinforcement Learning as
Inference (Levine 2018) framework, in which action priors
π0 (.|s) appear naturally in the proposed probabilistic model.
When using this framework, it is common to assume noninformative action priors, that is, uniform probability distributions over the action space. We show how this assumption
can be alleviated by reintroducing non-uniform action priors
to RL algorithms.
Specifically, we introduce a prior trick to be used to obtain
a reward bonus that recovers the effects of non-uniform priors. The resulting bonus coincides with the family of entropy
regularized policy distillation algorithms (Teh et al. 2017;
Schulman, Abbeel, and Chen 2017; Czarnecki et al. 2019).
Next, we design a class of adaptive policy distillation algorithms for the soft action prior setting. Our main contribution
is weighing rewards bonuses with prior weights which depend on the state. Such weights are learned parameters and
control how much the prior shapes the reward at each state.
Despite similarities with other policy distillation methods,
the proposed adaptive algorithm is able to better leverage
imperfect teachers. As a result, the proposed methods are
more widely applicable to scenarios where acquiring expert
knowledge is costly, but some helpful knowledge is available.
Our central assumption is that the prior may not be optimal,
but it is nevertheless informative about good actions in some
states. Consequently, following these priors may not result
in trajectories with high returns, but they are helpful when
learning optimal policies.
We propose a tabular experimental setup to study how well
different algorithms exploit different types of noisy priors,
which we call degraded priors. Empirically, we find that
adaptive algorithms match state-of-the-art performance in the
expert setting and surpass it when learning from imperfect
priors. We also find that the performance gain is larger in
more degraded settings.
Finally, an empirical study on continuous control benchmarks using deep actor-critics validates the advantages of
adaptive methods in the deep RL setting. Our proposed algo-

Despite success in many challenging problems, reinforcement
learning (RL) is still confronted with sample inefficiency,
which can be mitigated by introducing prior knowledge to
agents. However, many transfer techniques in reinforcement
learning make the limiting assumption that the teacher is an
expert. In this paper, we use the action prior from the Reinforcement Learning as Inference framework - that is, a distribution over actions at each state which resembles a teacher
policy, rather than a Bayesian prior - to recover state-of-the-art
policy distillation techniques. Then, we propose a class of
adaptive methods that can robustly exploit action priors by
combining reward shaping and auxiliary regularization losses.
In contrast to prior work, we develop algorithms for leveraging
suboptimal action priors that may nevertheless impart valuable
knowledge - which we call soft action priors. The proposed
algorithms adapt by adjusting the strength of teacher feedback according to an estimate of the teacher’s usefulness in
each state. We perform tabular experiments, which show that
the proposed methods achieve state-of-the-art performance,
surpassing it when learning from suboptimal priors. Finally,
we demonstrate the robustness of the adaptive algorithms in
continuous action deep RL problems, in which adaptive algorithms considerably improved stability when compared to
existing policy distillation methods.

Introduction
Model-free reinforcement learning has been successfully employed in a wide range of problem domains (Silver et al.
2014; Schulman et al. 2016; Lillicrap et al. 2015; Mnih et al.
2016). However, these methods demand a significant amount
of experience to achieve state-of-the-art results which effectively limits their usefulness in some domains (Thompson
et al. 2020). One such domain is healthcare, in which one
of the biggest challenges is learning with few samples (Yu
et al. 2021; Gottesman et al. 2019). Moreover, in many applications, researchers have access to some knowledge that
could be used to speed-up learning. By that, we mean that this
information does not necessarily convey optimal or “expert”
knowledge. Our goal is to leverage such information to improve the sample efficiency of RL algorithms in a principled
and robust way. Specifically, we study leveraging a soft action prior π0 which is a policy-like function mapping states
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6953

