The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Off-Policy Proximal Policy Optimization
Wenjia Meng1 , Qian Zheng2,3 , Gang Pan2,3 , Yilong Yin1∗
2

1
School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
wjmeng@sdu.edu.cn, qianzheng@zju.edu.cn, gpan@zju.edu.cn, ylyin@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract

Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al.
2017) is one of the most popular deep reinforcement learning methods, which optimizes policies by optimizing a
clipped surrogate objective of policy performance. In order to further improve the sample efficiency of PPO, several
works are proposed to achieve this goal from different perspectives. Specifically, Trust Region-Guided Proximal Policy Optimization (TRGPPO) (Wang et al. 2019) improves
the sample efficiency of PPO by adaptively adjusting the
clipping range within a trust region. Truly Proximal Policy
Optimization (Wang, He, and Tan 2020) improves the sample efficiency of PPO by adopting a new clipping function to
restrict the policy ratio, and substituting the triggering condition for clipping by a trust region-based one. Separated Trust
Regions Policy Optimization (Zou et al. 2019) improves the
sample efficiency of PPO by proposing a softer objective
with more conservative constraints and building the separated trust-region for optimization. However, these methods
ignore the perspective of directly utilizing off-policy data to
improve the sample efficiency of PPO (Wang et al. 2019),
(Wang, He, and Tan 2020), (Zou et al. 2019).
In this paper, we put forward an Off-Policy Proximal Policy Optimization (Off-Policy PPO) method that leverages
off-policy data to further improve the sample efficiency of
PPO. Specifically, we first propose a clipped surrogate objective that can use off-policy data and avoid the excessively
large policy update. Next, we theoretically clarify the use of
off-policy data during the optimization process of this objective does not harm the stability of PPO. We then introduce
the implementation details of the proposed Off-Policy PPO,
which include the whole procedure of this method and the
network update procedure in this method. Our contributions
are described as follows:
• We propose an Off-Policy Proximal Policy Optimization
method (Off-Policy PPO) that introduces a clipped surrogate objective using off-policy data and iteratively utilizes off-policy data to optimize policies by maximizing
this proposed clipped surrogate objective.
• We theoretically clarify that the stability of the proposed
Off-Policy PPO by demonstrating the degree of the policy update distance in our method is the same as that in
PPO. We also conduct experiments on a variety of representative continuous control tasks and the experimental
results demonstrate that our method can achieve better

Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) is an important reinforcement learning method, which has achieved great success
in sequential decision-making problems. However, PPO faces
the issue of sample inefficiency, which is due to the PPO cannot make use of off-policy data. In this paper, we propose an
Off-Policy Proximal Policy Optimization method (Off-Policy
PPO) that improves the sample efficiency of PPO by utilizing off-policy data. Specifically, we first propose a clipped
surrogate objective function that can utilize off-policy data
and avoid excessively large policy updates. Next, we theoretically clarify the stability of the optimization process of the
proposed surrogate objective by demonstrating the degree of
policy update distance is consistent with that in the PPO. We
then describe the implementation details of the proposed OffPolicy PPO which iteratively updates policies by optimizing
the proposed clipped surrogate objective. Finally, the experimental results on representative continuous control tasks validate that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods
on most tasks.

Introduction
Off-policy deep reinforcement learning has achieved huge
success in domains, e.g., games (Mnih et al. 2015), (Silver et al. 2016), (Silver et al. 2017), (Vinyals et al. 2019),
(Schrittwieser et al. 2020), (Xing et al. 2021), (Meng et al.
2019), robotics (Kober, Bagnell, and Peters 2013), and continuous control tasks (Lillicrap et al. 2016), (Haarnoja et al.
2018), (Yang et al. 2022b). These off-policy deep reinforcement learning methods make use of off-policy data collected
during the interaction between agent and environment to
optimize policies (Degris, White, and Sutton 2012), (Silver et al. 2014), which are more sample efficient than onpolicy methods only using on-policy data (Fujimoto, Hoof,
and Meger 2018), (Mnih et al. 2016). With the utilization of
off-policy data whose behavior policy differs from the target
policy, these off-policy deep reinforcement learning methods can avoid the expensive cost on large amounts of onpolicy interaction and are suitable for solving complex realworld sequential decision-making problems (Haarnoja et al.
2018), (Yang et al. 2022a), (Lillicrap et al. 2016), (Mnih
et al. 2015).
∗

Y. Yin is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9162

