The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

High-Level Semantic Feature Matters Few-Shot Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Lei Yu1 , Wanqi Yang1 * , Shengqi Huang1 , Lei Wang2 , Ming Yang1
1

School of Computer and Electronic Information, Nanjing Normal University, China
School of Computing and Information Technology, University of Wollongong, Australia
yulei@njnu.edu.cn, yangwq@njnu.edu.cn, huangshengqi@njnu.edu.cn, leiw@uow.edu.au, myang@njnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

support set in the source domain (sketch)

In few-shot unsupervised domain adaptation (FS-UDA), most
existing methods followed the few-shot learning (FSL) methods to leverage the low-level local features (learned from conventional convolutional models, e.g., ResNet) for classification. However, the goal of FS-UDA and FSL are relevant yet
distinct, since FS-UDA aims to classify the samples in target
domain rather than source domain. We found that the local
features are insufficient to FS-UDA, which could introduce
noise or bias against classification, and not be used to effectively align the domains. To address the above issues, we aim
to refine the local features to be more discriminative and relevant to classification. Thus, we propose a novel task-specific
semantic feature learning method (TSECS) for FS-UDA.
TSECS learns high-level semantic features for image-to-class
similarity measurement. Based on the high-level features, we
design a cross-domain self-training strategy to leverage the
few labeled samples in source domain to build the classifier in target domain. In addition, we minimize the KL divergence of the high-level feature distributions between source
and target domains to shorten the distance of the samples between the two domains. Extensive experiments on DomainNet show that the proposed method significantly outperforms
SOTA methods in FS-UDA by a large margin (i.e., ∼ 10%).

sailboat

bed

glasses

television snowman

query set in the target domain (clipart)
local features

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

lbo

sai

at bed sses ion an
s
m
glaelevi now
s
t

semantic features (ours)

bed

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
at bed sses ion an
s
m
glaelevi now
s
t

lbo

sai

Figure 1: A 5-way 1-shot task for FS-UDA where the support set includes five classes and one sample for each class.
The figure shows the similarity of query images to every
support classes and the spatial similarity of query images
to the predicted support class. We found using local features could cause some inaccurate regions of query images
to match the incorrect classes, while our semantic features
make the object region in query images similar with their
true class, thus achieving correct classification.

Introduction
Currently, a setting namely few-shot unsupervised domain
adaptation (FS-UDA) (Huang et al. 2021)(Yang et al. 2022),
which utilizes few labeled data in source domain to train
a model to classify unlabeled data in target domain, owns
its potential feasibility. Typically, a FS-UDA model could
learn general knowledge from base classes during training
to guide classification in novel classes during testing. It is
known that both insufficient labels in source domain and
large domain shift make FS-UDA as a challenging task.
Previous studies, e.g., IMSE (Huang et al. 2021), first followed several few-shot learning (FSL) methods (Li et al.
2019)(Tzeng et al. 2017) to learn the local features by using convolutional models (e.g., ResNet) and then leveraged
them to learn image-to-class similarity pattern for classification. However, we wish to clarify that the goal of FSUDA and FSL are relevant yet distinct, since both of them

suffer from insufficient labeled training data whereas FSUDA aims to classify the samples in target domain rather
than source domain. As shown in Figure 1, by visualizing
the spatial similarity of query images to predicted support
classes, we found using local features causes the inaccurate
regions of query images to match incorrect classes. This reason might be that few labeled samples and large domain shift
between the support and query sets simultaneously result in
the conventional local features in FSL to fail in classification. In this sense, the local features are insufficient to FSUDA, which could introduce noise or bias against the classification in target domain and not be used to effectively align
the domains.

* The corresponding author is Wanqi Yang.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11025

