The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DC-Former: Diverse and Compact Transformer for Person Re-identification
Wen Li1 , Cheng Zou1 , Meng Wang1 , Furong Xu1 , Jianan Zhao1 ,
Ruobing Zheng1 , Yuan Cheng2 * , Wei Chu1
1

Ant Group
Artificial Intelligence Innovation and Incubation (AI3 ) Institute, Fudan University
{yinian.lw,wuyou.zc,darren.wm,booyoungxu.xfr,zhaojianan.zjn,zhengruobing.zrb,
weichu.cw}@antgroup.com, cheng yuan@fudan.edu.cn

2

Abstract
In person re-identification (ReID) task, it is still challenging
to learn discriminative representation by deep learning, due
to limited data. Generally speaking, the model will get better
performance when increasing the amount of data. The addition of similar classes strengthens the ability of the classifier
to identify similar identities, thereby improving the discrimination of representation. In this paper, we propose a Diverse
and Compact Transformer (DC-Former) that can achieve a
similar effect by splitting embedding space into multiple diverse and compact subspaces. Compact embedding subspace
helps model learn more robust and discriminative embedding to identify similar classes. And the fusion of these diverse embeddings containing more fine-grained information
can further improve the effect of ReID. Specifically, multiple class tokens are used in vision transformer to represent
multiple embedding spaces. Then, a self-diverse constraint
(SDC) is applied to these spaces to push them away from
each other, which makes each embedding space diverse and
compact. Further, a dynamic weight controller (DWC) is further designed for balancing the relative importance among
them during training. The experimental results of our method
are promising, which surpass previous state-of-the-art methods on several commonly used person ReID benchmarks. Our
code is available at https://github.com/ant-research/Diverseand-Compact-Transformer.

Figure 1: Illustration of DC-Former for representation learning. On the left, each circle with dots denotes an embedding space. DC-Former uses multiple embeddings to represent each sample, and a self-diverse constraint is imposed on
these embeddings to push them away. Finally, DC-Former
obtains multiple diverse embedding subspaces for representation. And each subspace is more compact than the original
space, which increases the identity density of embedding
space to help model improve its discrimination for identifying similar classes. Figures on the right visualized by
Grad-Cam (Selvaraju et al. 2017) show that diverse embeddings from DC-Former focus on multiple different discriminative regions. And the fusion of them can provide more
fine-grained information.

Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims at identifying person
across different camera views, which is very important in
many applications, such as intelligent surveillance, cross
camera tracking and smart city. While ReID has attracted
great research interest and gained considerable development
in recent years, there still exist some challenges (Yan et al.
2021; Yang et al. 2021), such as blur, low resolution, occlusion, illumination and viewpoint variation. These factors
cause the intra-class distance of samples to be larger than the
inter-class distance, which makes it challenging to retrieve
pedestrians of correct identities.
Plenty of efforts (He et al. 2021; Gu et al. 2022; Tan et al.
2022) have been made recently to improve the performance

of ReID, and among which increasing the amount of training data may be the most powerful way. On the one hand,
increasing more instances for each identity helps to recognize one person under different circumstances, extracting the
most common and discriminative features for the same class,
thus reducing intra-class distance. On the other hand, increasing more identities means that there is a higher chance
to place more similar (easy-to-confuse) classes in the embedding space, which would help the model to extract discriminative features with larger inter-class distance for similar classes. Therefore, more identities and more instances

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1415

