The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Converge to the Truth:
Factual Error Correction via Iterative Constrained Editing
Jiangjie Chen1 * † , Rui Xu1 * , Wenxuan Zeng2 , Changzhi Sun3‡ , Lei Li4 , Yanghua Xiao1,5‡
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
ByteDance AI Lab
4
University of California, Santa Barbara
5
Fudan-Aishu Cognitive Intelligence Joint Research Center
jjchen19@fudan.edu.cn, ruixu21@m.fudan.edu.cn, wenxuan.zeng@std.uestc.edu.cn,
sunchangzhi@bytedance.com, leili@cs.ucsb.edu, shawyh@fudan.edu.cn
Claim

Abstract

Will Smith starred in The Truman Show in 2006.

Given a possibly false claim sentence, how can we automatically correct it with minimal editing? Existing methods either
require a large number of pairs of false and corrected claims
for supervised training or do not handle well errors spanning
over multiple tokens within an utterance. In this paper, we
propose V EN CE, a novel method for factual error correction
(FEC) with minimal edits. V EN CE formulates the FEC problem as iterative sampling editing actions with respect to a
target density function. We carefully design the target function with predicted truthfulness scores from an offline trained
fact verification model. V EN CE samples the most probable
editing positions based on back-calculated gradients of the
truthfulness score concerning input tokens and the editing
actions using a distantly-supervised language model (T5). Experiments on a public dataset show that V EN CE improves
the well-adopted SARI metrics by 5.3 (or a relative improvement of 11.8%) over the previous best distantly-supervised
methods.

1

Retrieved Evidence
The Pursuit of Happyness is a 2006 American
biographical drama film directed by Gabriele Muccino and
starring Will Smith as Chris Gardner, a homeless …

KB
Better supported by KB?

Masked Claim
—— —— — — [MASK]
VENCE

Iterative
Editing

Accept?
Reject?

—— —— — — 1998

Proposed Correction

×K

Fact Verifier
(External)

Will Smith starred in The Pursuit for Happyness in 2006.

Corrected Claim

Introduction

In the digital age, misinformation with textual factual errors
is spreading widely and quickly with the help of social media.
However, current text correction approaches mostly focus
on grammatical error correction (GEC) (Yuan and Briscoe
2016; Chollampatt and Ng 2018; Omelianchuk et al. 2020;
Yasunaga, Leskovec, and Liang 2021). The automatic correction of factual errors may help prevent them from fueling
misunderstanding and misleading decision-making, attracting an increasing amount of research attention. Given a false
claim and its evidence texts from trustworthy knowledge
bases, factual error correction (FEC) aims to correct the nonfactual text spans of the claim, so that it is better supported
by evidence. For the example in Figure 1, an FEC system
needs to correct that the movie that Will Smith starred in in
2006 is The Pursuit for Happyness, not The Truman Show.
* Authors contributed equally.
†

Work done during internship at ByteDance AI Lab.
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

12616

Figure 1: An overview of V EN CE, an FEC method based on
Metropolis-Hastings sampling. Given a claim and retrieved
evidence texts, V EN CE iteratively corrects the claim by claim
masking and correction proposal. Based on whether a new
proposal is better supported by the evidence, an external fact
verifier contributes to the decision of proposal acceptance.
After the sampling is converged, the most supported proposal
is selected as the corrected claim.

The main factor limiting the application of FEC systems
is the cost to obtain high-quality fine-grained annotations,
making it relatively under-explored. To gain more training
data, instead of annotating claims paired with their corrections, researchers (Shah, Schuster, and Barzilay 2020; Thorne
and Vlachos 2021) start using distant supervision from fact
verification (FV) datasets (Thorne et al. 2018). Specifically,
for a claim S UPPORTED by evidence in the FV dataset, they
first mask some tokens in the claim and train the FEC system
to restore the original claim from the masked one.
Existing distantly supervised models usually follow a onepass mask-then-correct paradigm (Shah, Schuster, and Barzilay 2020; Thorne and Vlachos 2021). The masker is designed
to find problematic spans in the claim, where token-level

