The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Solving Large-Scale Pursuit-Evasion Games Using Pre-trained Strategies
Shuxin Li1 , Xinrun Wang1 * , Youzhi Zhang2 * , Wanqi Xue1 , Jakub Černý1 , Bo An1
2

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Hong Kong Institute of Science & Innovation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{shuxin.li, xinrun.wang, wanqi001, boan}@ntu.edu.sg, youzhi.zhang@cair-cas.org.hk, cerny@disroot.org

Abstract

solution in the form of Nash equilibrium. Many methods
have been formulated for solving this type of game, including linear programs (Shoham and Leyton-Brown 2008),
double-oracle algorithms (McMahan, Gordon, and Blum
2003), counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich
et al. 2008), or policy-space response oracles (PSRO) (Lanctot et al. 2017). These algorithms are domain-agnostic and
were successfully applied to security problems as well. For
example, the double-oracle algorithms constitute the cores
of several solvers of attacker-defender scenarios deployed in
the real world (Jain et al. 2011), and there exist even CFR or
PSRO variants able to solve shallow pursuit-evasion games
with many pursuers (Li et al. 2021), or deep pursuit-evasion
games with a smaller space of legal actions (Xue et al. 2021;
Xue, An, and Yeo 2022).
The contemporary state-of-the-art algorithms for solving extensive-form games may be roughly divided into two
groups: no-regret methods derived from CFR, and incremental strategy-space generation methods of the PSRO framework. Both groups have their advantages and disadvantages.
The no-regret methods have strong convergence guarantees,
but they run out of memory soon or fail to converge when
solving games with deep game trees since computing the regret values therein is excessively time-consuming. Because
large-scale pursuit-evasion games inevitably involve very
long time steps and have extremely large combinatorial action spaces due to the need to coordinate multiple law enforcement units1 , we focus on the second group, the PSRO
methods. PSRO is a generalization of the double-oracle
algorithm, embedded with reinforcement learning (RL) to
handle large strategy spaces. In case the learning is sufficiently precise, the PSRO methods inherit the guarantees
of convergence to Nash equilibrium of the double-oracle.
PSRO works in iterations, computing best responses to equilibria of meta-games gradually increasing in size. Finding the best responses constitutes the PSRO’s key bottleneck, and several recent adaptations attempted to mitigate it
through parallelization (Balduzzi et al. 2019; McAleer et al.
2020). However, these methods still compute the responses
from scratch, restarting the computation in each iteration,

Pursuit-evasion games on graphs model the coordination of
police forces chasing a fleeing felon in real-world urban settings, using the standard framework of imperfect-information
extensive-form games (EFGs). In recent years, solving EFGs
has been largely dominated by the Policy-Space Response
Oracle (PSRO) methods due to their modularity, scalability,
and favorable convergence properties. However, even these
methods quickly reach their limits when facing large combinatorial strategy spaces of the pursuit-evasion games. To
improve their efficiency, we integrate the pre-training and
fine-tuning paradigm into the core module of PSRO – the repeated computation of the best response. First, we pre-train
the pursuer’s policy base model against many different strategies of the evader. Then we proceed with the PSRO loop and
fine-tune the pre-trained policy to attain the pursuer’s best responses. The empirical evaluation shows that our approach
significantly outperforms the baselines in terms of speed and
scalability, and can solve even games on street maps of megalopolises with tens of thousands of crossroads – a scale beyond the effective reach of previous methods.

1

Introduction

Preventing, deterring, and detecting crime to ensure the
safety and security of the population is an immensely serious task entrusted to various governmental law enforcement
forces. Because of its importance, many game-theoretic
models have been developed for safeguarding not just the
general public, but also critical infrastructure, using only
limited resources (Sinha et al. 2018). Among the problems
studied, one stands out due to its unflattering statistic: police
pursuits probably “injure or kill more innocent bystanders
than any other kind of force” (Rivara and Mack 2004). It is
hence of extreme importance to devise scalable methods to
efficiently coordinate multiple police units to capture a fleeing criminal as soon as possible to minimize casualties and
property damages. In the paper, this scenario is commonly
referred to as a pursuit-evasion game, and it is modeled via a
two-player zero-sum imperfect-information extensive-form
game. The extensive-form games provide a versatile framework capable of representing multiple agents, imperfect information, and stochastic events, and they have a delineated

1

For example, we solve games on a graph with degree 13 and 6
law enforcement units. The pursuer may hence choose from up to
136 ≈ 4.8 · 106 actions in each single information set.

* Corresponding Author

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11586

