The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Interpreting and Utilizing Symmetry Property in Adversarial Examples
Shibin Mei* , Chenglong Zhao* , Bingbing Ni† , Shengchao Yuan
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
{adair327, cl-zhao, nibingbing, sc yuan}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

ial examples from a fine-grained perspective. Based on attack proportion, we observe an intriguing phenomenon that
adversarial examples crafted from a certain class are prone
to be misclassified as particular classes. Besides, we further find that the attack proportion of adversarial examples
crafted from class i misclassified as class j is almost equal
to that of crafted from class j misclassified as class i. In
this paper, we define the observed phenomenon as symmetry property in adversarial examples. Through a lot of experimental results under recent popular adversarial attacks,
we ensure that the symmetry property is common in various
kinds of attack methods and neural networks (See Fig. 3).
More importantly, we also find that the maximum attack proportion is bi-directional for some class pairs, and we define
this kind of pairs as maximum symmetry pair (See Fig. 1).
It means that these class pairs possess a strong relationship
in adversarial examples. Therefore, we pose the following
question:
Why does symmetry property exist in adversarial
examples? Is there any relation between the property
and adversarial robustness? And could we take advantage of it to defend against adversarial attacks?
We observe that classes belonging to maximum symmetry
pair show similar appearance, e.g., automobile and truck in
CIFAR-10 (See Fig. 1). Based on this, we assume that samples with similar appearance, though different classes, have
similar mappings in feature space. These feature points lay
aside the class-wise decision boundary, which can be easily
made into adversarial examples by adding a small noise. In
other words, the features of samples extracted by DNNs are
not discriminative enough, and there lacks a large support
margin between different classes. Recent works (Liu et al.
2016; Pang et al. 2019) also show that the common training scheme of DNNs, i.e., the softmax cross-entropy loss,
merely builds the mapping between samples and their corresponding labels while ignores the relationship among samples in the feature space. To this end, we explore the similarity matrix (See Fig. 5) of weights of the classifier, where the
weights are considered as the prototype of features (Wang
et al. 2018; Deng et al. 2019). We note that the similarity
matrix is corresponding to the symmetry property, i.e., more
degree of similarity between different classes leads to more
attack proportion.
This inspires us to develop a new adversarial defense

In this paper, we identify symmetry property in adversarial
scenario by viewing adversarial attack in a fine-grained manner. A newly designed metric called attack proportion, is thus
proposed to count the proportion of the adversarial examples
misclassified between classes. We observe that the distribution of attack proportion is unbalanced as each class shows
vulnerability to particular classes. Further, some class pairs
correlate strongly and have the same degree of attack proportion for each other. We call this intriguing phenomenon
symmetry property. We empirically prove this phenomenon
is widespread and then analyze the reason behind the existence of symmetry property. This explanation, to some extent,
could be utilized to understand robust models, which also inspires us to strengthen adversarial defenses.

Introduction
Remarkable success has been achieved in computer vision
community due to the significant development of deep neural networks (DNNs). However, recent researches (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Madry et al. 2017)
have shown the fatal vulnerability of DNNs based systems.
Namely, natural images added with human-imperceptible
perturbations, dubbed adversarial examples, can fool the
well-pretrained classifier into predicting incorrect labels. As
the increasing trend of deploying DNNs based approaches
in safety- and security-critical devices, such as face verification and self-driving, it is a crucial topic to understand and
explore some of the properties and reasons for the existence
of adversarial examples.
Instead of explaining the adversarial examples as a
whole (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Athalye,
Carlini, and Wagner 2018), we consider the adversarial examples from the perspective of the mutual relationship between different classes. In particular, we give a new metric of
adversarial attack, called attack proportion, to count the proportion of the adversarial examples misclassified between
classes. Instead of simply using attack success rate (Madry
et al. 2017; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014), the defined attack proportion allows us to investigate the adversar* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9126

