The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Hybrid Learning with New Value Function for the Maximum
Common Induced Subgraph Problem
Yanli Liu1 , Jiming Zhao1 , Chu-Min Li2 * , Hua Jiang3 , Kun He4
1

School of Science, Wuhan University of Science and Technology, China
2
MIS, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, France
3
Engineering Research Center of Cyberspace & School of Software, Yunnan University, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{yanlil2008, jmzhao}@wust.edu.cn, chu-min.li@u-picardie.fr
huajiang@ynu.edu.cn, brooklet60@hust.edu.cn
Abstract

An important class of exact methods exploits the powerful
Branch-and-Bound (BnB) framework (Raymond and Willett 2002; McCreesh, Prosser, and Trimble 2017; Liu et al.
2020; Zhou et al. 2022) to travel the whole search tree and
try to match each vertex of Gp with each vertex of Gt (i.e.,
branching) to find the best matches. The key to design an
efficient BnB algorithm is to reduce the search space, using techniques such as effective branching heuristic (Englert
and Kovács 2015; Zhou et al. 2022) and powerful constraint
filtering (Solnon et al. 2015; McCreesh et al. 2016; McCreesh, Prosser, and Trimble 2017; Schmidt et al. 2021).
When exact solutions are not required, one can use inexact algorithms to find approximate solutions of acceptable
quality without exhausting the search space. These inexact
methods include meta-heuristics (Rutgers et al. 2010; Choi,
Yoon, and Moon 2012) and spectra methods (Bai, Hancock,
and Wilson 2009). Recently, classification technologies of
machine learning (Zanfir and Sminchisescu 2018; Bai et al.
2021) are also adopted to solve MCIS.
Some state-of-the-art BnB algorithms combine the advantages of both search and reinforcement learning techniques
to improve their branching methods to efficiently reduce the
search space. Based on the BnB algorithm framework, McSplit (McCreesh, Prosser, and Trimble 2017) uses a partition
method to satisfy the isomorphic constraint and a branching
heuristic based on the obtained partition and vertex degree to
minimize the search tree size. McSplit+RL (Liu et al. 2020)
explores the vertex pair selection policy based on reinforcement learning with a value function for each vertex so that
it can reach a leaf node of search tree as early as possible.
McSplit+LL (Zhou et al. 2022) further proposes a long-short
memory and leaf vertex union match to improve the performance of a BnB MCIS algorithm.
We observe that the learning policies in McSplit+RL and
McSplit+LL only concentrate on the reduction of upper
bound due to a branching. They only reward branching vertices of input graphs with upper bound reduction and select
a new branching vertices in the decreasing order of their accumulative rewards, that make the algorithm to branch only
on a small set of vertices so as to waste time on local optima.
To remedy these limitations, we propose a new value
function, namely Domain Action Learning (DAL), for evaluating each branching, that considers both upper bound re-

Maximum Common Induced Subgraph (MCIS) is an important NP-hard problem with wide real-world applications. An
efficient class of MCIS algorithms uses Branch-and-Bound
(BnB), consisting in successively selecting vertices to match
and pruning when it is discovered that a solution better than
the best solution found so far does not exist. The method of
selecting the vertices to match is essential for the performance
of BnB. In this paper, we propose a new value function and
a hybrid selection strategy used in reinforcement learning to
define a new vertex selection method, and propose a new BnB
algorithm, called McSplitDAL, for MCIS. Extensive experiments show that McSplitDAL significantly improves the current best BnB algorithms, McSplit+LL and McSplit+RL. An
empirical analysis is also performed to illustrate why the new
value function and the hybrid selection strategy are effective.

Introduction
Graphs have gained increasing attention in recent decades
due to their natural expression in representing numerous real-world problems. Given two graphs Gp (Vp , Ep )
and Gt (Vt , Et ), the Maximum Common Induced Subgraph
(MCIS) problem is to find an induced subgraph G′p of Gp
and an induced subgraph G′t of Gt , such that G′p and G′t
are isomorphic and have the maximum number of vertices.
MCIS allows to evaluate the similarity of two graphs and has
broad applications in many domains, such as graph database
systems (Yan, Yu, and Han 2005), biochemistry (Bonnici
et al. 2013; Larsen and Baumbach 2017), malware detection (Park, Reeves, and Stamp 2013; Sun et al. 2021), cheminformatics (Raymond and Willett 2002; Antelo-Collado
et al. 2020; Schmidt et al. 2021), computer vision (Solnon
et al. 2015), communication networks (Nirmala, Sulochana,
and Rethnasamy 2016), etc. There are also many MCIS variant problems, such as the Maximum Common Connected
Induced Subgraph (MCCIS) problem and the Subgraph Isomorphic (SI) problem.
MCIS is NP-hard and thus computationally challenging.
Despite its NP-hardness, many methods have been developed to solve MCIS, including exact and inexact algorithms.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4044

