The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Models as Agents: Optimizing Multi-Step Predictions of Interactive Local Models
in Model-Based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Zifan Wu1 , Chao Yu1,2 * , Chen Chen3 , Jianye Hao3 , Hankz Hankui Zhuo1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
wuzf5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {yuchao3,zhuohank}@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Beijing, China
cclvr@163.com, haojianye@huawei.com
Abstract

Research in model-based reinforcement learning has made
significant progress in recent years. Compared to single-agent
settings, the exponential dimension growth of the joint stateaction space in multi-agent systems dramatically increases
the complexity of the environment dynamics, which makes
it infeasible to learn an accurate global model and thus necessitates the use of agent-wise local models. However, during
multi-step model rollouts, the prediction of one local model
can affect the predictions of other local models in the next
step. As a result, local prediction errors can be propagated
to other localities and eventually give rise to considerably
large global errors. Furthermore, since the models are generally used to predict for multiple steps, simply minimizing
one-step prediction errors regardless of their long-term effect on other models may further aggravate the propagation
of local errors. To this end, we propose Models as AGents
(MAG), a multi-agent model optimization framework that reversely treats the local models as multi-step decision making
agents and the current policies as the dynamics during the
model rollout process. In this way, the local models are able
to consider the multi-step mutual affect between each other
before making predictions. Theoretically, we show that the
objective of MAG is approximately equivalent to maximizing
a lower bound of the true environment return. Experiments
on the challenging StarCraft II benchmark demonstrate the
effectiveness of MAG.

Figure 1: Intuition for multi-step interactions between the
local models and the policies.

information for policy learning of each corresponding agent,
so as to alleviate the issue of high dimension and avoid
modelling the whole complicated dynamics (Kim, Park, and
Sung 2020; Zhang et al. 2021).
One of the most commonly used paradigms in MultiAgent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) is Centralized
Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) (Lowe et al.
2017; Foerster et al. 2018; Rashid et al. 2018; Wang
et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2021; Fu et al. 2022), which allows the use of global information in the policy training
phase, yet retains local observability of each agent during execution. MAMBA (Egorov and Shpilman 2022), a
recently proposed multi-agent MBRL method under the
CTDE paradigm, achieves state-of-the-art sample efficiency
in several challenging benchmarks, especially the StarCraft
II challenge (Samvelyan et al. 2019). To take full advantage
of the centralized training phase, MAMBA utilizes the Attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017) to extract information for each local model from the global information, i.e.,
(f 1 , . . . , f N ) = Attention(l1 , . . . , lN ), where N is the number of agents, li := (oi , ai ) denotes the local information of
agent i, oi and ai are the observation and action of agent
i respectively, and f i denotes the extracted feature for the
local model of agent i. However, since the Attention block
fuses all local predictions obtained from the local models,
′
the prediction of each local model, i.e., P̂ i (oi |f i ), can affect the subsequent predictions of other local models in the
next rollout step.
Furthermore, while generally trained to simply minimize
one-step prediction errors, the local models are usually not
able to take into account the aforementioned multi-step er-

Introduction
Model-Based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL) (Moerland,
Broekens, and Jonker 2020; Luo et al. 2022) aims to improve
the sample efficiency of model-free methods by learning an
approximate world model and then using it to aid policy
learning. Despite the success in single-agent settings, there
are still limited works concentrating on MBRL in multiagent systems. In these systems, the exponential dimension
growth of the joint state-action space dramatically increases
the complexity of the environment dynamics, making it infeasible to learn an accurate global model (Zhang et al. 2021;
Wang, Zhang, and Zhang 2022). Thus, a common practice
is to make use of local agent-wise models which only require partial information and then predict the most relevant
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10435

