The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Crafting Monocular Cues and Velocity Guidance for
Self-Supervised Multi-Frame Depth Learning
Xiaofeng Wang1,2 , Zheng Zhu3 , Guan Huang3 , Xu Chi3 , Yun Ye3 , Ziwei Chen4 , Xingang Wang1 *
1

2

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Science
3
PhiGent Robotics
4
Southeast University
{wangxiaofeng2020, xingang.wang}@ia.ac.cn, zhengzhu@ieee.org
{guan.huang, xu.chi, yun.ye}@phigent.ai, richard chen@seu.edu.cn
Abstract

Godard, Aodha, and Brostow 2016; Godard et al. 2018),
which eliminates the necessity of expensive 3D hardware
and multi-sensor calibration. However, the accuracy of these
monocular methods is not yet on par with 3D sensors due to
their inherent ambiguity in geometric modeling.
To improve the monocular depth accuracy, recent multiframe methods 1 (Watson et al. 2021; Wimbauer et al. 2020;
Wang, Pizer, and Frahm 2019; Zhang et al. 2019; Feng et al.
2022; Patil et al. 2020; Wang, Pang, and Lin 2022) leverage
temporal and spatially associations in multi-frame video sequences which are available in real-world scenes (e.g., smart
devices (Ha et al. 2016) or moving vehicles (Menze and
Geiger 2015)). Among these approaches, cost-volume-based
methods (Feng et al. 2022; Watson et al. 2021; Wimbauer
et al. 2020) achieve state-of-the-art depth accuracy as they
take advantage of the successful Multi-View Stereo (MVS).
However, MVS is still challenged by unsatisfactory reconstructions in real-world scenes with non-Lambertian surfaces, textureless areas, and moving objects (Knapitsch et al.
2017; Schöps et al. 2017). To tackle these problems, teacherstudent training architectures (Watson et al. 2021; Feng et al.
2022; Shao et al. 2022) are proposed to enforce consistency
between monocular depth and MVS depth. However, the
consistency pushes MVS depth to mimic monocular depth,
which underuses the multi-view geometry, thus the performance of these methods is limited.
To improve the multi-view depth accuracy, the learningbased MVS methods (Yao et al. 2018, 2019) densely sample depth candidates in a large range. However, the dense
sampling strategy causes matching ambiguity in real-world
video frames without known camera pose and depth supervision (see Fig. 3). To mitigate the problem, we explore an
efficient approach to enhance geometric cues for improving
self-supervised multi-frame depth learning. Our intuition is
that the monocular depth serves as a geometric priority of
the scene, and the multi-frame matching ambiguity can be
significantly reduced by sampling depth candidates near the
monocular priority. Apart from the matching ambiguity, the
multi-view geometry is still challenged by insufficient Tri-

Self-supervised monocular methods can efficiently learn
depth information of weakly textured surfaces or reflective
objects. However, the depth accuracy is limited due to the
inherent ambiguity in monocular geometric modeling. In
contrast, multi-frame depth estimation methods improve the
depth accuracy thanks to the success of Multi-View Stereo
(MVS), which directly makes use of geometric constraints.
Unfortunately, MVS often suffers from texture-less regions,
non-Lambertian surfaces, and moving objects, especially in
real-world video sequences without known camera motion
and depth supervision. Therefore, we propose MOVEDepth,
which exploits the MOnocular cues and VElocity guidance to
improve multi-frame Depth learning. Unlike existing methods that enforce consistency between MVS depth and monocular depth, MOVEDepth boosts multi-frame depth learning
by directly addressing the inherent problems of MVS. The
key of our approach is to utilize monocular depth as a geometric priority to construct MVS cost volume, and adjust
depth candidates of cost volume under the guidance of predicted camera velocity. We further fuse monocular depth
and MVS depth by learning uncertainty in the cost volume,
which results in a robust depth estimation against ambiguity in multi-view geometry. Extensive experiments show
MOVEDepth achieves state-of-the-art performance: Compared with Monodepth2 and PackNet, our method relatively
improves the depth accuracy by 20% and 19.8% on the KITTI
benchmark. MOVEDepth also generalizes to the more challenging DDAD benchmark, relatively outperforming ManyDepth by 7.2%. The code is available at https://github.com/
JeffWang987/MOVEDepth.

Introduction
Depth estimation is a fundamental task in 3D computer vision, with versatile applications ranging from virtual/augmented reality (Luo et al. 2020) to autonomous driving
(Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012). Although 3D sensors
(e.g., LiDAR, structured light) can generate accurate depth
information, it is more attractive to infer depth from a single RGB image in a self-supervised way (Garg et al. 2016;

1

Compared with monocular methods that use single frame for
inference, the multi-frame methods input N (N ≥ 2) frames at
inference time.

* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2689

