The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Delving Deep into Pixel Alignment Feature for Accurate Multi-View Human Mesh
Recovery
Kai Jia, Hongwen Zhang∗ , Liang An, Yebin Liu*
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
kajia@umich.edu, zhanghongwen@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, al17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liuyebin@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

2020; Zanfir et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021a) make attempts
to predict a neural descent to estimate parameters iteratively
from feedback signals such as keypoint and part alignment
errors (Song, Chen, and Hilliges 2020; Zanfir et al. 2021),
or re-project the estimation to the original feature space to
get pixel-level feedback features (Zhang et al. 2021a). These
two trends of methods all utilize feedback features to update
the estimation iteratively, which achieves better alignment
quality than the previous regression-based methods. However, the accuracy of these monocular approaches remains
far from satisfactory due to the underdetermined observations from a single image.

Regression-based methods have shown high efficiency and
effectiveness for multi-view human mesh recovery. The key
components of a typical regressor lie in the feature extraction of input views and the fusion of multi-view features. In
this paper, we present Pixel-aligned Feedback Fusion (PaFF)
for accurate yet efficient human mesh recovery from multiview images. PaFF is an iterative regression framework that
performs feature extraction and fusion alternately. At each iteration, PaFF extracts pixel-aligned feedback features from
each input view according to the reprojection of the current
estimation and fuses them together with respect to each vertex of the downsampled mesh. In this way, our regressor
can not only perceive the misalignment status of each view
from the feedback features but also correct the mesh parameters more effectively based on the feature fusion on mesh
vertices. Additionally, our regressor disentangles the global
orientation and translation of the body mesh from the estimation of mesh parameters such that the camera parameters of input views can be better utilized in the regression
process. The efficacy of our method is validated in the Human3.6M dataset via comprehensive ablation experiments,
where PaFF achieves 33.02 MPJPE and brings significant improvements over the previous best solutions by more than
29%. The project page with code and video results can be
found at https://kairobo.github.io/PaFF/.

When deploying regression-based methods on multiview setups, it is crucial to fuse multi-view information
so that complementary observations can be considered in
the regression process. Existing multi-view regression-based
methods have proposed several fusion strategies, including
view-by-view (Liang and Lin 2019; Yao et al. 2019), volumetric (Iskakov et al. 2019; Shin and Halilaj 2020), graph
or transformer (Wu et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021b; Yagubbayli, Tonioni, and Tombari 2021; Shuai, Wu, and Liu 2022;
He et al. 2020). View-by-view fusion methods (Liang and
Lin 2019; Yao et al. 2019) perform estimation view by view
and pass the estimation to the next view or stage, which
gives improvement from their initial estimations. However,
these methods do not consider all of the camera parameters
in each stage, which can lead to a large multi-view misalignment. Volumetric fusion methods (Iskakov et al. 2019; Shin
and Halilaj 2020) utilize back-projection operation to construct a feature volume and then use 3D convolution to fuse
the spatial features. Nevertheless, these methods would introduce quantization errors in the discretization of the volume space. Moreover, noisy camera parameters and selfocclusion might lead to the situation that a target voxel in the
3D space corresponds to different body positions in 2D images, making the fusion ambiguous and less effective. Graph
or transformer fusion methods (Wu et al. 2021; Zhang et al.
2021b) capture correlation between features from different
views to search or infer the best fused feature for the final
estimation. But these features are too sparse for the estimation of body mesh such as SMPL (Loper et al. 2015). In this
work, we propose to fuse features on mesh vertices and show
that such a vertex-wise fusion strategy is more suitable for
multi-view human mesh recovery.

Introduction
Accurate and efficient recovery of the body mesh underlining a target human is undoubtedly helpful for substream tasks such as behavior understanding (Petrovich,
Black, and Varol 2022) and human digitalization (Zheng
et al. 2021), etc. With the employment of neural networks,
regression-based methods (Kanazawa et al. 2018; Kolotouros, Pavlakos, and Daniilidis 2019; Guler and Kokkinos
2019; Lin, Wang, and Liu 2021) have shown promising results towards this goal. However, regression-based methods
typically suffer from coarse alignment between the estimation and the person images. By analogizing the optimization
methods (Bogo et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2020b; Li, Oskarsson, and Heyden 2021), recent state-of-the-art approaches to
monocular human mesh recovery (Song, Chen, and Hilliges
* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

989

