The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Darwinian Model Upgrades: Model Evolving with Selective Compatibility
Binjie Zhang1,2,4§ , Shupeng Su1§ , Yixiao Ge1¶ , Xuyuan Xu3 , Yexin Wang3 ,
Chun Yuan4 , Mike Zheng Shou2 , Ying Shan1
1

ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
National University of Singapore
3
AI Technology Center of Tencent Video
4
Tsinghua University
2

old feature evolved feature compa1bility weight
new feature
new class center
feature evolving

Abstract
The traditional model upgrading paradigm for retrieval requires recomputing all gallery embeddings before deploying the new model (dubbed as “backfilling”), which is quite
expensive and time-consuming considering billions of instances in industrial applications. BCT presents the first step
towards backward-compatible model upgrades to get rid of
backfilling. It is workable but leaves the new model in a
dilemma between new feature discriminativeness and newto-old compatibility due to the undifferentiated compatibility
constraints. In this work, we propose Darwinian Model Upgrades (DMU), which disentangle the inheritance and variation in the model evolving with selective backward compatibility and forward adaptation, respectively. The old-to-new
heritable knowledge is measured by old feature discriminativeness, and the gallery features, especially those of poor
quality, are evolved in a lightweight manner to become more
adaptive in the new latent space. We demonstrate the superiority of DMU through comprehensive experiments on largescale landmark retrieval and face recognition benchmarks.
DMU effectively alleviates new-to-new degradation and improves new-to-old compatibility, rendering a more proper
model upgrading paradigm in large-scale retrieval systems.
Code: https://github.com/TencentARC/OpenCompatible.

(c)

(b)

new-to-old performance

(a)

Ours
UniBCT (IJCAI'22)
BCT (CVPR'20)
lower
bound

gain

degrada1on
oracle
new-to-new performance

Figure 1: (a) Previous backward-compatible model upgrades: the dilemma between new model capability and
backward compatibility caused by undifferentiated inheritance. (b) Darwinian model upgrades: get out of the dilemma
with selective backward compatibility/inheritance and forward adaptation/evolution. (c) Experimental verification:
our DMU well alleviates the new-to-new retrieval degradation while boosting new-to-old compatibility on Google
Landmark v2 dataset.

Introduction
The paradigm of backward-compatible model upgrades was
first introduced in (Shen et al. 2020), and attracted increasing attention in the community (Zhang et al. 2022a; Meng
et al. 2021; Hu et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022b; Su et al.
2022). Such a paradigm enables the backfill-free model upgrades* , that is, the backward-compatible new models can
be deployed on system immediately after training. It is especially beneficial for the large-scale retrieval systems in
which the conventional offline backfilling may take weeks
or even months for a model upgrade.
The essence of backward compatibility is to make old
gallery embeddings and new query embeddings interoperable in the same latent space. Despite various efforts (Zhang

et al. 2022b; Budnik and Avrithis 2020) to improve crossmodel compatibility, a dilemma has yet to be solved that the
new models have to sacrifice their internal capabilities (newto-new) to maintain the compatibility with the older inferior
models (new-to-old). Note that the new-to-new accuracy is
also important for backward-compatible model upgrades as
it affects the feature discriminativeness of the query and new
gallery instances. We argue that the dilemma is caused by the
undifferentiated inheritance in existing compatible methods
for retrieval, where new embedding models are required to
inherit both beneficial and harmful historical knowledge† .

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
§
Equal contribution. ¶ Corresponding author.
* The term “backfill” indicates re-extracting all the gallery embeddings with the new model before its deployment.

†
In embedding applications (e.g., image retrieval), model
knowledge is generally assessed by feature discriminativeness.

3393

