The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

EINNs: Epidemiologically-Informed Neural Networks
Alexander Rodrı́guez1 , Jiaming Cui1 , Naren Ramakrishnan2 , Bijaya Adhikari3 , and
B. Aditya Prakash1
1

College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Arlington, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA
{arodriguezc, jiamingcui1997, badityap}@gatech.edu, naren@cs.vt.edu, bijaya-adhikari@uiowa.edu
Abstract

these data sources to provide dramatic improvements in
short-term forecasting (usually 1-4 weeks ahead). At the
same time, as these methods do not explicitly learn mechanistic dynamics, such methods do not provide understanding
of how the epidemic will unfold at even longer time horizons, and do not support posing causal and counterfactual
questions (e.g., design of countermeasures). Such longerterm forecasting remains the province of mechanistic epidemic models that can support scenario-based understanding
of epidemic progression (e.g., ”what will happen if schools
are closed?”). However, these methods present scalability
issues, their calibration is prone to noise (Hazelbag et al.
2020), and they have limited capability to ingest multimodal
data sources (Viboud and Vespignani 2019). At the intersection of these two modeling approaches, we have hybrid
models that make compartmental models (based on ordinary
differential equations – ODEs) more informed of these data
sources (Shaman et al. 2013; Arik et al. 2020). However,
most of these approaches use the mechanistic model for prediction, thus, they are not flexible enough to fit the complex
patterns in epidemics and have very few tunable parameters.
In addition, they are not easily generalizable to new models/data sources or do not aim to incorporate ODE dynamics
from first principles (e.g., predict ODE parameters instead
of the ODE states).
In this paper, we develop a general framework for incorporating epidemic dynamics from a mechanistic model
into a neural framework for forecasting, which enables
seamless integration of multimodal data, greater representation power, and inclusion of composable neural modules of
learned representations. Our focus is to leverage the selective superiorities of both approaches (see Figure 1) to have
predictions that are accurate (low error) and well-correlated
with even longer-term epidemic trends than what has been
usually studied in past literature.
Recent lines of research (e.g., (Karniadakis et al. 2021))
aim to bridge scientific models (usually represented as differential equations) and ML algorithms. Specifically, the
rapidly growing literature in physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) has demonstrated that integrating neural networks with ODEs can lead to large scalability improvements
as forward passes (over the ODE) are no longer needed (Lu
et al. 2021). In addition, the neural network flexibility and
gradient-based learning enables robust solutions in spite of

We introduce EINNs, a framework crafted for epidemic forecasting that builds upon the theoretical grounds provided by
mechanistic models as well as the data-driven expressibility
afforded by AI models, and their capabilities to ingest heterogeneous information. Although neural forecasting models have been successful in multiple tasks, predictions wellcorrelated with epidemic trends and long-term predictions remain open challenges. Epidemiological ODE models contain
mechanisms that can guide us in these two tasks; however,
they have limited capability of ingesting data sources and
modeling composite signals. Thus, we propose to leverage
work in physics-informed neural networks to learn latent epidemic dynamics and transfer relevant knowledge to another
neural network which ingests multiple data sources and has
more appropriate inductive bias. In contrast with previous
work, we do not assume the observability of complete dynamics and do not need to numerically solve the ODE equations during training. Our thorough experiments on all US
states and HHS regions for COVID-19 and influenza forecasting showcase the clear benefits of our approach in both
short-term and long-term forecasting as well as in learning
the mechanistic dynamics over other non-trivial alternatives.

1

Introduction

The COVID-19 pandemic has led to a maturing of methods
for epidemic modeling and forecasting with the CDC establishing the first Center for Forecasting and Outbreak Analytics in 2021. A variety of forecasting innovations in machine
learning and deep learning were developed–e.g., (Rodrı́guez
et al. 2021a; Kamarthi et al. 2021)–with many lessons
learned for COVID-19 and future pandemics. As the current
experience has shown, predicting and preventing epidemics
is one of the major challenges with far reaching impacts on
health, economy and broad social well being1.
From this perspective, active participation by several academic and industrial teams (including by coauthors) in multiple CDC-led forecasting initiatives has led to two broad
themes that are important for epidemic modeling. First,
modern disease surveillance has grown by leaps and bounds
yielding novel data sources that can shed light into happenings real-time. Statistical/ML epidemic models leverage
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
www.who.int/activities/preventing-epidemics-and-pandemics

14453

