The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Query-Based Hard-Image Retrieval for Object Detection at Test Time
Edward Ayers* , Jonathan Sadeghi* , John Redford, Romain Mueller† , Puneet K. Dokania†
Five AI Ltd., UK
edward.ayers@five.ai, jonathan.sadeghi@five.ai, john.redford@five.ai
romain.mueller@five.ai, puneet.dokania@five.ai

Abstract
There is a longstanding interest in capturing the error behaviour of object detectors by finding images where their
performance is likely to be unsatisfactory. In real-world applications such as autonomous driving, it is also crucial to
characterise potential failures beyond simple requirements of
detection performance. For example, a missed detection of
a pedestrian close to an ego vehicle will generally require
closer inspection than a missed detection of a car in the distance. The problem of predicting such potential failures at
test time has largely been overlooked in the literature and
conventional approaches based on detection uncertainty fall
short in that they are agnostic to such fine-grained characterisation of errors. In this work, we propose to reformulate
the problem of finding “hard” images as a query-based hard
image retrieval task, where queries are specific definitions of
“hardness”, and offer a simple and intuitive method that can
solve this task for a large family of queries. Our method is
entirely post-hoc, does not require ground-truth annotations,
is independent of the choice of a detector, and relies on an
efficient Monte Carlo estimation that uses a simple stochastic model in place of the ground-truth. We show experimentally that it can be applied successfully to a wide variety of
queries for which it can reliably identify hard images for
a given detector without any labelled data. We provide results on ranking and classification tasks using the widely used
RetinaNet, Faster-RCNN, Mask-RCNN, and Cascade MaskRCNN object detectors. The code for this project is available
at https://github.com/fiveai/hardest.

Figure 1: Examples of images showing that “hardness” is
task-specific for object detectors. Green, red, and blue boxes
denote true positives, false positives, false negatives, respectively. (Top) Output of RetinaNet on an image from the
COCO val set. Is this image hard for the detector because of
the misclassified ‘wildebeest’ in the foreground or because
of the undetected ‘birds’ in the background? (Bottom) Output of Cascade-RCNN on a frame from the nuImages val set.
Should this image be considered to be hard for this detector because of the undetected ‘pedestrians’ even though they
are further away compared to the correctly detected ‘cars’?
Clearly, there is no single correct answer unless a specific
requirement of performance is described.

Introduction
How difficult (or hard) an image can be for a model at inference? A large body of work has already paid significant
attention in defining the notion of hard (or useful) images for
standard classification and object detection tasks. The main
objective of these works was to either perform active learning mainly to reduce the labelling and training cost (Gal, Islam, and Ghahramani 2017; Choi et al. 2021; Roy, Unmesh,
and Namboodiri 2018; Aghdam et al. 2019; Haussmann
et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2022; Feng et al. 2019), or to improve
the training mechanism (Shrivastava, Gupta, and Girshick
2016; Lin et al. 2017; Pang et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020),

perform metric learning (Suh et al. 2019; Bucher, Herbin,
and Jurie 2016), or even to improve the reliability of object
detectors towards out-of-distribution samples (Harakeh and
Waslander 2021; Du et al. 2022). All these approaches attempt to improve the performance or robustness of object
detectors by focusing on their training and generally assume

* ,† These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14692

