The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Controlling Class Layout for Deep Ordinal Classification
via Constrained Proxies Learning
Cong Wang, Zhiwei Jiang* , Yafeng Yin, Zifeng Cheng, Shiping Ge, Qing Gu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
cw@smail.nju.edu.cn, {jzw, yafeng}@nju.edu.cn, {chengzf, shipingge}@smail.nju.edu.cn, guq@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
For deep ordinal classification, learning a well-structured feature space specific to ordinal classification is helpful to properly capture the ordinal nature among classes. Intuitively, when
Euclidean distance metric is used, an ideal ordinal layout in
feature space would be that the sample clusters are arranged in
class order along a straight line in space. However, enforcing
samples to conform to a specific layout in the feature space
is a challenging problem. To address this problem, in this paper, we propose a novel Constrained Proxies Learning (CPL)
method, which can learn a proxy for each ordinal class and
then adjusts the global layout of classes by constraining these
proxies. Specifically, we propose two kinds of strategies: hard
layout constraint and soft layout constraint. The hard layout
constraint is realized by directly controlling the generation of
proxies to force them to be placed in a strict linear layout or
semicircular layout (i.e., two instantiations of strict ordinal
layout). The soft layout constraint is realized by constraining
that the proxy layout should always produce unimodal proxyto-proxies similarity distribution for each proxy (i.e., to be a
relaxed ordinal layout). Experiments show that the proposed
CPL method outperforms previous deep ordinal classification
methods under the same setting of feature extractor.

Target Sample

Multimodal Distribution

Unimodal Distribution

25-32
Class (Age group)

12345678

12345678










C1 ( 0-2 )
C2 ( 4-6 )
C3 ( 8-13)
C4 (15-20)
C5 (25-32)
C6 (38-43)
C7 (48-53)
C8 (60- )

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Illustration of (a) the unconstrained feature space
and (b) our target ordinal constrained feature space.

proposed (Liu, Kong, and Goh 2018; Diaz and Marathe 2019;
Shaham and Svirsky 2020; Li et al. 2021) and show superior
performance than traditional methods (Liu, Kong, and Goh
2018). Such performance gain is mainly attributed to neural
networks’ strong capability of representation learning.
To benefit more from the representation learning, existing deep ordinal classification methods seek to learn the
feature space specific to ordinal classification. These methods fall into two fashions: classification and regression. For
the case of general multi-class classification, neither feature
space nor output label distribution shows any ordinal property. Therefore, researchers proposed to make implicit ordinal
constraints on feature space by recoding the labels, such as
transforming the N -class classification into N − 1 binary
classifications (Niu et al. 2016), predicting the relative order
of samples in triplets (Liu, Kong, and Goh 2018), and softening the one-hot label distribution to unimodal distribution
(Diaz and Marathe 2019). For the case of regression, the samples are directly mapped into a one-dimensional space (i.e.,
a line of real numbers), which is ordered in nature. But the
samples are regressed into real numbers, which need to be
discretized into classes by the learned boundaries, based on
the unimodal transformation layer (Beckham and Pal 2017)
or Gaussian process layer (Liu, Wang, and Kong 2019). The
main difference between these two fashions of methods is
that, the classification fashion constrains the feature space in
a soft way by constraining the output label distribution, while
the regression fashion constrains the feature space in a hard

Introduction
Ordinal classification, also known as ordinal regression, aims
to predict the label of samples on the ordinal scale. It is a
learning paradigm lying between multi-class classification
and regression. Compared with multi-class classification, the
classes in ordinal classification are naturally ordered. Compared with regression, the number of classes in ordinal classification is finite and the distance between adjacent classes is
undefined. Some examples include predicting the age group
of a person (e.g., from Infants, Children to Aged) and the star
rating of a movie (e.g., from 1 star to 5 stars).
Traditional ordinal classification methods (Frank and Hall
2001; Chu, Ghahramani, and Williams 2005; Cardoso and
da Costa 2007; Lin and Li 2012) mainly work on handcrafted
features, which is labor-intensive and time-consuming. Recently, with the great progress brought by deep neural networks, several deep ordinal classification methods have been
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2483

