The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Selective Knowledge Distillation
for Non-Autoregressive Neural Machine Translation
Min Liu1∗ , Yu Bao2 , Chengqi Zhao2 , Shujian Huang1,3
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
ByteDance AI Lab
3
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
minliu@smail.nju.edu.cn, huangsj@nju.edu.cn, {baoyu.001,zhaochenqi.d}@bytedance.com
Abstract
Benefiting from the sequence-level knowledge distillation,
the Non-Autoregressive Transformer (NAT) achieves great
success in neural machine translation tasks. However, existing knowledge distillation has side effects, such as propagating errors from the teacher to NAT students, which may
limit further improvements of NAT models and are rarely discussed in existing research. In this paper, we introduce selective knowledge distillation by introducing an NAT evaluator
to select NAT-friendly targets that are of high quality and easy
to learn. In addition, we introduce a simple yet effective progressive distillation method to boost NAT performance. Experiment results on multiple WMT language directions and
several representative models show that our approach can realize a flexible trade-off between the quality and complexity of training data for NAT models, achieving strong performances. Further analysis shows that distilling only 5% of the
raw translations can help an NAT outperform its counterpart
trained on raw data by about 2.4 BLEU.

1

Figure 1: An illustration of our selective knowledge distillation. Standard knowledge distillation reduces the complexity
of raw data at the cost of translation quality. In contrast, we
propose combining the merits of raw and KD data, balancing the complexity and quality of training data.

Introduction

Non-autoregressive Transformer (NAT, Gu et al. 2018) introduces a promising paradigm of parallel decoding. Unlike sequentially predicting the words in an autoregressive
model, NAT models can generate a sentence in parallel
based on a conditional independence assumption, improving the inference speed by over 10 times. Besides, such a
parallel decoding paradigm also has the potential to avoid
the exposure bias that has a long-term discussion in sequential decoding models (Vaswani et al. 2017). As a result, we
see NAT models achieve great success in machine translation tasks (Qian et al. 2021b), surpassing many autoregressive models in WMT211 .
Despite the great potential of NAT models, they rely on
sequence-level knowledge distillation (KD, Kim and Rush
2016) to achieve success. The introduced conditional independence assumption prevents NAT models from leveraging the inherent structures to overcome the multi-modality
problem, where each input may correspond to several valid
outputs in the training data. In such background, Gu et al.

(2018) introduce sequence-level knowledge distillation to
bypass the multi-modality problem of NAT models. They
first train an autoregressive Transformer (AT, Vaswani et al.
2017) as a teacher model, and then train the NAT models using the teacher’s output as targets. The deterministic outputs
generated by the teacher can directly avoid the one-to-many
situation in raw training data and improve the performance
of an NAT model by over 5.0 BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002)
in machine translation.
However, there are still several problems in standard
knowledge distillation, which may limit the performance
of NAT models. First, NAT models learning only from AT
teachers may miss some important knowledge in the original
data, such as prediction on low-frequency words (Ding et al.
2021b). Second, the outputs generated by the AT teacher are
not necessarily suitable for the training of NAT models, as
these architectures have quite different modeling paradigms.
It should be noted that existing NAT research (Gu et al.
2018; Ghazvininejad et al. 2019; Guo, Xu, and Chen 2020;
Bao et al. 2021) only regards knowledge distillation as a necessary data processing technique but lacks a deeper discussion. Therefore, designing knowledge distillation strategies
to help NAT models learn better is still an open question.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Work done during the internship at ByteDance AI Lab.
1
http://statmt.org/wmt21/

13246

