The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Riemannian Local Mechanism for SPD Neural Networks
Ziheng Chen1 , Tianyang Xu1 , Xiao-Jun Wu* 1 , Rui Wang1 , Zhiwu Huang2 , Josef Kittler3
1
School of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science, Jiangnan University
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University
3
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing (CVSSP), University of Surrey
ziheng ch@163.com, {tianyang.xu, wu xiaojun,cs wr}@jiangnan.edu.cn, zwhuang@smu.edu.sg, j.kittler@surrey.ac.uk
2

Abstract

space(Huang et al. 2015c), or by projecting the manifold into
a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces (RKHS)(Chen et al.
2021; Harandi et al. 2012; Wang et al. 2012). However, these
methods tend to distort the geometrical structure communicated by the data. To address this issue, (Harandi, Salzmann, and Hartley 2018; Gao et al. 2019b) proposed direct
learning algorithms on SPD manifolds. In addition, inspired
by the significant progress achieved by deep learning (LeCun et al. 1998; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012),
(Huang and Van Gool 2017; Zhang et al. 2020; Brooks et al.
2019; Chakraborty et al. 2018, 2020; Chakraborty 2020;
Nguyen 2021; Zhen et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2022a,b) attempted to build deep Riemannian networks for non-linear
representation learning on SPD matrices.
Nevertheless, many existing deep SPD networks treat the
SPD features as a global representation. Given the success
of multi-scale features in both conventional feature design
(Belongie, Malik, and Puzicha 2002; Lowe 2004) and deep
learning (Szegedy et al. 2015; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012), it should be rewarding to investigate local
mechanism in Riemannian neural networks. Accordingly, in
this paper, we develop a deep multi-scale submanifold network designed to capture the informative local geometry in
deep SPD networks. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first work to successfully mine the local geometric information on SPD manifolds.
As convolution is one of the most successful techniques
for dealing with local information in traditional deep learning, we first analyze its mathematical essence from the perspective of category theory, to identify the universal property which is transferable to manifolds. We proceed to define the local information in the category of SPD manifolds
and propose multi-scale submanifold blocks to capture both
holistic and local geometric information. In summary, our
contributions are three-fold: 1). a theoretical guideline is developed for the Riemannian local mechanism. 2). local patterns in Riemannian manifolds are rigorously defined. 3). a
novel multi-scale submanifold block is proposed to capture
vibrant local statistical information on the SPD networks.

The Symmetric Positive Definite (SPD) matrices have received wide attention for data representation in many scientific areas. Although there are many different attempts to
develop effective deep architectures for data processing on
the Riemannian manifold of SPD matrices, very few solutions explicitly mine the local geometrical information in
deep SPD feature representations. Given the great success
of local mechanisms in Euclidean methods, we argue that it
is of utmost importance to ensure the preservation of local
geometric information in the SPD networks. We first analyse the convolution operator commonly used for capturing
local information in Euclidean deep networks from the perspective of a higher level of abstraction afforded by category theory. Based on this analysis, we define the local information in the SPD manifold and design a multi-scale submanifold block for mining local geometry. Experiments involving multiple visual tasks validate the effectiveness of our
approach. The supplement and source code can be found in
https://github.com/GitZH-Chen/MSNet.git.

1

Introduction

Symmetric Positive Definite (SPD) matrices have shown
great success in many scientific areas, like medical image analysis(Chakraborty et al. 2020, 2018), elasticity
(Guilleminot and Soize 2012), signal processing (Hua et al.
2017; Brooks et al. 2019), machine learning (Kulis, Sustik,
and Dhillon 2006; Harandi et al. 2012), and computer vision (Chakraborty 2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Zhen et al. 2019;
Huang and Van Gool 2017; Nguyen 2021; Harandi, Salzmann, and Hartley 2018). However, the non-Euclidean nature of SPD matrices precludes the use of a wide range of
data analysis tools, the applicability of which is confined to
Euclidean metric spaces. Motivated by this problem, a number of Riemannian metrics have been introduced, such as
Log-Euclidean metric (LEM) (Arsigny et al. 2005), AffineInvariant Riemannian metric (AIM) (Pennec, Fillard, and
Ayache 2006), Log-Cholesky metric (LCM) (Lin 2019).
With these well-studied Riemannian metrics, some Euclidean techniques can be generalized into SPD manifolds.
Some approaches adopted approximation methods that locally flatten the manifold by identifying it with its tangent

2

Related Work

To take advantage of deep learning techniques, some effort has been made to generalize Euclidean deep learning
into a Riemannian one. (Huang and Van Gool 2017) de-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7104

