The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning with Partial Labels from Semi-supervised Perspective
Ximing Li1,2 , Yuanzhi Jiang1,2 , Changchun Li1,2, * , Yiyuan Wang3,4 , Jihong Ouyang1,2
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of MOE, Jilin University, China
3
College of Information Science and Technology, Northeast Normal University, China
4
Key Laboratory of Applied Statistics of MOE, Northeast Normal University, China
liximing86@gmail.com, yzjiang20@mails.jlu.edu.cn, changchunli93@gmail.com, wangyy912@nenu.edu.cn, ouyj@jlu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Partial Label (PL) learning refers to the task of learning from
the partially labeled data, where each training instance is ambiguously equipped with a set of candidate labels but only
one is valid. Advances in the recent deep PL learning literature have shown that the deep learning paradigms, e.g.,
self-training, contrastive learning, or class activate values, can
achieve promising performance. Inspired by the impressive
success of deep Semi-Supervised (SS) learning, we transform
the PL learning problem into the SS learning problem, and propose a novel PL learning method, namely Partial Label learning with Semi-supervised Perspective (PLSP). Specifically, we
first form the pseudo-labeled dataset by selecting a small number of reliable pseudo-labeled instances with high-confidence
prediction scores and treating the remaining instances as
pseudo-unlabeled ones. Then we design a SS learning objective, consisting of a supervised loss for pseudo-labeled
instances and a semantic consistency regularization for pseudounlabeled instances. We further introduce a complementary
regularization for those non-candidate labels to constrain the
model predictions on them to be as small as possible. Empirical results demonstrate that PLSP significantly outperforms the
existing PL baseline methods, especially on high ambiguity
levels. Code available: https://github.com/changchunli/PLSP.

Huskie?
Alaskan Malamute?
Annotator 1 : Huskie
Annotator 2 : Alaskan Malamute

Figure 1: An example of PL instances. An Alaskan Malamute
is in this image, but annotators may also tag it with Huskie.

may tend to retain both of them as candidate labels. Due to
the popularity of such noisy data in applications, e.g., web
mining (Luo and Orabona 2010), multimedia context analysis (Zeng et al. 2013), and image classification (Chen, Patel,
and Chellappa 2018), the paradigm of learning from partial
labels, formally dubbed as Partial Label (PL) learning, has
recently attracted more attention from the machine learning
community (Feng and An 2019b; Feng et al. 2020; Lv et al.
2020; Li, Li, and Ouyang 2020; Li et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2022a; Wu, Wang, and Zhang 2022).
Naturally, the main challenge of PL learning lies in the
ambiguity of partial labels, because the ground-truth label is
unknown and can not be directly accessible to the learning
method. Accordingly, the mainstream of PL learning methods
concentrates on recovering precise supervised signals from
the ambiguous candidate labels. Some two-stage methods refine the candidate labels by label propagation among instance
nearest neighbors (Zhang and Yu 2015; Zhang, Zhou, and
Liu 2016; Xu, Lv, and Geng 2019); and most PL learning
methods jointly train the classifier with the refined labels and
refine the candidate labels with the classifier predictions (Wu
and Zhang 2018; Zhang, Zhou, and Liu 2019; Feng and An
2019a; Li, Li, and Ouyang 2020; Ni et al. 2021). Besides
them, some deep PL learning methods employ discriminators to recover precise supervision from the candidate labels
under the frameworks of GAN (Zhang et al. 2020) and Triple-

Introduction
During the past decades, modern deep neural networks have
gained great success in various domains such as computer
vision and natural language processing. Commonly, they are
built on the paradigm of supervised learning, which often
requires massive training instances with precise labels. However, in many real-world scenarios, the high-quality training
instances are intractable to collect, because instance annotation by human-beings is costly and even subject to label
ambiguity and noise, potentially resulting in many training
data with various noisy supervision (Li, Socher, and Hoi
2020; Li et al. 2022). Among them, one prevalent noisy challenge is from the partially labeled data, where each training
instance is equipped with a set of candidate labels but only
one is valid (Cour, Sapp, and Taskar 2011). As illustrated
in Fig.1, for a human annotator it could be difficult to correctly distinguish Alaskan Malamute and Huskie, so she/he
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8666

