The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Augmented Proximal Policy Optimization for Safe Reinforcement Learning
Juntao Dai1,2 * , Jiaming Ji1 * , Long Yang3 , Qian Zheng1,2† , Gang Pan1,2
1

The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
{juntaodai, jmji, qianzheng, gpan}@zju.edu.cn, yanglong001@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

straints on the traditional Markov decision process (MDP)
to restrict feasible policy sets.
A common approach to solving a CMDP is approximating
the non-convex constrained objective function by a quadratic
optimization problem within some trust regions (Achiam
et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2020). However, these works require
expensive computation since their solution includes calculating the inverse Fisher information matrix. According to
benchmark evaluation (Ray, Achiam, and Amodei 2019),
simple Lagrangian-based algorithms perform as well or even
better than the above quadratic optimization methods. However, convergence analysis (Tessler, Mankowitz, and Mannor 2018; Paternain et al. 2019) shows that Lagrangian
dual parameters update more slowly than policy iteration.
Many constraint-violating iterations arise when the multipliers are not fully effective, and the constraints are over-valued
when the multipliers are over-increased. Thus, Lagrangianbased methods have inherent oscillation and cost overshoot
in the learning dynamics (Platt and Barr 1987; Wah et al.
2000) leading to poor convergence. The penalty function is
another technique used in safe RL, constructing different
penalty terms to control cost. Penalty function-based algorithms generally require sufficiently large or infinite penalty
factors; otherwise, the constructed penalty function fails to
be equivalent to the primal problem and leading to probable
suboptimal solutions (Freund 2004). It faces a tough tradeoff since growing the penalty factor increases the approximation error (Zhang et al. 2022; Liu, Ding, and Liu 2020).
In this article, we propose the Augmented Proximal Policy Optimization (APPO) method to address the above three
issues. Firstly, APPO augments the Lagrangian function of
the primal constrained problem via attaching a quadratic deviation term. The additional term provides stable and continuous cost control to complement the lagged Lagrangian
multipliers, which improves the convergence of our method.
Secondly, we theoretically prove that this attached term, also
regarded as a quadratic penalty, is an exact penalty from
the primal problem in the constructed primal-dual problem.
Thus, the constructed multiplier-penalty function is equivalent to the primal constrained problem to provide precise
cost control. Thirdly, we apply the clipped technique inspired by PPO (Schulman et al. 2017) to both reward and
cost objectives to update policy with data sampled by proximal policies, which makes APPO eliminate the trust region

Safe reinforcement learning considers practical scenarios that
maximize the return while satisfying safety constraints. Current algorithms, which suffer from training oscillations or
approximation errors, still struggle to update the policy efficiently with precise constraint satisfaction. In this article, we
propose Augmented Proximal Policy Optimization (APPO),
which augments the Lagrangian function of the primal constrained problem via attaching a quadratic deviation term.
The constructed multiplier-penalty function dampens cost oscillation for stable convergence while being equivalent to the
primal constrained problem to precisely control safety costs.
APPO alternately updates the policy and the Lagrangian multiplier via solving the constructed augmented primal-dual
problem, which can be easily implemented by any first-order
optimizer. We apply our APPO methods in diverse safetyconstrained tasks, setting a new state of the art compared with
a comprehensive list of safe RL baselines. Extensive experiments verify the merits of our method in easy implementation, stable convergence, and precise cost control.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 2018) has
achieved significant successes in many challenging highdimensional tasks such as sophisticated video games (Mnih
et al. 2013, 2016), robotic locomotion (Peters and Schaal
2008; Schulman et al. 2017; Haarnoja et al. 2018; Vuong,
Zhang, and Ross 2019), and Go (Silver et al. 2016, 2017).
However, standard RL algorithms merely consider maximizing performance in the policy space, which is insufficient in real-world applications. Some policies are infeasible since they lead to undesirable behaviors, especially
for safety violations. For instance, human-machine hybrid
scenarios (e.g., autonomous driving, service robots) require
machines to perform their tasks without harming humans.
Thus, it is essential to explore safe reinforcement learning,
which searches for maximizing return policy while satisfying safety constraints. The constrained Markov decision
process (CMDP) (Altman 1995) is a well-known sequential
framework to formalize safe RL. It attaches additional con* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7288

