The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Easy Begun Is Half Done:
Spatial-Temporal Graph Modeling with ST-Curriculum Dropout
Hongjun Wang1,2§ , Jiyuan Chen1,2§ , Tong Pan3 , Zipei Fan4 † , Xuan Song1,2† , Renhe Jiang4,5 , Lingyu
Zhang1,2,7 , Yi Xie6 , Zhongyi Wang6 , and Boyuan Zhang1,2
1

SUSTech-UTokyo Joint Research Center on Super Smart City, Southern University of Science and Technology
2
Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous Systems, Southern University of Science and Technology
3
Department of Physics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Center for Spatial Information Science, University of Tokyo
5
Information Technology Center, University of Tokyo
6
Huawei Technologies CO.LTD
7
Didichuxing Inc
Abstract

Spatial-temporal (ST) graph modeling, such as traffic speed
forecasting and taxi demand prediction, is an important task
in deep learning area. However, for the nodes in graph, their
ST patterns can vary greatly in difficulties for modeling,
owning to the heterogeneous nature of ST data. We argue
that unveiling the nodes to the model in a meaningful order, from easy to complex, can provide performance improvements over traditional training procedure. The idea has
its root in Curriculum Learning which suggests in the early
stage of training models can be sensitive to noise and difficult
samples. In this paper, we propose ST-Curriculum Dropout,
a novel and easy-to-implement strategy for spatial-temporal
graph modeling. Specifically, we evaluate the learning difficulty of each node in high-level feature space and drop those
difficult ones out to ensure the model only needs to handle fundamental ST relations at the beginning, before gradually moving to hard ones. Our strategy can be applied to
any canonical deep learning architecture without extra trainable parameters, and extensive experiments on a wide range
of datasets are conducted to illustrate that, by controlling the
difficulty level of ST relations as the training progresses, the
model is able to capture better representation of the data and
thus yields better generalization.

a

b

c

d

e

f

Figure 1: Speed data visualization in METR-LA dataset.

has many real-world applications like traffic speed forecasting (Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2017) and human action recognition
(Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018).
While plenty of attention has been devoted to designing
more sophisticated model architectures so as to capture better ST relations, we are convinced that it’s also valuable
to take a step back and focus on an essential yet easilyoverlooked question: Can we simply use a more advanced
training strategy to improve model performances? Almost
all the existing work in ST modeling tends to treat the nodes
in the graph equally and feed them into the neural network.
However, chances are that the difficulty of modeling a node’s
ST pattern can vary greatly. Figure 1 (a), (b) and (c) show the
regular speed pattern of nodes in METR-LA dataset (Li et al.
2017), which demonstrate that most of the nodes are only
significantly affected by the morning and/or evening peaks,
when heavy traffic congestions might happen. These regular
temporal patterns are easy for models to learn. Nevertheless, Figure 1 (d) shows an example of nodes whose speed
patterns are highly disordered and unpredictable, and their
data representation can be very different from the majority

Introduction
With the advances in deep learning techniques such as Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and Graph Neural Networks (GNN), spatial-temporal graph modeling has been receiving increasing attention. The basic assumption behind
it is that a node’s future state is conditioned on its historical state as well as its spatial neighbors’ historical state
(Wu et al. 2019). Thus, the modeling target seeks to discover both the node-level spatial inter-dependent relations
and the node’s self-dependent temporal relations. The task
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
§
Equal contribution.
†
Corresponding to: Zipei Fan (fanzipei@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp) and
Xuan Song (songx@sustech.edu.cn).

4668

