The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Supervised Contrastive Few-Shot Learning for High-Frequency Time Series
Xi Chen, Cheng Ge, Ming Wang, Jin Wang
Alibaba Group
{chuyu.cx, eric.gc}@alibaba-inc.com, duchen.wm@taobao.com, jet.wangj@alipay.com

Abstract

many engineering fields such as petroleum, steel, aerospace
etc., harsh working conditions with heavy load, continued
fatigue, improper installation or inadequate maintenance often lead to various failures, some of which may cause fatal
breakdown with enormous maintenance cost and even safety
issues. Learning useful representations for vibration monitoring and recognition is of great importance for mechanical fault diagnosis in order to ensure stable performance and
economic life-cycle management (Wang et al. 2019).
Classical approaches exert massive effort on feature engineering through diverse statistical and signal processing
techniques (Smith and Randall 2015; Chen et al. 2018). Although the feature extraction can be explainable, it heavily relies on domain knowledge and engineering experience
which may not be able to discover all important features.
With the development of deep learning, hierarchical features can be automatically learned aiming at the final targets and significantly reduce expertise intervention (Deng
and Yu 2014; Shao et al. 2018). Besides, some domainknowledge based signal analysis methods have been integrated into multi-layer neural networks for feature representation enhancement (Verstraete et al. 2017; Jin and Chen
2021; Chen et al. 2022b). However, a large number of annotated samples are required for network training whereas
in practice, faulty samples are often limited and labeling can
be costly and challenging.
Fortunately, recent studies on contrastive learning have
shed light on the alleviation of data annotation in time series analysis. Many works focus on the proper generation of
positive and negative samples under the assumption that no
label is available.
A typical approach is through negative sampling. Specifically, an unsupervised time-based criterion was developed
following word2vec’s intuition, in which similar time series are generated from their sampled subseries (Franceschi,
Dieuleveut, and Jaggi 2019). Considering the non-stationary
characteristic of time series, adjacent time intervals were
treated as similar pairs while intervals temporally separated
were deemed to have weaker dependencies (Deldari et al.
2021). However, the non-neighborhood random sampling
strategy may result in negative samples similar to the reference in case of any accidental or periodical property of time
series (Arora et al. 2019; Chuang et al. 2020), which compromises the learning effectiveness. To alleviate sampling

Significant progress has been made in representation learning, especially with recent success on self-supervised contrastive learning. However, for time series with less intuitive or semantic meaning, sampling bias may be inevitably
encountered in unsupervised approaches. Although supervised contrastive learning has shown superior performance
by leveraging label information, it may also suffer from
class collapse. In this study, we consider a realistic scenario in industry with limited annotation information available. A supervised contrastive framework is developed for
high-frequency time series representation and classification,
wherein a novel variant of supervised contrastive loss is proposed to include multiple augmentations while induce spread
within each class. Experiments on four mainstream public
datasets as well as a series of sensitivity and ablation studies demonstrate that the learned representations are effective
and robust compared with the direct supervised learning and
self-supervised learning, notably under the minimal few-shot
situation.

Introduction
In recent years, a surgence of studies in contrastive learning
have led to significant advances in the field of representation learning (Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018; Tian, Krishnan,
and Isola 2020; Chen et al. 2020a). The common idea behind contrastive learning is to bring “positive pairs” (samples considered to be similar) closer together while to separate “negative pairs” (samples considered to be different)
further apart in the embedding space. The learned representations are expected to be distinguishable in downstream
tasks. Such approaches have made particular success in the
vision domain (He et al. 2020; Henaff 2020; Chen et al.
2020b; Li et al. 2021), where various views of image data
are readily available. Contrary to that, time series, as another
common data type stemming from the industrial or medical field, are highly heterogeneous. Transformations are not
as easily found and sometimes may lead to adverse results
(Iwana and Uchida 2021; Eldele et al. 2021).
In this study, we focus on a typical subset of time series which is commonly observed in industry, i.e., highfrequency vibration generated by rotating machinery. In
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7069

