The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Optimal Decision Diagrams for Classification
Alexandre M. Florio1,2 * , Pedro Martins3 * , Maximilian Schiffer4 * ,
Thiago Serra5 * , Thibaut Vidal1,2 *
1
CIRRELT & SCALE-AI Chair in Data-Driven Supply Chains,
Department of Mathematical and Industrial Engineering, Polytechnique Montréal, Canada,
3
Department of Computer Science, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
4
School of Management & Munich Data Science Institute, Technical University of Munich, Germany,
5
Freeman College of Management, Bucknell University, USA
aflorio@gmail.com, pmartins@inf.puc-rio.br, schiffer@tum.de, thiago.serra@bucknell.edu, thibaut.vidal@polymtl.ca
2

Abstract

represented as a rooted directed acyclic graph in which each
internal node represents a splitting hyperplane, and each terminal node is uniquely associated to a class. The topology
of the graph remains a free parameter of the model, such that
decision diagram learning requires to jointly determine the
splitting hyperplanes and the node-connecting arcs.
Decision diagrams possess notable advantages over decision trees. Firstly, their width is not bound to grow exponentially with their depth, which allows training deep
but narrow decision diagrams without quickly facing issues of data fragmentation (Shotton et al. 2013; Ignatov
and Ignatov 2018). Moreover, additional degrees of freedom in their topology design permit to express a richer
set of concepts and to achieve better model compression in
memory-constrained computing environments (Breslow and
Aha 1997; Kumar, Goyal, and Varma 2017).
Despite these advantages, decision diagrams have been
more rarely used than decision trees, as learning them remains inherently complex. A decision diagram topology
cannot be easily optimized by construction or local optimization algorithms based on impurity measures. However,
recent enhancements in global optimization techniques for
decision tree training motivate us to reevaluate this issue.
Indeed, optimal decision tree training through mathematical
programming is becoming practical due to the formidable
progress of hardware and mixed-integer linear programming
solvers, which collectively led to speed-ups as high as 1011
between 1991 and 2015—most of which due to algorithmic
improvements rather than hardware (Bixby 2012). In view of
this, we reevaluate the problem of searching for optimal decision diagrams (ODDs) through modern combinatorial optimization lenses and propose new mathematical models and
efficient solution techniques to learn ODDs. Specifically, our
contributions are threefold:
1. We propose the first mixed-integer linear program
(MILP) to train decision diagrams for classification. This
model effectively represents the decision diagram topology and the flow of samples within it, employing a limited number of binary variables. In practice, it includes
exponentially fewer binary variables than (Bertsimas and
Dunn 2017) when applied to decision tree topologies.

Decision diagrams for classification have some notable advantages over decision trees, as their internal connections can
be determined at training time and their width is not bound
to grow exponentially with their depth. Accordingly, decision
diagrams are usually less prone to data fragmentation in internal nodes. However, the inherent complexity of training these
classifiers acted as a long-standing barrier to their widespread
adoption. In this context, we study the training of optimal decision diagrams (ODDs) from a mathematical programming
perspective. We introduce a novel mixed-integer linear programming model for training and demonstrate its applicability for many datasets of practical importance. Further, we
show how this model can be easily extended for fairness, parsimony, and stability notions. We present numerical analyses
showing that our model allows training ODDs in short computational times, and that ODDs achieve better accuracy than
optimal decision trees, while allowing for improved stability
without significant accuracy losses.

Introduction
Decision diagrams, also known as decision graphs or decision streams, have a long history in logic synthesis and formal circuit verification (Lee 1959; Bryant 1986, 1992) as
well as in optimization (Behle 2007; Bergman et al. 2016;
Lange and Swoboda 2021) and artificial intelligence topics such as planning (Sanner, Uther, and Delgado 2010;
Castro et al. 2019), knowledge compilation (Abı́o et al.
2012; Lai, Liu, and Wang 2013; Serra 2020), and constraint propagation (Andersen et al. 2007; Perez and Régin
2015; Verhaeghe, Lecoutre, and Schaus 2018). In machine
learning, decision diagrams have recurrently emerged as
a possible classification model (Oliver 1993; Oliveira and
Sangiovanni-Vincentelli 1996; Mues et al. 2004; Shotton
et al. 2013; Ignatov and Ignatov 2018) or as a by-product
of model compression algorithms applied on decision trees
(Breslow and Aha 1997; Gossen and Steffen 2019; Choudhary et al. 2020). A decision diagram for classification is
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7577

