The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Linking People across Text and Images Based on Social Relation Reasoning
Yang Lei1 , Peizhi Zhao1 , Pijian Li1 , Yi Cai3,4,5 , Qingbao Huang1,2 *
1

School of Electrical Engineering, Guangxi University, Nanning, China
Guangxi Key Laboratory of Multimedia Communications and Network Technology
3
School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
4
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot (SCUT), MOE of China
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{2012391019, 2112391073, 1912302005}@st.gxu.edu.cn, ycai@scut.edu.cn, qbhuang@gxu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
As a sub-task of visual grounding, linking people across text
and images aims to localize target people in images with
corresponding sentences. Existing approaches tend to capture superficial features of people (e.g., dress and location)
that suffer from the incompleteness information across text
and images. We observe that humans are adept at exploring social relations to assist identifying people. Therefore,
we propose a Social Relation Reasoning (SRR) model to
address the aforementioned issues. Firstly, we design a Social Relation Extraction (SRE) module to extract social relations between people in the input sentence. Specially, the
SRE module based on zero-shot learning is able to extract
social relations even though they are not defined in the existing datasets. A Reasoning based Cross-modal Matching
(RCM) module is further used to generate matching matrices by reasoning on the social relations and visual features.
Experimental results show that the accuracy of our proposed
SRR model outperforms the state-of-the-art models on the
challenging datasets Who’s Waldo and FL: MSRE, by more
than 5% and 7%, respectively. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/VILAN-Lab/SRR.

A was at the White
House, received a
summons by B in
June.

Existing
Approaches
Human
Comprehending
(A, summon, B)

A

at

B

at

White
House

reasoning on multi-modal features

(1) Two men shaking hands
may have a meeting.
(1) A and B are
(2) The man sitting on the
having a meeting. chair is more likely to be the
(2) B is the leader. leader.
(3) The man in black suit is
... ...
rrelevant people.

Figure 1: A case of linking people across text and images. Existing approaches capture superficial features such
as “at the White House”. However, it is difficult for them
to match corresponding people with the information above
and lead inaccurately linking. Humans are adept at comprehending image-sentence pairs by extracting social relations
(B, summon, A), and then matching corresponding people
by reasoning on multi-modal features. In addition, summon
is a social relation but not defined in the existing datasets,
which requires zero-shot learning methods.

Introduction
As a core task of multi-modal researches, visual grounding
(a.k.a. referring expression comprehension) aims to localize
an object in an image with a corresponding sentence, which
becomes a hot and widespread concern topic for its great
potential in bridging the gap between visual perception and
textual expression. Since the original work (Yu et al. 2016),
a surge of subsequent models (Mao et al. 2016a; Liu et al.
2019; Li, Bu, and Cai 2021; Ye et al. 2022) have emerged,
and promote significant development of this task.
Previous datasets (Yu et al. 2016; Mao et al. 2016b) permit
models to match the features of a salient object in an imagesentence pair, however, they ignore considering matching
multiple objects in actual needs. To localize multiple people in an image-sentence pair, Cui et al. (2021) propose a
person-centric sub-task of linking people across text and images, which encourages models to learn the capability of reasoning on textual cues and visual features. It is a meaningful

task that can be widely used in reading comprehension and
people identification in the newspaper.
However, existing models tend to capture superficial features (e.g., dress and location) of people and establish a oneto-one mapping. As shown in Figure 1, these models are
capable of capturing superficial textual and visual features,
such as “at the White House”, “shaking hands”, “sitting on a
chair”, and “standing behind”. Obviously, it is still difficult
for them to link people merely depending on the information above. Moreover, when these models cannot comprehend the image-sentence pair, they are more likely to link
both A and B to the man in blue and white stripes shirt for
he is close to the center of the image. Although Cui et al.

* Corresponding author: Qingbao Huang
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1260

