The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Token Mixing: Parameter-Efficient Transfer Learning
from Image-Language to Video-Language
Yuqi Liu1, 2 * , Luhui Xu2 , Pengfei Xiong2 , Qin Jin1†
1

School of Information, Renmin University of China
2
Tencent
{yuqi657, qjin}@ruc.edu.cn, {luhuixu.cn, xiongpengfei2019}@gmail.com

Abstract
Applying large scale pre-trained image-language model to
video-language tasks faces two challenges. One is how to effectively transfer knowledge from static images to dynamic
videos, and the other is how to cope with the prohibitive cost
of fully fine-tuning due to the growing size of the model. Existing works that attempt to realize parameter-efficient imagelanguage to video-language transfer learning can be categorized into two types: 1) appending a sequence of temporal transformer blocks after the 2D Vision Transformer
(ViT), and 2) inserting a temporal block into the ViT architecture. While these two types of methods only require
fine-tuning the newly added components, there are still many
parameters to update, and they are only validated on a single video-language task. In this work, based on our analysis of the core ideas of different temporal modeling components in existing approaches, we propose a token mixing strategy to allow cross-frame interactions, which enables
transferring from the pre-trained image-language model to
video-language tasks through selecting and mixing a key
set and a value set from the input video samples. As token mixing does not require the addition of any components or modules, we can partially fine-tune the pre-trained
image-language model to achieve parameter-efficiency. We
carry out extensive experiments to compare our proposed
token mixing method with other parameter-efficient transfer learning methods. Our token mixing method outperforms other methods on both understanding tasks and generation tasks. Besides, our method achieves new records
on multiple video-language tasks. The code is available at
https://github.com/yuqi657/video language model.

Figure 1: Different parameter-efficient tuning methods on
video-language tasks. We compare our method with four
partial fine-tuning methods including Dual-channel Attention (Hong et al. 2022), BitFit (Zaken, Ravfogel, and Goldberg 2021), ST-Adapter (Pan et al. 2022) and Adapter
(Houlsby et al. 2019), Temporal Fine-tuning and a fully finetuning method ViViT (Arnab et al. 2021). Our method is
effective in both video-text retrieval and video captioning
tasks while has smaller updated parameters.

model training or fine-tuning (e.g., BLIP-L/14 with 578M
parameters), which would restrict the deployment of models in real-world applications. Therefore, parameter-efficient
transfer learning from image-language to video-language
has attracted much research attention recently.
Motivated by works in the NLP area which have been proposed for parameter-efficient fine-tuning and achieved competitive performance by only fine-tuning a small set of parameters (Hong et al. 2022; Sung, Cho, and Bansal 2022;
Pan et al. 2022), different approaches of parameter-efficient
cross-modal transfer learning are proposed to leverage the
power of pre-trained image-language models (Hong et al.
2022; Sung, Cho, and Bansal 2022; Pan et al. 2022). These
works can be divided into two types: 1) appending a sequence of temporal transformer blocks after the original 2D
Vision Transformer (ViT), or 2) inserting a temporal block
into the original ViT architecture. Only the newly added

Introduction
With the recent success of image-language pre-trained models (Li et al. 2022; Radford et al. 2021), many works
(Luo et al. 2021; Fang et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2022b) have explored adopting an image-language pretrained model to video-language tasks. These works usually face two challenges. One is how to effectively transfer knowledge learnt from 2D static images to 3D dynamic
videos. The other is how to handle the expensive cost in
* This work was done when Yuqi was an intern at Tencent
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1781

