The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Memory-Oriented Structural Pruning for Efficient Image Restoration
Xiangsheng Shi1,2 * , Xuefei Ning1† * , Lidong Guo3 * , Tianchen Zhao1 ,
Enshu Liu1 , Yi Cai1 , Yuhan Dong2 , Huazhong Yang1 , Yu Wang1†
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
3
School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University
shi-xs20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, foxdoraame@gmail.com, gld21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
suozhang1998@gmail.com, les19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, cai-y13@mail.tsinghua.org.cn,
dongyuhan@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, yanghz@tsinghua.edu.cn, yu-wang@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

39.5

Deep learning (DL) based methods have significantly pushed
forward the state-of-the-art for image restoration (IR) task.
Nevertheless, DL-based IR models are highly computationand memory-intensive. The surging demands for processing
higher-resolution images and multi-task paralleling in practical mobile usage further add to their computation and memory burdens. In this paper, we reveal the overlooked memory redundancy of the IR models and propose a MemoryOriented Structural Pruning (MOSP) method. To properly
compress the long-range skip connections (a major source
of the memory burden), we introduce a compactor module
onto each skip connection to decouple the pruning of the
skip connections and the main branch. MOSP progressively
prunes the original model layers and the compactors to cut
down the peak memory while maintaining high IR quality.
Experiments on real image denoising, image super resolution
and low-light image enhancement show that MOSP can yield
models with higher memory efficiency while better preserving performance compared with baseline pruning methods.

39.0
PSNR / dB

38.5
38.0
37.5

Uniformly Scale
ASSL
Group Lasso (Uniform)
Group Lasso (Global L2)
Ours

37.0
36.5
36.0

2.5

5.0

7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0 22.5

Peak Memory / MB

Figure 1: Trade-off between IR performance (PSNR) and
peak memory consumption on the SIDD dataset. We compare our pruning method MOSP with uniformly scale, group
lasso (Wen et al. 2016) and ASSL (Zhang et al. 2021a).

Introduction
Owing to the adverse environmental conditions and the limitations of image acquisition devices, image degradations
(e.g., noise, blur) are often introduced during the image acquisition process. As a fundamental computer vision application, image restoration (IR) aims to recover clean images
from such contaminated measurements. Thanks to the superior capacity for learning implicit and generalizable priors
in a data-driven fashion, deep learning (DL) based methods (Zamir et al. 2021b; Wang et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022)
have emerged and dominated the field of image restoration,
providing satisfactory image reconstructions.
Nevertheless, due to the pixel-to-pixel reconstruction nature of the IR task, these methods have excessive demands
for hardware resources in terms of memory and computation. Besides, considering that the computational units on
mobile devices need to process multi-tasks simultaneously,

the actual resources allocated for IR tasks are further limited. Moreover, the surging demand for processing higherresolution images (Chen et al. 2018; Lamba and Mitra 2021)
adds to the burden of hardware resources. Therefore, deploying the DL-based IR models on resource-constrained mobile
devices for practical use is challenging and calls for efficiency improvements.
While improving the computation efficiency of the IR
models has been investigated by recent researches, either
through compact module design (Chen et al. 2022) or
model compression (Zhang et al. 2021a,b), specific optimization for memory consumption of the IR models remains overlooked. In this paper, we point out that the frequently adopted multi-scale feature aggregation strategy
in IR model design is memory-costly and calls for improvements. Specifically, the widely used U-Net architectures (Chen et al. 2018; Zamir et al. 2021b; Chen et al. 2021)
contains multiple long-range skip connections from the encoder to the decoder. Thus the intermediate features need to

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2245

