The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SEnsor Alignment for Multivariate Time-Series Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Yucheng Wang1,2 , Yuecong Xu2 , Jianfei Yang1 , Zhenghua Chen2,3 * ,
Min Wu2 , Xiaoli Li1,2,3 , Lihua Xie1
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research, A*STAR, Singapore
{yucheng003, xuyu0014, yang0478, chen0832}@e.ntu.edu.sg, {wumin, xlli}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, elhxie@ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

Sensors in source

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) methods can reduce label dependency by mitigating the feature discrepancy between labeled samples in a source domain and unlabeled samples in a similar yet shifted target domain. Though
achieving good performance, these methods are inapplicable for Multivariate Time-Series (MTS) data. MTS data are
collected from multiple sensors, each of which follows various distributions. However, most UDA methods solely focus on aligning global features but cannot consider the distinct distributions of each sensor. To cope with such concerns, a practical domain adaptation scenario is formulated
as Multivariate Time-Series Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (MTS-UDA). In this paper, we propose SEnsor Alignment (SEA) for MTS-UDA to reduce the domain discrepancy at both the local and global sensor levels. At the local sensor level, we design the endo-feature alignment to
align sensor features and their correlations across domains,
whose information represents the features of each sensor and
the interactions between sensors. Further, to reduce domain
discrepancy at the global sensor level, we design the exofeature alignment to enforce restrictions on the global sensor features. Meanwhile, MTS also incorporates the essential spatial-temporal dependencies information between sensors, which cannot be transferred by existing UDA methods. Therefore, we model the spatial-temporal information of
MTS with a multi-branch self-attention mechanism for simple and effective transfer across domains. Empirical results
demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of our proposed
SEA on two public MTS datasets for MTS-UDA. The code is
available at https://github.com/Frank-Wang-oss/SEA

Sensors in target

Alignment

Before

After

Poor alignment
Before

After

Figure 1: Comparisons between previous UDA methods
and ours, where before and after represent before and after alignment respectively. Left: Only global sensor features
are aligned, resulting in the poor alignment of the red sensor.
Right: SEA aligns the sensor information between domains,
so the feature discrepancy of each sensor can be reduced.

the knowledge from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled
target domain in the absence of labels of the target domain.
To reduce discrepancy across domains, existing UDA methods learn domain-invariant features with two paradigms,
which include metric-based methods (Tzeng et al. 2014)
and adversarial-based methods (Ganin et al. 2016). These
methods have achieved decent performance, showing the effectiveness of UDA in reducing label dependency. Subsequently, researchers applied UDA for TS data, aiming to reduce the discrepancy across domains by learning domaininvariant temporal features extracted by Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN) (Purushotham et al. 2017), Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM) (Cai et al. 2021), and Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) (Liu and Xue 2021).
While substantial progress has been made, existing TS
UDA methods generally focus on Univariate Time-Series
(UTS) data by assuming that data originate from one single source (Cai et al. 2021). Yet, they are inapplicable for
real-world applications where multiple sensors are deployed
simultaneously, e.g. remaining useful life (RUL) prediction
and human activity recognition (HAR). To cope with such
applications, we thus formulate a more challenging yet practical scenario of Multivariate Time-Series Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (MTS-UDA). Different from UTS data,

Introduction
Time-Series (TS) data have been widely studied thanks to
their applications in various fields. Due to the powerful ability to model latent dependencies within data, Deep Learning (DL) methods have made notable advances in TS related
problems (Zhao et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2021a; He et al.
2022). However, they require a vast amount of labeled TS
data for training, which may not be available in real-world
applications due to the high cost of data labeling.
To reduce the cost of labeling, Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (UDA) methods have been proposed to transfer
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10253

