The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Reinforced Approximate Exploratory Data Analysis
Shaddy Garg1 , Subrata Mitra1 * , Tong Yu1 ,
Yash Gadhia2† , Arjun Kashettiwar 2†
2

1
Adobe Research
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay

Abstract
Exploratory data analytics (EDA) is a sequential decision
making process where analysts choose subsequent queries
that might lead to some interesting insights based on the previous queries and corresponding results. Data processing systems often execute the queries on samples to produce results
with low latency. Different downsampling strategy preserves
different statistics of the data and have different magnitude
of latency reductions. The optimum choice of sampling strategy often depends on the particular context of the analysis
flow and the hidden intent of the analyst. In this paper, we are
the first to consider the impact of sampling in interactive data
exploration settings as they introduce approximation errors.
We propose a Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) based
framework which can optimize the sample selection in order to keep the analysis and insight generation flow intact.
Evaluations with 3 real datasets show that our technique can
preserve the original insight generation flow while improving
the interaction latency, compared to baseline methods.

1

Figure 1: Divergence of intent distribution: Single sampling
strategy (stratified or uniform) for all the contexts in sequential data exploration can make user to get mislead into wrong
analysis flow due to approximation errors.
dula 2017; Park et al. 2018; Sheoran et al. 2022a) and visualizations (Park, Cafarella, and Mozafari 2016; Moritz et al.
2017; Porwal et al. 2022). For large datasets that are often a target for EDA (Galakatos et al. 2017; Wang et al.
2014), running queries on samples can substantially reduce
the query latency. However, sampling creates approximation
errors and can mislead the users in an interactive data exploration flow, especially when the use, choice and degree of
approximation is transparent to the user. In this paper, we
are the first to explore a setting where an EDA system transparently uses different forms of downsampling strategy on
the original data to run the queries but protect the user from
being mislead due to approximation error from poor choice
of samples. Figure 1 shows distributions of 10 user-intents
extracted from several thousand of realistic EDA sequences
on Flights data. It can be observed that if only a particular
downsample strategy (e.g. stratified or uniform sampling) is
used for every context in the entire sequence, the resulting
intent distribution diverges from the ideal.

Introduction

Exploratory data analysis (EDA) is an interactive and sequential process of data understanding and insight generation where a user (e.g. a data analyst) issues an analysis
action (i.e. a query) against a tabular data, receives some
answers, subsection of the tabular data or some visualization and then decides which queries to issue next in order to
understand the hidden characteristics of the data and associated insights better (Ma et al. 2021a; Bar El et al. 2020;
Milo et al. 2018a). Characteristics and insights obtained using EDA are crucial for subsequent decision making in various domains (Ma et al. 2021a). The success of an EDA session and the quality of insights obtained from it large depend
on two things: (1) how interactive the system is (i.e. how
quickly results are obtained) and (2) whether the outcome of
previous sequence of queries are reliable and representative
enough for an expert analyst to issue subsequent queries so
as to uncover interesting characteristics.
To improve latency of interactions, downsampling the data
has been proposed in various works target ting approximate query processing (AQP) (Chaudhuri, Ding, and Kan-

This is because the results of the previous query can get distorted due to sampling and may prompt the user to a false
path of analysis, which would have been useless if the original data was used. Second, there are numerous sampling
techniques available, such as uniform sampling with different sampling rates, stratified sampling of few different kinds,
systematic sampling, cluster sampling, diversity sampling
etc. Each of these sampling algorithms are good at preserving some properties of the data at the cost of introducing approximation errors for other properties. For a sequential and
interactive data exploration workflow where multiple different types of queries are used on different subsections of the
data, there is often not a single sampling strategy that wins
over everything else. This is because, in a sequential interac-

* Corresponding Author
†

Work done while at Adobe Research
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7660

