The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SARAS-Net: Scale and Relation Aware Siamese Network for Change Detection
Chao-Peng Chen1 , Jun-Wei Hsieh1 *, Ping-Yang Chen2 , Yi-Kuan Hsieh1 , Bor-Shiun Wang2
1

College of Artificial Intelligence and Green Energy, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan.
2
Department of Computer Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University Taiwan.
f64051041@gmail.com, [jwhsieh, pingyang.cs08, khjhsnaughty.ai10, eddiewang.cs10]@nycu.edu.tw

Abstract
Change detection (CD) aims to find the difference between
two images at different times and outputs a change map to
represent whether the region has changed or not. To achieve
a better result in generating the change map, many State-ofThe-Art (SoTA) methods design a deep learning model that
has a powerful discriminative ability. However, these methods still get lower performance because they ignore spatial
information and scaling changes between objects, giving rise
to blurry or wrong boundaries. In addition to these, they
also neglect the interactive information of two different images. To alleviate these problems, we propose our network,
the Sacale and Relation-Aware Siamese Network (SARASNet) to deal with this issue. In this paper, three modules are
proposed that include relation-aware, scale-aware, and crosstransformer to tackle the problem of scene change detection more effectively. To verify our model, we tested three
public datasets, including LEVIR-CD, WHU-CD, and DSFIN, and obtained SoTA accuracy. Our code is available at
https://github.com/f64051041/SARAS-Net.

Figure 1: Result of our model for change detection in the
LEVIR-CD dataset. (a) and (b) input remote sensing images,
(c) ground truth, and (d) prediction result of our model.

ability can extract more useful features from images. However, these methods still face some problems when analyzing the change region. For example, FCN (Jaturapitpornchai
et al. 2019) uses the U-net model to detect the region that
constructs new buildings. Although it can roughly indicate
the position of newly built constructions, it gets low performance because it ignores spatial information and different scale changes between objects. Although SNUNet (Fang
et al. 2022) focuses on processing multi-scale features to
tackle the scaling changes of objects through an ECAM (Ensemble Channel Attention Module). However, this ECAM
considers only channel attention and ignores the spatial relations between pixels to generate the change maps, so many
unexpected regions with seasonal changes in vegetation are
also detected. To punish attention to unchanged feature pairs
and increase attention to changed feature pairs, some methods (Liu et al. 2021a; Zhang et al. 2020; Peng et al. 2021)
have used attention mechanisms, such as channel attention
and spatial attention, to improve the detection result. However, these networks emphasize each pixel’s channel importance to make the extractor more effective; it still neglects the cross-relation between features that are generated by two remote sensing images. In contrast to these
networks, BIT (Chen, Qi, and Shi 2022a) uses the transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) to encode high-level concepts
of the change of interest by a set of semantic tokens and
then fuses them with the original deep features to generate
the expected binary change map. Though it applies attention
mechanisms and considers the relationship between two features, it does not consider performing some convolution operations to fine-tune change maps after feature subtraction.
From the above discussions, we summarize the problems

Introduction
Change detection is a critical and challenging research topic
in computer vision and remote sensing. This issue aims to
find the difference between two images at different times
and output a change map to represent whether the region
has changed or not, as shown in Figure 1. The change detection task has been widely used in many applications, such
as urban expansion (Lu, Moran, and Hetrick 2011), damage assessment (Xu et al. 2019), and land cover monitoring (Hulley, Veraverbeke, and Hook 2014). To generate a
change map, most traditional methods focus on detecting the
changed pixels and classifying them. However, these results
often come with low accuracy because of some noise, including different light intensity and surface colors. Hence,
designing a good network with powerful discrimination to
solve these problems is crucial.
With the development of deep learning, most existing
methods have been proposed with powerful CNN models to
tackle change detection. They have better performance than
traditional methods because their outstanding discriminative
*Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14187

