The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Neural Diffeomorphic Non-uniform B-spline Flows
Seongmin Hong1 , Se Young Chun1,2 *
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
2
INMC, Interdisciplinary Program in AI, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
{smhongok, sychun}@snu.ac.kr

(1)
For X = {x(n) }N
, . . . , x(N ) are i.i.d. samples
n=1 where x
⋆
from px , normalizing flows are trained on X by minimizing
the following negative log-likelihood (NLL):

Abstract
Normalizing flows have been successfully modeling a complex probability distribution as an invertible transformation
of a simple base distribution. However, there are often applications that require more than invertibility. For instance, the
computation of energies and forces in physics requires the
second derivatives of the transformation to be well-defined
and continuous. Smooth normalizing flows employ infinitely
differentiable transformation, but with the price of slow nonanalytic inverse transforms. In this work, we propose diffeomorphic non-uniform B-spline flows that are at least
twice continuously differentiable while bi-Lipschitz continuous, enabling efficient parametrization while retaining analytic inverse transforms based on a sufficient condition for
diffeomorphism. Firstly, we investigate the sufficient condition for C k−2 -diffeomorphic non-uniform kth-order B-spline
transformations. Then, we derive an analytic inverse transformation of the non-uniform cubic B-spline transformation
for neural diffeomorphic non-uniform B-spline flows. Lastly,
we performed experiments on solving the force matching
problem in Boltzmann generators, demonstrating that our
C 2 -diffeomorphic non-uniform B-spline flows yielded solutions better than previous spline flows and faster than smooth
normalizing flows. Our source code is publicly available at
https://github.com/smhongok/Non-uniform-B-spline-Flow.

N

1 X
LNLL = −
log px (x(n) ) ≈ −Ex∼p⋆x [log px (x)] (2)
N n=1
where the above approximation becomes true as N → ∞.
Density estimation corresponds to obtaining T from x and
sampling is referred to getting x = T (u) from u ∼ pu (u).
Normalizing flows are often used to model physical systems. For example, one can model the probability density
of a molecular system (Köhler, Klein, and Noé 2020; Wu,
Köhler, and Noé 2020; Garcia Satorras et al. 2021; Xu
et al. 2021), sample a lattice model (Li and Wang 2018;
Albergo, Kanwar, and Shanahan 2019; Nicoli et al. 2020,
2021; Boyda et al. 2021), or estimate free energies (Wirnsberger et al. 2020; Ding and Zhang 2021). While a C 1 diffeomorphic T may be sufficient in a typical normalizing
flow for generating images or texts, modeling physical systems requires more conditions such as a normalizing flow
being a C k -diffeomorphism. For example, Boltzmann generator (Noé et al. 2019; Köhler, Krämer, and Noé 2021; Liu
et al. 2022; Ahmad and Cai 2022; Jing et al. 2022) requires
the condition that T is a C 2 -diffeomorphism.
Boltzmann generators are generative models for sampling
molecular structures whose existence probability distributions follow the Boltzmann distributions. Without loss of
generality, the true target distribution can be expressed as
p⋆x (x) ∝ exp (−v(x)) where v is the potential energy of a
molecular system and its force components are

Introduction
Normalizing flows (Rezende and Mohamed 2015; Papamakarios et al. 2021) model complex probability distributions. Normalizing flows are not only performing the probability density estimation but also sampling from the learned
probability distribution. Let X be a dataset from the true
target probability distribution p⋆x . Constructing normalizing
flows fits a flow-based model px to the true target distribution p⋆x using a simple base probability distribution pu and
a diffeomorphic (i.e., invertible and differentiable) mapping
T : Ω → Ω where Ω is a compact subset of RD with the
following density transformation:
px (x) = pu (T −1 (x)) det

∂T −1
(x) .
∂x

f (x) = −∂x v(x) = ∂x log p⋆x (x) = ∂x p⋆x (x)/p⋆x (x). (3)
Since valid molecular systems have well-defined and continuous force components, p⋆x must be at least once continuously differentiable (for continuous f ) and nonzero (for
well-defined f ).
When the Boltzmann generators are constructed using the
normalizing flows, Equation (1) implies that T −1 must be
at least twice continuously differentiable (for continuously
differentiable px ) and its derivative must have positive lower
bound (for px to have positive lower-bound). In other words,
T should be at least C 2 -diffeomorphic. In this case, it is possible to train through force matching (FM) by minimizing

(1)

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12225

