The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PEN: Prediction-Explanation Network to
Forecast Stock Price Movement with Better Explainability
Shuqi Li1 * , Weiheng Liao2 * , Yuhan Chen1 * , Rui Yan1, 3†
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence (GSAI), Renmin University of China
2
MADE by DATA ‡
3
Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, Ministry of Education
shuqili@ruc.edu.cn, weiheng@madebydata.com, yuhanchen@ruc.edu.cn, ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract

(Xing, Cambria, and Welsch 2018; Jiang 2021; Si et al.
2013; Schumaker and Chen 2009). The aligned text streams
are to some extent explaining the prediction from an external
perspective other than the stock price time series. The use of
deep text mining algorithms to model text data also makes a
massive difference. For this kind of models, we observe two
facts. 1) Not all the texts are equally useful in predicting the
future, and those unimportant texts shall be filtered out. 2)
When investors make investments decisions, they only focus on a small subset of key information.
With these motivations in mind, we propose a model
named Prediction-Explanation Network (PEN) to jointly
predict the stock price movement and explore probable effect factors. The key component of the proposed PEN model
is a shared representation learning (SRL) module to analyze
text embeddings and stock price series jointly and learn their
shared representation from their correlation. To be more specific, this component selects the stock price data and the corresponding salient text information, fuse them into a single
representation vector. To better incorporate stochastic factors, we leverage the variant of Variational Auto-Encoders
(VAE) to generate stock movements from latent variables.
To sum up, the key contributions of our work include:
• A novel framework for stock price movement prediction
with better explainability through alignment of stock price
streams and text streams.
• A key shared representation learning (SRL) module
which models the interaction between text data and stock
price data and produces better text and price embeddings.
• A salient regulator that is inspired by individual investors’ decision process and specifically designed to work
within the PEN framework in order to maximize the explainability of texts.
We conduct extensive experiments on real-world datasets
to verify the effectiveness of the proposed PEN model. Experiments on two distinct datasets spanning two different
time periods show that PEN outperforms the existing stateof-art models, demonstrating that focusing on the right information can indeed help to make a better prediction.

Nowadays explainability in stock price movement prediction
is attracting increasing attention in banks, hedge funds and
asset managers, primarily due to audit or regulatory reasons.
Text data such as financial news and social media posts can be
part of the reasons for stock price movement. To this end, we
propose a novel framework of Prediction-Explanation Network (PEN) jointly modeling text streams and price streams
with alignment. The key component of the PEN model is
an shared representation learning module that learns which
texts are possibly associated with the stock price movement
by modeling the interaction between the text data and stock
price data with a salient vector characterizing their correlation. In this way, the PEN model is able to predict the stock
price movement by identifying and utilizing abundant messages while on the other hand, the selected text messages also
explain the stock price movement. Experiments on real-world
datasets demonstrate that we are able to kill two birds with
one stone: in terms of accuracy, the proposed PEN model outperforms the state-of-art baseline; on explainability, the PEN
model are demonstrated to be far superior to attention mechanism, capable of picking out the crucial texts with a very high
confidence.

Introduction
Stock price movement prediction, a hugely challenging but
equally rewarding task, has always drawn enormous interest
from both academia and industry (Frankel and Frankel 1995;
Bollen, Mao, and Zeng 2011; Edwards, Magee, and Bassetti
2018). Classical approaches like time series analysis have
continued to remain popular due to their simple structures
and intepretability. In recent years, deep learning techniques
have gained much popularity due to its ability to improve
the prediction accuracy when there are large quantities of
training data, as often is the case of financial markets.
For better prediction, an external network becomes a possible solution via alignment of financial news commentaries
and social media posts, revealing rich information about the
market, far beyond price, trading volume or financial KPIs
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn)
https://www.madebydata.com
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Related Work

‡

Stock Price Movement Prediction. Traditional approach
tends to focus on identifying patterns and correlations in
5187

