The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Better Generalized Few-Shot Learning Even without Base Data
Seong-Woong Kim, Dong-Wan Choi*
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Inha University, South Korea
wauri6@gmail.com, dchoi@inha.ac.kr

Abstract

Base:

This paper introduces and studies zero-base generalized fewshot learning (zero-base GFSL), which is an extreme yet practical version of few-shot learning problem. Motivated by the
cases where base data is not available due to privacy or ethical
issues, the goal of zero-base GFSL is to newly incorporate the
knowledge of few samples of novel classes into a pretrained
model without any samples of base classes. According to our
analysis, we discover the fact that both mean and variance of
the weight distribution of novel classes are not properly established, compared to those of base classes. The existing GFSL
methods attempt to make the weight norms balanced, which
we find helps only the variance part, but discard the importance
of mean of weights particularly for novel classes, leading to the
limited performance in the GFSL problem even with base data.
In this paper, we overcome this limitation by proposing a simple yet effective normalization method that can effectively control both mean and variance of the weight distribution of novel
classes without using any base samples and thereby achieve a
satisfactory performance on both novel and base classes. Our
experimental results somewhat surprisingly show that the proposed zero-base GFSL method that does not utilize any base
samples even outperforms the existing GFSL methods that
make the best use of base data. Our implementation is available at: https://github.com/bigdata-inha/Zero-Base-GFSL.

(a) Pretrained

Novel:

(b) Biased

(c) Desired (ours)

Figure 1: Visualization of the decision boundaries of ResNet18 trained with an auxiliary 2D projection module before the
classifier layer on tiered-ImageNet, where red triangles are
feature vectors of novel classes and the others are those of
base classes. Note that feature vectors themselves remain the
same in the frozen feature space. (a): Well-formed decision
boundaries of the pretrained model of base classes. (b): Finetuned decision boundaries biased toward novel classes. (c):
Well-balanced decision boundaries for both base and novel
classes via our normalization.
(Gidaris and Komodakis 2018, 2019; Kukleva, Kuehne, and
Schiele 2021; Shi et al. 2020) tackle this version of FSL,
namely generalized few-shot learning (GFSL), which not
only aims to learn about novel classes but also preserve the
existing knowledge for base classes.
Due to its simplicity and performance, transfer learning
becomes a dominant approach in GFSL, where we fine-tune a
model already trained over base classes to additionally learn
the knowledge of new classes with a few samples. Despite the
small volume of new data, the fine-tuned model gets easily
biased to novel classes to the point that the model becomes
pretty useless for base classes. Hence, most existing works
in GFSL focus on how to make the resulting model well
balanced over base and novel classes by performing balanced
fine-tuning (Kukleva, Kuehne, and Schiele 2021; Li et al.
2019; Qi, Brown, and Lowe 2018) or leveraging additional
architectures (Gidaris and Komodakis 2018; Ren et al. 2019;
Yoon et al. 2020) and supplement information (Li et al. 2020;
Shi et al. 2020).
All the aforementioned approaches assume the presence
of base data (i.e., samples of base classes) for preserving the
knowledge of base classes as well as learning the relationship

Introduction
Few-shot learning (FSL) (Fei-Fei, Fergus, and Perona 2006;
Lake et al. 2011; Lake, Salakhutdinov, and Tenenbaum 2015)
has become a major problem due to the practical difficulties
of data collection. Trying to mimic the human’s ability to
acquire general knowledge with a few observations, the goal
of FSL is to learn new knowledge by training only a few
samples on a model, which is often a pretrained model. Many
existing works focus on a scenario where the resulting model
only discriminates novel classes, referred to as standard fewshot learning (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Koch et al.
2015; Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017; Vinyals et al. 2016).
It is even more challenging, yet practical, when the model
can infer both existing classes (a.k.a. base classes) already
trained in the model and unseen classes (a.k.a. novel classes)
newly learned with a few samples. Only some recent works
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8282

