The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Heterogeneous Graph Learning for Multi-Modal Medical Data Analysis
Sein Kim1 , Namkyeong Lee1 , Junseok Lee1 , Dongmin Hyun2 , Chanyoung Park1,3 *
1

Dept. of Industrial and Systems Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
2
Institute of Artifical Intelligence, POSTECH, Pohang, Republic of Korea
3
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
rlatpdlsgns@kaist.ac.kr, namkyeong96@kaist.ac.kr, junseoklee@kaist.ac.kr, dm.hyun@postech.ac.kr, cy.park@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

to more accurate clinical decisions when they are properly
combined. Hence, it is crucial to study how to integrate the
multi-modal medical data for medical image analysis, which
is relatively under explored despite its importance.
However, effectively fusing the multi-modal medical data
is not a trivial task since a variety of clinical modalities contain their own distinct information and may have different
data format (Cui et al. 2022). Some studies reflect multiple modalities in an “early fusion” manner by combining
images of different modalities (e.g., positron emission tomography (PET), computed tomography (CT) and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI)) before training the model (Teramoto et al. 2016; Tan et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2019). On
the other hand, “late fusion” approaches combine representations of different imaging modalities (Liu et al. 2021; Suk
et al. 2014; Xu et al. 2016), while others learn from both
image and non-image medical data by combining information from independently trained models in a post-hoc manner (Sanyal, Kar, and Sarkar 2021; Akselrod-Ballin et al.
2019; Cheerla and Gevaert 2019). A recent approach proposes end-to-end learning strategies for fusing multi-modal
features at different stages of the model training, i.e., fusing
intermediate features and output probabilities (Holste et al.
2021). However, current practice of naively integrating different modalities cannot fully benefit from the complementary relationship between multiple modalities.
In this work, we focus on the fact that patients who share
similar non-image data are likely to suffer from the same
disease. For example, it is well known that a group of people possessing the E4 allele of apolipoprotein E (APOE)
has the primary genetic risk factor for the sporadic form of
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) (Emrani et al. 2020). Hence, by
introducing non-image data (e.g., APOE in the tabular data)
in addition to image data, we argue that preemptive clinical
decisions can be made at an early stage of AD, which may
not be detected based on image data only.
To elaborate our argument, we compare the similarity of
non-image data between various levels of dementia with
OASIS-3 (LaMontagne et al. 2019) dataset in which patients in the dataset are divided into four classes according
to the severity of dementia assessed using Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale (Morris 1991): CDR 0 indicates normal cognitive function, CDR 0.5 indicates very mild impairment, CDR 1 indicates mild impairment, and CDR 2 indi-

Routine clinical visits of a patient produce not only image data, but also non-image data containing clinical information regarding the patient, i.e., medical data is multimodal in nature. Such heterogeneous modalities offer different and complementary perspectives on the same patient,
resulting in more accurate clinical decisions when they are
properly combined. However, despite its significance, how to
effectively fuse the multi-modal medical data into a unified
framework has received relatively little attention. In this paper, we propose an effective graph-based framework called
HetMed (Heterogeneous Graph Learning for Multi-modal
Medical Data Analysis) for fusing the multi-modal medical
data. Specifically, we construct a multiplex network that incorporates multiple types of non-image features of patients to
capture the complex relationship between patients in a systematic way, which leads to more accurate clinical decisions.
Extensive experiments on various real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority and practicality of HetMed. The source
code for HetMed is available at https://github.com/Sein-Kim/
Multimodal-Medical.

1

Introduction

Along with recent advances of deep convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) in computer vision domain, analyzing
medical image with CNNs have achieved great success in
patient healthcare (Azizi et al. 2021; Sun, Yu, and Batmanghelich 2021; Taleb et al. 2020; Deng et al. 2020; Aggarwal et al. 2021). Despite their success, they pay little attention to the inherent uniqueness of medical data: medical
data is multi-modal in nature. That is, routine clinical visits of a patient produce not only image data, but also nonimage data containing clinical information regarding the patient (Cui et al. 2022), which offers complementary diagnostic information of patients. More precisely, image data
includes images of various body parts used for diagnostic or
treatment purposes, while non-image data includes clinical
data (e.g., demographic features and diagnosis) and lab test
results (e.g., structured genomic sequences and blood test
results). Such heterogeneous medical data provides different and complementary views of the same patient, leading
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5141

