The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DQ-DETR: Dual Query Detection Transformer for
Phrase Extraction and Grounding
Shilong Liu1,2 * , Shijia Huang3 , Feng Li2,4 , Hao Zhang2,4 ,
Yaoyuan Liang5 , Hang Su1 , Jun Zhu1† , Lei Zhang2†
1

Dept. of CST, BNRist Center, Inst. for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint Center for ML, Tsinghua University.
2
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA).
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong.
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
5
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University.
{liusl20,liang-yy21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {fliay,hzhangcx}@connect.ust.hk, sjhuang@cse.cuhk.edu.hk,
{suhangss,dcszjmail.tsinghua.edu.cn, {leizhang}@idea.edu.cn
Task

Abstract
(a)

In this paper, we study the problem of visual grounding by
considering both phrase extraction and grounding (PEG). In
contrast to the previous phrase-known-at-test setting, PEG requires a model to extract phrases from text and locate objects from image simultaneously, which is a more practical
setting in real applications. As phrase extraction can be regarded as a 1D text segmentation problem, we formulate PEG
as a dual detection problem and propose a novel DQ-DETR
model, which introduces dual queries to probe different features from image and text for object prediction and phrase
mask prediction. Each pair of dual queries is designed to have
shared positional parts but different content parts. Such a design effectively alleviates the difficulty of modality alignment
between image and text (in contrast to a single query design)
and empowers Transformer decoder to leverage phrase maskguided attention to improve the performance. To evaluate the
performance of PEG, we also propose a new metric CMAP
(cross-modal average precision), analogous to the AP metric
in object detection. The new metric overcomes the ambiguity of Recall@1 in many-box-to-one-phrase cases in phrase
grounding. As a result, our PEG pre-trained DQ-DETR establishes new state-of-the-art results on all visual grounding
benchmarks with a ResNet-101 backbone. For example, it
achieves 91.04% and 83.51% in terms of recall rate on RefCOCO testA and testB with a ResNet-101 backbone. Code
will be available at https://github.com/IDEA-Research/DQDETR.

Referring
Expression
(b)
Comprehension
(REC)

(c)

(d)

Input

Output

Object
Detection
(DET)

Phrase
Grounding
Phrase
Extraction
and Grounding
(PEG)

cat
ball

Metric
AP

Recall@1
The ball that is
in front of a cat

or

Recall@1
(consider only
one object for
each phrase)

A cat and two balls

or

A cat and two balls

CMAP
(cross-modal
two balls
average precision)
two balls
A cat

Figure 1: Comparisons of different settings. (a) Given an
image, object detection (DET) is to locate objects in predefined categories. The most popular metric for DET is mAP
(Lin et al. 2014). (b) Referring expression comprehension
(REC) aims at locating objects described by an input text. Its
performance is normally evaluated by the recall of the most
confident outputs. (c) Phrase grounding needs to ground the
spatial regions described by phrases in an image. Most methods treat this task as a ranking problem and evaluate it by
recall. The phrases in sentences are usually assumed known
during inference. (d) We re-emphasize a phrase extraction
and grounding (PEG) setting in this paper. A key difference
compared with phrase grounding is that phrases in PEG are
unknown during test. We propose a CMAP (cross-modal average precision) metric for the PEG task, analogous to mAP
for DET. In this paper, we use the term “visual grounding”
for all of three tasks: REC, phrase grounding, and PEG.

Introduction
Visual grounding aims to locate objects referred to by language expressions or phrases, which closely relates to object detection (DET, Fig. 1 (a)) in vision. It has received
increasing attention for its potential to benefit other multimodal tasks like visual question answering (VQA) (Fukui

et al. 2016) and image retrieval (Karpathy, Joulin, and FeiFei 2014; Radenovic, Tolias, and Chum 2016).
Some works (Deng et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2022) treat
the terms visual grounding, referring expression comprehension (REC), and phrase grounding interchangeable. How-

* This work was done when Shilong Liu, Yaoyuan Liang, Feng

Li, Shijia Huang, and Hao Zhang were interns at IDEA.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1728

