The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Tight Inapproximability for Graphical Games
Argyrios Deligkas1 , John Fearnley2 , Alexandros Hollender3 , Themistoklis Melissourgos4
1

Royal Holloway, United Kingdom
University of Liverpool, United Kingdom
3
EPFL, Switzerland
4
University of Essex, United Kingdom
argyrios.deligkas@rhul.ac.uk, john.fearnley@liverpool.ac.uk, alexandros.hollender@epfl.ch,
themistoklis.melissourgos@essex.ac.uk
2

entries, giving n·md+1 payoffs in total, which provides much
more reasonable scaling as n grows when d is constant.

Abstract
We provide a complete characterization for the computational
complexity of finding approximate equilibria in two-action
graphical games. We consider the two most well-studied approximation notions: ε-Nash equilibria (ε-NE) and ε-wellsupported Nash equilibria (ε-WSNE), where ε ∈ [0, 1]. We
prove that computing an ε-NE is PPAD-complete for any constant ε < 1/2, while a very simple algorithm (namely, letting
all players mix uniformly between their two actions) yields
a 1/2-NE. On the other hand, we show that computing an
ε-WSNE is PPAD-complete for any constant ε < 1, while a
1-WSNE is trivial to achieve, because any strategy profile is a
1-WSNE. All of our lower bounds immediately also apply to
graphical games with more than two actions per player.

Graphical games were introduced more than twenty years
ago by Kearns, Littman, and Singh (Kearns, Littman, and
Singh 2001) as a succinct model of a multi-player game.
These games have found a wide variety of applications. On
the theoretical side, they have served as a fundamental tool
for showing seminal PPAD-completeness results in algorithmic game theory (Daskalakis, Goldberg, and Papadimitriou
2009; Chen, Deng, and Teng 2009). Practically, graphical
games have been used as a foundation for the game theoretic
analysis of networks (Galeotti et al. 2010; Jackson and Zenou
2015), social networks, and multi-agent systems (Kearns
2007; Jackson 2011).
A graphical game is specified by a directed graph with
n vertices. Each vertex represents a player, and each player
has m distinct actions. The edges of the graph specify the
interactions between the players: the payoff to player i is
determined entirely by the actions chosen by player i and the
in-neighbours of player i. Formally, the payoffs for a player
are given by a payoff tensor, which maps the actions chosen
by that player and their in-neighbours to a payoff in [0, 1].
Graphical games are more succinct than standard normal
form games when the maximum in-degree d is constant. An
n-player m-action game requires n · mn payoffs to be written
down, which becomes infeasibly large as n grows. On the
other hand, each tensor in a graphical game has md+1 payoff

The complexity of finding equilibria. Unfortunately it is
known that finding a Nash equilibrium in a graphical game is
a PPAD-hard problem (Daskalakis, Goldberg, and Papadimitriou 2009) and thus considered to be intractable. This has
left open the question of finding approximate Nash equilibria,
and two notions of approximate equilibrium have been studied in the literature. An ε-Nash equilibrium (ε-NE) requires
that no player can improve their payoff by more than ε by unilaterally changing their strategy, while an ε-well-supported
Nash equilibrium (ε-WSNE) requires that all players only
place positive probability on actions that are ε-best responses.
Every ε-WSNE is also an ε-NE, but the reverse is not true.
In this paper we make the standard assumption that all
payoffs lie in the range [0, 1], which then gives us a scale on
which we can measure the additive approximation factor ε. A
0-NE or 0-WSNE is an exact Nash equilibrium, while a 1-NE
or 1-WSNE can be trivially obtained, since the requirements
will be satisfied no matter what strategies the players use.
For many years, the best known lower bounds for approximate equilibria in graphical games were given by Rubinstein (Rubinstein 2018), who proved that there is some
unspecified small constant ε for which finding an ε-NE is
PPAD-complete, and there is a different but still unknown
small constant ε′ for which finding an ε′ -WSNE is PPADcomplete. In fact, Rubinstein’s result applies to games that
are simultaneously graphical games of constant degree and
also polymatrix games, namely in which each edge represents
a two-player game and a player’s payoff is the sum of payoffs
from these games against her in-neighbours.
This was recently improved by a result of Deligkas et
al. (Deligkas et al. 2022a). They showed that it is PPADcomplete to find a 1/48-NE of a two-action polymatrix game,
and it is PPAD-complete to find an ε-WSNE of a two-action
polymatrix game for all ε < 1/3 (the latter result being tight).
Since these hardness results hold even for constant-degree
polymatrix games, they also apply to graphical games.1
On the other hand, only trivial upper bounds are known
for approximate equilibria in graphical games, even when
the players only have two actions. For ε-WSNE the upper

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
A polymatrix game of constant degree can be turned into its
graphical game representation in polynomial time.

Introduction

5600

