The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Local-Global Defense against Unsupervised Adversarial Attacks on Graphs
Di Jin1 , Bingdao Feng1 , Siqi Guo1 , Xiaobao Wang1 * , Jianguo Wei1 , Zhen Wang2∗
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
{jindi, fengbingdao, guosiqi, wangxiaobao, jianguo}@tju.edu.cn, w-zhen@nwpu.edu.cn

2

Predicted label 1 Predicted label 2
graph downstream
encoder embedding
model

Perturbed edge

Abstract
Unsupervised pre-training algorithms for graph representation learning are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, such as
first-order perturbations on graphs, which will have an impact
on particular downstream applications. Designing an effective representation learning strategy against white-box attacks
remains a crucial open topic. Prior research attempts to improve representation robustness by maximizing mutual information between the representation and the perturbed graph,
which is sub-optimal because it does not adapt its defense
techniques to the severity of the attack. To address this issue,
we propose an unsupervised defense method that combines
local and global defense to improve the robustness of representation. Note that we put forward the Perturbed Edges
Harmfulness (PEH) metric to determine the riskiness of the
attack. Thus, when the edges are attacked, the model can automatically identify the risk of attack. We present a method of
attention-based protection against high-risk attacks that penalizes attention coefficients of perturbed edges to encoders.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our strategies can enhance the robustness of representation against various adversarial attacks on three benchmark graphs.

encoder

graph downstream
embedding model

Accuracy (%)

80
70
60
50

graph
encoder
embedding

downstream
model

40
30
0

(a)

PGD Attack on Cora

DGI
Edgedrop
GraphCL
GRV
Ours

30

60

90

Ratio of Perturbations (%)

(b)

Figure 1: The overview of (a) a graph attacked under different peturbed edges and (b) accuracy of different unsurpervised models under various perturbation rates.

shown encouraging outcomes, (Xu et al. 2022) indicates
that these models based on GNN are also more vulnerable
to adversarial attacks on graphs (Zügner, Akbarnejad, and
Günnemann 2018; Zügner and Günnemann 2019; Xu et al.
2019), which affect the representation ability of the entire
graph and then transmit the incorrect representation to all
downstream tasks. Even subtle perturbations have a considerable impact on the learned graph representation, thereby
degrading the performance of downstream tasks such as severe rumor detection (Sun et al. 2022) and financial supervision (Paranjape, Benson, and Leskovec 2017). For example,
hackers invading a bank system and making subtle modifications to the clean data cause the system to provide the same
credit limit to two unconnected clients in accordance with
the attacker’s instructions.
Figure 1(a) provides an overview of several attacks on the
graph pre-training process. The main purpose of these attacks is to perturb a clean graph to alter its representation and
jeopardize applications that are used afterward. However, we
find that numerous studies (Xu et al. 2019; Zügner, Akbarnejad, and Günnemann 2018; Zügner and Günnemann 2019)
have demonstrated that perturbing various edges can result
in different degrees of damage to representations. The degree of damage produced by perturbing an edge is primarily
determined by the edge’s sensitivity, and a small number of
perturbations on edges with high sensitivity can significantly
reduce the representation capability of the model. The existing robust GNN pre-training models (Xu et al. 2022; Zhu
et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022a; Yang, Zhang, and Yang 2021)

Introduction
Graphs are commonly used to simulate real-world relationships (Wu et al. 2022), such as social networks (Zhang et al.
2020), biological interaction graphs (Vlaic et al. 2018) and
e-commerce networks (Eswaran et al. 2017). In recent years,
graph neural networks (GNNs) (Welling and Kipf 2016)
based on graph-structured data have gained a lot of attention
due to their outstanding performance in many applications,
such as node classification (Jin et al. 2021a; Yu et al. 2021),
link prediction (Kipf and Welling 2016), and graph clustering (Bo et al. 2020; Jin et al. 2021b).
Due to the high cost of labels and complexity of graph
neural network training, many studies (Velickovic et al.
2019; You et al. 2020; Peng et al. 2020; Qiu et al. 2020)
have moved towards establishing pretraining graph models
on unlabeled data and feeding the learned representations to
off-the-shelf machine learning models for applicable downstream tasks. Although pre-trained models on graphs have
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8105

