The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Revisiting the Importance of Amplifying Bias for Debiasing
Jungsoo Lee* 1,2 , Jeonghoon Park* 1,2 , Daeyoung Kim* 1 ,
Juyoung Lee2 , Edward Choi1 , Jaegul Choo1
1

KAIST
Kakao Enterprise, South Korea
bebeto@kaist.ac.kr, jeonghoon park@kaist.ac.kr, daeyoung.k@kaist.ac.kr,
michael.jy@kakaoenterprise.com, edwardchoi@kaist.ac.kr, jchoo@kaist.ac.kr
2

Abstract
In image classification, debiasing aims to train a classifier to
be less susceptible to dataset bias, the strong correlation between peripheral attributes of data samples and a target class.
For example, even if the frog class in the dataset mainly consists of frog images with a swamp background (i.e., biasaligned samples), a debiased classifier should be able to correctly classify a frog at a beach (i.e., bias-conflicting samples). Recent debiasing approaches commonly use two components for debiasing, a biased model fB and a debiased
model fD . fB is trained to focus on bias-aligned samples
(i.e., overfitted to the bias) while fD is mainly trained with
bias-conflicting samples by concentrating on samples which
fB fails to learn, leading fD to be less susceptible to the
dataset bias. While the state-of-the-art debiasing techniques
have aimed to better train fD , we focus on training fB , an
overlooked component until now. Our empirical analysis reveals that removing the bias-conflicting samples from the
training set for fB is important for improving the debiasing performance of fD . This is due to the fact that the biasconflicting samples work as noisy samples for amplifying the
bias for fB since those samples do not include the bias attribute. To this end, we propose a simple yet effective data
sample selection method which removes the bias-conflicting
samples to construct a bias-amplified dataset for training fB .
Our data sample selection method can be directly applied to
existing reweighting-based debiasing approaches, obtaining
consistent performance boost and achieving the state-of-theart performance on both synthetic and real-world datasets.

Figure 1: Visualization results of GradCAM applied to biased models with different initialization (i.e., fB∗ 1 , . . . , fB∗ 5 ).
The first column indicates the original images. Starting from
the second column, we observe that each biased model with
different initialization focuses on different visual attributes.
fail to correctly classify frog images in other places. To mitigate such an issue, debiasing aims to train the image classification model to learn the intrinsic attributes, the visual
attributes which inherently define a target class, such as the
legs or eyes of frogs.
In a biased dataset, the data samples without the bias
attribute (i.e., bias-conflicting samples) such as frogs on
grasses or beaches are excessively scarce compared to the
samples including the bias attributes (i.e., bias-aligned samples). Due to the scarcity, existing state-of-the-art debiasing
studies (Nam et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2021) train a given model
by reweighting the data samples which refers to imposing 1)
high weight on losses of the bias-conflicting samples and 2)
low weight on those of the bias-aligned ones. For example,
Nam et al. (2020) reweight the data samples based on the
finding that the bias attributes are easy to learn compared
to the intrinsic attributes. To be more specific, they intentionally train a biased model fB to be overfitted to the easily learned bias attribute. Then, they utilize fB for computing a reweighting value w for each training sample, which
the value is designed to be high for samples fB fails to
classify (i.e., bias-conflicting samples). The data items are

Introduction
When there exists a correlation between peripheral attributes
and labels which is referred to as dataset bias (Torralba and
Efros 2011) in the training dataset, image classification models often heavily rely on such a bias. Dataset bias is caused
when the majority of data samples include bias attributes,
the visual attributes that frequently co-occur with the target class but not innately defining it (Lee et al. 2021). For
example, frogs are commonly observed in swamps (bias attribute), but frogs can also be found in other places such as
grasses or beaches. In such a case, the image classification
model trained with the biased dataset could use swamps as
the visual cue for classifying frogs. In other words, it may
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14974

