The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Lifelong Embedding Learning and Transfer for Growing Knowledge Graphs
Yuanning Cui1 , Yuxin Wang1 , Zequn Sun1 , Wenqiang Liu3 , Yiqiao Jiang3 , Kexin Han3 , Wei Hu1,2 *
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
National Institute of Healthcare Data Science, Nanjing University, China
3
Interactive Entertainment Group, Tencent Inc, China
{yncui, zqsun, yxwangcs}.nju@gmail.com, {masonqliu, gennyjiang, casseyhan}@tencent.com, whu@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

science
fiction

1

genre

Existing knowledge graph (KG) embedding models have primarily focused on static KGs. However, real-world KGs do not
remain static, but rather evolve and grow in tandem with the
development of KG applications. Consequently, new facts and
previously unseen entities and relations continually emerge,
necessitating an embedding model that can quickly learn and
transfer new knowledge through growth. Motivated by this,
we delve into an expanding field of KG embedding in this
paper, i.e., lifelong KG embedding. We consider knowledge
transfer and retention of the learning on growing snapshots
of a KG without having to learn embeddings from scratch.
The proposed model includes a masked KG autoencoder for
embedding learning and update, with an embedding transfer
strategy to inject the learned knowledge into the new entity and
relation embeddings, and an embedding regularization method
to avoid catastrophic forgetting. To investigate the impacts of
different aspects of KG growth, we construct four datasets to
evaluate the performance of lifelong KG embedding. Experimental results show that the proposed model outperforms the
state-of-the-art inductive and lifelong embedding baselines.

KG

Stranger
Things

Duffer Millie Bobby
Brown
Brothers

seen entity

𝑖𝑖 = 1

Squid
Game

Netflix

science
fiction

Stranger
Things

Duffer
Brothers

unseen entity

Millie Bobby
Brown

𝑖𝑖 = 2

Squid
Game

science
fiction

Duffer
Brothers

seen relation

Netflix

Stranger
Things

Millie
Bobby
Brown

…

Marbella
𝑖𝑖 = 3

unseen relation

Figure 1: An example of a growing KG. In each snapshot
i, new facts are added into the KG, and previously unseen
entities and relations emerge with the new facts.
The key idea of this paper comes from the human learning
process. Humans are typical lifelong learners, with knowledge transfer and retention being the most important aspects
of lifelong learning. Humans, in particular, can continually
learn new knowledge given new facts and use previously
learned knowledge to help new knowledge learning (knowledge learning and transfer), as well as update old knowledge
while retaining useful knowledge (knowledge update and
retention). Motivated by this, we seek to build a lifelong
KG embedding model, namely LKGE, which is capable
of learning, transferring and retaining knowledge for growing KGs efficiently. Existing related work, such as inductive
KG embedding (Hamaguchi et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2019b),
mainly focuses on knowledge transfer, ignoring new knowledge learning and old knowledge update.
The proposed lifelong KG embedding task faces two major challenges. First, how to strike a balance between new
knowledge learning and old knowledge transfer? Learning
embeddings for new entities and relations from scratch cannot leverage previously learned knowledge, and inductively
generating embeddings for them ignores new knowledge in
the new snapshot. Second, how to update old knowledge
while retaining useful knowledge? Learning new facts about
an old entity usually requires updating the previously learned
embeddings, which can be harmful to the old model. This
is because updating an old entity embedding would affect
many other old embeddings of related entities. This would
cause the catastrophic forgetting issue, and therefore affect
the applications built on the old KG snapshot.
To resolve the above challenges, we propose three solu-

Introduction

Many knowledge-driven applications are built on knowledge
graphs (KGs), which store massive amounts of structured
facts about the real world (Ji et al. 2022). Throughout the
life-cycle of KG construction and application, new facts, unseen entities, and unseen relations continually emerge into
the KG on a regular basis. As a result, the real-world KG is
rarely a static graph, but rather evolves and grows alongside
the development. Figure 1 illustrates an example excerpted
from Wikidata (Vrandecic and Krötzsch 2014), which shows
the growth of the KG along with the continuous knowledge
extraction. However, KG embedding, a critical task for downstream applications, has primarily focused on static KGs over
the years (Wang et al. 2017). Learning from scratch every
time is inefficient and wastes previously acquired knowledge,
and simply fine-tuning new facts would quickly disrupt previously acquired knowledge. Hence, this paper proposes to
investigate lifelong embedding learning and transfer for growing KGs, with the goal of learning new facts while retaining
old knowledge without re-training from scratch.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4217

