The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Ensemble-in-One: Ensemble Learning within Random Gated Networks for
Enhanced Adversarial Robustness
Yi Cai, Xuefei Ning* , Huazhong Yang, Yu Wang*
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
yicai.cy@gmail.com, foxdoraame@gmail.com, yanghz@tsinghua.edu.cn,
yu-wang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Such vulnerability of CNN models has spurred extensive
researches on improving the robustness against adversarial
attacks. One stream of approaches target on learning robust
features for an individual model (Madry et al. 2017; Brendel et al. 2020). Informally, robust features are defined as
the features that are less sensitive to the adversarial perturbations on the inputs. A representative approach, referred
to as adversarial training (Madry et al. 2017), on-line generates adversarial examples on which the model minimizes
the training loss. As a result, adversarial training encourages the model to capture the robust features that are less
sensitive to the adversarial input perturbations, thereby alleviating the model’s vulnerability. However, such adversarial training methods often have to sacrifice the clean accuracy for enhanced robustness (Zhang et al. 2019) even with
a bag of tricks (Pang et al. 2020), since they exclude the
non-robust features and become less discriminative for the
examples with high similarity in the feature space.
Besides pursuing improved robustness for an individual
model, another active stream of researches focus on forming strong ensemble models to improve the robustness (Yang
et al. 2020; Bagnall, Bunescu, and Stewart 2017; Pang et al.
2019; Kariyappa and Qureshi 2019; Liu et al. 2019). Generally speaking, an ensemble model is constructed by aggregating multiple sub-models. Intuitively, an ensemble model
is more likely to exhibit better robustness than an individual
model, because a successful attack needs to mislead the majority of the sub-models rather than just one model. While
the robustness of an ensemble highly relies on the diversity of its sub-models, recent study finds that CNN models trained independently have highly-overlapped adversarial subspaces (Tramèr et al. 2017). Therefore, many studies propose ensemble training methods to diversify the submodels. For example, DVERGE (Yang et al. 2020) proposes to distill non-robust features corresponding to each
sub-model’s vulnerability, then isolates the vulnerabilities of
sub-models by mutual learning so as to impede the adversarial transferability among them.
There is another recognized insight that the ensembles
composed by more sub-models tend to have greater robustness improvement. Table 1 shows the robustness trend of the
ensembles trained with various ensemble training methods.
It drives us to further explore whether the trend will continue when keeping increasing the sub-models until infinity.

Adversarial attacks have threatened modern deep learning
systems by crafting adversarial examples with small perturbations to fool the convolutional neural networks (CNNs). To
alleviate that, ensemble training methods are proposed to facilitate better adversarial robustness by diversifying the vulnerabilities among the sub-models, simultaneously maintaining comparable natural accuracy as standard training. Previous practices also demonstrate that enlarging the ensemble
can improve the robustness. However, conventional ensemble methods are with poor scalability, owing to the rapidly
increasing complexity when containing more sub-models in
the ensemble. Moreover, it is usually infeasible to train or
deploy an ensemble with substantial sub-models, owing to
the tight hardware resource budget and latency requirement.
In this work, we propose Ensemble-in-One (EIO), a simple but effective method to efficiently enlarge the ensemble with a random gated network (RGN). EIO augments a
candidate model by replacing the parametrized layers with
multi-path random gated blocks (RGBs) to construct an RGN.
The scalability is significantly boosted because the number of paths exponentially increases with the RGN depth.
Then by learning from the vulnerabilities of numerous other
paths within the RGN, every path obtains better adversarial
robustness. Our experiments demonstrate that EIO consistently outperforms previous ensemble training methods with
smaller computational overheads, simultaneously achieving
better accuracy-robustness trade-offs than adversarial training methods under black-box transfer attacks. Code is available at https://github.com/cai-y13/Ensemble-in-One.git

Introduction
With the convolutional neural networks (CNNs) becoming
ubiquitous, the security and robustness of neural network
systems are attracting increasing focuses. Recent studies
find that CNN models are inherently vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014), which
add imperceptible perturbations or patches on the natural
images, referred to as adversarial examples, to mislead the
neural network models. Even without accessing the target
model, an adversary can still generate adversarial examples
on other surrogate models to attack the target model by exploiting the adversarial transferability among them.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14738

