The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Mixture Uniform Distribution Modeling and Asymmetric Mix Distillation
for Class Incremental Learning
Sunyuan Qiang1 , Jiayi Hou2 , Jun Wan1,3,4∗ , Yanyan Liang1 * , Zhen Lei3,4 , Du Zhang1
1

Macau University of Science and Technology
2
Lafayette College
3
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
jun.wan@ia.ac.cn, yyliang@must.edu.mo
Abstract

2015; Li and Hoiem 2016) are widely utilized in the community. Such methods typically store limited exemplars of
previous stages and train jointly with the samples of the current stage. Then, the KD is used to transfer the knowledge
from the previous model to the current one. However, despite incorporating the benefits of KD methods, the insufficient memory for old classes still leads to the distortions
of the training data distribution, which limits the model performance and can be considered as a major cause of catastrophic forgetting. Some recent works (Wu et al. 2019; Zhao
et al. 2020) have also noted this problem, but in-depth analysis and modeling of distribution discrepancy is lacking.
In this work, we first analyze the above phenomenon by
modeling the mixture uniform marginal data distribution and
KL divergence is employed to measure the mismatch. The
training data distribution deviates significantly from the target test distribution with growing incremental tasks, which
motivates us to explore a novel data distribution model in
CIL from the discrepancy perspective. Moreover, inspired
by the mixup (Zhang et al. 2018, 2021), recent research communities also applied this training strategy in CIL (Mi et al.
2020; Bang et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2022).
We extend our modeling framework to mixup and find that
discrepancy remains as in Corollary 1 and Fig. 2(b). To this
end, we propose the asymmetric mix distillation method,
which minimizes the objective error on our well-designed
asymmetric Mix-Distill-Aug data distribution model. Such a
data distribution enables us to alleviate the mismatch under
our modeling framework while preventing past knowledge
from being forgotten, as shown in Fig. 2.
The asymmetric Mix-Distill-Aug data model is composed
of three components: incremental mix samplers, incremental mix distillation, and incremental mix factor. Specifically,
two pairs of data are firstly sampled from incremental mix
samplers respectively to ensure the observation of each data
samples and increase the focus on the rehearsal memory data
samples. Then, the learnt knowledge of the old model is
transferred to the current training stage via incremental mix
distillation. The linear interpolation factors are obtained by
the incremental mix factor procedure, which further slightly
calibrate for mismatches in the distributions. Finally, our
asymmetric Mix-Distill-Aug data model is obtained by linearly interpolating two pairs of distillation-based samples

Exemplar rehearsal-based methods with knowledge distillation (KD) have been widely used in class incremental learning (CIL) scenarios. However, they still suffer from performance degradation because of severely distribution discrepancy between training and test set caused by the limited storage memory on previous classes. In this paper, we mathematically model the data distribution and the discrepancy at the
incremental stages with mixture uniform distribution (MUD).
Then, we propose the asymmetric mix distillation method to
uniformly minimize the error of each class from distribution discrepancy perspective. Specifically, we firstly promote
mixup in CIL scenarios with the incremental mix samplers
and incremental mix factor to calibrate the raw training data
distribution. Next, mix distillation label augmentation is incorporated into the data distribution to inherit the knowledge
information from the previous models. Based on the above
augmented data distribution, our trained model effectively alleviates the performance degradation and extensive experimental results validate that our method exhibits superior performance on CIL benchmarks.

Introduction
Processing real-world data streams is fundamental for humans to perceive the world and acquire experience. Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have exhibited significant improvements in computer vision tasks (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016), they suffer
from severe performance degradation in processing streaming data. Such a nuisance phenomenon is known as catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen 1989; Goodfellow
et al. 2014), where the knowledge learned at previous stages
is severely lost when learning future tasks. Therefore, class
incremental learning (CIL) (Rebuffi et al. 2017; Belouadah,
Popescu, and Kanellos 2021) is widely researched to relieve
this problem, where the model learns new classes incrementally.
Owing to promising performances, rehearsal-based approaches (Rebuffi et al. 2017; Chaudhry et al. 2019) with
knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9498

