The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Reviewing Labels: Label Graph Network with Top-k Prediction Set
for Relation Extraction
Bo Li1,2 , Wei Ye1 * , Jinglei Zhang1,2 , Shikun Zhang1∗
National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University
2
School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University
deepblue.lb@stu.pku.edu.cn, wye@pku.edu.cn,
jinglei.zhang@stu.pku.edu.cn, zhangsk@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

1

1.0

Semantic Similarity

0.4

The typical way for relation extraction is fine-tuning large
pre-trained language models on task-specific datasets, then
selecting the label with the highest probability of the output
distribution as the final prediction. However, the usage of the
Top-k prediction set for a given sample is commonly overlooked. In this paper, we first reveal that the Top-k prediction
set of a given sample contains useful information for predicting the correct label. To effectively utilizes the Top-k prediction set, we propose Label Graph Network with Top-k Prediction Set, termed as KLG. Specifically, for a given sample,
we build a label graph to review candidate labels in the Top-k
prediction set and learn the connections between them. We
also design a dynamic k-selection mechanism to learn more
powerful and discriminative relation representation. Our experiments show that KLG achieves the best performances on
three relation extraction datasets. Moreover, we observe that
KLG is more effective in dealing with long-tailed classes.

Top-k Recall

1

0.9

0.3

0.8

Random Selection (0.24)

0.2

2

4

6

i-th Prediction

(a)

8

10

0.7

2

4

6

8

Top-k Prediction Set

10

(b)

Figure 1: The statistical information of the Top-k prediction
sets from a well-trained relation extraction model. (a) shows
the average semantic similarity between the ground truth label and its i-th prediction. (b) shows the recall of different
Top-k prediction set. We can observe that labels existing in
the Top-k prediction set has strong connections with the corresponding ground truth label. Besides, the Top-6 prediction
set achieves a recall score of more than 0.99, meaning that
most ground truth labels exist in Top-6 prediction sets.

Introduction

Relation extraction (RE) is a fundamental natural language
processing task with various downstream applications. RE
aims to classify the relation between two target entities under a given input. By incorporating powerful pre-trained language models (PLMs) (Devlin et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019),
researchers achieve impressive performances on most of relation extraction datasets (Ye et al. 2019; Yamada et al. 2020;
Zhou and Chen 2021; Lyu and Chen 2021; Roy and Pan
2021).
Generally, these approaches first fine-tune a PLM on
downstream datasets, then get the prediction based on the
output probability distribution of the classification layer. Selecting the label with the highest probability as the final
prediction is a default solution, however, the Top-k prediction set—Top-k predictions with the highest probability—is
largely overlooked. We argue that the Top-k prediction set
contains some information that may be useful for the prediction. Specifically, given a well-trained PLM and a sample, if
the prediction is wrong, the Top-k prediction set may contain
the ground truth label. We can review labels in it and correct
the prediction. Even if the prediction is correct, we can still

establish the label connections between the ground truth and
the other labels in the Top-k prediction set, and further refine
the relation representation.
We first conduct a pilot experiment to explore whether
Top-k prediction sets contain meaningful information. We
first train a relation extraction model using RoBERTa-large
(Liu et al. 2019) on the TACRED (Zhang et al. 2017) dataset,
and then use this well-trained model to obtain the Top-k prediction set of each test sample. The statistical information is
visualized in Figure 1. We report the average semantic similarity between the ground truth label and the i-th label in
the corresponding Top-k prediction set.1 For each example,
we also compute the semantic similarity between its ground
truth and a randomly selected relation as the lower bound,
denoted as random selection. We find that labels in the Top-k
prediction set have strong connections with its ground truth
label, while random selection shows much lower similarity.
In Figure 1 (b), we show the recall of the Top-k prediction
set with different k. We can easily observe that the recall
grows fast as the k increases, e.g., Top-1 recall is only around
1

We use SBERT(Reimers and Gurevych 2019) to compute the
cosine similarity between relation names, since relation names in
TACRED are meaningful phases.

*

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13051

