The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Lifelong Person Re-identification via Knowledge Refreshing and Consolidation
Chunlin Yu1 , Ye Shi1,3 , Zimo Liu2 , Shenghua Gao1,3 , Jingya Wang1,3 *
1

ShanghaiTech University
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
{yuchl, shiye, gaoshh, wangjingya}@shanghaitech.edu.cn; liuzm@pcl.ac.cn

Performance

Abstract
Lifelong person re-identification (LReID) is in significant demand for real-world development as a large amount of ReID
data is captured from diverse locations over time and cannot be accessed at once inherently. However, a key challenge for LReID is how to incrementally preserve old knowledge and gradually add new capabilities to the system. Unlike most existing LReID methods, which mainly focus on
dealing with catastrophic forgetting, our focus is on a more
challenging problem, which is, not only trying to reduce
the forgetting on old tasks but also aiming to improve the
model performance on both new and old tasks during the
lifelong learning process. Inspired by the biological process of human cognition where the somatosensory neocortex and the hippocampus work together in memory consolidation, we formulated a model called Knowledge Refreshing and Consolidation (KRC) that achieves both positive forward and backward transfer. More specifically, a knowledge
refreshing scheme is incorporated with the knowledge rehearsal mechanism to enable bi-directional knowledge transfer by introducing a dynamic memory model and an adaptive working model. Moreover, a knowledge consolidation
scheme operating on the dual space further improves model
stability over the long term. Extensive evaluations show
KRC’s superiority over the state-of-the-art LReID methods
on challenging pedestrian benchmarks. Code is available at
https://github.com/cly234/LReID-KRKC.

Lack of Stability
(Negative Backward Transfer)

Training Steps

Performance

2

Training Steps
(c)

Task 1

Training Steps
(b)

Stability and Plasticity
Performance

Performance

(a)

Lack of Plasticity
(Negative Forward Transfer)

Positive Forward and Backward
Transfer

Training Steps
(d)

Task 2

Task 3

Figure 1: Four scenarios of forward and backward transfer
for lifelong learning. The dashed line denotes when a single
task has been trained separately at random initialization.
knowledge. As a result, catastrophic forgetting may occur.
This suboptimal result has inspired the community to seek
sustainable approaches to lifelong person ReID (LReID).
Compared to conventional lifelong learning, which focuses
on closed-set recognition problems, LReID is inherently a
fine-grained open-set problem. The identities in the training
and testing sets for LReID are non-overlapped, and one of
the goals of LReID is to improve the model’s generalization
ability among various distributions.
To date, LReID has been the topic of several studies. For
example, (Pu et al. 2021) studied knowledge accumulation,
while (Wu and Gong 2021) and (Ge et al. 2022) both examined ways to replay selected exemplars with ad-hoc techniques. While these methods leverage knowledge distillation or knowledge accumulation as a countermeasure to prevent catastrophic forgetting, dealing with this issue leaves
us far from solving the whole problem. Here, we target a
more challenging LReID problem, which is not only trying to minimize catastrophic forgetting but also tackling the
idea that model performance can be improved on both new
and old tasks during the lifelong learning process. Generally, lifelong learning models can be classified into four categories according to the stability and plasticity model performance: Fig. 1(a) shows that models that lack stability are

Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to recognize the same
person reappearing in different camera views and locations.
Person ReID has long been investigated in surveillance systems as a person retrieval problem, where myriad efforts
have been made to tackle various challenges such as occlusions and pose variations. However, the current paradigm
often sidesteps the desiderata of real-world deployments to
successively learn timely-updated new tasks and retain old
knowledge in an ever-changing environment.
In particular, when ReID systems are incrementally
learned on a sequence of data collected from diverse locations and domains over time, they will often fit in the current data distribution to the detriment of previously gained
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3295

