The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Context-Aware Transformer for 3D Point Cloud Automatic Annotation
Xiaoyan Qian, Chang Liu, Xiaojuan Qi, Siew-Chong Tan,
Edmund Lam, Ngai Wong
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong
{qianxy10, lcon7}@connect.hku.hk, {xjqi, sctan, elam, nwong}@eee.hku.hk

Abstract
3D automatic annotation has received increased attention
since manually annotating 3D point clouds is laborious.
However, existing methods are usually complicated, e.g.,
pipelined training for 3D foreground/background segmentation, cylindrical object proposals, and point completion. Furthermore, they often overlook the inter-object feature relation that is particularly informative to hard samples for 3D
annotation. To this end, we propose a simple yet effective
end-to-end Context-Aware Transformer (CAT) as an automated 3D-box labeler to generate precise 3D box annotations
from 2D boxes, trained with a small number of human annotations. We adopt the general encoder-decoder architecture,
where the CAT encoder consists of an intra-object encoder
(local) and an inter-object encoder (global), performing selfattention along the sequence and batch dimensions, respectively. The former models intra-object interactions among
points, and the latter extracts feature relations among different objects, thus boosting scene-level understanding. Via local and global encoders, CAT can generate high-quality 3D
box annotations with a streamlined workflow, allowing it to
outperform existing state-of-the-art by up to 1.79% 3D AP on
the hard task of the KITTI test set.

Figure 1: Attention maps directly from a CAT layer. We
compute the attention from the reference point (red star) to
all points of an object and display the points with the top
500 highest attention scores in blue. The attention groups
the points within an object. The attention between the box
and the points is displayed in red to describe the correlations
between the box (in blue) and the points. Verge points in the
background can also provide positive information about the
box size and location, presumably making it easier to generate the 3D bounding box. Ground truth in green.

Early works on 3D annotation have investigated automatic annotation models with weak annotations, e.g., 2D
bounding boxes (Wei et al. 2021; Qi et al. 2018; Liu et al.
2022b,a), center-clicks (Meng et al. 2020, 2021), or 2D segmentation masks (McCraith et al. 2021; Wilson, Kira, and
Hays 2020). They rely on foreground/background 3D segmentation to preserve high-quality 3D annotations. While
effective, such complicated annotation designs have required multi-staged training models, additionally processing
point clouds, and designing special 3D operators and objective functions. 3D annotation in such cascaded pipelines
is prone to be influenced by the failure modes of the early
stages, e.g., the first 3D segmentation is a performance bottleneck for the final boxes regression stage.
Acquiring high-quality 3D annotations is challenging
since 3D point clouds are irregular, sparse, and unstructured,
especially on hard samples with few points. To this end,
multi-modality object detectors take advantage of images
and point clouds, i.e., extracting features from each modality
and fusing them for comprehensive predictions at the final
stage for sparse point cloud tasks (Chen et al. 2017; Huang
et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2021b; Liu et al. 2022a,b). Although
they have demonstrated a remarkable performance on the
KITTI benchmark, they tend to increase the model complexity and calibration errors to combine multi-modal in-

Introduction
3D point cloud has emerged as indispensable sensory data in
3D visual tasks, driven by the ubiquity of the LiDAR sensor
and its widespread applications in autonomous driving and
robotics. Such inherence has led to the rapid development
of 3D object detectors (Shi, Wang, and Li 2019; Lang et al.
2019; Xu et al. 2021) focusing on the problem of identifying
and localizing objects in 3D scenes. Nevertheless, these 3D
object detectors require large amounts of 3D ground truth
for supervision signals. Although 3D data acquisition is accessible by modern LiDAR scanning devices, it is laborious, error-prone, and even infeasible in some extreme realworld applications to manually annotate 3D point clouds for
training high-quality 3D object detection models (Wei et al.
2021; Qin, Wang, and Lu 2020; Liu et al. 2022b). The difficulty, therefore, motivates us to develop 3D automatic annotators with human-level labeling performance while only
requiring lightweight human annotations.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2082

