The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Jointly Imputing Multi-View Data with Optimal Transport
Yangyang Wu1 , Xiaoye Miao1 * , Xinyu Huang3 , Jianwei Yin1,2
1
Center for Data Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Data Science Institute, Columbia University, New York, USA
{zjuwuyy, miaoxy}@zju.edu.cn, xh2511@columbia.edu, zjuyjw@cs.zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

a special case of the feature-level missing problem when
all features in the target-view are completely missing. They
learn the mapping between the source-view and target-view
in the multi-view data to predict the missing target-view conditional on the given source-view. These multi-view imputation algorithms are neither efficient nor effective. For imputing the target-view, one has to train a group of mapping models. The number of possible source-views determines how
many models should be learnt. Particularly, four mapping
models are built for multi-view imputation over the karolinska directed emotional faces dataset KDEF (Goeleven et al.
2008) with five views. Moreover, the real-life multi-view
data generally lose a proportion of features in each view in
practice. Existing methods do not consider the feature missing state/information in each view. The corresponding root
mean squared error for missing feature imputation is even
higher than 30 on some multi-view datasets. Therefore, it is
not proper, even infeasible, to apply existing multi-view imputation approaches for dealing with the multi-view data in
real-life scenarios with arbitrarily missing features.
In this paper, we propose a novel generative multi-view
imputation model, termed as Git, with the support of optimal transport theory. Git is composed of two modules, a
multi-view joint generator (MJG) and a masking energy discriminator (MED). The generator MJG leverages a multiple
imputation based autoencoder to learn a mapping between
all observed multi-view data and target-view data, so as to
jointly and efficiently impute missing features in the multiview data. However, the typical Jensen-Shannon divergence
used in the generative imputation model (Arjovsky and Bottou 2017) is not continuous and non-differentiable, resulting
in the “vanishing” gradient problem. In view of this, we develop a masking energy (ME) divergence in MED to enable
both modules in Git to be differentiable. It thus can always
provide reliable gradients to avoid the “vanishing” gradient
problem for better imputation ability. In summary, the main
contributions of this paper are described as follows.
• We propose a generative multi-view imputation model
Git that is able to efficiently and effectively predict missing features in the multi-view data. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first proposal to address the missing feature problem within multi-view data.
• The MJG module in Git estimates the missing features
of the target-view data conditional on all observed multi-

The multi-view data with incomplete information hinder the
effective data analysis. Existing multi-view imputation methods that learn the mapping between complete view and completely missing view are not able to deal with the common
multi-view data with missing feature information. In this paper, we propose a generative imputation model named Git
with optimal transport theory to jointly impute the missing
features/values, conditional on all observed values from the
multi-view data. Git consists of two modules, i.e., a multiview joint generator (MJG) and a masking energy discriminator (MED). The generator MJG incorporates a joint autoencoder with the multiple imputation rule to learn the data
distribution from all observed multi-view data. The discriminator MED leverages a new masking energy divergence function to make Git differentiable for imputation enhancement.
Extensive experiments on several real-world multi-view data
sets demonstrate that, Git yields over 35% accuracy gain,
compared to the state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction
Multi-view data (Guo 2013) are captured from different
modalities, sources, spaces, and other forms. It has become
one of the main data types in many real-life scenarios, such
as video surveillance, entertainment media, medical detection, etc. Due to various reasons like the collection device
failure, instable system environment, or privacy concerns
(Miao et al. 2022a, 2021; Wu et al. 2022), it is common
that a fraction of features/values in some data views are not
collected, resulting in the missingness of multi-view data.
For example, the public medical dataset PhysioNet (Silva
et al. 2012) collects patients’ physiological signals and measurements from multiple views, including respiration, blood
pressure, and electrocardiograms. It takes above 80% average missing rate, making it difficult to analyze. Hence, such
feature missing problem poses a daunting challenge to the
multi-view data analysis (Yan et al. 2021; Miao et al. 2022b).
Existing multi-view imputation studies (Farhangfar, Kurgan, and Pedrycz 2007; Jaques et al. 2017; Tran et al. 2017;
Yoon, Jordon, and Schaar 2018; Spinelli, Scardapane, and
Uncini 2019) focus on the view-level missing problem, i.e.,
* Corresponding author: miaoxy@zju.edu.cn
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4747

