The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Data Source for Reasoning Embodied Agents
Jack Lanchantin, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Gabriel Synnaeve, Yuxuan Sun, Kavya Srinet, Arthur
Szlam
Meta AI
{jacklanchantin, sainbar, gab, yuxuans, ksrinet, aszlam}@meta.com
Sequence Context + GPT-2: “marbles”
Structured Context + Transformer:
“marbles”

Abstract

agent

pebbles

Recent progress in using machine learning models for reasoning tasks has been driven by novel model architectures,
large-scale pre-training protocols, and dedicated reasoning
datasets for fine-tuning. In this work, to further pursue these
advances, we introduce a new data generator for machine reasoning that integrates with an embodied agent. The generated
data consists of templated text queries and answers, matched
with world-states encoded into a database. The world-states
are a result of both world dynamics and the actions of the agent.
We show the results of several baseline models on instantiations of train sets. These include pre-trained language models
fine-tuned on a text-formatted representation of the database,
and graph-structured Transformers operating on a knowledgegraph representation of the database. We find that these models
can answer some questions about the world-state, but struggle
with others. These results hint at new research directions in
designing neural reasoning models and database representations. Code to generate the data and train the models will be
released at github.com/facebookresearch/neuralmemory.

wilson
agent
marbles

speaker

Sequence Context: "agent is at location (10,7,8). agent has pitch 1.0 and yaw
2.5. agent has property agent. speaker is at location (8,7,0). speaker has pitch
0.8 and yaw 2.3. wilson is at location (0,7,9). wilson has pitch -0.8 and yaw
1.1. wilson has property rabbit. wilson has property brown. marbles is at
location (10,7,3). marbles has pitch 1.1 and yaw 3.1. marbles has property
chicken. marbles has property white. pebbles is at location (10,10,13).
pebbles has pitch 0.5 and yaw -0.3. pebbles has property sheep. pebbles has
property mottled. gus is at location (3,7,9). gus has pitch 0.4 and yaw -0.1.
gus has property cow. gus has property black. inst_seg is at location (3,8,1).
inst_seg has property arch. inst_seg is at location (10,8,12). inst_seg has
property dome. inst_seg is at location (14,6,6). inst_seg has property hole."

Introduction
Advances in machine learning (ML) architectures (Vaswani
et al. 2017), large datasets and model scaling for pre-training
(Radford et al. 2019; Chowdhery et al. 2022; Zhang et al.
2022), modeling approaches (Nye et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2022), and multiple dedicated reasoning datasets (Yang et al.
2018a; Hudson and Manning 2019; Petroni et al. 2020;
Vedantam et al. 2021) have driven progress in both building models that can succeed in aspects of “reasoning” and
in automatically evaluating such capabilities. This has been
evident particularly in the text setting, but also in computer
vision (Krishna et al. 2016; Johnson et al. 2017; Yi et al.
2020).
In parallel, the last decade has seen advances in the ability
to train embodied agents to perform tasks and affect change
in their environments. These have been also powered in part
by data, with many environments made available for exploring modeling approaches and benchmarking. In particular,
with respect to “reasoning” in embodied agents, there have
been works showing that adding inductive biases to support
reasoning can lead to improved performance with end-to-end

Query: “what is closest from speaker?”
Answer: “marbles”

Figure 1: (Top): Example of a generated scene in our 3d
gridworld. (Middle): Given the 3d scene, we can convert the
information in the render to a text or structured representation. Here we show the text Sequence Context representation.
“inst_segs” represent the block items such as structures or
holes. (Bottom): For a particular scene, we can generate a
wide variety of queries. Here we show and example of a distance query asking which object is the closest to the speaker,
which is the chicken named “marbles”.
training (Zambaldi et al. 2018) and other works have shown
how models can be augmented with extra supervision (Zhong,
Rocktäschel, and Grefenstette 2019).
Recently, several works have shown how large languagemodel pre-training can be used to affect planners for embodied agents (Huang et al. 2022; Ahn et al. 2022). More
generally, symbolic representations can be a hub for connecting perception, memory, and reasoning in embodied agents.
However, the growing literature in NLP reasoning models

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8438

s

