The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Metric Multi-View Graph Clustering
Yuze Tan, Yixi Liu, Hongjie Wu, Jiancheng Lv, Shudong Huang*
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China
{tanyuze, liuyixi}@stu.scu.edu.cn, wuhongjie0818@gmail.com {lvjiancheng, huangsd}@scu.edu.cn

Abstract

frequently employed in various practical fields of machine
learning.
It is widely known that real-world data generally contain multiple views that are collected from multiple channels (Bickel and Scheffer 2004; Gao et al. 2015; Huang,
Kang, and Xu 2020). For instance, a face image might consist of various features such as ambient light and a person’s
emotion, where one type of feature corresponds to a distinct view of data. Unlike traditional single-view algorithms,
multi-view subspace clustering methods can precisely reshape the correlation between data samples. Assuming that
a comprehensive latent representation can be generated from
multi-view data, (Zhang et al. 2017) designed a multi-view
subspace clustering method by searching the underlying latent representation from multiple views. To better fit the reallife data, the work (Luo et al. 2018) exploited one common
consistent structure and a group of view-specific representations simultaneously to construct subspace representations.
In (Huang et al. 2021), the diversity of multi-view data is redefined to represent a much broader concept than the noises
and a holistic design of the clustering method is adopted
by simultaneously considering the diverse parts and consistent pure components. (Zhang et al. 2020) introduced a
one-step multi-view subspace clustering algorithm by integrating the steps of similarity learning, multi-view information fusion, and final clustering, which is distinguished from
existing methods with isolated learning. To reduce the computational complexity of multi-view clustering, (Liu et al.
2022) employed the optimal anchor graph to directly output
the clustering labels and incorporated the processes of graph
construction and anchor learning into an integrated model to
facilitate subsequent clustering tasks.
Although the aforementioned multi-view clustering algorithms showcase prominent performance, there are still two
major drawbacks. For one thing, they assume that each sample can be well represented from the original data space,
which may yield insufficient representation as real-world
data generally consist of redundancy and are easily corrupted. Therefore, it is elusive to recover a separable representation to facilitate the subsequent clustering module. For
another, blindly utilizing the Euclidean distance to measure
the similarity between samples ignores the inherent correlation between samples to a large extent and thus fails to
explore the underlying data distribution accurately. In this

Graph-based methods have hitherto been used to pursue coherent patterns of data due to their ease of implementation
and efficiency. These methods have been increasingly applied
in multi-view learning and achieved promising performance
in various clustering tasks. However, despite their noticeable
empirical success, existing graph-based multi-view clustering
methods may still suffer the suboptimal solution considering
that multi-view data can be very complicated in raw feature
space. Moreover, existing methods usually adopt the similarity metric by an ad hoc approach, which largely simplifies
the relationship among real-world data and results in an inaccurate output. To address these issues, we propose to seamlessly integrate metric learning and graph learning for multiview clustering. Specifically, we employ a useful metric to
depict the inherent structure with linearity-aware of affinity
graph representation learned based on the self-expressiveness
property. Furthermore, instead of directly utilizing the raw
features, we prefer to recover a smooth representation such
that the geometric structure of the original data can be retained. We model the above concerns into a unified learning
framework, and hence complement each learning subtask in a
mutual reinforcement manner. The empirical studies corroborate our theoretical findings and demonstrate that the proposed method is able to boost the multi-view clustering performance.

Introduction
Learning the underlying similarity relationships contributes
to capturing the inherent information of data and thus further facilitates the performance of downstream tasks. Considering the data points typically lying in latent subspaces,
the subspace clustering technique plays an essential role to
group data with respect to their underlying subspaces. These
methods first exploit a similarity graph to represent the relationship of data by means of the self-expressiveness property and then perform the spectral clustering on the obtained
graph to achieve the final clustering result (Ma et al. 2020).
These methods are essentially graph-based methods, among
which Sparse Subspace Clustering (SSC) (Elhamifar and Vidal 2013), Least Squares Regression (LSR) (Lu et al. 2012)
and Low-Rank Representation (LRR) (Liu et al. 2012) are
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9962

