The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Grouped Knowledge Distillation for Deep Face Recognition
†

Weisong Zhao 1,3* , Xiangyu Zhu 2,4* , Kaiwen Guo 2 , Xiao-Yu Zhang 1,3 , Zhen Lei 2,4,5
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
CBSR&NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Hong Kong Institute of Science & Innovation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hong Kong, China
{zhaoweisong, zhangxiaoyu}@iie.ac.cn, guokaiwen1991@gmail.com, {xiangyu.zhu, zlei}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Compared with the feature-based distillation methods, logits
distillation can liberalize the requirements of consistent feature dimension between teacher and student networks, while
the performance is deemed inferior in face recognition. One
major challenge is that the light-weight student network has
difficulty fitting the target logits due to its low model capacity, which is attributed to the significant number of identities in face recognition. Therefore, we seek to probe the target logits to extract the primary knowledge related to face
identity, and discard the others, to make the distillation more
achievable for the student network. Specifically, there is a
tail group with near-zero values in the prediction, containing minor knowledge for distillation. To provide a clear perspective of its impact, we first partition the logits into two
groups, i.e., Primary Group and Secondary Group, according to the cumulative probability of the softened prediction.
Then, we reorganize the Knowledge Distillation (KD) loss of
grouped logits into three parts, i.e., Primary-KD, SecondaryKD, and Binary-KD. Primary-KD refers to distilling the primary knowledge from the teacher, Secondary-KD aims to refine minor knowledge but increases the difficulty of distillation, and Binary-KD ensures the consistency of knowledge
distribution between teacher and student. We experimentally
found that (1) Primary-KD and Binary-KD are indispensable
for KD, and (2) Secondary-KD is the culprit restricting KD at
the bottleneck. Therefore, we propose a Grouped Knowledge
Distillation (GKD) that retains the Primary-KD and BinaryKD but omits Secondary-KD in the ultimate KD loss calculation. Extensive experimental results on popular face recognition benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of proposed
GKD over state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: The distribution of the predictions (softened probabilities) of student and teacher networks trained from
scratch. The analysis is conducted on MS1MV2 (Deng et al.
2019a) dataset. The predictions are visualized based on a
randomly selected sample. There is a long tail group that has
several near-zero values, containing minor knowledge for
distillation. We partition the original logits into two groups,
i.e., primary group (pink) and secondary group (blue), via a
cumulative probability threshold τ of ranked student prediction. Best viewed in color.

devices, e.g., MobileFaceNet (Chen et al. 2018) and MobileNetV3 (Howard et al. 2019). However, discriminative
networks always benefit from a large model capacity, which
will introduce more computational and storage costs. Given
a heavy teacher network, Knowledge Distillation (KD) aims
to improve the accuracy of light-weight networks, where the
knowledge from a heavy teacher network is transferred to
the light-weight student network.
The idea of KD (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) was
first introduced to transfer knowledge by reducing the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the prediction
probabilities of the teacher and the student networks. In
the past decade, the research attention has been drawn to
conducting instance-wise constraints on the activation of
the hidden layers, e.g., FitNet (Romero et al. 2015) distills
knowledge from deep features of intermediate layers. How-

Introduction
Face recognition has achieved great success in various application domains (Li and Jain 2011; Lei, Pietikäinen, and Li
2014). However, a large number of light-weight yet discriminative face recognition models are required due to the development of mobile and edge devices. An intuitive solution
is to optimize the neural network architectures for mobile
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3615

