The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Utility Maximizer or Value Maximizer:
Mechanism Design for Mixed Bidders in Online Advertising
Hongtao Lv1,2 , Zhilin Zhang3 , Zhenzhe Zheng2 * , Jinghan Liu4 ,
Chuan Yu3 , Lei Liu1 , Lizhen Cui1 and Fan Wu2
1

School of Software & Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research (C-FAIR), Shandong University, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
3
Alibaba Group, China
4
SJTU-ParisTech Elite Institute of Technology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{lht, l.liu, clz}@sdu.edu.cn, {zhangzhilin.pt, yuchuan.yc}@alibaba-inc.com, {zhengzhenzhe, u nivers, wu-fan}@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

maximizer (UM), i.e., an advertiser aims to optimize the difference between the value of the allocation and her payment.
However, in modern online advertising systems, many advertisers have started to use auto-bidding tools, where they
only set high-level constraints specifying a targeted return
on investment (ROI) constraint (i.e., a targeted minimum ratio between the obtained value and the payment) under a
certain budget (Aggarwal, Badanidiyuru, and Mehta 2019;
He et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2019; Zhang, Yuan, and Wang
2014). When the ROI constraint is close to one, it could be
captured by the individual rationality property (Nisan et al.
2008) in the UM model. Nevertheless, when the targeted
ROI becomes large, the classical UM model could not capture the behaviors of advertisers in auto-bidding (Szymanski and Lee 2006; Cavallo et al. 2017). As a consequence,
Wilkens, Cavallo, and Niazadeh (2016; 2017) proposed another model for advertisers, called value maximizer (VM),
which specifies the value of allocation as her objective and
the payment as the second-order objective. It is empirically
shown in their work that, as long as the ROI requirement of
an advertiser is moderately high (above 2 or 3), her behavior pattern would be close to that in the VM model. This
new model brings about an important theoretical result, i.e.,
GSP auction becomes a truthful mechanism for VMs, which
offers a new perspective on the prevalence of GSP. This result renders the VM model attractive for both the academics
(Niazadeh et al. 2022; Cavallo et al. 2017) and the industry
(Wang et al. 2021) in recent years.

Digital advertising constitutes one of the main revenue
sources for online platforms. In recent years, some advertisers tend to adopt auto-bidding tools to facilitate advertising performance optimization, making the classical utility maximizer model in auction theory not fit well. Some recent studies proposed a new model, called value maximizer,
for auto-bidding advertisers with return-on-investment (ROI)
constraints. However, the model of either utility maximizer
or value maximizer could only characterize partial advertisers in real-world advertising platforms. In a mixed environment where utility maximizers and value maximizers coexist,
the truthful ad auction design would be challenging since bidders could manipulate both their values and affiliated classes,
leading to a multi-parameter mechanism design problem. In
this work, we address this issue by proposing a payment rule
which combines the corresponding ones in classical VCG and
GSP mechanisms in a novel way. Based on this payment rule,
we propose a truthful auction mechanism with an approximation ratio of 2 on social welfare, which is close to the lower
bound of at least 45 that we also prove. The designed auction
mechanism is a generalization of VCG for utility maximizers
and GSP for value maximizers.

Introduction
Digital advertising is one of the most successful applications of auction theory, and it serves as a primary source
of revenue for online platforms, such as Google, Facebook, Alibaba, and Baidu. In a typical scenario of selling advertising slots, the online platforms conduct ad allocation and compute corresponding payments for advertisers by Vickrey-Clarke-Grove (VCG) mechanism (Vickrey 1961; Clarke 1971; Groves 1973) or generalized second
price (GSP) auction (Varian 2007; Edelman, Ostrovsky, and
Schwarz 2007). It is widely known that VCG is a truthful
mechanism, while GSP, as a more pervasive alternative in
industry, is not truthful but has envy-free Nash equilibria,
and all such equilibria yield no lower revenue than VCG.
The existing analysis on VCG and GSP mainly builds
upon the quasi-linear utility model, also called as utility

However, either the model of UM or VM characterizes
only a part of advertisers, i.e., UMs represent the advertisers with relatively low ROI constraints while VMs are
those bidders with relatively high ROI constraints. As the
ROI constraints of advertisers would be various in realworld advertising platforms, a natural problem arises: how
to design a truthful mechanism when both classes of UMs
and VMs coexist in an advertising system? This problem involves two aspects: 1) when the class information is public, i.e., an advertiser could only misreport her value, and
2) when the class information is private, i.e., an advertiser
could misreport both her affiliated class and her value. Even
in the simpler former case, it is a nontrivial mechanism design problem as the strategic behaviors of advertisers are

* Z. Zheng is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5789

