The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Point-Teaching: Weakly Semi-supervised Object Detection
with Point Annotations
Yongtao Ge1 , Qiang Zhou2 , Xinlong Wang3 , Chunhua Shen4 , Zhibin Wang2 , Hao Li 2
1

The University of Adelaide
2
Alibaba Group
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
4
Zhejiang University
yongtao.ge@adelaide.edu.au, {jianchong.zq, zhibin.waz, lihao.lh}@alibaba-inc.com, wangxinlong@baai.ac.cn,
chunhuashen@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

squiggles. Semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) methods (Jeong et al. 2019; Sohn et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021;
Zhou et al. 2021b; Yang et al. 2021) train object detectors
with a small amount of fully-labeled images and large-scale
unlabeled images. However, although both ways can reduce
the annotation cost, the performance of the trained detectors
is still far behind the fully-supervised counterpart.

Point annotations are considerably more time-efficient than
bounding box annotations. However, how to use cheap point
annotations to boost the performance of semi-supervised
object detection remains largely unsolved. In this work,
we present Point-Teaching, a weakly semi-supervised object detection framework to fully exploit the point annotations (WSSOD-P). Specifically, we propose a Hungarianbased point-matching method to generate pseudo labels for
point-annotated images. We further propose multiple instance
learning (MIL) approaches at the level of images and points
to supervise the object detector with point annotations. Finally, we propose a simple-yet-effective data augmentation,
termed point-guided copy-paste, to reduce the impact of the
unmatched points. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method on a few datasets and various data regimes.
In particular, Point-Teaching outperforms the previous best
method Group R-CNN by 3.1 AP with 5% fully labeled
data and 2.3 AP with 30% fully labeled data on MS COCO
dataset. We believe that our proposed framework can largely
lower the bar of learning accurate object detectors and pave
the way for its broader applications. The code is available at
https://github.com/YongtaoGe/Point-Teaching.

In this paper, we aim to train object detectors with considerably fewer annotations while achieving comparable performance with the fully-supervised counterpart. To achieve
this goal, there are two key problems: 1) what annotation
formats to use and 2) how to train object detectors with
such annotations. A cheap but effective annotation format
for object detection should be 1) simple to annotate, 2) convenient to store and use 3) localization-aware. Among various weak formats, point click annotation stands out as it
meets all the requirements. Point click provides a stronger
prior of object location compared with image-level category annotation. Meanwhile, it does not require detailed
and expensive location information such as object bounding
box or segmentation masks, thus being considerably more
time-efficient. According to (Papadopoulos et al. 2017a) and
(Cheng, Parkhi, and Kirillov 2022), a box annotation takes 7
seconds while a point annotation takes 0.8-0.9 seconds. To
achieve the best balance of detection performance and annotation cost, we adopt mixed annotation formats to construct
the training dataset. In the following, we use point annotated
setting to represent such a dataset which comprises a small
number of fully annotated images and massive point annotated images. Under this setting, we are able to obtain abundant annotations in a relatively cheaper manner (Su, Deng,
and Fei-Fei 2012; Russakovsky, Li, and Li 2015).

Introduction
Great progress has been achieved in object detection and
segmentation in recent years (Ren et al. 2015; Redmon et al.
2016; Lin et al. 2017; Tian et al. 2019; He et al. 2017; Tian,
Shen, and Chen 2020; Wang et al. 2021). Accurate object detectors can be trained using large fully-labeled datasets (Lin
et al. 2014; Gupta, Dollár, and Girshick 2019). However, annotating large-scale object detection datasets are extremely
expensive and time-consuming, as it requires the annotators
to find all the objects of interest in the images and to draw a
tight bounding box/segmentation mask for each of them.
How to train object detectors with fewer annotations has
attracted increasing attention. Weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) methods (Song et al. 2014; Cinbis, Verbeek, and Schmid 2014; Bilen and Vedaldi 2016; Kantorov et al. 2016; Tang et al. 2017; Ren et al. 2020a) reduce the cost via replacing the box annotations with cheaper
annotations, e.g., image-level categories, point clicks and

To fully utilize both the limited box annotations and
abundant point annotations, we propose a novel weakly
semi-supervised object detection framework, termed PointTeaching. Inspired by Mean Teacher (Tarvainen and Valpola
2017) and Unbiased Teacher (Liu et al. 2021), we construct a Student model and a Teacher model with the same
architecture. In each training iteration, weakly augmented
point-labeled images are fed to the Teacher model to generate reliable pseudo-bounding boxes. The Student is then
optimized on fully labeled and pseudo-labeled images with
strong augmentation. The Teacher is updated via the Expo-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

667

