The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning-Augmented Algorithms for Online TSP on the Line
Themistoklis Gouleakis1 , Konstantinos Lakis2 , Golnoosh Shahkarami3
1

National University of Singapore
2
ETH Zürich
3
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Universität des Saarlandes
tgoule@nus.edu.sg, klakis@student.ethz.ch, gshahkar@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract

shelves in an intelligent warehouse of a large shipping company. This robot is tasked with moving left and right on the
aisle to collect the items ordered by customers. However,
these orders arrive online, meaning that the release time and
location of the item are only revealed at the time of order.
The goal is to route the robot such that it collects and returns
all the items as soon as possible, minimizing the makespan
as it is called. This practically interesting task is indeed captured by the theoretical framework of online TSP on the line.
The offline version of the problem can be solved in quadratic
time (Bjelde et al. 2021), therefore the difficulty lies in the
late availability of the input, such as the locations of the requests. However, the great availability of data as well as the
improved computer processing power and machine learning
algorithms can make it possible for predictions to be made
on these locations (e.g combining information from historical data, events that may affect demand of stored items,
etc). In a line of work that started a few years ago (Lykouris
and Vassilvtiskii 2018) and sparked a huge interest (Purohit,
Svitkina, and Kumar 2018; Antoniadis et al. 2020a; Gollapudi and Panigrahi 2019; Wang and Li 2020; Angelopoulos
et al. 2020; Wei 2020; Rohatgi 2020), it has been demonstrated that such prior knowledge about the input of an online algorithm has the potential to achieve improved performance (i.e competitive ratio) compared to known algorithms
(or even lower bounds) that do not use (resp. assume the absence of) any kind of prediction. Therefore, it is natural to
consider ways to utilize this information in this problem using a so-called learning-augmented approach.
The input to our online algorithm consists of a set of requests, each associated with a position on the real line as
well as a release time. An algorithm for this problem faces
the task of controlling an agent that starts at the origin and
can move with at most unit speed. The agent may serve a
request at any time after it is released. The algorithm’s objective is to minimize the makespan, which is the total time
spent by the agent before serving all requests. We have two
different variants of the problem, depending on whether the
agent is required to return to the origin after serving all the
requests or not. This requirement exists in the closed variant, while it does not in the open variant. The makespan in
the closed variant is the time it takes the agent to serve the
requests and return to the origin.
We quantify the performance of an online algorithm by its

We study the online Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) on
the line augmented with machine-learned predictions. In the
classical problem, there is a stream of requests released over
time along the real line. The goal is to minimize the makespan
of the algorithm. We distinguish between the open variant and
the closed one, in which we additionally require the algorithm
to return to the origin after serving all requests. The state of
the art is a 1.64-competitive algorithm and a 2.04-competitive
algorithm for the closed and open variants, respectively. In
both cases, a tight lower bound is known.
In both variants, our primary prediction model involves predicted positions of the requests. We introduce algorithms that
(i) obtain a tight 1.5 competitive ratio for the closed variant
and a 1.66 competitive ratio for the open variant in the case
of perfect predictions, (ii) are robust against unbounded prediction error, and (iii) are smooth, i.e., their performance degrades gracefully as the prediction error increases.
Moreover, we further investigate the learning-augmented setting in the open variant by additionally considering a prediction for the last request served by the optimal offline algorithm. Our algorithm for this enhanced setting obtains a 1.33
competitive ratio with perfect predictions while also being
smooth and robust, beating the lower bound of 1.44 we show
for our original prediction setting for the open variant. Also,
we provide a lower bound of 1.25 for this enhanced setting.

Introduction
The Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) is one of the most
fundamental and widely studied problems in computer science, both in its offline version (Lawler 1985), where the
input is known in advance, and the online version (Ausiello
et al. 2001) where it arrives sequentially. In this paper, we
consider the online Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) on
the real line. This version of the problem arises in real-world
scenarios such as one dimensional delivery/collection tasks.
Such tasks include the operation of elevator systems, robotic
screwing/welding, parcel collection from massive storage
facilities and cargo collection along shorelines (Ascheuer
et al. 1999; Psaraftis et al. 1990). An illustrative example,
which was also described in (Chen et al. 2019), is the following. Consider a robot that is used in a row of storage
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11989

