The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

TC - DWA: Text Clustering with Dual Word-Level Augmentation
Bo Cheng1,4,5 , Ximing Li2,3, * , Yi Chang1,4,5
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, China
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
3
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of MOE, Jilin University, China
4
International Center of Future Science, Jilin University, China
5
Engineering Research Center of Knowledge-Driven Human-Machine Intelligence, Ministry of Education, China
chengbo9691@gmail.com, liximing86@gmail.com, yichang@jlu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

with deep neural networks in unsupervised manner (Zhang
et al. 2020). Due to unsupervised nature of deep representation learning, it is naturally to integrate the representation techniques with clustering objectives, leading to a new
topic of deep clustering (Wu et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019;
Niu et al. 2020; Gansbeke et al. 2020; Tsai, Li, and Zhu
2021; Huang and Gong 2021). For instance, it solves for the
embedded features and cluster memberships jointly under
the auto-encoder (Xie, Girshick, and Farhadi 2016) or selftraining paradigms (Chang et al. 2017). Thanks to the effectiveness of dense embedded features, the emerging deep
clustering methods have empirically achieved clear performance gain comparing against the conventional methods
(Tsai, Li, and Zhu 2021; Huang and Gong 2021).
In parallel with deep clustering, the pre-trained language
models such as ELMo (Peters et al. 2018) and BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) can enjoy strong contextualized embedded
features for text data by capturing high-order, long-range dependency in texts, and meanwhile they are often pre-trained
on large-scale text corpora, enabling to capture generic linguistic knowledge for texts (Petroni et al. 2019). Directly
fine-tuning them can bring promising performance improvement to many text-specific tasks, ranging from supervised
(Chalkidis et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2022), semi-supervised
(Li, Li, and Ouyang 2021), to weakly supervised learning
tasks (Meng et al. 2020; Ouyang et al. 2022).
To achieve stronger embedded features for texts, there
are dozens of studies further fine-tune the language models
with contrastive learning in unsupervised manner (Yan et al.
2021; Gao, Yao, and Chen 2021). With this spirit, the recent deep TC method SCCL (Zhang et al. 2021) fine-tunes
the language model by integrating the clustering objective
with contrastive learning, and can achieve promising improvements compared with SOTA deep clustering methods
on benchmark text datasets. Since one basic idea of contrastive learning is to push the embedded features of augmented samples of the same text closer, we regard that how
to generate high-quality augmented samples efficiently is
the key problem of SCCL to some extent. However, the text
augmentation techniques used in SCCL, i.e., word insertion,
word substitution, and back translation, may generate noisy
augmented samples and be costly, potentially hindering the
further performance improvement for the TC task.
To remedy those problems, we propose a novel deep

The pre-trained language models, e.g., ELMo and BERT,
have recently achieved promising performance improvement
in a wide range of NLP tasks, because they can output strong
contextualized embedded features of words. Inspired by their
great success, in this paper we aim to fine-tune them to effectively handle the text clustering task, i.e., a classic and
fundamental challenge in machine learning. Accordingly, we
propose a novel BERT-based method, namely Text Clustering with Dual Word-level Augmentation (TC - DWA). To be
specific, we formulate a self-training objective and enhance it
with a dual word-level augmentation technique. First, we suppose that each text contains several most informative words,
called anchor words, supporting the full text semantics. We
use the embedded features of anchor words as augmented
features, which are selected by ranking the norm-based attention weights of words. Second, we formulate an expectation
form of word augmentation, which is equivalent to generating
infinite augmented features, and further suggest a tractable
approximation of Taylor expansion for efficient optimization. To evaluate the effectiveness of TC - DWA, we conduct
extensive experiments on several benchmark text datasets.
The results demonstrate that TC - DWA consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art baseline methods. Code available:
https://github.com/BoCheng-96/TC-DWA.

Introduction
Text Clustering (TC) is a classic and fundamental challenge
in the machine learning community with a wide spectrum of
real applications. The basic goal of TC, as its name suggests,
is to partition a collection of unlabeled texts into a number
of clusters (i.e., text subsets), so that the texts in each cluster
share coherent semantic topics, often proximity according
to some certain distance measures. During the past decades,
many clustering methods, e.g., k-means, Gaussian Mixture
Model (GMM), and spectral clustering, have been long established. However, they may tend to be less effective for
text data, primarily because the high-dimensional sparse nature of text features results in difficulties of accurately measuring the distances between texts.
The deep representation learning techniques aim to transform the original features to better dense embedded features
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7113

