The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robust Planning over Restless Groups:
Engagement Interventions for a Large-Scale Maternal Telehealth Program
Jackson A. Killian* 1 , Arpita Biswas* 1 , Lily Xu* 1 , Shresth Verma* 2 , Vineet Nair2 , Aparna Taneja2 ,
Aparna Hegde3 , Neha Madhiwalla3 , Paula Rodriguez Diaz1 , Sonja Johnson-Yu1 , Milind Tambe1,2
1

Harvard University, Cambridge, United States
2
Google Research, Bangalore, India
3
ARMMAN, Mumbai, India
{jkillian,arpitabiswas,lily xu}@g.harvard.edu, {vermashresth, vineetn, aparnataneja}@google.com,
{aparnahegde, neha}@armman.org, {prodriguezdiaz, sjohnsonyu}@g.harvard.edu, milindtambe@google.com

Abstract
In 2020, maternal mortality in India was estimated to be as
high as 130 deaths per 100K live births, nearly twice the
UN’s target. To improve health outcomes, the non-profit ARMMAN sends automated voice messages to expecting and
new mothers across India. However, 38% of mothers stop listening to these calls, missing critical preventative care information. To improve engagement, ARMMAN employs health
workers to intervene by making service calls, but workers can
only call a fraction of the 100K enrolled mothers. Partnering
with ARMMAN, we model the problem of allocating limited
interventions across mothers as a restless multi-armed bandit
(RMAB), where the realities of large scale and model uncertainty present key new technical challenges. We address
these with GROUPS, a double oracle–based algorithm for robust planning in RMABs with scalable grouped arms. Robustness over grouped arms requires several methodological
advances. First, to adversarially select stochastic group dynamics, we develop a new method to optimize Whittle indices
over transition probability intervals. Second, to learn grouplevel RMAB policy best responses to these adversarial environments, we introduce a weighted index heuristic. Third,
we prove a key theoretical result that planning over grouped
arms achieves the same minimax regret–optimal strategy as
planning over individual arms, under a technical condition.
Finally, using real-world data from ARMMAN, we show that
GROUPS produces robust policies that reduce minimax regret by up to 50%, halving the number of preventable missed
voice messages to connect more mothers with life-saving maternal health information.

1

Figure 1: Mothers enrolled with ARMMAN receive lifesaving preventative care information via voice messages
throughout their pregnancy, childbirth, and neonatal period.
Photo courtesy of ARMMAN.

in 2020 (Meh et al. 2021; Gates Foundation 2021), significantly higher than Sustainable Development Goal 3.1 target of 70 per 100K births (United Nations 2021). Tragically, most maternal deaths are preventable (WHO 2023),
but lack of finances and awareness prevent mothers from
seeking care, particularly in low-income communities (Carvalho, Salehi, and Goldie 2013).
To improve maternal health outcomes, we work with
ARMMAN, an India-based non-profit that provides free
preventive care to millions of mothers by sending automated health voice messages, specifically targeted towards
low-income communities (similar to MAMA (Johnson &
Johnson 2017)). Mothers enrolled in the program receive
weekly automated voice messages during pregnancy and
up to one year after childbirth. Randomized control trials
showed that ARMMAN’s messaging program significantly
improves key indicators including treatment-seeking during
complications, infant breastfeeding, and post-infancy weight
(Murthy et al. 2019). However, ARMMAN found that nearly
38% of mothers disengage, missing critical health information. To improve engagement, ARMMAN employs health
workers to provide service calls, but there are only tens of
health workers compared to hundreds of thousands of mothers in a given service area — so interventions must be carefully targeted to maximize engagement.
Working with ARMMAN, we model this resource-limited
intervention planning problem as a restless multi-armed
bandit (RMAB), where each mother (arm) changes their
weekly engagement (state) according to a stochastic Markov

Introduction

Maternal mortality, the death of a mother1 during pregnancy
or within 42 days after childbirth, is an ongoing global health
crisis. In India, the maternal mortality rate is particularly
stark, estimated between 99 and 130 deaths per 100K births
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We recognize that the term “mother” is imperfect, most notably by not reflecting transgender and non-binary identities. We
highlight alternative language with discussion in Appendix A.

14295

