The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Counterfactuals for the Future
Lucius E.J. Bynum1 , Joshua R. Loftus2 , Julia Stoyanovich1
1

New York University, New York, NY, USA
London School of Economics, London, United Kingdom
lucius@nyu.edu, J.R.Loftus@lse.ac.uk, stoyanovich@nyu.edu
2

Abstract

Suppose you want to allocate resources within a particular population to improve an outcome. For a concrete example, consider allocating tutoring to students at a school
in order to improve test performance. Further, suppose that
unobserved external factors about the students (e.g., family
income, encouragement from parents) explain at least some
of the variation in the outcome across units. How should we
allocate resources to these students?
We frame this as a computational problem involving a few
steps. The input is a dataset describing units, in the style of
an observational study at one time step, along with assumptions about causal structure (which could also be learned
from the data). The output is a treatment assignment across
units, for example, which students get tutoring. The optimization problem operates over an exponential space of possible treatment assignments and involves estimating the impact of a given assignment on the outcome distribution. In
this work, we are agnostic to the particular optimization objective. However, we focus on objectives that would require
the entire outcome distribution, which is of particular interest if we care about mitigating inequality rather than maximizing utility. Our work here concerns the following question: Which approach — interventional or counterfactual —
should we use to estimate the outcome distribution? (See
Section 2 for precise definitions of interventional and counterfactual distributions.)
Approach 1. We could use our model of the data to identify which subgroups of students to treat based on their covariate values only. After learning an optimal treatment rule,
we would apply it to our observed students. We could describe this as a treatment choice problem focused on interventional distributions — a problem studied extensively
in econometrics. We may take an approach to tackling this
problem such as Empirical Welfare Maximization (EWM)
that, in short, maximizes the social welfare in a target population using a sampled population to learn a treatment assignment rule (Kitagawa and Tetenov 2018). Notice that
here, in contrast to much work in econometrics, our sample
is our entire population of interest.
Approach 2. We could use our model of the data to identify which students to treat based on their covariate values
in addition to any student-specific idiosyncrasies not captured by the covariates we have measured. This gives rise
to a problem focused on counterfactual distributions, which

Counterfactuals are often described as ‘retrospective,’ focusing on hypothetical alternatives to a realized past. This description relates to an often implicit assumption about the
structure and stability of exogenous variables in the system
being modeled — an assumption that is reasonable in many
settings where counterfactuals are used. In this work, we consider cases where we might reasonably make a different assumption about exogenous variables; namely, that the exogenous noise terms of each unit do exhibit some unit-specific
structure and/or stability. This leads us to a different use of
counterfactuals — a forward-looking rather than retrospective counterfactual. We introduce “counterfactual treatment
choice,” a type of treatment choice problem that motivates
using forward-looking counterfactuals. We then explore how
mismatches between interventional versus forward-looking
counterfactual approaches to treatment choice, consistent
with different assumptions about exogenous noise, can lead
to counterintuitive results.

1

Introduction

Counterfactuals are often described as retrospective, focusing on hypothetical alternatives to a realized past. Here,
we explore how this view of counterfactuals as retrospective connects to implicit assumptions about how exogenous
(noise) variables behave in the system being modeled. We
frame our discussion in terms of graphical approaches to
causality (Pearl 2009; Spirtes et al. 2000; Peters, Janzing,
and Schölkopf 2017). We characterize assumptions about
such exogenous variables as being of two kinds: (1) assumptions about how a unit looks exogenously compared to itself over time, and (2) assumptions about how a unit looks
exogenously compared to other units. We refer to the first
kind as assumptions about ‘stability’ and to the second as assumptions about ‘structure.’ In characterizing these assumptions, we explore how they lead us to a forward-looking
rather than a retrospective use of counterfactuals.
The questions we explore in this work are motivated by a
distinction between two types of approaches to maximizing
social welfare (or minimizing inequality) in a target population by learning a treatment rule. We now contrast these two
approaches with an example.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14144

