The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Pixel Is All You Need: Adversarial Trajectory-Ensemble Active Learning for
Salient Object Detection
Zhenyu Wu1 , Lin Wang2 , Wei Wang3 , Qing Xia4 , Chenglizhao Chen5 * , Aimin Hao1,6 , Shuo Li7
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
2
School of Transportation Science and Engineering, Beihang University
3
Harbin Institute of Technology
4
SenseTime Group Limited
5
China University of Petroleum
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory
7
Case Western Reserve University
Number (104)

Abstract
Although weakly-supervised techniques can reduce the labeling effort, it is unclear whether a saliency model trained with
weakly-supervised data (e.g., point annotation) can achieve
the equivalent performance of its fully-supervised version.
This paper attempts to answer this unexplored question by
proving a hypothesis: there is a point-labeled dataset where
saliency models trained on it can achieve equivalent performance when trained on the densely annotated dataset. To
prove this conjecture, we proposed a novel yet effective adversarial trajectory-ensemble active learning (ATAL). Our
contributions are three-fold: 1) Our proposed adversarial attack triggering uncertainty can conquer the overconfidence of
existing active learning methods and accurately locate these
uncertain pixels. 2) Our proposed trajectory-ensemble uncertainty estimation method maintains the advantages of the
ensemble networks while significantly reducing the computational cost. 3) Our proposed relationship-aware diversity
sampling algorithm can conquer oversampling while boosting performance. Experimental results show that our ATAL
can find such a point-labeled dataset, where a saliency model
trained on it obtained 97%-99% performance of its fullysupervised version with only 10 annotated points per image.

Confidence for uncertainty pixels
Confidence for certainty pixels

4
3

Before using AATU

2

Overconfidence

1

Number (104)

0

4.5
3.5

0.2

0.4

0.6

1.0

Confidence for uncertainty pixels
Confidence for certainty pixels

After using AATU

2.5

Overconfidence

1.5
0

0.8

Confidence

0.2

0.4

0.6

Confidence

0.8

1.0

Figure 1: Our AATU can conquer the overconfidence issue
of existing active learning methods and accurately identify
these uncertain pixels.

tion. Despite the substantial progress, it is unclear whether
a saliency model trained with weakly-supervised data (e.g.,
point-annotation) can achieve the equivalent performance of
its fully-supervised version (i.e., pixel-wise annotation).
In this paper, we answer this unexplored question by proving a hypothesis: there is a point labeled dataset where
saliency models trained on it could achieve equivalent performance when trained on the densely annotated dataset.
This conjecture, if it is true, has rather promising practical
significance–it suggests that the pixel-wise annotation is in
fact unnecessary, freeing humans from the heavy burden of
labeling pixel-wise data. While finding such a point-labeled
dataset is non-trivial, there are two main challenges: 1) In
standard active learning (AL), uncertain pixels are defined as
the low confidence pixels to the current model that has been
trained over the present labeled set. However, our experiments revealed that existing AL methods are prone to produce “overconfident” predictions for uncertain pixels (see
Fig. 1), resulting in inaccurate estimation. 2) Despite deep
ensemble networks (DEN) (Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and
Blundell 2017; Franchi et al. 2020; Zaidi et al. 2021) is the
most effective methodology for uncertainty estimation, it introduces prohibitive training cost, which is mainly incurred
by training N networks repeatedly (see Fig. 2a).

Introduction
Recently, deep learning based SOD methods (Ji et al. 2021;
Fan et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021a; Tang et al.
2021; Gu et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2021) have achieved great
success with the help of well-annotated large-scale datasets.
Unfortunately, it is a prohibitive cost to annotate a large
amount of pixel-wise data.
Weakly-supervised salient object detection (WSOD)
methods have been proposed to alleviate the dependency
on pixel-wise data. Existing WSOD methods (Zeng et al.
2019; Li, Xie, and Lin 2018; Wang et al. 2017) utilize weak
annotation, such as image-level label and scribble annotation, which is easier to collect than a densely annotated
label. More recently, (Gao et al. 2022) proposed a pointsupervised SOD framework with the help of edge informa* Corresponding Author: Chenglizhao Chen, cclz123@163.com
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2883

