The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Probability Guided Loss for Long-Tailed Multi-Label Image Classification
Dekun Lin
Chengdu Institute of Computer Applications, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chengdu 610041, China
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
kunonkey@163.com

Abstract
Long-tailed learning has attracted increasing attention in very
recent years. Long-tailed multi-label image classification is
one subtask and remains challenging and poorly researched.
In this paper, we provide a fresh perspective from probability
to tackle this problem. More specifically, we find that existing cost-sensitive learning methods for long-tailed multi-label
classification will affect the predicted probability of positive
and negative labels in varying degrees during training, and
different processes of probability will affect the final performance in turn. We thus propose a probability guided loss
which contains two components to control this process. One
is the probability re-balancing which can flexibly adjust the
process of training probability. And the other is the adaptive
probability-aware focal which can further reduce the probability gap between positive and negative labels. We conduct
extensive experiments on two long-tailed multi-label image
classification datasets: VOC-LT and COCO-LT. The results
demonstrate the rationality and superiority of our strategy.

(a) BCE Loss

(b) Focal Loss

(c) DB Loss

(d) Our PG Loss

Figure 1: Predicted mean probability curves by different
cost-sensitive methods on long-tailed multi-label classification dataset VOC-LT during training. H denotes the head
classes, M and T indicate the medium and tail classes, respectively. Both the superscript + and the solid line denote
the probability of positive labels, while subscript − and the
dotted line represent the probability of negative labels.

Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved extraordinary success on computer vision so
far (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan and
Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016), which is largely owing to
the artificial balanced datasets (e.g., CIFAR (Krizhevsky
2009), ImageNet ILSVRC (Deng et al. 2009) and MS
COCO (Lin et al. 2014)). However, real-world data often
exhibits long-tailed distribution. Namely, a few dominant
categories have the majority of samples while most of the
classes are instance-scarce. Such a universal phenomenon
poses severe challenges to a number of computer vision
tasks, e.g., image classification (Cui et al. 2019; Zhou et al.
2020), object detection (Tan et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020) and
instance segmentation (Hsieh et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021).
Models are prone to overfit on minority classes and suffer
from performance decline dramatically.
There are multiple objects in a daily captured image
typically. Multi-label classification (MLC) is to identify
these objects concurrently. Compared to classic single label
classification (SLC) such as ImageNet ILSVRC 2012, the

MLC is undoubtedly more practical and challenging. Longtailed multi-label classification (LTMLC) which combines
the characteristics of long-tailed learning and MLC is underestimated to date.
Cost-sensitive learning methods (Elkan 2001; Zhou and
Liu 2005) adjust loss values for various classes during training for re-balancing. In contrast with complicated model design, such approaches are more simple, interpretable and
may be even more powerful. CB loss (Cui et al. 2019) calculates class-wise effective samples to re-weight loss and
achieve nice performance on SLC. Ridnik et al. who are
aware of the imbalance between positive and negative labels
in a multi-label setting, i.e., the number of negative labels is
much larger than positive labels, propose the ASL loss (Ridnik et al. 2021) to slow down the learning of massive easy
negative labels on MLC. Similarly, Wu et al. put forward the
DB loss (Wu et al. 2020) which focuses more on the learning of negative labels during training and make remarkable
advance in LTMLC.

Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1577

