The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Pixel-Wise Warping for Deep Image Stitching
Hyeokjun Kweon* , Hyeonseong Kim* , Yoonsu Kang* , Youngho Yoon* , Wooseong Jeong and
Kuk-Jin Yoon
Korean Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
{0327june, brian617, gzgzys9887, dudgh1732, stk14570, kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Existing image stitching approaches based on global or local homography estimation are not free from the parallax
problem and suffer from undesired artifacts. In this paper,
instead of relying on the homography-based warp, we propose a novel deep image stitching framework exploiting the
pixel-wise warp field to handle the large-parallax problem.
The proposed deep image stitching framework consists of a
Pixel-wise Warping Module (PWM) and a Stitched Image
Generating Module (SIGMo). For PWM, we obtain pixelwise warp in a similar manner as estimating an optical flow
(OF). In the stitching scenario, the input images usually include non-overlap (NOV) regions of which warp cannot be
directly estimated, unlike the overlap (OV) regions. To help
the PWM predict a reasonable warp on the NOV region, we
impose two geometrical constraints: an epipolar loss and a
line-preservation loss. With the obtained warp field, we relocate the pixels of the target image using forward warping.
Finally, the SIGMo is trained by the proposed multi-branch
training framework to generate a stitched image from a reference image and a warped target image. For training and evaluating the proposed framework, we build and publish a novel
dataset including image pairs with corresponding pixel-wise
ground truth warp and stitched result images. We show that
the results of the proposed framework are qualitatively and
quantitatively superior to those of the conventional methods.

Figure 1: Qualitative comparison on large parallax images.
Reference image (left top), target image (right top), stitched
image of APAP (Zaragoza et al. 2013) (left bottom), and
stitched image of our method (right bottom).

the camera and the target scene are close and/or scenes include abrupt depth changes. In these ”large-parallax” cases,
the ghosting effect degrades the quality of the stitched results. Several studies (Gao, Kim, and Brown 2011; Zaragoza
et al. 2013; Zheng et al. 2019) reduced dependency on the
planar scene assumption, by optimizing the homographybased transformation on each subregion (e.g. grid or superpixel). However, there is still a trade-off between accuracy
and convergence of warping functions when using these approaches. If we divide the image into smaller subregions to
make them nearly planar, then the correspondences on such
subregions would be scarce and therefore difficult to optimize the regional warp on these regions. On the other hand,
if we use larger subregions, it would provide sufficient correspondences but the planar assumption could be weakened.
To resolve this issue, we propose a deep image stitching
framework, formulating the transformation between images
as a pixel-wise warp field. In our framework, the 2D warp
vector of each pixel is directly estimated, instead of optimizing the transformation function shared for each subregion. Since our approach defines neither subregions nor regionally shared function, it is free from the aforementioned

Introduction
Image stitching is a classic computer vision task widely used
in diverse applications such as robot navigation or 360◦
image acquisition. Image stitching aligns multiple images
taken from different viewpoints into an image from a specific viewpoint with a wider field of view. A general pipeline
of image stitching methods is as follows: 1) obtaining transformation between images based on the correspondences, 2)
warping image with the transformation, and 3) blending the
warped images while reducing unpleasant artifacts.
As far as we know, most image stitching studies formulate the transformation between images as a homography
(or affine) matrix. However, the approach relies on the planar scene assumption, which cannot be established when
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1196

