The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Taxonomizing and Measuring Representational Harms: A Look at Image Tagging
Jared Katzman* 1 , Angelina Wang* 2 , Morgan Scheuerman3 , Su Lin Blodgett4 , Kristen Laird5 ,
Hanna Wallach4 , Solon Barocas4
1

University of Michigan
Princeton University
3
University of Colorado, Boulder
4
Microsoft Research
5
Microsoft
2

Abstract

criminatory.” However, in many of these cases, it can be difficult to identify the full range of normative values at stake.
We aim to bring greater structure and precision to
discussions of some of the harms caused by image tagging
systems and the many computational approaches that have
been proposed to measure them. We first provide relevant
background by defining image tagging and revisiting
the distinction between allocational and representational
harms (Barocas et al. 2017)—emphasizing that problematic
cases of image tagging can affect the understandings,
beliefs, and attitudes that people hold about particular social
groups. We then analyze previously proposed computational
approaches for measuring the “fairness” of image tagging
systems, clustering them into five distinct categories, each
with its own analytic foundation.1 Next, we identify four
types of representational harms that can be caused by image
tagging systems, moving beyond generic concerns about
“unfairness,” “bias,” or “discrimination.” We consider how
different computational measurement approaches map to
each of these types of harms, finding that each approach
can be used to measure all four types. In light of this, we
argue that no single measurement approach is definitive
and that, without explicit reasoning, it is not possible to
infer from the use of a particular measurement approach
which type of harm was intended to be measured. Lastly, we
conclude by exploring tensions between attempts to mitigate
different types of representational harms—and what these
tensions might mean for developing appropriate mitigations.

In this paper, we examine computational approaches for measuring the “fairness” of image tagging systems, finding that
they cluster into five distinct categories, each with its own analytic foundation. We also identify a range of normative concerns that are often collapsed under the terms “unfairness,”
“bias,” or even “discrimination” when discussing problematic
cases of image tagging. Specifically, we identify four types of
representational harms that can be caused by image tagging
systems, providing concrete examples of each. We then consider how different computational measurement approaches
map to each of these types, demonstrating that there is not
a one-to-one mapping. Our findings emphasize that no single measurement approach will be definitive and that it is not
possible to infer from the use of a particular measurement
approach which type of harm was intended to be measured.
Lastly, equipped with this more granular understanding of the
types of representational harms that can be caused by image
tagging systems, we show that attempts to mitigate some of
these types of harms may be in tension with one another.

Introduction
In recent years, computer vision has gone from a largely academic research topic to a set of technologies that touch the
lives of people in a variety of impactful ways. With this success comes the importance of understanding when computer
vision systems can cause harms. In this paper, we consider
some of the harms that can be caused by a seemingly mundane, yet widespread, computer vision task: image tagging.
Prior work has already documented several problematic
cases of image tagging. For example, researchers have identified harms caused by gender classification systems and
other systems that sort people into social groups based on
their appearance (Keyes 2018; Barlas et al. 2021), demonstrated that the performance of image tagging systems can
vary according to the identities of the people depicted in images (Hendricks et al. 2018; Zhao et al. 2017), and revealed
a variety of different ways that such systems can perpetuate
stereotypes (Schwemmer et al. 2020; Bhargava and Forsyth
2019). These findings have been held up as evidence that image tagging systems can be “unfair,” “biased,” or even “dis-

Background
In this section, we define both image tagging and representational (versus allocational) harms (Barocas et al. 2017).

Image Tagging
Image tagging is the task of applying tags to an image so
as to describe salient aspects of its contents. Image tagging
differs from the related task of object recognition, where the
goal is to identify all objects that are depicted in an image.
1

We restrict our focus to only quantitative measurement
approaches, setting aside a survey of qualitative measurement
approaches (e.g., Barlas et al. 2019b; Hu and Strout 2018; Kay,
Matuszek, and Munson 2015a; Miceli, Schuessler, and Yang 2020;
Scheuerman et al. 2020; Offert and Bell 2020) for future work.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Authors contributed equally to this work

14277

