The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Scalable and Globally Optimal Generalized L1 K-center Clustering via
Constraint Generation in Mixed Integer Linear Programming
Aravinth Chembu1 , Scott Sanner1 * , Hassan Khurram1 , Akshat Kumar2
1

University of Toronto, Toronto
Singapore Management University, Singapore
(aravinth.chembu, hassan.khurram)@mail.utoronto.ca, ssanner@mie.utoronto.ca, akshatkumar@smu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

is an essential and fundamental task in exemplar-based clustering (Kaufman and Rousseeuw 2009) and has been a wellstudied formulation for metric clustering (Gonzalez 1985)
for over three decades. The key idea in the vertex k-center
problem is to choose a subset of k points from the data observations as the respective centers of k clusters such that
each point is assigned to its closest center. The objective of
the problem is to minimize the maximum distance from any
point to its nearest cluster center. The generalized variant of
the k-centers problem relaxes the centers to be arbitrary vectors (Calik and Tansel 2013; Xu, Peng, and Xu 2018).
The k-center clustering problem has many real-world applications. Recently, k-center clustering was used for the unsupervised learning task of detecting suspected spammers in
a dataset of Amazon reviews (Zhong, Tan, and Qu 2020).
Bateni et al. (2021) discuss the application of k-center clustering in spam and fraud detection. Further use cases of kcenters for online advertisement and document search are
also discussed in the literature (Wang et al. 2009).
We note that the k-centers problem is inherently immune
to cluster imbalance, e.g., when we have both dense and
sparse clusters in the data (cf. Figure 1). This is a result of the
objective minimizing the within-cluster worst-case distance
(or radius) (Bateni et al. 2021), making it insensitive to the
number of points that lie within this radius. This contrasts
with the minimum sum-of-squared error clustering (MSSC)
objective where the within-cluster sum of distances is considered (Fränti and Sieranoja 2018). In fact, imbalance in
cluster sizes is a common occurrence in many real-world use
cases for clustering, including medical diagnosis (Lin et al.
2017), financial fraud, and bioinformatics (Liang et al. 2012)
and hence k-centers is appropriate for such settings.
The vertex k-center problem is known to be NP-Hard in
the metric space and cannot be solved in polynomial time
within an approximation factor of less than 2 unless P =
NP (Gonzalez 1985). Some exact algorithms can be found
in the literature as discussed in Section 2. However, they
are mostly restricted to the vertex k-center problem and do
not extend to its generalized variant. Moreover, most algorithms do not scale beyond 1,000’s of data points (cf. Section 2). On the other hand, there exist several polynomial
time heuristic greedy algorithms that match the best possible 2-approximation bound (Gonzalez 1985; Hochbaum
and Shmoys 1985) that we discuss further in Section 2 and

The k-center clustering algorithm, introduced over 35 years
ago, is known to be robust to class imbalance prevalent in
many clustering problems and has various applications such
as data summarization, document clustering, and facility location determination. Unfortunately, existing k-center algorithms provide highly suboptimal solutions that can limit their
practical application, reproducibility, and clustering quality.
In this paper, we provide a novel scalable and globally optimal solution to a popular variant of the k-center problem
known as generalized L1 k-center clustering that uses L1 distance and allows the selection of arbitrary vectors as cluster centers. We show that this clustering objective can be reduced to a mixed-integer linear program (MILP) that facilitates globally optimal clustering solutions. However, solving
such a MILP may be intractable for large datasets; to remedy
this, we present a scalable algorithm that leverages constraint
generation to efficiently and provably converge to its global
optimum. We further enhance outlier handling through a simple but elegant extension to our MILP objective. We first evaluate our algorithm on a variety of synthetic datasets to better
understand its properties and then validate on 20 real benchmark datasets where we compare its performance to both traditional L1 distance k-center and k-medians baselines. Our
results demonstrate significant suboptimality of existing algorithms in comparison to our approach and further demonstrate
that we can find optimal generalized L1 k-center clustering
solutions up to an unprecedented 1,000,000 data points.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a classical data analysis tool extensively used
in problems in unsupervised learning. It is found ubiquitously in a varied range of machine learning and data mining tasks, including pattern recognition, document clustering, image segmentation, medical and social sciences (Jain,
Murty, and Flynn 1999; Xu and Wunsch 2005; Xu and Tian
2015; Jain 2010). Clustering is often formulated as an optimization problem to aggregate similar data observations into
clusters; formalizing this notion of similarity with different
objective functions leads to different clustering algorithms.
k-center clustering One of the most traditionally used
center-based clustering problems is the k-center problem. It
* Affiliate to Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7015

