The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Wasserstein Actor-Critic: Directed Exploration via Optimism for
Continuous-Actions Control
Amarildo Likmeta1, 2 , Matteo Sacco2 , Alberto Maria Metelli2 , Marcello Restelli2
1

University of Bologna
Politecnico di Milano
amarildo.likmeta2@unibo.it, matteo3.sacco@mail.polimi.it, albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it, marcello.restelli@polimi.it
2

Abstract

Actor-Critic (AC) methods (Haarnoja et al. 2018; Ciosek
et al. 2019; Schulman et al. 2015) represent the current state
of the art for continuous control. Despite their widespread
adoption, these methods still suffer from high sample complexity. Efficient exploration strategies have been extensively
studied in the literature as a means of reducing sample complexity mainly in tabular domains (Auer, Jaksch, and Ortner
2008; Ian, Benjamin, and Daniel 2013; O’Donoghue et al.
2018; Metelli, Likmeta, and Restelli 2019). Classical exploration strategies, like -greedy or Boltzmann (Sutton and
Barto 2018), inject noise around the current greedy policy
to enforce exploration. Although in simple settings this is
enough to guarantee convergence (Szepesvári 1997), this
exploration strategy is not efficient in the general case.
A common trend in the RL literature consists of endowing
existing methods with some form of uncertainty quantification and using it to perform directed exploration while focusing on the most promising regions. In particular, a recent
extension of Soft Actor-Critic (SAC, Haarnoja et al. 2018),
Optimistic Actor-Critic (OAC, Ciosek et al. 2019), proved
to improve sample efficiency over the standard SAC. Indeed,
uncertainty quantification is a fundamental step to define efficient exploration strategies. Exploration strategies, coming
from the Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB, Lattimore 2020) literature, have been extended for the RL settings, starting from
tabular domains (Auer, Jaksch, and Ortner 2008; Ian, Benjamin, and Daniel 2013; Metelli, Likmeta, and Restelli 2019),
with theoretical guarantees on the sample complexity and/or
regret. In turn, they have been extended to the Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) settings too, but the guarantees no
longer hold up. Ensemble methods allow quantifying the uncertainty but do not propagate it across the state action-space
when performing the critic updates. Uncertainty propagation
is a fundamental tool of any principled uncertainty estimation
approach since most AC methods rely on bootstrapping when
updating the critics. This results in Q-value estimates that
also incorporate uncertainty about the bootstrapped values.
Distributional RL (O’Donoghue et al. 2018) allows for uncertainty propagation but considers only aleatoric uncertainty,
being aimed at estimating the full return distribution.
In this paper, we address the problem of uncertainty estimation and propagation in the context of continuous-action RL.
Starting from the methodology introduced in WQL (Metelli,
Likmeta, and Restelli 2019), we devise a novel actor-critic

Uncertainty quantification has been extensively used as a
means to achieve efficient directed exploration in Reinforcement Learning (RL). However, state-of-the-art methods for
continuous actions still suffer from high sample complexity requirements. Indeed, they either completely lack strategies for
propagating the epistemic uncertainty throughout the updates,
or they mix it with aleatoric uncertainty while learning the full
return distribution (e.g., distributional RL). In this paper, we
propose Wasserstein Actor-Critic (WAC), an actor-critic architecture inspired by the recent Wasserstein Q-Learning (WQL),
that employs approximate Q-posteriors to represent the epistemic uncertainty and Wasserstein barycenters for uncertainty
propagation across the state-action space. WAC enforces exploration in a principled way by guiding the policy learning
process with the optimization of an upper bound of the Q-value
estimates. Furthermore, we study some peculiar issues that
arise when using function approximation, coupled with the
uncertainty estimation, and propose a regularized loss for the
uncertainty estimation. Finally, we evaluate our algorithm on
standard MujoCo tasks as well as suite of continuous-actions
domains, where exploration is crucial, in comparison with
state-of-the-art baselines. Additional details and results can be
found in the supplementary material with our Arxiv preprint.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton and Barto 2018) is one
of the most widely used frameworks for solving sequential
decision-making problems. When an agent acts in an uncertain environment, it faces the choice between exploring
with the hope of discovering more profitable behaviors or
exploiting the current information about the actions’ values. This exploration-exploitation dilemma is particularly
challenging in continuous-state spaces, where function approximation is required to generalize across states, and an
accurate estimate of the uncertainty on the value estimates
is not available point-wise. Continuous-action tasks pose additional challenges since most exploration methods require
the maximization of some objective (e.g., upper bound of the
Q-value) over the action space. While in the discrete case,
this maximization can be performed by enumeration, in the
continuous case it requires solving a complex optimization
problem, increasing the computational demands.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8782

