The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Communication-Efficient Collaborative Best Arm Identification
Nikolai Karpov, Qin Zhang
Indiana University Bloomington
nkarpov@iu.edu, qzhangcs@indiana.edu

Abstract

agents learn from the same environment and the non-IID data
setting in which agents learn from different environments.

We investigate top-m arm identification, a basic problem in
bandit theory, in a multi-agent learning model in which agents
collaborate to learn an objective function. We are interested in
designing collaborative learning algorithms that achieve maximum speedup (compared to single-agent learning algorithms)
using minimum communication cost, as communication is frequently the bottleneck in multi-agent learning. We give both
algorithmic and impossibility results, and conduct a set of experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithms.

The Collaborative Learning Model. We begin by introducing the collaborative learning model, in which K agents
communicate via a coordinator (central server) to learn a
common objective function. The learning process proceeds
in rounds. During each round, each agent takes a sequence
of actions (one at each time step) and receives a sequence
of observations. Each action is taken based on the agent’s
previous actions and observations, messages received from
other parties, and the randomness of the algorithm. At the end
of each round, each agent sends a message to the coordinator.
After collecting messages and performing some computation,
the coordinator sends a message back to each agent. At the
end of the last round, the coordinator outputs the answer.
The collaborative learning model is similar to the federated learning model, which has attracted a lot of attention
recently (Kairouz et al. 2019). The main difference is that in
federated learning we aim at training machine learning models (e.g., neural networks) on multiple machines with local
datasets, while the collaborative learning model is tailored
for multi-agent reinforcement learning.

Introduction
As the scale of reinforcement learning continues to grow,
multi-agent learning has become a necessity in many scenarios to speed up the learning process. In this paper, we
explore collaborative learning, a multi-agent learning model
introduced in Hillel et al. (2013) and Tao, Zhang, and Zhou
(2019) for studying parallel reinforcement learning under
communication constraints. Communication is frequently the
bottleneck in multi-agent learning owing to network latency,
energy consumption, mobile data usage, and privacy considerations. For example, in the deep sea and outer space exploration, data transmission between agents (sensors, robots,
etc.) is expensive since it consumes a lot of energy, which cannot be easily recharged. In the setting where communication
makes use of a mobile network, data transmission directly
adds to our bill. In scenarios where privacy is a concern, we
also want to minimize the total amount of communication,
since messages will leak information about local data which
we do not want to share with other parties. In this paper, we
are interested in the following question:

Top-m Arm Identification in MAB. In this problem we
have n alternative arms; the i-th arm is associated with an
unknown distribution Di with support [0, 1]. Given a time
budget T , we want to identify the top-m arms/distributions
with the largest means by a sequence of T arm pulls (each
pull takes a unit time). Upon each pull of the i-th arm, the
agent observes an i.i.d. sample from Di .
In the collaborative learning model, agents pull arms in
parallel in each round. If multiple agents pull the same arm i
at a particular time step, then each agent gets an independent
sample from distribution Di . At the end of the last round, the
coordinator needs to output the top-m arms.
W.l.o.g., we assume that n ≥ 2m, since otherwise, we
can try to find the bottom (n − m) < n/2 arms, which is
symmetric to identifying the top-(n − m) arms.

How much communication is necessary and sufficient
for scalable algorithms in the collaborative learning
model?
We study a basic problem in bandit theory: top-m arm
identification in multi-armed bandits (MAB); when m = 1,
the problem is called best arm identification. This problem
has numerous applications, including medical tests, industrial
engineering, evolutionary computation, and crowd-sourcing.
We study this problem in both the IID data setting in which

Speedup in Collaborative Learning. We use the concept
of speedup introduced in Tao, Zhang, and Zhou (2019) and
Karpov, Zhang, and Zhou (2020) to quantify the performance
of multi-agent learning in the collaborative learning model.
For top-m arm identification, given an input instance I of n

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8203

