The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Event Process Typing via Hierarchical Optimal Transport
Bo Zhou1,2 , Yubo Chen1,2 , Kang Liu1,2,3 , Jun Zhao1,2
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
{bo.zhou,yubo.chen,kliu,jzhao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

Determine the time of arrival

Understanding intention behind event processes in texts is important to many applications. One challenging task in this line
is event process typing, which aims to tag the process with
one action label and one object label describing the overall
action of the process and object the process likely affects respectively. To tackle this task, existing methods mainly rely
on the matching of the event process level and label level representation, which ignores two important characteristics: Process Hierarchy and Label Hierarchy. In this paper, we propose
a Hierarchical Optimal Transport (HOT) method to address
the above problem. Specifically, we first explicitly extract the
process hierarchy and label hierarchy. Then the HOT optimally matches the two types of hierarchy. Experimental results show that our model outperforms the baseline models,
illustrating the effectiveness of our model.

Compare airfares
Event
Process

Choose an airline
Buy a ticket

Action: book

Introduction

Object: flight

Figure 1: An example of the event process typing task. The
action label of the event process is book and the object label
is flight.

Being able to understand the overall intention behind event
processes in texts is important to many artificial intelligence
applications which require the ability to reason about chains
of activities, such as script event prediction (Lv, Zhu, and
Hu 2020), question answering (Li et al. 2020a), and event
based summarization (Li and Zhang 2020). One challenging
task in this line is event process typing (Chen et al. 2020).
Given an event process composed of a sequence of events,
the task aims to tag the process with two labels: one action
label describing the overall action of the process and one
object label describing the overall object the process likely
affects. An example of the event process typing is showed in
Figure 1, given an event process of four events, the task tags
one action label book and one object label flight.
To tackle the event process typing task, previous methods (Chen et al. 2020) leverage pre-trained language model
to encode the whole process and the action label as process
feature vector and action label vector respectively, then the
action whose feature vector is the closest to the process is
predicted as the action label for the process. The object label for the process is predicted in the same way. Though
effective, they ignore two important characteristics: Process
Hierarchy and Label Hierarchy, which can be leveraged to
improve performance of the task. In the following, we will

elaborate the two characteristics and the reasons why they
are important for the event process typing task.
Process Hierarchy: Event process is composed of events,
and event is composed of words, previous methods ignore
this hierarchy since their predictions mainly rely on the
event process-level representation. Thus they failed to directly match labels with events in the process and labels
with words in the events, which can provide fine-grained
prediction clues for the task. For example in Figure 1, the
words airfares and airline strongly indicate the object label
of flight, while the event Buy a ticket implies that the action
is likely to be book. Thus, a challenging problem is to model
the process hierarchy and leverage it to capture the matching
with action and object labels.
Label Hierarchy: Due to the large label space (1,336 action types and 10,441 object types) of the event process typing, it’s difficult to directly capture the association between
a process and a single label. Meanwhile, the action label
and object label of this task are verb and noun respectively,
both of which have hypernyms. The verb-hypernyms (nounhypernyms) hierarchy can provide additional information
for the original label consisting of only one verb (noun).

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14038

