The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Diffusing Gaussian Mixtures for Generating Categorical Data
Florence Regol, Mark Coates
Dept. Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University
Montréal, QC, Canada
florence.robert-regol@mail.mcgill.ca, mark.coates@mcgill.ca

Abstract

Z
0

Learning a categorical distribution comes with its own set
of challenges. A successful approach taken by state-of-theart works is to cast the problem in a continuous domain to
take advantage of the impressive performance of the generative models for continuous data. Amongst them are the recently emerging diffusion probabilistic models, which have
the observed advantage of generating high-quality samples.
Recent advances for categorical generative models have focused on log likelihood improvements. In this work, we propose a generative model for categorical data based on diffusion models with a focus on high-quality sample generation,
and propose sampled-based evaluation methods. The efficacy
of our method stems from performing diffusion in the continuous domain while having its parameterization informed
by the structure of the categorical nature of the target distribution. Our method of evaluation highlights the capabilities
and limitations of different generative models for generating
categorical data, and includes experiments on synthetic and
real-world protein datasets.

…

…

x4
x3
x2

p(X|Z0)

q(Z0|X)
x1
t

t-1

n(Z |Z )

…
Zt-1
Zt

x1

x4
x2x3

dθ(Zt-1|Zt)

Zt-1
Zt-1~p(Zt-1|Zt,X)

X
X ~pθ(X|Zt,t)

n(Zt+1|Zt)
n(ZT|ZT-1)

Zt+1
…
ZT-1
T
Z

dθ
(Zt|Zt+1)
dθ(ZT-1|ZT)

[Zt,t]

Figure 1: Overview of the architecture. On the left, a visualisation of the diffusion process for the first element of a
sequence x(1) is depicted. The sequence is mapped to the
continuous space through the fixed Gaussian Mixture (GM)
encoder q(Z0 |X = x), then is diffused through the iterative application of noise distributions n(Zt |Zt−1 ) until the
signal is destroyed at ZT . The right depicts the generative
process. Starting from ZT , the denoising function models a
distribution x conditioned on zT , t which in turns models
the mixture component of the fixed GM that will be used
to produce Zt−1 conditioned on Zt , t. The final sequence is
generated from the decoder p(X|Z0 ).

Introduction
There are numerous applications for generative models of
categorical random sequences; text generation, speech and
music synthesis, drug design and protein synthesis are all
important tasks that require modeling of high-dimensional
nominal data. Learning the structure and substructure underlying those complex high-dimensional distributions can be
useful for downstream tasks. For example, in drug synthesis,
studies have confirmed the important role that mutational covariation plays in determining protein function, and this has
found practical applications in drug design and drug resistance prediction (McGee et al. 2021; Tubiana, Cocco, and
Monasson 2019; Socolich et al. 2005). As a result, recent
works have employed generative models to learn from existing proteins and generate new ones (Trinquier et al. 2021;
McGee et al. 2021; Jain et al. 2022). For this type of problem, the ability to generate quality samples is essential.
While the research on generative models for continuous
data has been flourishing (see (Bond-Taylor et al. 2022) for a
review), the literature on modeling nominal categorical data
is not as developed (Hoogeboom et al. 2021a).

Autoregressive (AR) methods are well suited for modeling categorical data (Cooijmans et al. 2017). A notable
class of AR models that give impressive performance for this
problem are Transformers (Dai et al. 2019; Child et al. 2019;
Hua et al. 2022; Jun et al. 2020). Transformers are powerful, but generally suffer from the weaknesses associated with
autoregressive models; they are generally slow to train and
slow to sample from (Bond-Taylor et al. 2022). They also
suffer from quadratic complexity (w.r.t. sequence length),
and because of their impressive flexibility in modeling capability, are harder to apply to smaller datasets (Lin et al.
2021). As a result, many works have attempted to linearize
the time/memory complexity (Hua et al. 2022; Katharopou-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9570

