The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

VASR: Visual Analogies of Situation Recognition
Yonatan Bitton, Ron Yosef, Eliyahu Strugo, Dafna Shahaf, Roy Schwartz, Gabriel Stanovsky
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
{yonatan.bitton,ron.yosef,eli.strugo,dafna.shahaf,roy.schwartz1,gabriel.stanovsky}@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract
A core process in human cognition is analogical mapping: the
ability to identify a similar relational structure between different situations. We introduce a novel task, Visual Analogies
of Situation Recognition, adapting the classical word-analogy
task into the visual domain. Given a triplet of images, the task
is to select an image candidate B’ that completes the analogy
(A to A’ is like B to what?). Unlike previous work on visual
analogy that focused on simple image transformations, we
tackle complex analogies requiring understanding of scenes.
We leverage situation recognition annotations and the CLIP
model to generate a large set of 500k candidate analogies.
Crowdsourced annotations for a sample of the data indicate
that humans agree with the dataset label ∼80% of the time
(chance level 25%). Furthermore, we use human annotations
to create a gold-standard dataset of 3,820 validated analogies. Our experiments demonstrate that state-of-the-art models do well when distractors are chosen randomly (∼86%),
but struggle with carefully chosen distractors (∼53%, compared to 90% human accuracy). We hope our dataset will
encourage the development of new analogy-making models.
Website: https://vasr-dataset.github.io/

Figure 1: An example of visual analogy from the VASR
dataset. The task is to select an image which best completes
the analogy. The answer is found in the footnote.

The ability to draw analogies, flexibly mapping relations
between superficially different domains, is fundamental to
human intelligence, creativity and problem solving (Hofstadter and Sander 2013; Depeweg, Rothkopf, and Jäkel
2018; Goodman, Tenenbaum, and Gerstenberg 2014; Fauconnier 1997; Gentner, Holyoak, and Kokinov 2001; Carey
2011; Spelke and Kinzler 2007). This ability has also been
suggested to be key to constructing more general and trustworthy AI systems (Mitchell 2021; McCarthy et al. 2006).
An essential part of analogical thinking is the ability to look
at different situations and extract abstract patterns. For example, a famous analogy is between the solar system and the
Rutherford-Bohr model of the atom. Importantly, while the
surface features are very different (atoms are much smaller
than planets, different forces are involved, etc.), both phenomena share deep structural similarity (e.g., smaller objects
revolving around a massive object, attracted by some force).

Most computational analogy works to date have focused on text (Mikolov, Yih, and Zweig 2013; Allen and
Hospedales 2019), often studying SAT-type analogies (e.g.,
walk:legs :: chew:mouth). In works involving analogies between situations (Falkeneheimer, Forbus, and Gentner 1986;
Evans 1964; Winston 1980; Gentner 1983), both entities
and relations need explicit structured representations, limiting their scalability. In the visual domain, works also focused on SAT-type questions (Lovett and Forbus 2017; Lake,
Salakhutdinov, and Tenenbaum 2015; Depeweg, Rothkopf,
and Jäkel 2018), synthetic images (Lu et al. 2019; Reed et al.
2015) or images depicting static objects, where the analogies focus on object properties (color, size, etc.) (Tewel et al.
2021; Sadeghi, Zitnick, and Farhadi 2015), rather than requiring understanding of a full scene.
In this work we argue that images are a promising source
of relational analogies between situations, as they provide
rich semantic information about the scenes depicted in them.
We take a step in that direction and introduce the Visual
Analogies of Situation Recognition (VASR) dataset. Each
instance in VASR is composed of three images (A, A’, B)
and K = 4 candidates (see Figure 1). The task is to se-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Answer: 3. Between A and A’, man changed to monkey. Thus,
from B to B’, a man feeling cold changes to a monkey feeling cold.

1

Introduction

241

