The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Relational Program Synthesis with Numerical Reasoning
Céline Hocquette, Andrew Cropper
University of Oxford
celine.hocquette@cs.ox.ac.uk, andrew.cropper@cs.ox.ac.uk

Positive example

Abstract
Learning programs with numerical values is fundamental to
many AI applications, including bio-informatics and drug design. However, current program synthesis approaches struggle
to learn programs with numerical values. An especially difficult problem is learning continuous values from multiple
examples, such as intervals. To overcome this limitation, we
introduce an inductive logic programming approach which
combines relational learning with numerical reasoning. Our
approach, which we call N UM S YNTH, uses satisfiability modulo theories solvers to efficiently learn programs with numerical values. Our approach can identify numerical values in
linear arithmetic fragments, such as real difference logic, and
from infinite domains, such as real numbers or integers. Our
experiments on four diverse domains, including game playing
and program synthesis, show that our approach can (i) learn
programs with numerical values from linear arithmetical reasoning, and (ii) outperform existing approaches in terms of
predictive accuracies and learning times.

1

Negative example

(a) Examples
zendo(A) ← piece(A,B), contact(B,C),
size(C,D), geq(D,7)
(b) A rule which states that two pieces are in contact,
one with size greater or equal to 7.
zendo(A) ← piece(A,B), contact(B,C), size(C,D),
geq(D,N), @numerical(N)
(c) Intermediate hypothesis.

Figure 1: Learning a hypothesis for Zendo. Learning this
hypothesis involves reasoning with the numerical predicate
geq represented in bold to identify the numerical value 7.

Introduction

Zendo is a game in which one player, the Master, creates a
rule that structures made of pieces must follow. The rest of
the players, as Students, try to discover this rule by building
and studying structures which follow or break the rule. The
first student to correctly guess the rule wins. For instance,
suppose the structure on the left of Figure 1a follows the
secret rule while the one on the right does not. Figure 1b
shows a possible secret rule. It states that structures must have
two pieces in contact, one with size at least 7. Discovering
this rule involves identifying the numerical value 7.
Suppose we want to use machine learning to play Zendo,
i.e. to learn secret rules from examples of structures. Then
we need an approach that can (i) learn explainable rules, and
(ii) generalise from small numbers of examples. However,
these requirements are difficult for standard machine learning techniques, yet are crucial for many real-world problems
(Cropper et al. 2022) including protein folding (Turcotte,
Muggleton, and Sternberg 2001), mutagenic activity (Srinivasan et al. 1996) or drug design (Finn et al. 1998).
Inductive logic programming (ILP) (Muggleton 1991) is
a form of machine learning that can learn explainable rules

from small numbers of examples. Existing ILP techniques
could, for instance, learn rules for simple Zendo problems.
However, existing approaches struggle to learn rules that
require identifying numerical values from infinite domains
(Corapi, Russo, and Lupu 2011; Evans and Grefenstette 2018;
Cropper and Morel 2021). Moreover, although some ILP approaches can learn programs with numerical values (Muggleton 1995; Hocquette and Cropper 2022), they cannot perform
complex numerical reasoning, such as identifying numerical
values by reasoning over multiple examples jointly. For instance, they struggle to learn that the size of one piece must
be greater than some particular numerical value, or that the
sum of the coordinates describing the position of a piece must
be lower than some particular numerical value. These limitations are not specific to ILP and, as far as we are aware, apply
to all current program synthesis approaches (Raghothaman
et al. 2019; Ellis et al. 2018; Shi et al. 2022).
To overcome these limitations, we introduce an approach
that can identify numerical values from infinite domains and
reason from multiple examples. The key idea of our approach
is to decompose the learning task into two stages (i) program
search, and (ii) numerical search.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6425

