The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Rehabilitating Homeless: Dataset and Key Insights*
Anna Bykova1 , Nikolay Filippov1 , Ivan P. Yamshchikov2,3
1

LEYA Lab for Natural Language Processing, Higher School of Economics, Yandex, St. Petersburg, Russia
2
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics (CAIRO), THWS, Würzburg, Germany
3
CEMAPRE, University of Lisbon, Portugal
ivan@yamshchikov.info

Abstract

The CES acknowledges that the above approach does not
provide a full definition of the “homeless” (UN 2009).
The problem of homelessness has attracted the attention of researchers since the 1980-s. Many researchers like
(Crane and Takashi 1998), (Avramov 2001) or (Collin 1992)
studied homelessness as primarily a housing problem. Others like (Dear and Wolch 2014) or (Wennig 1991) studied homelessness among people with mental diseases attributing it to deinstitutionalizing state mental hospitals and
reducing public expenditures on welfare. Many other aspects of homelessness were studied, providing various aggregate data on homelessness. There is much research on
the key factors and areas that could be addressed to prevent
homelessness; see, for example, (Cunningham, Schmitt, and
Henry 2006), or (Rukmana 2010). (O’Flaherty 2004), or
(Byrne et al. 2013) provide a meta-analysis of various previous research results and list variables negatively and positively affecting homelessness rates. For the recent metaanalysis, we address the reader to (Rukmana 2020). This paper points out that many aspects of the homelessness problem and approaches to helping homeless people, as well as
preventing homelessness, heavily depend on the country and
local specifics.
In many developing countries, the homelessness problem is often practically addressed by charity and nongovernment organizations (NGOs) in parallel with the public sector. “Nochlezhka” charity organization is one of those
helping homeless people in Moscow, Saint Petersburg, and
other cities in Russia. Homeless people receive help in
humanitarian and re-socialization projects. Humanitarian
projects provide free overnight stay, hot food, access to a
shower, hygiene products, and clothes. These services are
provided to any homeless person, regardless of their intent
to move into a permanent shelter, where they can get further
assistance from social workers. Re-socialization projects are
available for the homeless who decided to leave the street
for the shelter and want to restore documents, find a job or
find an independent residence.
The employees of such organizations often face a necessity to make difficult and non-obvious decisions based on
noisy, incomplete and conflicting data. Recently, data analytics and machine learning started to get wider adoption
in assisting such decision-making. There are examples of
machine learning applications to predict homelessness in

This paper presents a large anonymized dataset of homelessness alongside insights into the data-driven rehabilitation of
homeless people. The dataset was gathered by a large nonprofit organization working on rehabilitating the homeless for
twenty years. This is the first dataset that we know of that contains rich information on thousands of homeless individuals
seeking rehabilitation. We show how data analysis can help
to make the rehabilitation of homeless people more effective
and successful. Thus, we hope this paper alerts the data science community to the problem of homelessness.

Introduction
There is no universal definition of homelessness. In general, homelessness is the condition of lacking stable, safe,
and adequate housing. In 2004, the United Nations sector of
Economic and Social Affairs defined a homeless household
as households without a shelter that would fall within the
scope of living quarters. They carry their few possessions
with them, sleeping in the streets, in doorways or on piers,
or in any other space, on a more or less random basis.(UN
2004).
In 2009, at the United Nations Economic Commission for
Europe Conference of European Statisticians (CES), held in
Geneva, Switzerland, the Group of Experts on Population
and Housing Censuses defined homelessness as follows:
In its Recommendations for the Censuses of Population
and Housing, the CES identifies homeless people under two
broad groups:
(a) Primary homelessness (or rooflessness). This category
includes persons living in the streets without a shelter that
would fall within the scope of living quarters;
(b) Secondary homelessness. This category may include persons with no place of usual residence who frequently
move between various types of accommodations (including dwellings, shelters, and institutions for the homeless
or other living quarters). This category includes persons
living in private dwellings but reporting “no usual address” on their census form.
* Supported by ‘‘Nochlezhka” non-commercial organization for
rehabilitation of the homeless people, see https://homeless.ru/en/
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14136

