The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Stability-Based Generalization Analysis for Mixtures of Pointwise and Pairwise
Learning
Jiahuan Wang1 , Jun Chen2 , Hong Chen1, 3, 4, * , Bin Gu5 , Weifu Li1, 3, 4 , Xin Tang6
1

College of Science, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China
College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China
3
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Agriculture, Ministry of Education, Wuhan 430070, China
4
Key Laboratory of Smart Farming for Agricultural Animals, Wuhan 430070, China
5
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
6
Ping An Property & Casualty Insurance Company, Shenzhen, China
chenh@mail.hzau.edu.cn
2

Abstract

plexity, while pairwise learning can mine valuable information in terms of the intrinsic relationship among samples. As
illustrated by Wang et al. (2016), the degraded performance
may occur for the pointwise learning with the ambiguity of
some labels and for the pairwise learning as samples in different categories have similar features. Therefore, it is natural to consider the middle modality of the above paradigms
to alleviate their drawbacks. Along this line, some learning
algorithms have been proposed under the pointwise and pairwise learning (PPL) framework, where the pointwise loss
and the pairwise loss are employed jointly (Liu and Zhang
2015; Wang et al. 2016; Lei et al. 2017; Zhuo et al. 2022;
Wang et al. 2022a). In PPL, its pointwise part concerns the
fitting ability to empirical observations and its pairwise part
addresses the stability or robustness of learning models (Liu
and Zhang 2015). While the studies on algorithmic design
and applications are increasing, there are far fewer results to
investigate the generalization ability of PPL in theory.

Recently, some mixture algorithms of pointwise and pairwise learning (PPL) have been formulated by employing
the hybrid error metric of “pointwise loss + pairwise loss”
and have shown empirical effectiveness on feature selection,
ranking and recommendation tasks. However, to the best of
our knowledge, the learning theory foundation of PPL has not
been touched in the existing works. In this paper, we try to fill
this theoretical gap by investigating the generalization properties of PPL. After extending the definitions of algorithmic
stability to the PPL setting, we establish the high-probability
generalization bounds for uniformly stable PPL algorithms.
Moreover, explicit convergence rates of stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) and regularized risk minimization (RRM) for
PPL are stated by developing the stability analysis technique
of pairwise learning. In addition, the refined generalization
bounds of PPL are obtained by replacing uniform stability
with on-average stability.

Introduction

As one of the main routines of learning theory analysis, the algorithmic stability tools have advantages in some
aspects, such as dimensional independence and adaptivity
for broad learning paradigms (Bousquet and Elisseeff 2002;
Shalev-Shwartz et al. 2010; Hardt, Recht, and Singer 2016;
Feldman and Vondrak 2018, 2019). Specially, the stability
and generalization have been well understood recently for
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and regularized risk minimization (RRM) under both the pointwise learning (Hardt,
Recht, and Singer 2016; Lei and Ying 2020) and the pairwise
learning setting (Lei, Ledent, and Kloft 2020; Lei, Liu, and
Ying 2021). Inspired by the recent progress, in this paper,
we try to fill this theoretical gap of PPL by establishing its
generalization bounds in terms of the algorithmic stability
technique. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first theoretical understanding of generalization properties for PPL.

There are mainly two paradigms to formulate machine learning systems including pointwise learning and pairwise learning. Usually, the former aims to train models under the error
metric associated with single sample, while the latter concerns the relative relationships between objects measured by
the loss related to the pair of samples. Besides wide applications, the theoretical foundations of the above paradigms
have been well established from the viewpoint of statistical
learning theory, e.g., pointwise stability analysis (Bousquet
and Elisseeff 2002; London, Huang, and Getoor 2016; Sun,
Li, and Wang 2021), pairwise stability analysis (Agarwal
and Niyogi 2009; Lei, Ledent, and Kloft 2020; Lei, Liu, and
Ying 2021), and uniform convergence analysis (Clémençon,
Lugosi, and Vayatis 2008; Rejchel 2012; Cao, Guo, and
Ying 2016; Ying, Wen, and Lyu 2016; Ying and Zhou 2016).
It is well known that pointwise (or pairwise) learning enjoys certain advantages and limitations for real-world data
analysis. For the same number of samples, pointwise learning has computation feasibility due to its low model com-

The main work of this paper is two-fold: One is to establish a relationship between uniform stability and estimation error for the mixture setting, which can be considered as
natural extension of the related results in (Lei, Ledent, and
Kloft 2020; Lei, Liu, and Ying 2021). The other is to characterize the stability-based generalization bounds for some
PPL algorithms (i.e. SGD and RRM) under mild conditions.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10113

