The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Amodal Instance Segmentation via Prior-Guided Expansion
Junjie Chen1 , Li Niu1 * , Jianfu Zhang1 , Jianlou Si2 , Chen Qian2 , Liqing Zhang1 *
1

The MoE Key Lab of AI, CSE department, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
SenseTime Research, SenseTime
{chen.bys, ustcnewly, c.sis}@sjtu.edu.cn, {sijianlou,qianchen}@sensetime.com, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Amodal instance segmentation aims to infer the amodal
mask, including both the visible part and occluded part of
each object instance. Predicting the occluded parts is challenging. Existing methods often produce incomplete amodal
boxes and amodal masks, probably due to lacking visual evidences to expand the boxes and masks. To this end, we propose a prior-guided expansion framework, which builds on a
two-stage segmentation model (i.e., Mask R-CNN) and performs box-level (resp., pixel-level) expansion for amodal box
(resp., mask) prediction, by retrieving regression (resp., flow)
transformations from a memory bank of expansion prior. We
conduct extensive experiments on KINS, D2SA, and COCOA
cls datasets, which show the effectiveness of our method.

1

Figure 1: Overview of our method, which performs boxlevel expansion (resp., pixel-level expansion) guided by the
prior-based regression transformations (resp., flow transformations). Visually, the amodal mask in (b) consists of both
the visible part (in blue) and occluded part (in light blue).

Introduction

Instance segmentation (e.g., Mask R-CNN (He et al. 2017))
focuses on segmenting visible pixels for each object instance. In real-world images, the object instances usually
partially occlude each other. To better parse the complex
scene, amodal instance segmentation (Xiao et al. 2021; Li
and Malik 2016) requires to infer the complete amodal
mask, including both the visible region and the occluded region for each object instance. Such capacity could greatly
benefit intelligent systems in extensive real-world applications, e.g., facilitating the moving decision in complex traffic or living environment in autonomous driving (Qi et al.
2019) or robotics (Fang et al. 2020; Follmann et al. 2019).
Recent years have witnessed promising progress in the
amodal instance segmentation area. Former methods (Qi
et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2017; Follmann et al. 2019) directly
infer both the visible and the amodal regions from images,
while recent methods infer depth order information (Zhang
et al. 2019; Zhan et al. 2020) or introduce prior information (Xiao et al. 2021) to help amodal instance segmentation. Despite the great progress of previous works, predicting amodal masks is still challenging because of lacking visible evidences for the occluded regions.
In practice, we found that the inferred amodal box and
amodal mask are often incomplete, probably due to lacking evidences for expanding to complete amodal region. Re-

cently, Xiao et al. (2021) employs several ground-truth (GT)
amodal masks of training instances (i.e., instances with GT
annotations in the training set) similar to the initially estimated amodal mask as shape prior to benefit the mask refinement. We also consider exploiting prior information to
support amodal inference. In contrast, we propose to exploit
the prior information of expanding visible region to amodal
region, based on which prior-guided expansion is performed
for amodal instance segmentation. Specifically, the amodal
mask is represented by a box and a mask within it (He et al.
2017; Xiao et al. 2021). Undersize box inherently limits the
subsequent amodal mask prediction, which remains ignored
in recent works (Xiao et al. 2021; Follmann et al. 2019).
Thus, we perform box-level (resp., pixel-level) expansion
for amodal box (resp., mask) prediction.
Following (Xiao et al. 2021; Follmann et al. 2019), our
framework is built upon Mask R-CNN and further includes
an expansion prior memory bank, a prior-guided amodal box
head, and a prior-guided amodal mask head. The general
pipeline firstly employs Mask R-CNN to infer the object
class, original amodal box, and visible mask. After that, we
search expansion prior for box in the bank to help the priorguided amodal box head obtain the expanded amodal box,
as shown in Fig. 1 (a). Finally, we search expansion prior
for mask in the bank to assist the prior-guided amodal mask

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

313

