The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Proportionality in Approval-Based Participatory Budgeting
Markus Brill1,2 , Stefan Forster3 , Martin Lackner3 , Jan Maly4 , Jannik Peters1
1

TU Berlin, Berlin, Germany
University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
3
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
4
ILLC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands
markus.brill@warwick.ac.uk, stefan.forster@tuwien.ac.at, lackner@dbai.tuwien.ac.at, j.f.maly@uva.nl,
jannik.peters@tu-berlin.de
2

Abstract

To be able to speak about proportional representation in
the context of PB, one first needs to decide on how to measure the representation of a given voter by a selection of
projects. If votes are cast in the form of approval ballots,
as is the case in most PB processes in practice, two standard
ways to measure the satisfaction of a voter have emerged.
The first assumes that the satisfaction a voter derives from
an outcome is the total cost of the approved projects in
this outcome (Aziz, Lee, and Talmon 2018; Aziz and Lee
2021; Talmon and Faliszewski 2019). In other words, voters
care about how much money is spent on projects they like.
The second assumes the satisfaction of a voter to be simply the number of approved projects in the outcome (Peters,
Pierczyński, and Skowron 2021; Los, Christoff, and Grossi
2022; Fairstein et al. 2022; Talmon and Faliszewski 2019).
We refer to these two measures as cost-based satisfaction
and cardinality-based satisfaction, respectively. Both measures, though naturally appealing, have their downsides:
Under the cost-based satisfaction measure, inefficient (i.e.,
more expensive) projects are seen as preferable to equivalent
but cheaper ones. Under the cardinality-based satisfaction
measure, large projects (e.g., a new park) and small projects
(e.g., a new bike rack) are treated as equivalent.

The ability to measure the satisfaction of (groups of) voters is a crucial prerequisite for formulating proportionality
axioms in approval-based participatory budgeting elections.
Two common — but very different — ways to measure the
satisfaction of a voter consider (i) the number of approved
projects and (ii) the total cost of approved projects, respectively. In general, it is difficult to decide which measure of
satisfaction best reflects the voters’ true utilities. In this paper,
we study proportionality axioms with respect to large classes
of approval-based satisfaction functions. We establish logical
implications among our axioms and related notions from the
literature, and we ask whether outcomes can be achieved that
are proportional with respect to more than one satisfaction
function. We show that this is impossible for the two commonly used satisfaction functions when considering proportionality notions based on extended justified representation,
but achievable for a notion based on proportional justified
representation. For the latter result, we introduce a strengthening of priceability and show that it is satisfied by several
polynomial-time computable rules, including the Method of
Equal Shares and Phragmén’s sequential rule.

1

Introduction

The ambiguity of measuring satisfaction leads to three
main problems: First, different papers present incomparable
notions of fairness based on different measures of satisfaction. For example, both Aziz, Lee, and Talmon (2018) and
Los, Christoff, and Grossi (2022) generalized a well-known
proportionality axiom known as proportional justified representation (PJR), but they did so based on different satisfaction measures. Second, the two measures described above
are certainly not the only reasonable functions for measuring satisfaction; and results in the literature cannot easily be
transferred to new satisfaction functions. For example, satisfaction could be estimated by experts evaluating projects;
if efficiency is taken into account, such a measure may differ significantly from the cost-based one. Third, most papers
so far have focused on a single satisfaction function only.
Therefore, it is not known whether we can guarantee proportionality properties with respect to different satisfaction
measures simultaneously. This would be extremely useful in
practice: If a mechanism designer is not sure which satisfaction function most accurately describes the voters’ preferences in a given PB process, she could potentially choose a

“How can cities ensure that the results of their participatory
budgeting process proportionally represents the preferences
of the citizens?” This is the key question in a recently emerging line of research on proportional participatory budgeting (Aziz, Lee, and Talmon 2018; Peters, Pierczyński, and
Skowron 2021; Los, Christoff, and Grossi 2022). Participatory budgeting (PB) is the collective process of identifying
a set of projects to be realized with a given budget cap; often, the final decision is reached by voting (e.g., Laruelle
2021). The goal of proportional PB is to identify voting rules
that guarantee proportional representation without the need
to declare a priori which groups deserve representation. Instead, each group of sufficient size with sufficiently similar
interests is taken into account. Such a group could be a district, cyclists, parents, or any other collection of people with
similar preferences. This is contrast to, e.g., assigning each
district a proportional part of the budget, which excludes
other (cross-district) groups from consideration.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5524

