The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Contrastive Pre-training with Adversarial Perturbations for
Check-in Sequence Representation Learning
Letian Gong1, 2 , Youfang Lin1, 2 , Shengnan Guo1, 2 * , Yan Lin1, 2 ,
Tianyi Wang1 , Erwen Zheng1 , Zeyu Zhou1 , Huaiyu Wan1, 2
1

School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing, China
{gonglt, yflin, guoshn, ylincs, wangtianyi, zhengerwen, zeyuzhou, hywan}@bjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

mobility behavior to support various downstream practical
tasks, e.g., next check-in location predictions for personalized recommendation, trajectory user link, and abnormal trajectory detection for safety control. A core step of mining
human mobility data is to learn representations for check-in
sequences. In order to help for improving downstream tasks,
the learned representations should be able to fully describe
the spatial-temporal mobility patterns of people and capture
the high-level semantics of check-in sequences. Actually,
representation learning is always one of the hottest topics
in the fields of spatial-temporal data mining (STDM) (Lin
et al. 2021) (Wan et al. 2021), natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision (CV) (Le-Khac, Healy, and
Smeaton 2020). Many successful self-supervised representation learning algorithms that utilize numerous unlabelled
data to capture the universal patterns of studied data are proposed and are used to improve a wide range of downstream
tasks. Among these algorithms, contrastive pre-training via
self-supervised signals (Jaiswal et al. 2020) is proven to be
the most effective way in many scenarios. It pre-trains encoders by contrasting positive pairs and negative pairs generated from data augmentations. Compared to the generative
self-supervised models for representation learning that aims
to recover all the details (usually including the noise) of original, contrastive self-supervised models distill high-level semantics from sparse and noisy inputs by ”learning to compare” (Liu et al. 2021) and usually enjoy satisfactory generalizable abilities with the help of pre-training paradigm.
Inspired by these success, we want to explore adopting the
contrastive pre-training paradigm for check-in sequence representation learning. In this way, we expect that universal
spatial-temporal patterns and high-level semantics could be
captured and the pre-trained representation model could improve the computational efficiency and the overall prediction
performance of downstream tasks.

A core step of mining human mobility data is to learn accurate
representations for user-generated check-in sequences. The
learned representations should be able to fully describe the
spatial-temporal mobility patterns of users and the high-level
semantics of traveling. However, existing check-in sequence
representation learning is usually implicitly achieved by endto-end models designed for specific downstream tasks, resulting in unsatisfactory generalizable abilities and poor performance. Besides, although the sequence representation learning models that follow the contrastive learning pre-training
paradigm have achieved breakthroughs in many fields like
NLP, they fail to simultaneously consider the unique spatialtemporal characteristics of check-in sequences and need manual adjustments on the data augmentation strategies. So, directly applying them to check-in sequences cannot yield
a meaningful pretext task. To this end, in this paper we
propose a contrastive pre-training model with adversarial
perturbations for check-in sequence representation learning
(CACSR). Firstly, we design a novel spatial-temporal augmentation block for disturbing the spatial-temporal features
of check-in sequences in the latent space to relieve the stress
of designing manual data augmentation strategies. Secondly,
to construct an effective contrastive pretext task, we generate “hard” positive and negative pairs for the check-in sequence by adversarial training. These two designs encourage the model to capture the high-level spatial-temporal patterns and semantics of check-in sequences while ignoring the
noisy and unimportant details. We demonstrate the effectiveness and versatility of CACSR on two kinds of downstream
tasks using three real-world datasets. The results show that
our model outperforms both the state-of-the-art pre-training
methods and the end-to-end models.

Introduction
Location-based services (LBS) platforms, such as Gowalla,
Foursquare, Alipay, have grown rapidly in recent years.
They provide convenience for people to share and find location information as well as surrounding services, meanwhile generating a large amount of human mobility behavior data, i.e., check-in sequences on point of interests (POIs).
This gives us an opportunity to mine and understand human

The key to learning representations for check-in sequences via contrastive pre-training is to design an effective data augmentation strategy so that it can encourage the
encoder to mine the spatial-temporal patterns from mobility behavior data and capture the high-level semantics for
human mobility. However, existing augmentation methods
including those specially designed for sequential data and
spatial-temporal data cannot meet the needs. Specifically,
there are two reasons.

* Corresponding author: Shengnan Guo
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4276

