The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

GenéLive! Generating Rhythm Actions in Love Live!*
Atsushi Takada1 , Daichi Yamazaki1 , Yudai Yoshida1 , Nyamkhuu Ganbat1 , Takayuki Shimotomai1 ,
Naoki Hamada1 , Likun Liu2 , Taiga Yamamoto2 , Daisuke Sakurai2
1

KLab Inc.
Kyushu University
{takada-at,yamazaki-d, yoshida-yud, ganbat-n, shimotomai-t, hamada-n}@klab.com,
{liu.likun.654, yamamoto.taiga.160}@s.kyushu-u.ac.jp, d.sakurai@ieee.org
2

Abstract
This article presents our generative model for rhythm action games together with applications in business operation.
Rhythm action games are video games in which the player is
challenged to issue commands at the right timings during a
music session. The timings are rendered in the chart, which
consists of visual symbols, called notes, flying through the
screen. We introduce our deep generative model, GenéLive!,
which outperforms the state-of-the-art model by taking into
account musical structures through beats and temporal scales.
Thanks to its favorable performance, GenéLive! was put into
operation at KLab Inc., a Japan-based video game developer, and reduced the business cost of chart generation by as
much as half. The application target included the phenomenal “Love Live!,” which has more than 10 million users across
Asia and beyond, and is one of the few rhythm action franchises that has led the online-era of the genre. In this article,
we evaluate the generative performance of GenéLive! using
production datasets at KLab as well as open datasets for reproducibility, while the model continues to operate in their
business. Our code and the model, tuned and trained using a
supercomputer, are publicly available.

1

Figure 1: Love Live! School Idol Festival All Stars.2

Although deep generative models for rhythm actions have
been studied for a while – notably by Donahue, Lipton, and
McAuley (2017), they have been focusing on proof of concept or personal hobby use, not yet being used in cuttingedge commercial products. There thus remain questions:
what is the blocker to leverage chart generation models in
the game business, and how should we overcome it?
The present article reveals a key remaining problem,
which is musical structure recognition. Indeed, we considered features such as beats and temporal scales with our
model (see section 2.1 for more on musical structures).
While existing models have not had components dedicated
for these concepts, our preset model has them, which process beats and multiple temporal scales. Those correspond
to our beat guide and multi-scale conv-stack, respectively.
The beat guide is an extraordinary technique in the sense
that it can be computed for any input audio and straightforwardly. Somewhat surprisingly, it had been overlooked by
existing works. The multi-scale conv-stack is incorporated
in order to capture musical features of different time scales,
like repeats and notes of various lengths.
We have included a thorough evaluation of this improved
model, employing a supercomputer and user feedback from
our application in the gaming industry operation with a business company. The benchmarks show that our improved
model outperformed the state-of-the-art model known as
the Dance Dance Convolution; DDC (Donahue, Lipton, and
McAuley 2017). From the business feedback (section 6), we

Introduction

The success of deep generative models is rapidly spreading over the entire fields of industry and academia. In today’s game developments, deep generative models are starting to help us create various assets including graphics,
sounds, character motions, conversations, landscapes, and
level designs. For instance, the Game Developers Conference 20211 held a special session named “Machine Learning Summit” to present various deep generative models used
in game products, such as for generating character motions
that match the content of conversations (Ding 2021) and for
generating 3D facial expression models of characters from
human face pictures (Li 2021).
* This paper is dedicated to Tomori Kusunoki and the memory
of her Setsuna Yuki.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://gdconf.com/.
2
©2013 PROJECT Lovelive! ©2017 PROJECT Lovelive! Sunshine!! ©2020 PROJECT Lovelive! Nijigasaki High School Idol
Club ©Bushiroad International ©SUNRISE ©bushiroad

5266

