The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

WSiP: Wave Superposition Inspired Pooling for Dynamic
Interactions-Aware Trajectory Prediction
Renzhi Wang1 , Senzhang Wang1 * , Hao Yan1 , Xiang Wang2
1

Central South University
National University of Defense Technology
rzwang516@gmail.com, szwang@csu.edu.cn,
CSUyh1999@csu.edu.cn, xiangwangcn@nudt.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Predicting motions of surrounding vehicles is critically important to help autonomous driving systems plan a safe path
and avoid collisions. Although recent social pooling based
LSTM models have achieved significant performance gains
by considering the motion interactions between vehicles close
to each other, vehicle trajectory prediction still remains as a
challenging research issue due to the dynamic and high-order
interactions in the real complex driving scenarios. To this
end, we propose a wave superposition inspired social pooling (Wave-pooling for short) method for dynamically aggregating the high-order interactions from both local and global
neighbor vehicles. Through modeling each vehicle as a wave
with the amplitude and phase, Wave-pooling can more effectively represent the dynamic motion states of vehicles and
capture their high-order dynamic interactions by wave superposition. By integrating Wave-pooling, an encoder-decoder
based learning framework named WSiP is also proposed.
Extensive experiments conducted on two public highway
datasets NGSIM and highD verify the effectiveness of WSiP
by comparison with current state-of-the-art baselines. More
importantly, the result of WSiP is more interpretable as the
interaction strength between vehicles can be intuitively reflected by their phase difference. The code of the work is
publicly available at https://github.com/Chopin0123/WSiP.

Figure 1: Illustration of high-order interactions between vehicles. Agents A and B both intend to merge to the left lane.
Agent C suddenly makes a braking operation, causing agent
B to be unable to change lanes. Thus the motion states of C
indirectly cause A to go straight ahead.

et al. 2012), and Gaussian Processes (Williams and Rasmussen 2006). These models regard vehicles as independent
motion entities governed by physical laws or controlled by
human drivers’ intentions. However, traffic agents are highly
interactive and will affect the motions of each other in real
driving scenarios, which is called social interaction (Alahi
et al. 2016; Mohamed et al. 2020). These models ignore
the complex social interactions and usually cause large prediction bias. With the success of Long Short-Term memory (LSTM) networks in modeling non-linear times series
data, recent works have adopted them to predict trajectories. Alahi et al. (Alahi et al. 2016) propose a Social LSTM
model to predict pedestrian trajectories. Social LSTM for
the first time introduces social pooling, which models the social interactions between pedestrians through letting neighboring pedestrians share the motion states. Following Social LSTM, CS-LSTM (Deo and Trivedi 2018) uses convolutional social pooling layers for robustly modeling the
inter-dependencies in vehicle motions. Gupta et al. (Gupta
et al. 2018) further propose a GAN-based encoder-decoder
framework called Social GAN, which introduces a pooling
module built upon MLP and max pooling to model the interactions among people in a scene.
Although social pooling based methods can better capture
the interactions among traffic agents and achieve significant
performance gains, they still suffer from the following three
limitations. First, existing social pooling methods are not effective to capture the dynamics of interactions among vehicles. For example, as shown in Figure 1, agent A intends
to merge to the left lane. If agent B merges to the left lane

Introduction
Predicting trajectories of moving vehicles (also called agents
in this paper) is one of significant tasks in autonomous driving. During driving, an autonomous vehicle usually makes
decisions according to its surrounding traffic situations. For
example, as shown in Figure 1, vehicle A will first perceive
surrounding traffic environment, and then predict the possible motions of its neighboring vehicles (e.g. vehicle B).
This will help A plan a safe path for avoiding potential collisions. Accurately predicting the trajectories of vehicles is
critically important to infer the intended motions of adjacent agents (Tang and Salakhutdinov 2019; Liu et al. 2021;
Wang, Cao, and Yu 2022).
Conventional models predict the motion of a single vehicle, which are mostly based on statistical models such as
Kalman Filters (Kalman 1960), Hidden Markov Model (Firl
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4685

