The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Scalable Attributed-Graph Subspace Clustering
Chakib Fettal1,2 , Lazhar Labiod1 , Mohamed Nadif1
1

Centre Borelli UMR 9010, Université Paris Cité, 75006 Paris, France
2
Informatique Caisse des Dépôts et Consignations
{firstname.lastname}@u-paris.fr

Affinity Matrix
Coefficient Matrix
Solve an optimization
problem of the following (may not be symmetric, (symmetric with nonmay contain negative entries) negative entries)
form

Input

Abstract
Over recent years, graph convolutional networks emerged as
powerful node clustering methods and have set state of the art
results for this task. In this paper, we argue that some of these
methods are unnecessarily complex and propose a node clustering model that is more scalable while being more effective. The proposed model uses Laplacian smoothing to learn
an initial representation of the graph before applying an efficient self-expressive subspace clustering procedure. This is
performed via learning a factored coefficient matrix. These
factors are then embedded into a new feature space in such a
way as to generate a valid affinity matrix (symmetric and nonnegative) on which an implicit spectral clustering algorithm
is performed. Experiments on several real-world attributed
datasets demonstrate the cost-effective nature of our method
with respect to the state of the art.

Input Data Partition
Spectral Clustering of the affinity matrix
Normalize

Eigendecomposition

k-means

post-processing

Time complexity of

Figure 1: The traditional subspace clustering pipeline. A coefficient matrix C is initially learned. An affinity matrix M
is then generated based on the magnitudes of C, e.g., a common choice is M = (|C| + |C⊤ |)/2. Finally, a partition of
the data is created via applying spectral clustering on M.

Introduction
An attributed-graph is a type of graph that contains two information sources, a topology or structure and node- and/or
edge-level features. Under different approaches, they are
used to model a wide variety of structured data (Fettal,
Labiod, and Nadif 2023, 2022b), with applications in the
fields of recommender systems (Fan et al. 2019; Ying et al.
2018), computer vision (Satorras and Estrach 2018; Yang
et al. 2018), Natural language processing (Marcheggiani and
Titov 2017) and physical systems (Hoshen 2017).
With the advent of the Graph Convolutional Network
(GCN) (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Kipf
and Welling 2016), graph related tasks such as graph representation learning (Wu et al. 2019; Zhu and Koniusz 2021)
and graph clustering (Anton Tsitsulin and Müller 2020) have
received a lot of attention. We observe, however, that for the
task of graph clustering, few approaches (Cai et al. 2020)
based on the subspace clustering principle have been proposed despite it being, at first sight, well-suited to attributedgraph data. We argue that this is mostly due to subspace
clustering models suffering from high spatial and/or computational complexity. In a nutshell, the goal of subspace clustering is to group data points according to the subspaces in
which they lie within a dataset. For example, subspace clustering models that use the self-expressive property, whereby

every data point can be represented as an approximate linear
combination of other points, have to learn a square matrix
called the coefficient or self-representation matrix. This coefficient matrix has a size that is quadratic in the number of
points. Once this matrix is learned, an affinity matrix is constructed from it and spectral clustering is performed on said
affinity matrix. We can see the classical subspace clustering
pipeline in figure 1.
In this paper, we argue that subspace clustering is wellsuited to attributed-graph representations generated with
GCN-based models due the neighborhood averaging making the data points closer and thus helping with the selfexpressiveness of the data points. To leverage this property
and in order to avoid the complexity problems associated
with traditional subspace clustering, we propose an efficient
variant to learn an initial representation of the graph before applying an efficient self-expressive subspace clustering procedure via learning a factored coefficient matrix and
then projecting these factors into a new feature space in such
a way as to generate a valid affinity matrix (symmetric with
non-negative entries) on which to perform implicit spectral
clustering. A schema for our model is available in figure

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7559

