The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning to Know Myself : A Coarse-to-Fine Persona-Aware Training Framework
for Personalized Dialogue Generation
Yunpeng Li1,2 , Yue Hu1,2 * , Yajing Sun1,2 , Luxi Xing1,2 , Ping Guo1,2 , Yuqiang Xie1,2 , Wei Peng1,2
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{liyunpeng, huyue, sunyajing, guoping, xieyuqiang, pengwei}@iie.ac.cn, xingluxi.xlx@gmail.com
2

Persona (Dialogue Agent)

Abstract

Sentence 1: I like to sing in my spare time.




A critical challenge for open-domain dialogue agents is to
generate persona-relevant and consistent responses. Due to
the nature of persona sparsity in conversation scenarios, previous persona-based dialogue agents trained with Maximum
Likelihood Estimation tend to overlook the given personas
and generate responses irrelevant or inconsistent with personas. To address this problem, we propose a two-stage
coarse-to-fine persona-aware training framework to improve
the persona consistency of a dialogue agent progressively.
Specifically, our framework first trains the dialogue agent to
answer the constructed persona-aware questions, making it
highly sensitive to the personas to generate persona-relevant
responses. Then the dialogue agent is further trained with a
contrastive learning paradigm by explicitly perceiving the difference between the consistent and the generated inconsistent
responses, forcing it to pay more attention to the key persona
information to generate consistent responses. By applying our
proposed training framework to several representative baseline models, experimental results show significant boosts on
both automatic and human evaluation metrics, especially the
consistency of generated responses.

Dialogues
Query : My hobby is collecting civil war antiques, what about you ?
Response 1: That sounds great, as a high school student majoring in art,
I like to sing when I am free.

Consistent with the given persona.
Response 2: That sounds great, as a high school student majoring in art,
I like to swim when I am free.

Inconsistent with the given persona.
Response 3: Wow, I think it is fantastic.

Irrelevant to the given persona.

Figure 1: Examples of persona-irrelevant and personainconsistent responses.
in the training corpus. Favoring to generate high-frequency
tokens, they still face the persona inconsistency issue due to
the nature of persona sparsity in conversation scenarios.
As a matter of fact, human responses are not always
persona-relevant. Even if a certain response talks about
the persona, it would also contain much persona-irrelevant
information. Therefore, the persona sparsity problem
also
Јҿ‫▁ޥ‬৩Ж㓬ࣩ‫ॸੱت‬ঞ
exists in the crowd-sourced dataset such as
Persona-Chat
⭘ᡧ˖֐ྭˈ֐ᱟ⭧⭏䘈ᱟྣ⭏˛
(Zhang et al. 2018a) as all the responses are collected from
ሩ䈍ᵪಘӪ˖֐ྭੰˈᡁᱟањሿ⭧ᆙǄ
real conversations. As illustrated in Figure⭘ᡧ˖֐ᱟањྣ⭏ੇ˛
1, in response
ሩ䈍ᵪಘӪ˖ᱟⲴˈᡁᱟањྣ⭏Ǆ
1, only four words “I like to sing” are relevant to the perҿ‫▁ޥ‬৩Ж㓬ࣩ‫ॸੱت‬ঞ
sona sentence “I like to sing in my spare time.”. The problem of persona sparsity hampers the consistency
of
existing
⭘ᡧ˖֐ྭˈ֐ᱟ⭧⭏䘈ᱟྣ⭏˛
persona-based dialogue models mainly in two aspects:
ሩ䈍ᵪಘӪ˖֐ྭੰˈᡁᱟањሿ⭧ᆙǄ
⭘ᡧ˖֐ᱟањྣ⭏ੇ˛
On the one hand, considering the coarse-grained
persona
ሩ䈍ᵪಘӪ˖нੰˈᡁᱟањ⭧⭏Ǆ
consistency, dialogue agents overlook the persona sentences
and generate persona-irrelevant responses. Illustrated in Figure 1, the response 3 fails to perceive the persona sentence
1 and leads to a persona-irrelevant reaction. As the training
data only contains a limited number of responses relevant to
speakers’ personas, the models cannot attend to the persona
sentences and may even regard them as noises. On the other
hand, considering the fine-grained persona consistency, dialogue agents lack extra attention to the key persona information and generate persona-relevant but inconsistent responses. As shown in response 2 in Figure 1, the wrong generated word “swim” turns the good consistent response into
an inconsistent one. The reason is that training with MLE,

Introduction
Despite the recent success of open-domain dialogue generation by training from large volumes of human contextresponse pairs data, achieving human-machine conversation
is still in its infancy (Li et al. 2016). The performance of the
dialogue agent is limited, which makes communicating with
them a rather unsatisfying experience for human beings due
to the lack of a consistent personality.
To alleviate the inconsistency issue, (Zhang et al. 2018a)
introduces the Persona-Chat dataset to endow dialogue
agents with predefined personas, which is comprised of a set
of sentences describing personal information (as shown in
the top of Figure 1). Various approaches have been explored
to incorporate explicit personas into dialogue generation,
such as using latent variables (Song et al. 2019; Wu et al.
2020) and large pre-training models (Wolf et al. 2019; Liu
et al. 2020; Song et al. 2021). Typically, these persona-based
dialogue models are trained with Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) to mimic the human context-response pairs
* Corresponding
ႝ
Author

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Ⴙș
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13157

