The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fast Convergence in Learning Two-Layer Neural Networks
with Separable Data
Hossein Taheri1 , Christos Thrampoulidis2
1

University of California, Santa Barbara
2
University of British Columbia
hossein@ucsb.edu, cthrampo@ece.ubc.ca

Abstract

the model is a non-singular matrix. Moreover, in this case
the PL parameter, which specifies the rate of convergence,
is the smallest eigenvalue of the tangent kernel(Liu, Zhu,
and Belkin 2022). The fact that over-parameterized neural
networks trained by quadratic loss satisfy the PL condition,
guarantees that the loss convergences exponentially fast to a
global optimum. The global optimum in this case is a model
which “perfectly” interpolates the data, where we recall that
perfect interpolation requires that the model output for every
training input is precisely equal to the corresponding label.
On the other hand, gradient descent using un-regularized
logistic regression with linear models and separable data
is biased toward the max-margin solution. In particular, in
this case the parameter converges in direction with the rate
O(1/log(t)) to the solution of hard margin SVM problem,
while the training loss converges to zero at the rate Õ(1/t)
(Soudry et al. 2018; Ji and Telgarsky 2018). More recently,
normalized gradient descent has been proposed as a promising approach for fast convergence of exponentially tailed
losses (Nacson et al. 2019). In this method, at any iteration
the step-size is chosen proportionally to the inverse of value
of training loss function i.e., ηt ∝ 1/F (wt ). This results in
choosing unboundedly increasing step-sizes for the iterates
of gradient descent as F (wt ) decays to zero. This choice of
step-size leads to significantly faster rates for the parameter’s
directional convergence. In particular, for linear models with
separable data, it is shown that normalized
GD with decaying
√
step-size enjoys a rate of O(1/ t) in directional parameter convergence to the max-margin separator (Nacson et al.
2019). This has been improved to O(1/t) with normalized
GD using fixed step-size (Ji and Telgarsky 2021).
Despite remarkable progress in understanding the behavior
of normalized GD with separable data, these results are only
applicable to the implicit bias behavior of “linear models”. In
this paper, we aim to discover for the first time, the dynamics of learning a two-layer neural network with normalized
GD trained on separable data. For the training loss, we show
that using normalized GD on an exponentially-tailed loss
with a two layered neural network leads to exponentially fast
convergence of the loss to the global optimum. This is significantly faster than the convergence rate of Õ(1/t) for GD
with constant step-size under the same settings. Compared
to the convergence analysis of standard GD which is usually
carried out using smoothness of the loss function, here for

Normalized gradient descent has shown substantial success
in speeding up the convergence of exponentially-tailed loss
functions (which includes exponential and logistic losses) on
linear classifiers with separable data. In this paper, we go
beyond linear models by studying normalized GD on twolayer neural nets. We prove for exponentially-tailed losses that
using normalized GD leads to linear rate of convergence of
the training loss to the global optimum. This is made possible
by showing certain gradient self-boundedness conditions and
a log-Lipschitzness property. We also study generalization
of normalized GD for convex objectives via an algorithmicstability analysis. In particular, we show that normalized GD
does not overfit during training by establishing finite-time
generalization bounds.

Introduction
Motivation
A wide variety of machine learning algorithms for classification tasks rely on learning a model using monotonically
decreasing loss functions such as logistic loss or exponential
loss. In modern practice these tasks are often accomplished
using over-parameterized models such as large neural networks where the model can interpolate the training data, i.e.,
it can achieve perfect classification accuracy on the samples.
In particular, it is often the case that the training of the model
is continued until achieving approximately zero training loss
(Zhang et al. 2021).
Over the last decade there has been remarkable progress
in understanding or improving the convergence and generalization properties of over-parameterized models trained by
various choices of loss functions including logistic loss and
quadratic loss. For the quadratic loss it has been shown that
over-parameterization can result in significant improvements
in the training convergence rate of (stochastic)gradient descent on empirical risk minimization algorithms. Notably,
quadratic loss on two-layer ReLU neural networks is shown
to satisfy the Polyak-Łojasiewicz(PL) condition (Charles and
Papailiopoulos 2018; Bassily, Belkin, and Ma 2018; Liu, Zhu,
and Belkin 2022). In fact, the PL property is a consequence
of the observation that the tangent kernel associated with
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9944

