The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Generalizing Downsampling from Regular Data to Graphs
Davide Bacciu, Alessio Conte, Francesco Landolfi*
Department of Computer Science, Università di Pisa
davide.bacciu@unipi.it, alessio.conte@unipi.it, francesco.landolfi@phd.unipi.it

Abstract

for instance, it is used in clockwork-type Recurrent Neural
Networks (Koutnı́k et al. 2014; Carta, Sperduti, and Bacciu
2021) to store information extracted at different frequencies
and timescales. More recently, the Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs, Micheli 2009; Gori, Monfardini, and Scarselli
2005; Bacciu et al. 2020) community popularized graph reduction mechanisms as a structured counterpart of the image
pooling mechanism in classical CNNs.
The definition of a reduction mechanism that downsamples
information at regular intervals between data points (e.g., a
sample, a pixel, a timestamped observation, etc) is straightforward when working with images and time series. It can
be achieved simply by picking up a data point every k ones,
where k is a given reduction factor defining the distance between the sampled points in the original data, possibly aggregating the properties of non-selected point with appropriate
functions. The same approach cannot be straightforwardly
applied to graphs, which lack regularity and a consistent ordering among their constituent data points, i.e., the nodes.
Therefore, defining a well-formed notion of downsampling
for graphs becomes non-trivial. The research community
has been tackling this issue by a number of approaches, including differentiable clustering of node embeddings (Ying
et al. 2018; Bianchi, Grattarola, and Alippi 2020), graph reductions (Shuman, Faraji, and Vandergheynst 2016; Loukas
2019), and node ranking (Cangea et al. 2018; Gao and Ji
2019). Notably, approaches like the latter select important
nodes in a graph and simply discard the rest without protecting the linked structure of the network, while reduction
methods typically focus on preserving structure without accounting for the role or relevance of nodes involved.
What is yet an open problem is how to define a controllable
graph coarsening method, which reduces the size while preserving the overall structure by sampling representative yet
evenly spaced elements, similarly to the approaches discussed
above for image and time series reduction.
This paper provides a first approach introducing such a
topology-preserving graph coarsening and its use in graph
pooling. We provide mechanisms which are the graph equivalent of pooling and striding operators on regular data, accompanying our intuition with formal proofs (in the Supplementary Material) of the equivalence of such operators on graphs
which model regular data.
Central to our contribution is the definition of a mechanism

Downsampling produces coarsened, multi-resolution representations of data and it is used, for example, to produce lossy
compression and visualization of large images, reduce computational costs, and boost deep neural representation learning.
Unfortunately, due to their lack of a regular structure, there
is still no consensus on how downsampling should apply to
graphs and linked data. Indeed reductions in graph data are
still needed for the goals described above, but reduction mechanisms do not have the same focus on preserving topological
structures and properties, while allowing for resolution-tuning,
as is the case in regular data downsampling.
In this paper, we take a step in this direction, introducing a
unifying interpretation of downsampling in regular and graph
data. In particular, we define a graph coarsening mechanism
which is a graph-structured counterpart of controllable equispaced coarsening mechanisms in regular data. We prove
theoretical guarantees for distortion bounds on path lengths,
as well as the ability to preserve key topological properties in
the coarsened graphs. We leverage these concepts to define a
graph pooling mechanism that we empirically assess in graph
classification tasks, providing a greedy algorithm that allows
efficient parallel implementation on GPUs, and showing that
it compares favorably against pooling methods in literature.

1

Introduction

The concept of information coarsening is fundamental in
the adaptive processing of data, as it provides a simple, yet
effective, means to obtain multi-resolution representations of
information at different levels of abstraction. In large scale
problems coarsening also serves to provide computational
speed-ups by solving tasks on the reduced representation,
ideally with a contained loss in precision with respect to
solving the original problem.
Coarsening is key in Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs, Fukushima 1980; LeCun et al. 1989), where
pooling is often used to repeatedly subsample an image to
extract visual feature detectors at increasing levels of abstraction (e.g., blobs, edges, parts, objects, etc). Downsampling is
also popular in the adaptive processing of timeseries where,
* Corresponding author. Supplementary Material available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.03523.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6718

