The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

An Efficient Algorithm for Fair Multi-Agent Multi-Armed Bandit with Low Regret
Matthew Jones, Huy Nguyen, Thy Nguyen
Northeastern University
{jones.m, hu.nguyen, nguyen.thy2}@northeastern.edu

Abstract

same arm for different agents need not be the same, and
hence an optimal arm for one agent might be sub-optimal for
the others. As such, the goal of picking the optimal arm in
the standard MAB problem is no longer meaningful, and a
different objective is needed.

Recently a multi-agent variant of the classical multi-armed
bandit was proposed to tackle fairness issues in online learning.
Inspired by a long line of work in social choice and economics,
the goal is to optimize the Nash social welfare instead of the
total utility. Unfortunately previous algorithms either are not
efficient or achieve sub-optimal regret in terms of the number
of rounds. We propose a new efficient algorithm with lower
regret than even previous inefficient ones. We also complement
our efficient algorithm with an inefficient approach with regret
that matches the lower bound for one agent. The experimental
findings confirm the effectiveness of our efficient algorithm
compared to the previous approaches.

1

In this setting, one intuitive objective would be to optimize the expected rewards over all agents. This reduces the
problem to the classic MAB problem and can be solved accordingly (Slivkins 2019). In practice, this objective has a key
weakness: individual rewards may be neglected in order to
improve the reward of the collective. Consider an extremely
divided case with two arms where just over half of agents
receive reward 1 from the first arm and reward 0 from the
second arm, and the other agents receive the opposite rewards. The optimal strategy in this case is to always choose
the first arm: half of the agents receive reward 1, and almost
half of the agents receive reward 0. While this formulation
is well-studied by reduction, it unfortunately does not serve
to enforce fairness among the agents. A fairer choice would
be to pull each arm with roughly the same probability, which
only slightly reduces the individual utilities. In other words,
the agents would receive similar rewards with each other
if the algorithm learns a distribution π over the arms and
converges to pulling each arm almost uniformly. Thus, the
optimal strategy for a MA-MAB problem corresponds not to
picking the optimal arm as in the classic MAB problem, but
a probability distribution over the arms.

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem poses an identical set of choices (or actions, arms) at each time step to
the decision-maker. When the decision maker pulls makes a
choice, she receives a reward drawn from a distribution associated with that choice. The goal is to select arms to maximize
the total reward in expectation, or to minimize their expected
regret with respect to the optimal strategy (or policy). The
MAB problem lends itself to many applications including
allocation of resources in a financial portfolio (Hoffman et al.
2011; Shen et al. 2015; Huo and Fu 2017), selection of both
dosages (Bastani and Bayati 2020) and treatments (Durand
et al. 2018) in clinical healthcare, and a broad range of recommender systems (Zhou et al. 2017; Bouneffouf, Bouzeghoub,
and Gançarski 2012, 2013).
In many scenarios, making a decision impacts not only one
but multiple agents. For instance, consider a policy-maker
making decisions that might influence various groups of their
constituents (Zhu and Walker 2018), or a recommendation
engine that picks hyperparameters for their system to serve
many users. The multi-agent multi-armed bandit problem
(MA-MAB), proposed in Hossain, Micha, and Shah (2021),
is a variant of the MAB problem in which there are N agents
and K arms, and in every round t, the algorithm selects
the same arm a for every agent and receive N rewards realizations drawn from unknown distributions {Dj,a }N
j=1 with
⋆
N
unknown means {µj,a }j=1 . The reward distributions of the

In (Hossain, Micha, and Shah 2021), the authors proposed an objective motivated by studies on fairness in
social choice: the Nash social welfare (NSW). This is a
classical notion going back to (Nash 1950) and (Kaneko
and Nakamura 1979). For n agents
Q with expected utility
u1 , u2 , . . . , un , the Nash product  i ui is sandwiched beP
n
Q
n
i ui
u
≤
, serving as a
tween (mini ui ) ≤
i
i
n
compromise between an egalitarian approach (optimizing
the minimum reward across agents) and a utilitarian approach (optimizing the sum of rewards across agents). In
the context of the MA-MAB problem, the optimal fair
strategy corresponds to the distribution that maximizes
the cummulative Nash product of the agents’ expected
rewards. Formally, π ⋆ = arg maxπ∈∆K NSW(π, µ⋆ ) =
Q
P
⋆
K
arg maxπ∈∆K j∈[N ]
is the
a∈[K] πa µj,a , where ∆

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8159

