The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Reliable Robustness Evaluation via Automatically Constructed Attack Ensembles
Shengcai Liu1,2 , Fu Peng2 , Ke Tang1,2 *
1
Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous Systems,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
liusc3@sustech.edu.cn, pengf2022@mail.sustech.edu.cn, tangk3@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
Attack Ensemble (AE), which combines multiple attacks together, provides a reliable way to evaluate adversarial robustness. In practice, AEs are often constructed and tuned by
human experts, which however tends to be sub-optimal and
time-consuming. In this work, we present AutoAE, a conceptually simple approach for automatically constructing AEs.
In brief, AutoAE repeatedly adds the attack and its iteration
steps to the ensemble that maximizes ensemble improvement
per additional iteration consumed. We show theoretically that
AutoAE yields AEs provably within a constant factor of the
optimal for a given defense. We then use AutoAE to construct two AEs for l∞ and l2 attacks, and apply them without any tuning or adaptation to 45 top adversarial defenses
on the RobustBench leaderboard. In all except one cases we
achieve equal or better (often the latter) robustness evaluation
than existing AEs, and notably, in 29 cases we achieve better
robustness evaluation than the best known one. Such performance of AutoAE shows itself as a reliable evaluation protocol for adversarial robustness, which further indicates the
huge potential of automatic AE construction. Code is available at https://github.com/LeegerPENG/AutoAE.

Figure 1: Comparison of AutoAE and the recently proposed
attacks on the CIFAR-10 adversarial training model. AutoAE achieves the best robustness evaluation with only a
small number of gradient evaluations.

tially but broken later, i.e., exhibiting significant drops of
robust accuracy (often by more than 10%) when evaluated
by more powerful or adapted attacks (Carlini and Wagner
2017; Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018). With the fast development of this field, it is therefore of utmost importance
to reliably evaluate new defenses, such that the really effective ideas can be identified. Recently, Croce and Hein
(2020b) proposed to assess adversarial robustness using an
attack ensemble (AE), dubbed AutoAttack, and has achieved
better robustness evaluation for many defenses than the original evaluation. More specifically, when applied to a defense,
an AE would run its component attacks individually, and
choose the best of their outputs. It is thus conceivable that
the performance of an AE heavily relies on the complementarity and diversity among its component attacks. In general, one would choose those attacks with different nature as
the component attacks (Croce and Hein 2020b). However,
given the rich literature of attacks, manual construction of
high-quality AEs such as AutoAttack is often a challenging
task, requiring domain experts (with deep understanding of
both attacks and defenses) to explore the vast design space
of AEs, which can be time-consuming and sub-optimal.
The main goal of this work is to develop an easy-to-use

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have exhibited vulnerability
to adversarial examples, which are crafted by maliciously
perturbing the original input (Szegedy et al. 2014). Such perturbations are nearly imperceptible to humans but can fool
DNNs into producing unexpected behavior, thus raising major concerns about their utility in security-critical applications (Liu et al. 2022; Dai et al. 2022). Over the past few
years, defense strategies against adversarial attacks have attracted rapidly increasing research interest (Machado, Silva,
and Goldschmidt 2021). Among them the notable ones include adversarial training (Madry et al. 2018) that uses different losses (Carlini and Wagner 2017; Zhang and Wang
2019) and generates additional training data (Carmon et al.
2019; Alayrac et al. 2019), as well as provable robustness
(Ruan et al. 2019; Croce, Andriushchenko, and Hein 2019;
Gowal et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019).
On the other hand, there also exists much evidence showing that many proposed defenses seem to be effective ini* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8852

