The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Cross-Domain Few-Shot Graph Classification
with a Reinforced Task Coordinator
Qiannan Zhang1 * , Shichao Pei2 * , Qiang Yang1 , Chuxu Zhang3† ,
Nitesh Chawla2 , Xiangliang Zhang2†‡
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia
2
University of Notre Dame, USA
3
Brandeis University, USA
{qiannan.zhang, qiang.yang}@kaust.edu.sa, chuxuzhang@brandeis.edu,
{spei2, nchawla, xzhang33}@nd.edu

Abstract

Wang et al. 2020; Yao et al. 2020) and graph classification
(Guo et al. 2021; Chauhan, Nathani, and Kaul 2020) tasks.
Current graph few-shot learning models assume that the
meta-training and meta-testing tasks are sampled from the
same task distribution. Yet, the assumption cannot be well
held in real-world scenarios. Collecting adequate training
data from a single domain is non-trivial in some cases, while
the data from distinct but related data-rich domains might
contain implicitly correlated knowledge, which is transferable to facilitate the few-shot learning on the data-scarce domain. Learning from cross-domain data thus is a feasible
solution to mitigate the label scarcity issue and a requisite
for many real-world applications. However, meta-learning
could be outperformed by pre-training and fine-tuning methods when there is a large shift between source and target
domains (Chen et al. 2019). Hence, addressing domain shift
issue and improving cross-domain generalizability for graph
few-shot learning are of great interest.
The studies of cross-domain few-shot learning mainly fall
in the computer vision field, and tackle the domain shift issue by learning generalizable statistics for feature augmentation (Tseng et al. 2020), feature masking (Das, Yun, and
Porikli 2022), and batch normalization (Du et al. 2020). A
recent attempt (Hassani 2022) on graphs leverages a bunch
of source domains to pre-train a designed graph encoder for
the target domain with scarce labeled data. However, existing works are far from perfect due to two major challenges.
The coarse utilization of source domains. Recent solutions (Jiang et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2021; Shen et al. 2020a)
to cross-domain knowledge transfer leverage whole information from one or multiple source domains to gain generalizability. Yet, source domains inevitably include targetrelevant and target-irrelevant information that could cause
the domain shift issue. Roughly fusing all source domains
without distinction into the learning model would introduce
noisy and redundant target-irrelevant knowledge, which
might degrade the generalization on the target domain. A
recent effort (Guo, Pasunuru, and Bansal 2020) on text classification selects closer domains under certain criteria from
all source domains. However, the strategy is limited to the
coarse choice at the level of domains and unavoidably faces

Cross-domain graph few-shot learning attempts to address the
prevalent data scarcity issue in graph mining problems. However, the utilization of cross-domain data induces another intractable domain shift issue which severely degrades the generalization ability of cross-domain graph few-shot learning
models. The combat with the domain shift issue is hindered
due to the coarse utilization of source domains and the ignorance of accessible prompts. To address these challenges,
in this paper, we design a novel Cross-domain Task Coordinator to leverage a small set of labeled target domain data as
prompt tasks, then model the association and discover the relevance between meta-tasks from the source domain and the
prompt tasks. Based on the discovered relevance, our model
achieves adaptive task selection and enables the optimization
of a graph learner using the selected fine-grained meta-tasks.
Extensive experiments conducted on molecular property prediction benchmarks validate the effectiveness of our proposed
method by comparing it with state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
Canonical graph learning models have achieved remarkable progress in modeling and inference on graph-structured
data. These models commonly require abundant annotated
(labeled) data and inevitably suffer from the label scarcity
issue in practice due to the expense and hardship of data annotation. This issue leads to the difficulty of inference on
novel classes with scarce annotations and harms the generalization of graph learning models. To alleviate the impact
of label scarcity, graph few-shot learning, mainly empowered by meta-learning (Hospedales et al. 2020), formulates
graph learning into a few-shot framework, which allows for
the fast adaptation to novel tasks with scarce labeled data after training with a sufficient number of related tasks, as applied in various node classification (Huang and Zitnik 2020;
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding authors.
Dr. Xiangliang Zhang is secondly affiliated with the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

4893

