The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SLOTH: Structured Learning and Task-Based Optimization for Time Series
Forecasting on Hierarchies
Fan Zhou, Chen Pan, Lintao Ma, Yu Liu, Shiyu Wang, James Zhang, Xinxin Zhu, Xuanwei Hu,
Yunhua Hu, Yangfei Zheng, Lei Lei, Hu Yun
Ant Group
{hanlian.zf, bopu.pc, lintao.mlt, nuoman.ly, weiming.wsy, james.z, qinrui.zxx, xuanwei.hxw, yangfei.zyf, jason.ll,
huyun.h}@antgroup.com, wugou.hyh@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

commodity hierarchies (of varies categories) are nested to
be parts of the supply chain in the retail sector.
The critical challenge in hierarchical forecasting tasks
lies in producing accurate prediction results while satisfying
aggregation (coherence) constraints (Taieb and Koo 2019).
Specifically, the hierarchical structure in these time series
implies coherence constraint, i.e., time series at upper levels are the aggregation of those at lower levels. However,
independent forecasts from a prediction model (called base
forecasts) are unlikely to satisfy coherence constraint.
Previous work on hierarchical forecasting mainly focuses
on a procedure of two separate stages (Hyndman, Lee, and
Wang 2016; Taieb and Koo 2019; Corani et al. 2020; Anderer and Li 2021): In the first stage, base forecasts are generated independently for each time series in the hierarchy;
in the second stage, these forecasts are adjusted via reconciliation to derive coherent results. The base forecasts are
obtained by univariate or multivariate time series models,
such as traditional forecasting methods (e.g., ARIMA (Taieb
and Koo 2019)) and deep learning techniques (e.g. DeepVar (Salinas et al. 2019)). However, both approaches ignore the information of hierarchical structure for prediction. As for reconciliation, traditional statistical methods
mostly rely on strong assumption, such as unbiased forecasts
and Gaussian noises (e.g., MinT (Wickramasuriya, Athanasopoulos, and Hyndman 2019)), which are often inconsistent
with non-Gaussian/non-linear real-world hierarchical time
series (HTS) data. A notable exception is the approach proposed in (Rangapuram et al. 2021), promising coherence by
a closed-form projection to achieve an end-to-end reconciliation without any assumptions. However, this method may
introduce huge adjustments on the original forecasts for coherency, making the final forecasts unreasonable. Moreover,
even coherent forecasters might still be impractical for some
real-world tasks with further practical operational or taskrelated constraints, such as inventory management and resource scheduling. These reconciliation concerns can be addressed by imposing more realistic constraints to control the
scale and optimize the task-based targets for the downstream
tasks, which can be achieved by deep neural optimization
layer (OptNet) (Amos and Kolter 2017).
In this work, we provides an end-to-end framework to
generate coherent forecasts of hierarchical time series that
incorporates the hierarchical structure in the prediction pro-

Multivariate time series forecasting with hierarchical structure is widely used in real-world applications, e.g., sales
predictions for the geographical hierarchy formed by cities,
states, and countries. The hierarchical time series (HTS) forecasting includes two sub-tasks, i.e., forecasting and reconciliation. In the previous works, hierarchical information is only
integrated in the reconciliation step to maintain coherency,
but not in forecasting step for accuracy improvement. In this
paper, we propose two novel tree-based feature integration
mechanisms, i.e., top-down convolution and bottom-up attention to leverage the information of the hierarchical structure to improve the forecasting performance. Moreover, unlike most previous reconciliation methods which either rely
on strong assumptions or focus on coherent constraints only,
we utilize deep neural optimization networks, which not only
achieve coherency without any assumptions, but also allow
more flexible and realistic constraints to achieve task-based
targets, e.g., lower under-estimation penalty and meaningful
decision-making loss to facilitate the subsequent downstream
tasks. Experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate that
our tree-based feature integration mechanism achieves superior performances on hierarchical forecasting tasks compared
to the state-of-the-art methods, and our neural optimization
networks can be applied to real-world tasks effectively without any additional effort under coherence and task-based constraints.

Introduction
Forecasting for multiple time series with complex hierarchical structure has been applied in various real-world problems
(Dangerfield and Morris 1992; Athanasopoulos, Ahmed,
and Hyndman 2009; Liu, Yan, and Hauskrecht 2018; Jeon,
Panagiotelis, and Petropoulos 2018). For instance, the international sales forecasting of transnational corporations
needs to consider geographical hierarchies involving the levels of city, state, and country (Han, Dasgupta, and Ghosh
2021). Moreover, retail sales can also be divided into different groups according to the product category to form another hierarchy. The combination of different hierarchies can
form a more complicated but realistic virtual topology, e.g.,
the geographical hierarchies (of different regions) and the
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11417

