The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Formalising the Robustness of Counterfactual Explanations for Neural Networks
Junqi Jiang∗ , Francesco Leofante∗ , Antonio Rago, Francesca Toni
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
{junqi.jiang, f.leofante, a.rago, f.toni}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

ing the applicant an idea of what is required to change the
output. Such correctness of the modified output in attaining
an alternative value is the basic property of CFXs, referred
to as validity, and is one of a whole host of metrics around
which CFXs are designed (e.g., see (Guidotti 2022)).
Our main focus in this paper is the metric of robustness.
This is most often defined as robustness to input perturbations, i.e., the validity of CFXs when perturbations are
applied to inputs (Sharma, Henderson, and Ghosh 2020).
While this notion is useful, e.g., for protecting against manipulation (Slack et al. 2021), other forms of robustness can
be equally important in ensuring that CFXs are safe and can
be trusted. Robustness to model changes, i.e., the validity
of CFXs when model parameters are altered, has thus far
received little attention but is arguably one of the most commonly required forms of robustness, given that model parameters change every time retraining occurs (Rawal, Kamar, and Lakkaraju 2020). Indeed, if a CFX is invalidated
with just a slight change of the training settings as in,
e.g., (Dutta et al. 2022), we may question its quality in terms
of real-world meaning. Consider the loan example: if, after
retraining, the loan applicant changing their credit rating to
medium no longer changes the output to accepted (thus invalidating the CFX), the CFX was not robust to the model
changes induced during retraining. In this case, it might be
argued that the bank should have a policy to guarantee that
this CFX remains valid regardless, but this may have unfavourable consequences for the bank. Therefore, it is desirable that the CFXs account for such robustness.
Though some have targeted robustness to model
changes1 , e.g., (Upadhyay, Joshi, and Lakkaraju 2021;
Dutta et al. 2022), these approaches are heuristic, and may
fail to provide strong robustness guarantees. Formal methods for assessing CFXs along this metric are lacking. Indeed, there are calls for both formal explanations for nonlinear models such as neural networks (Marques-Silva and
Ignatiev 2022) and for standardised benchmarking in evaluating CFXs (Kenny and Keane 2021), voids we help to fill.
In this work we propose the novel notion of ∆-robustness
for assessing the robustness of CFXs for neural networks in
a formal, deterministic manner. We introduce an abstraction
framework based on interval neural networks (Prabhakar

The use of counterfactual explanations (CFXs) is an increasingly popular explanation strategy for machine learning models. However, recent studies have shown that these explanations may not be robust to changes in the underlying model
(e.g., following retraining), which raises questions about their
reliability in real-world applications. Existing attempts towards solving this problem are heuristic, and the robustness to
model changes of the resulting CFXs is evaluated with only a
small number of retrained models, failing to provide exhaustive guarantees. To remedy this, we propose ∆-robustness,
the first notion to formally and deterministically assess the
robustness (to model changes) of CFXs for neural networks.
We introduce an abstraction framework based on interval
neural networks to verify the ∆-robustness of CFXs against
a possibly infinite set of changes to the model parameters,
i.e., weights and biases. We then demonstrate the utility of
this approach in two distinct ways. First, we analyse the ∆robustness of a number of CFX generation methods from the
literature and show that they unanimously host significant deficiencies in this regard. Second, we demonstrate how embedding ∆-robustness within existing methods can provide CFXs
which are provably robust.

1

Introduction

Ensuring that machine learning models are explainable has
become a dominant goal in recent years, giving rise to
the field of explainable AI (XAI). One of the most popular strategies for XAI is the use of counterfactual explanations (CFXs) (see (Stepin et al. 2021) for an overview),
favoured for a number of reasons including their intelligibility (Byrne 2019), appeal to users (Barocas, Selbst, and
Raghavan 2020), information capacity (Kenny and Keane
2021) and alignment with human reasoning (Miller 2019).
A CFX for a given input to a model is defined as an altered
input for which the model gives a different output to that of
the original input. Consider the classic illustration of a loan
application, with features unemployed status, 25 years of age
and low credit rating, being classified by a bank’s model as
rejected. A CFX for the rejection could be an altered input
where a medium credit rating (with the other features unchanged) would result in the loan being accepted, thus giv∗

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

14901

Referred to simply as robustness, unless otherwise specified.

