The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Logical Satisfiability of Counterfactuals for Faithful Explanations in NLI
Suzanna Sia1 * , Anton Belyy1 , Amjad Almahairi2 ,
Madian Khabsa2 , Luke Zettlemoyer2 , Lambert Mathias2
1

Johns Hopkins University
2
Meta AI Research

Premise (u)

Abstract
Evaluating an explanation’s faithfulness is desired for many
reasons such as trust, interpretability and diagnosing the
sources of model’s errors. In this work, which focuses on
the NLI task, we introduce the methodology of Faithfulnessthrough-Counterfactuals, which first generates a counterfactual hypothesis based on the logical predicates expressed in
the explanation, and then evaluates if the model’s prediction
on the counterfactual is consistent with that expressed logic
(i.e. if the new formula is logically satisfiable). In contrast to
existing approaches, this does not require any explanations
for training a separate verification model. We first validate
the efficacy of automatic counterfactual hypothesis generation,
leveraging on the few-shot priming paradigm. Next, we show
that our proposed metric distinguishes between human-model
agreement and disagreement on new counterfactual input. In
addition, we conduct a sensitivity analysis to validate that our
metric is sensitive to unfaithful explanations.

1

Original Hypothesis
Explanation

Counterfactual
Hypothesis

Visual NLI
Model (f)

Original Label
??

Counterfactual Rewriting (Figure 2)

??

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed FTC approach, evaluating faithfulness of explanations through counterfactuals.
If the explanation is faithful to the model, the NLI
label on the new counterfactual hypothesis should
change to Entailment. If the model still predicts
Contradiction, this indicates that the explanation is not
faithful to the model, i.e. the logic of the explanation and the
model are not consistent.

Introduction

How should we evaluate an explanation’s faithfulness with
respect to the task model? According to Jacovi and Goldberg
(2020), faithful measures should focus on utility to the user
and the idea that an explanation can be sufficiently faithful.1
The goal of interpretability research is to increase warranted
trust and identify the influence of certain variables and allow
users to understand how a model will behave on given inputs
(Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017; Lipton 2018).
In interpretable NLP, there is growing interest in tasks that
require world and commonsense “knowledge” and “reasoning” (Danilevsky et al. 2020). We focus on natural language
inference (SNLI; Bowman et al. (2015)), where extractive
explanations also known as rationales (DeYoung et al. 2020)
are limited as they take a subset of the existing input. Instead,
we require free-form natural language explanations to fill in
the reasoning or knowledge gap for such tasks (Camburu et al.
2018; Rajani et al. 2019). Our setting is thus characterised by

the post-hoc interpretation of black-box classification models
via generative explanations. Our work follows the standard
“predict-and-explain” paradigm (Do et al. 2020). Here an
explanation generator generates the explanations conditioned
on the predicted task label.2 Without faithfulness evaluations,
the explanation approximately describes the internal process
at best, and is generated from superficial similarities between
the training data and the class label at worst.
The central contribution of this paper is a methodology
grounded in first-order free logic (Lambert 1967; Bencivenga 2002),3 to verify a given explanations’ faithfulness.
Our proposed approach generates a revised (counterfactual)
hypothesis based on the logical propositions expressed in the
explanation, and evaluates the logical satisfiability (Boolos,

*Work done at Meta internship. Correspondence to ssia1@jh.edu
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Jacovi and Goldberg (2020) originally posit that faithful explanations should “accurately represents the reasoning process behind
the model’s prediction”, however also acknowledge that this is “impossible to satisfy fully”.

2

(Do et al. 2020) report little to no difference between jointly
predict and explain compared to predict then explain. Note that the
emphasis of this work is on evaluating the faithfulness of explanations rather than generating them.
3
This is an extension of predicate logic and should not be confused with either predicate or propositional logic.

9837

