The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Adaptive Texture Filtering for Single-Domain Generalized Segmentation
Xinhui Li1 , Mingjia Li1 , Yaxing Wang2 , Chuan-Xian Ren3 , Xiaojie Guo1 *
1

Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Nankai University, Tianjin, China
3
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangdong, China
{lixinhui, mingjiali}@tju.edu.cn, yaxing@nankai.edu.cn, rchuanx@mail.sysu.edu.cn, xj.max.guo@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Domain generalization in semantic segmentation aims to
alleviate the performance degradation on unseen domains
through learning domain-invariant features. Existing methods
diversify images in the source domain by adding complex or
even abnormal textures to reduce the sensitivity to domainspecific features. However, these approaches depend heavily
on the richness of the texture bank, and training them can
be time-consuming. In contrast to importing textures arbitrarily or augmenting styles randomly, we focus on the single source domain itself to achieve generalization. In this paper, we present a novel adaptive texture filtering mechanism
to suppress the influence of texture without using augmentation, thus eliminating the interference of domain-specific
features. Further, we design a hierarchical guidance generalization network equipped with structure-guided enhancement
modules, which purpose is to learn the domain-invariant generalized knowledge. Extensive experiments together with ablation studies on widely-used datasets are conducted to verify
the effectiveness of the proposed model, and reveal its superiority over other state-of-the-art alternatives.

Figure 1: Illustration of existing DG methods (Peng et al.
2021) using texture augmentation, and our proposed approach using texture suppression.

Since data in the target domain is inaccessible during the
training process, current DG methods advocate alleviating
the distribution shift by reducing the domain gap (e.g., appearance, style, or texture). These approaches can be divided
into two main categories, i.e., multi-source DG and singlesource DG. Multi-source DG schemes (Li et al. 2018; Peng
et al. 2019; Matsuura and Harada 2020; Zhu and Li 2021)
attempt to align multiple available source domains through
minimizing the divergence among domains. However, the
alignment is typically based on the accessibility of multiple domain distributions that are not always available. To
mitigate the pressure from data, another branch of DG approaches (Tobin et al. 2017; Volpi et al. 2018; Qiao, Zhao,
and Peng 2020; Peng et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021b) using
single-source has been studied to achieve the goal. Some of
recent methods (Ulyanov, Vedaldi, and Lempitsky 2017; Pan
et al. 2018) investigate the normalization to standardize feature distributions, while the strategies (Prakash et al. 2019;
Kang et al. 2022; Tjio et al. 2022) focus on the style transformation to diversify image styles. The other works (Tobin et al. 2017; Ulyanov, Vedaldi, and Lempitsky 2017; Yue
et al. 2019; Peng et al. 2021) execute the domain randomization for texture synthesis. As shown in Fig. 1(top), some

Introduction
The powerful data representation capability endows deep
neural networks with remarkable achievements in a series
of computer vision tasks, e.g., semantic segmentation, object detection, and scene understanding. These successes
are usually based on the assumption that models should
be trained and tested on data having the same underlying
distribution. However, in realistic scenarios, it is impractical to collect sufficient data that covers the entire space.
Even more, some deployed domains are completely inaccessible. For instance, collecting images under all possible
conditions and scenarios are impossible in the self-driving
system. Therefore, as a representative line, domain generalization (DG) (Carlucci et al. 2019; Qiao, Zhao, and Peng
2020; Peng et al. 2021) is extensively investigated to address a fundamental flaw: the network exhibits obvious performance degradation in the face of out-of-distribution or
unseen-domain data. It is also known as the distribution shift
(Moreno-Torres et al. 2012) issue.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1442

