The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CoopInit: Initializing Generative Adversarial Networks via Cooperative Learning
Yang Zhao, Jianwen Xie, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{yangzhao.eric, jianwen.kenny, pingli98}@gmail.com

Abstract

To alleviate these issues, several techniques have been proposed, including gradient penalty (Arjovsky, Chintala, and
Bottou 2017; Mescheder, Geiger, and Nowozin 2018), spectral normalization (Miyato et al. 2018), discriminator bottleneck (Zhao et al. 2020c) and data augmentation (Karras
et al. 2020a). In contrast, Generative Cooperative Networks
(CoopNets) (Xie et al. 2018) are another class of generative
framework that jointly trains a descriptor and a generator,
which has been successfully applied to image synthesis (Xie,
Zheng, and Li 2021; Xie et al. 2022b), 3D generation (Xie
et al. 2020b), supervised conditional learning (Xie et al.
2022a), salient object prediction (Zhang et al. 2022), unpaired image-to-image translation (Xie et al. 2021), and image hashing (Doan et al. 2022). Unlike GANs, CoopNets are
optimized through cooperative maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). The descriptor, essentially a generative energybased model (EBM) (Xie et al. 2016; Nijkamp et al. 2019;
Du and Mordatch 2019), incorporates the Stochastic Gradient Markov Chain Monte Carlo (SG-MCMC) to approximate the data distribution. The generator is an amortized
sampler that simultaneously chases the descriptor towards
the data distribution. The MLE-based learning scheme is often more stable and does not suffer from mode collapse issues. However, the training of CoopNets relies on an expensive MCMC sampler. It has also been suggested (Xie et al.
2020a) that likelihood-based generative models tend to generate blurry images because they are obliged to fit all the
major modes of the empirical data distribution. If they cannot fit the modes closely, they interpolate the major modes.
In this work, we aim to combine adversarial learning and
cooperative learning to create stable, efficient, and powerful
generative models. We propose a novel approach that leverages the strengths of both learning schemes. We first demonstrate that CoopNets and GAN can share network structures,
so that we can treat them as one framework conveniently.
Specifically, the discriminator in GAN can be transformed
into the descriptor in CoopNets, and vice versa. In other
words, a bottom-up ConvNet, which plays the role of energy
function of a descriptor in cooperative learning, can take a
new role of discriminator in adversarial learning.
Moreover, we propose a hybrid and effective strategy to
train generative models. Specifically, the proposed framework consists of two networks, a bottom-up network Dθ parameterized by θ and a top-down network Gϕ parameterized

Numerous research efforts have been made to stabilize the
training of the Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs),
such as through regularization and architecture design. However, we identify the instability can also arise from the fragile
balance at the early stage of adversarial learning. This paper proposes the CoopInit, a simple yet effective cooperative
learning-based initialization strategy that can quickly learn a
good starting point for GANs, with a very small computation
overhead during training. The proposed algorithm consists of
two learning stages: (i) Cooperative initialization stage: The
discriminator of GAN is treated as an energy-based model
(EBM) and is optimized via maximum likelihood estimation
(MLE), with the help of the GAN’s generator to provide synthetic data to approximate the learning gradients. The EBM
also guides the MLE learning of the generator via MCMC
teaching; (ii) Adversarial finalization stage: After a few iterations of initialization, the algorithm seamlessly transits to the
regular mini-max adversarial training until convergence. The
motivation is that the MLE-based initialization stage drives
the model towards mode coverage, which is helpful in alleviating the issue of mode dropping during the adversarial learning stage. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
approach on image generation and one-sided unpaired imageto-image translation tasks through extensive experiments.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling has proven to be an effective approach
in many scenarios, e.g., image synthesis (Xie et al. 2016,
2018; Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2019; Karras, Laine,
and Aila 2019; Zhao, Xie, and Li 2021) and sequence generation (Tulyakov et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2017). One of the
most popular and powerful generative frameworks to date
is the Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) (Goodfellow
et al. 2014), which defines a mini-max game seeking a Nash
equilibrium between a discriminator and a generator. Despite the recent successes of GANs in modeling complex
high-dimensional distributions and generating realistic images (Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2019; Karras et al.
2020b), their training suffers from instability issues due to
alternating parameter update (Heusel et al. 2017), the sensitivity to the hyper-parameter choices (Salimans et al. 2016)
and mode collapse issues (Arora, Risteski, and Zhang 2018).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11345

