The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Crowd-Level Abnormal Behavior Detection via Multi-Scale
Motion Consistency Learning
Linbo Luo1 * , Yuanjing Li1 , Haiyan Yin2 , Shangwei Xie1 , Ruimin Hu1 , Wentong Cai3
1

School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University
2
Sea AI Lab
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
lbluo@xidian.edu.cn, yjli98@stu.xidian.edu.cn, yinhaiyan@outlook.com,
swxie@stu.xidian.edu.cn, hrm1964@163.com, aswtcai@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract
Detecting abnormal crowd motion emerging from complex
interactions of individuals is paramount to ensure the safety
of crowds. Crowd-level abnormal behaviors (CABs), e.g.,
counter flow and crowd turbulence, are proven to be the crucial causes of many crowd disasters. In the recent decade,
video anomaly detection (VAD) techniques have achieved remarkable success in detecting individual-level abnormal behaviors (e.g., sudden running, fighting and stealing), but research on VAD for CABs is rather limited. Unlike individuallevel anomaly, CABs usually do not exhibit salient difference
from the normal behaviors when observed locally, and the
scale of CABs could vary from one scenario to another. In
this paper, we present a systematic study to tackle the important problem of VAD for CABs with a novel crowd motion
learning framework, multi-scale motion consistency network
(MSMC-Net). MSMC-Net first captures the spatial and temporal crowd motion consistency information in a graph representation. Then, it simultaneously trains multiple feature
graphs constructed at different scales to capture rich crowd
patterns. An attention network is used to adaptively fuse the
multi-scale features for better CAB detection. For the empirical study, we consider three large-scale crowd event datasets,
UMN, Hajj and Love Parade. Experimental results show that
MSMC-Net could substantially improve the state-of-the-art
performance on all the datasets.

(a) Individual-level anomaly

(b) Crowd-level anomaly

Figure 1: An illustrative example of individual-level
vs. crowd-level abnormal behaviors: (a) individual-level
counter-direction pedestrian, whose motion in the local region (red rectangle) exhibits salient difference from neighbouring regions; (b) crowd-level turbulence, in which individuals’ motions in the local region (yellow rectangle) do
not differ much from neighbouring regions. (Legend: yellow
arrows represent optical flow fields; black/blue arrows show
the average velocity in each unit-region/circled-region; red/green dashed lines imply low/high motion consistency.)

Introduction
In real-world crowd events, many self-organizing crowd behaviors could emerge from the complex interactions of individuals, where some of those behaviors, such as counter
flow, stop-and-go waves and crowd turbulence, can bring
excessive contact forces, making people lose balance, get
crushed, or even suffocated (Helbing and Mukerji 2012; Li
et al. 2020). Such hazardous self-organizing behaviors are
often referred to as crowd-level abnormal behaviors (CABs).
Many post-disaster analyses have revealed that CABs are the
causes of fatalities in many crowd disasters (Helbing, Johansson, and Al-Abideen 2007; Helbing and Mukerji 2012;
Helbing 2013; Ma et al. 2013; Zhao et al. 2020). In the

past decade, more than ten thousand people have lost their
lives or got injured in the crowd disasters recorded worldwide (Wikipedia 2022). Thus, it is crucial to detect these
CABs during large-scale crowd events to reduce crowd risks.
In recent decades, video anomaly detection (VAD) research has gained tremendous momentum. The task of VAD
is to detect behaviors or events that are rare and/or have
significantly different characteristics from the normal ones
in videos. Despite the remarkable success achieved by the
existing VAD methods, most of them are designed and
testified for detecting individual-level abnormal behaviors,
such as sudden running, fighting and stealing, thanks to
the full range of publicly available datasets of this kind
(e.g., UCSD (Mahadevan et al. 2010), ShanghaiTech (Liu
et al. 2018), UCF Crime (Sultani, Chen, and Shah 2018),
etc.). However, VAD for CABs is still very limited. We

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Appendix available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.00501

8984

