The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Continuous Mixtures of Tractable Probabilistic Models
Alvaro H.C. Correia1, * , Gennaro Gala1, * ,
Erik Quaeghebeur1 , Cassio de Campos1 , Robert Peharz1,2
1

Eindhoven University of Technology
2
Graz University of Technology
{a.h.chaim.correia, g.gala, e.quaeghebeur, c.decampos, r.peharz}@tue.nl

Abstract

Some successful recent examples of uncountable mixtures
are variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling
2014), generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al. 2014), and normalising Flows (Rezende and Mohamed
2015). All three of these models use a simple prior p(z),
e.g. an isotropic Gaussian, and represent the mixture components with a neural network. In the case of VAEs, the
mixture component is a proper density p(x | z) with respect
to the Lebesgue measure, represented by the so-called decoder, while for GANs and Flows the mixture component is
a point measure, i.e. a deterministic function x = f (z)1 . The
use of continuous neural networks topologically relates the
latent space and the observable space with each other, so that
these models can be described as continuous mixture models.
The use of continuous mixtures allows, to a certain extent,
the interpretation of Z as a (latent) embedding of X, but also
seems to benefit generalisation, i.e. to faithfully approximate
real-world distributions with limited training data.
However, while continuous mixture models have achieved
impressive results in density estimation and generative modelling, their ability to support probabilistic inference remains
limited. Notably, the key inference routines of marginalisation and conditioning, which together form a consistent reasoning process (Ghahramani 2015; Jaynes 2003), are largely
intractable in these models, mainly due to the integral in (1)
which forms a hard computational problem in general.
Meanwhile, the area of tractable probabilistic modelling
aims at models which allow a wide range of exact and efficient inference routines. One of the most prominent frameworks to express tractable models are probabilistic circuits
(PCs) (Vergari et al. 2020), which are computational graphs
composed of (simple) tractable input distributions, factorisations (product nodes) and discrete mixture distributions
(sum nodes). PCs describe many tractable models such as
Chow-Liu trees (Chow and Liu 1968), arithmetic circuits
(Darwiche 2003), sum-product networks (Poon and Domingos 2011), cutset networks (Rahman, Kothalkar, and Gogate
2014), probabilistic sentential decision diagrams (Kisa et al.
2014), and generative forests (Correia, Peharz, and de Campos 2020). The distribution represented by a PC depends
both on its network structure S and its parameters ϕ, which

Probabilistic models based on continuous latent spaces, such
as variational autoencoders, can be understood as uncountable
mixture models where components depend continuously on
the latent code. They have proven to be expressive tools for
generative and probabilistic modelling, but are at odds with
tractable probabilistic inference, that is, computing marginals
and conditionals of the represented probability distribution.
Meanwhile, tractable probabilistic models such as probabilistic circuits (PCs) can be understood as hierarchical discrete
mixture models, and thus are capable of performing exact
inference efficiently but often show subpar performance in
comparison to continuous latent-space models. In this paper,
we investigate a hybrid approach, namely continuous mixtures
of tractable models with a small latent dimension. While these
models are analytically intractable, they are well amenable
to numerical integration schemes based on a finite set of integration points. With a large enough number of integration
points the approximation becomes de-facto exact. Moreover,
for a finite set of integration points, the integration method effectively compiles the continuous mixture into a standard PC.
In experiments, we show that this simple scheme proves remarkably effective, as PCs learnt this way set new state of the
art for tractable models on many standard density estimation
benchmarks.

Introduction
Probabilistic modelling typically aims to capture the datagenerating joint distribution, which can then be used to perform probabilistic inference to answer queries of interest.
A recurring scheme in probabilistic modelling is the use of
an uncountable mixture model, that is, the data generating
distribution is approximated by
Z
p(x) = Ep(z) [p(x | z)] = p(x | z) p(z) dz
(1)
where p(z) is a mixing distribution (prior) over latent variables Z, p(x | z) is a conditional distribution of x given z
(mixture components), and p(x) is the modelled density over
variables X, given by marginalising Z from the joint distribution defined by p(x | z) p(z).

1

In Flows z is not truly latent since it relates to x via a bijection.
An extended version of this paper that includes the Appendix
is available at arxiv.org/abs/2209.10584.

* These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7244

