The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Adaptive Discrete Communication Bottlenecks with Dynamic Vector Quantization
for Heterogeneous Representational Coarseness
Dianbo Liu1 , Alex Lamb1 , Xu Ji1 , Pascal Junior Tikeng Notsawo1 , Michael Mozer2 , Yoshua
Bengio1, 4 , Kenji Kawaguchi 3
1
Mila-Quebec AI Institute
Google Research, Brain Team
3
National Univeristy of Singapore
4
CIFAR AI Chair
liudianbo@gmail.com, alex6200@gmail.com
2

Abstract

step (Darwen and Yao 1996; Goyal et al. 2019; Bengio 2017;
Lamb et al. 2021). The communication bottleneck is tightened by switching from continuous to discrete representations
(Liu et al. 2021). Beyond improvements in generalization error from decreasing capacity, it has been hypothesized that
the inductive bias of bottlenecked communication between
modules improves generalization by 1) reflecting the true
causal structure of data generated by sparse interactions between few variables, 2) increasing robustness when modules
are recombined in novel ways, compared to unspecialized
modules with all-to-all communication, 3) improving sample
efficiency since specialized modules require fewer training
points to learn (Goyal et al. 2019; Bengio 2017).
However, discrete bottleneck methods typically lack adaptability. This work improves on the vector quantization
method of Liu et al. (2021) by making tightness of the bottleneck dynamic. Instead of a single discretization function
that maps all inputs to a discrete space with fixed size, we
use a pool of discretization functions with varying levels of
output capacity, and choose the function applied for a given
input using key-query attention between representations of
the input and discretization functions.
The hypothesis is that this improves generalization because
the optimal level of discretization suggested by the bounds,
which is the tightest bottleneck such that training error can
still be minimized (Liu et al. 2021), is unlikely to be the same
for all regions of a data distribution. The shortest description
that captures adequate information in inputs for performing
well on a task generally varies with the input, for example
images contain different numbers of objects, and gameplay
involves goals of varying complexity. In terms of generalization error, using a single discretization capacity is potentially
wasteful for simpler inputs, because the generalization gap
can be reduced by selectively imposing a tighter representation bottleneck on the former without increasing training
error. To minimize the model selecting looser bottlenecks
than necessary, we use an objective function that penalizes
the choice of bottleneck proportional to its capacity.
In summary, the contributions of our work are as follows:

Vector Quantization (VQ) is a method for discretizing latent
representations and has become a major part of the deep learning toolkit. It has been theoretically and empirically shown that
discretization of representations leads to improved generalization, including in reinforcement learning where discretization
can be used to bottleneck multi-agent communication to promote agent specialization and robustness. The discretization
tightness of most VQ-based methods is defined by the number
of discrete codes in the representation vector and the codebook size, which are fixed as hyperparameters. In this work,
we propose learning to dynamically select discretization tightness conditioned on inputs, based on the hypothesis that data
naturally contains variations in complexity that call for different levels of representational coarseness which is observed
in many heterogeneous data sets. We show that dynamically
varying tightness in communication bottlenecks can improve
model performance on visual reasoning and reinforcement
learning tasks with heterogeneity in representations.

Introduction
Discretization of latent representations via vector quantization is a method for improving the robustness and generalization of learned models (Oord, Vinyals, and Kavukcuoglu
2017; Liu et al. 2021). Replacing a continuous representation with a discrete representation, and limiting the capacity
of the discrete representation, both improve generalization
guarantees (Liu et al. 2021). Discretization imposes a bottleneck (Tishby, Pereira, and Bialek 2000) as the representation
can take fewer values, and reducing capacity of the discrete
representation tightens this bottleneck.
Discretization can be used to bottleneck communication
in modular inference models, for example in multi-agent reinforcement learning. Modular inference combines outputs
across modules into new module inputs while restricting the
number of modules that communicate (Goyal et al. 2019). To
make up for the loss in expressivity from being restricted to
few communicative modules in each timestep, the model is
forced to learn to perform inference in steps of specialized
skill as opposed to applying all skills at once, which specializes the modules by definition since few are active in each

• We propose a dynamic vector quantization method (DVQ)
that adaptively chooses the number of discrete codes and
the codebook size that control tightness of the bottleneck.
• Our theoretical analysis shows that dynamic adjustment of

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8825

