The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Quantized Feature Distillation for Network Quantization
Ke Zhu, Yin-Yin He, Jianxin Wu*
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
zhuk@lamda.nju.edu.cn, heyy@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wujx2001@nju.edu.cn

QFD (Ours)

Effectiveness

Abstract
Neural network quantization aims to accelerate and trim fullprecision neural network models by using low bit approximations. Methods adopting the quantization aware training
(QAT) paradigm have recently seen a rapid growth, but are
often conceptually complicated. This paper proposes a novel
and highly effective QAT method, quantized feature distillation (QFD). QFD first trains a quantized (or binarized) representation as the teacher, then quantize the network using
knowledge distillation (KD). Quantitative results show that
QFD is more flexible and effective (i.e., quantization friendly)
than previous quantization methods. QFD surpasses existing
methods by a noticeable margin on not only image classification but also object detection, albeit being much simpler.
Furthermore, QFD quantizes ViT and Swin-Transformer on
MS-COCO detection and segmentation, which verifies its potential in real world deployment. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that vision transformers have been
quantized in object detection and image segmentation tasks.

Feature KD

Logit KD

(previous methods)
Baseline (w/o KD)

Flexibility

Figure 1: Illustration of different quantization KD methods.
‘Flexibility’ stands for adaptability to different vision tasks,
and ‘Effectiveness’ indicates whether or not a method is
friendly for network quantization (i.e., the ability to achieve
high accuracy by the quantized network).
precision (Boo et al. 2021), manually defined auxiliary modules (Zhuang et al. 2020) or several stages (Kim et al. 2019).
All these methods resort to logit distillation, which are then
difficult to be applied in other computer vision tasks (e.g.,
object detection).
In this paper, we propose a novel, simple, and effective
distillation method targeting network quantization, quantized feature distillation (QFD). Our motivation came from
an important result in Wu and Luo (2018): an FP model
with only its output features binarized can achieve similar
or better accuracy compared with the full FP model. Then,
it must be advantageous to use these quantized features as
a teacher signal to help quantize the rest of the network
(i.e., the student). On one hand, feature distillation is more
flexible in comparison with logit distillation, especially in
tasks like object detection (Yang et al. 2022); on the other
hand, it is natural to conjecture that it will be easier for
the fully quantized student to mimic a fixed point feature
representation rather than directly mimicking the floatingpoint logits or features. In other words, the proposed QFD
will be both more flexible and more effective (quantization
friendly). This conjecture (and motivation for our QFD) is
illustrated in Figure 1, which is firmly supported by the experimental results in Figure 2 and Table 1.
These experiments that verified our motivation were carried out on CIFAR100 with ResNet-18 using 4 different
quantization methods: the quantization baseline (a uniform

Introduction
Network quantization transfers a full precision (FP) network’s weights and activations to their fixed point approximations without obvious accuracy drop. Recently, various
approaches (Lee, Kim, and Ham 2021; Liu et al. 2022; Lin
et al. 2022) have been proposed and quantization aware
training (QAT) becomes a mature paradigm for its ability to
recover network accuracy even in extreme low bit settings.
Modern QAT methods are based on a general principle: optimizing quantization interval (parameters) with task
loss (Jung et al. 2019). Many variants have been put forward,
such as non-uniform quantization (Yamamoto 2021; Liu
et al. 2022), complex gradient approximation (Gong et al.
2019; Lee, Kim, and Ham 2021) or manually designed regularization (Zhuang et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2021). These methods are complex and simplicity is often sacrificed. Another
line of QAT methods introduce knowledge distillation (Hinton et al. 2015) into the quantization phase. While the idea
of quantization KD is straightforward (i.e., a full precision
teacher helps recover the accuracy of a quantized student
network), the implementation includes heuristic stochastic
* J. Wu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11452

