The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SwiftAvatar: Efficient Auto-Creation of Parameterized Stylized Character
on Arbitrary Avatar Engines
Shizun Wang1 * , Weihong Zeng2 * , Xu Wang2 , Hao Yang2 , Li Chen2 , Chuang Zhang1 ,
Ming Wu1† , Yi Yuan2 , Yunzhao Zeng2 , Min Zheng2 , Jing Liu2
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Douyin Vision
{wangshizun, zhangchuang, wuming}@bupt.edu.cn
{zengweihong, wangxu.ailab, yang.hao, chenli.phd, yuanyi.cv, zengyunzhao, zhengmin.666, jing.liu}@bytedance.com
Abstract

cautious adjustment to achieve a satisfactory result. Therefore, it is valuable to study how to automatically create a
stylized avatar that best matches the user’s input selfie.
A straightforward way to realize avatar auto-creation is
using supervised learning: a network is trained on labeled
data to predict avatar vectors based on real face inputs. However, this requires large amount of data collection and manual labeling, which is laborious, expensive, and is not generalizable across engines. Because the definition of avatar
vectors and assets vary from engine to engine, data labeled
for one engine can not be used to train on other engines.
Several unsupervised learning methods have been proposed to address avatar auto-creation without using any labeled data, including Tied Output Synthesis (TOS) (Wolf,
Taigman, and Polyak 2017) and the Face-to-Parameter (F2P)
series (Shi et al. 2019, 2020). The main idea of these works
can be abstracted by Fig. 2-a. In order to achieve an avatar
vector that renders avatar image as similar to the input face
as possible, these methods impose constraints on the imagelevel. They suffer from issues as follows: 1) The image-level
similarity constraints they establish are designed for realistic avatar images, not applicable to stylized avatar images
that have domain gap with real face images. 2) Leveraging the image-level supervision requires that the avatar rendering process is differentiable. So they usually introduce
an imitator network that imitates the behavior of the nondifferentiable avatar engine. However, the un-avoidable deviation of imitators from the original avatar engine, as illustrated by Fig. 2-a, degrades the accuracy of the similarity
measure. 3) Some approaches like F2P (Shi et al. 2019) need
iterative optimization to guarantee the quality of estimated
avatar vectors, which is time-consuming in inference.
To address these issues, we propose SwiftAvatar, a novel
avatar auto-creation framework shown by Figure. 2-b). Unlike previous works that use similarity constraints to find the
avatar vector whose rendered image best matches a given
face, the core idea of our framework is cross-domain data
synthesis. SwiftAvatar is able to synthesize pairs of avatar
vectors and corresponding realistic faces in high fidelity as
many as possible. They are used to train a light-weight estimator that directly predicts avatar vectors from input selfie.
Specifically, the SwiftAvatar framework consists of three
components: dual-domain generators, a pipeline for cross-

The creation of a parameterized stylized character involves
careful selection of numerous parameters, also known as the
“avatar vectors” that can be interpreted by the avatar engine.
Existing unsupervised avatar vector estimation methods that
auto-create avatars for users, however, often fail to work because of the domain gap between realistic faces and stylized
avatar images. To this end, we propose SwiftAvatar, a novel
avatar auto-creation framework that is evidently superior to
previous works. SwiftAvatar introduces dual-domain generators to create pairs of realistic faces and avatar images using
shared latent codes. The latent codes can then be bridged with
the avatar vectors as pairs, by performing GAN inversion on
the avatar images rendered from the engine using avatar vectors. Through this way, we are able to synthesize paired data
in high-quality as many as possible, consisting of avatar vectors and their corresponding realistic faces. We also propose
semantic augmentation to improve the diversity of synthesis.
Finally, a light-weight avatar vector estimator is trained on
the synthetic pairs to implement efficient auto-creation. Our
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of
SwiftAvatar on two different avatar engines. The superiority
and advantageous flexibility of SwiftAvatar are also verified
in both subjective and objective evaluations.

1

Introduction

The emerging of the Metaverse concept is alongside with
the wide usage of virtual avatars, embodiment of Metaverse
users in various styles, which are popular in modern digital lives such as socialization, e-shopping and gaming. Even
though many avatar platforms, such as Zepeto, BitMoji and
ReadyPlayerMe, have enabled users to create their own stylized avatars by specifying avatar vectors that can be interpreted by their avatar engines, the manual creation process
is tiresome and time consuming, especially when the engine
provides with a large set of options making up a long avatar
vector. Besides, the avatar vectors to specify usually consists of parameters in both continuous forms (to control facial shape, eye spacing, etc.) and discrete forms (to control
hair styles, wearings etc.), all requiring careful selection and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6101

