The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Decentralized Riemannian Algorithm for Nonconvex Minimax Problems
Xidong Wu, Zhengmian Hu, Heng Huang
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States
xidong wu@outlook.com, huzhengmian@gmail.com, henghuanghh@gmail.com

Abstract

The minimax problems arise throughout machine learning,
such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014), adversarial training (Wu, Zhang, and Huang
2022), and policy evaluation (Wai et al. 2019). In recent
years, minimax problems over Riemannian manifolds (possibly nonconvex constraints) have attracted intensive interest because of their important applications in many scientific and engineering fields (Jordan, Lin, and VlatakisGkaragkounis 2022), such as subspace robust Wasserstein
distance (Paty and Cuturi 2019), distributionally robust
principal component analysis (PCA) (Zhang, Zhang, and

Sra 2022), adversarial training over Riemannian manifolds
(Huang and Gao 2020) and orthonormal generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Müller, Klein, and Weinmann
2019). Among them, optimization over the Stiefel manifold
is popular because, from robust PCA to deep neural networks with orthogonal weights, a plethora of machine learning applications can be cast into it (Huang et al. 2018).
As sizes of model parameters and training datasets keep
increasing, machine learning tasks heavily rely on distributed training (Bao et al. 2022; Lu et al. 2019; Wu et al.
2022). Given that computing capacity increases rapidly,
communication overhead gradually becomes the bottleneck
of training speed. As a result, research on communication
efficient distributed optimization is very important. One important direction is decentralized distributed training, where
each worker node updates the local model based on its local data and communicates exclusively with its neighbors,
instead of a central server (Lian et al. 2017). In other words,
when there are a lot of worker nodes, the decentralized distributed training strategy is more conducive to communication. In addition, due to data heterogeneity in the distributed
setting, distributed robust training has wide applications.
The distributed robustification of many ML tasks can also
be formulated as decentralized minimax optimization problems (Jordan, Lin, and Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis 2022).
Although decentralized distributed training has gained
popularity, algorithms for decentralized Riemannian minimax problems have not been studied. The existing minimax optimization methods over Riemannian manifolds cannot be applied to these problems (Jordan, Lin, and VlatakisGkaragkounis 2022; Zhang, Zhang, and Sra 2022; Han et al.
2022; Huang and Gao 2020), since (1) they mainly focus
on the geodesically strongly-convex-concave case or require
PL condition, which might not be satisfied in the deep learning and nonconvex optimization (Han et al. 2022); (2) algorithms cannot be used in the distributed setting.
In this paper, we study the following distributed
nonconvex-strongly-concave minimax problem on Stifel
manifolds:
n
1X
min max F (x, y) =
fi (xi , yi )
(1)
n i=1
x∈St(d,r) y∈Y

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

s.t. xi = xj , yi = yj , (i, j) ∈ E
where the function fi (x, y) : M × Y → R is nonconvex

The minimax optimization over Riemannian manifolds (possibly nonconvex constraints) has been actively applied to
solve many problems, such as robust dimensionality reduction and deep neural networks with orthogonal weights
(Stiefel manifold). Although many optimization algorithms
for minimax problems have been developed in the Euclidean
setting, it is difficult to convert them into Riemannian cases,
and algorithms for nonconvex minimax problems with nonconvex constraints are even rare. On the other hand, to address the big data challenges, decentralized (serverless) training techniques have recently been emerging since they can
reduce communications overhead and avoid the bottleneck
problem on the server node. Nonetheless, the algorithm for
decentralized Riemannian minimax problems has not been
studied. In this paper, we study the distributed nonconvexstrongly-concave minimax optimization problem over the
Stiefel manifold and propose both deterministic and stochastic minimax methods. The Steifel manifold is a non-convex
set. The global function is represented as the finite sum of
local functions. For the deterministic setting, we propose
DRGDA and prove that our deterministic method achieves a
gradient complexity of O(ϵ−2 ) under mild conditions. For the
stochastic setting, we propose DRSGDA and prove that our
stochastic method achieves a gradient complexity of O(ϵ−4 ).
The DRGDA and DRSGDA are the first algorithms for distributed minimax optimization with nonconvex constraints
with exact convergence. Extensive experimental results on the
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) training over the Stiefel manifold demonstrate the efficiency of our algorithms.

Introduction

10370

