The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Memory-Aided Contrastive Consensus Learning for Co-salient Object Detection
Peng Zheng1 , Jie Qin1∗ , Shuo Wang2 , Tian-Zhu Xiang3 , Huan Xiong4,5 *
1

Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
2
ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
3
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
4
Harbin Institute of Technology, China
5
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
{zhengpeng0108, qinjiebuaa, shawnwang.tech, tianzhu.xiang19, huan.xiong.math}@gmail.com
Abstract
Co-salient object detection (CoSOD) aims at detecting common salient objects within a group of relevant source images.
Most of the latest works employ the attention mechanism
for finding common objects. To achieve accurate CoSOD
results with high-quality maps and high efficiency, we propose a novel Memory-aided Contrastive Consensus Learning (MCCL) framework, which is capable of effectively detecting co-salient objects in real time (∼150 fps). To learn
better group consensus, we propose the Group Consensus
Aggregation Module (GCAM) to abstract the common features of each image group; meanwhile, to make the consensus representation more discriminative, we introduce the
Memory-based Contrastive Module (MCM), which saves and
updates the consensus of images from different groups in a
queue of memories. Finally, to improve the quality and integrity of the predicted maps, we develop an Adversarial Integrity Learning (AIL) strategy to make the segmented regions more likely composed of complete objects with less
surrounding noise. Extensive experiments on all the latest
CoSOD benchmarks demonstrate that our lite MCCL outperforms 13 cutting-edge models, achieving the new state of
the art (∼5.9% and ∼6.2% improvement in S-measure on
CoSOD3k and CoSal2015, respectively). Our source codes,
saliency maps, and online demos are publicly available at
https://github.com/ZhengPeng7/MCCL.

+0.48 Sm
+2.0 ms

+0.57 Sm
-51.4 ms

Figure 1: Accuracy (S-measure) and inference time (ms)
of the update-to-date and representative deep-learningbased CoSOD methods on the CoSOD3k dataset (Fan
et al. 2022). We conduct the comparison on both accuracy (the vertical axis) and speed (the horizontal axis)
among seven existing representative CoSOD models and
our MCCL. Larger bubbles mean larger volume of the
model weights. Our MCCL achieves great performance
(0.860 S-measure) in real time (7.6 ms) with a lightweight
model (104.5 Mb weights and 5.93G FLOPs). All the methods are tested with batch size 2 on one A100-80G, an
online benchmark for inference speed can be found at:
https://github.com/ZhengPeng7/CoSOD fps collection.

Introduction
Co-salient object detection (CoSOD) aims at detecting the
most common salient objects among a group of source images. Compared with the standard salient object detection
(SOD) task, CoSOD is more challenging for distinguishing co-occurring objects across a group of images where
salient objects of different classes and non-salient objects
of the same class are both hard distractors. CoSOD methods
also show their advantage of acting as a pre-processing step
for other computer vision tasks, such as semantic segmentation (Zeng et al. 2019), co-segmentation (Hsu, Lin, and
Chuang 2019), and object tracking (Zhou et al. 2021), etc..
Previous works tend to exploit various types of consistency among the image group to solve the CoSOD task, including shared features (Fu, Cao, and Tu 2013) and common

semantic information (Han et al. 2018). With the success
of unified models in up-stream tasks (Ren et al. 2015; Xiao
et al. 2017), the latest CoSOD models try to address salient
object detection and common object detection in a unified
framework (Fan et al. 2021, 2022; Zhang et al. 2020c). Despite the promising performance achieved by these methods,
most of them only focus on learning better consistent feature
representations in an individual group (Zhang et al. 2020c;
Wei et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2020b; Cong et al. 2022; Jin
et al. 2020; Tang et al. 2022), which may make them suffer from the following limitations. First, images from the

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3687

