The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Resolving Task Confusion in Dynamic Expansion Architectures for
Class Incremental Learning
Bingchen Huang1,2 , Zhineng Chen1,2 * , Peng Zhou3 , Jiayin Chen1,2 , Zuxuan Wu1,2
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center on Intelligent Visual Computing
3
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
{bchuang21, jiayinchen21}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {zhinchen, zxwu}@fudan.edu.cn, pengzhou@terpmail.umd.edu
Abstract

Task A

The dynamic expansion architecture is becoming popular
in class incremental learning, mainly due to its advantages
in alleviating catastrophic forgetting. However, task confusion is not well assessed within this framework, e.g., the
discrepancy between classes of different tasks is not well
learned (i.e., inter-task confusion, ITC), and certain priority is still given to the latest class batch (i.e., old-new confusion, ONC). We empirically validate the side effects of
the two types of confusion. Meanwhile, a novel solution
called Task Correlated Incremental Learning (TCIL) is proposed to encourage discriminative and fair feature utilization
across tasks. TCIL performs a multi-level knowledge distillation to propagate knowledge learned from old tasks to the
new one. It establishes information flow paths at both feature and logit levels, enabling the learning to be aware of
old classes. Besides, attention mechanism and classifier rescoring are applied to generate more fair classification scores.
We conduct extensive experiments on CIFAR100 and ImageNet100 datasets. The results demonstrate that TCIL consistently achieves state-of-the-art accuracy. It mitigates both
ITC and ONC, while showing advantages in battle with catastrophic forgetting even no rehearsal memory is reserved.
Source code: https://github.com/YellowPancake/TCIL.

Task B

Task A&B

(a) inter-task confusion (ITC)

(b) old-new confusion (ONC)

(c) error statistics

Figure 1: Task confusion illustration. (a) ITC: class discrepancy within every task is well learned, but it is not taught to
distinguish classes from different tasks. (b) ONC: old classes
have similar weight distribution while larger weights are
given to new classes. (c) TCIL significantly reduces ONC
errors on CIFAR100. It also suppresses the cases that ONC
transforming to ITC to some extent (CR V.S. Ours), leading
to remarkable overall confusion reduction.

Introduction
Class incremental learning aims to develop machine learning algorithms that are capable of continuously learning
new classes, while retaining the knowledge learned from old
classes (Thrun 1995; Rebuffi et al. 2017). It receives increasing attention as the learning is in line with the underlying assumption in many real-world applications, e.g., the classes
to be processed dynamically evolve through time (Pierre
2018), previous data are unavailable for privacy-preserving
reasons (Li et al. 2017; Lange et al. 2020). Recently, deep
neural networks have been applied to this field and have
achieved impressive performance. However, these studies
commonly suffer from the problem of catastrophic forgetting, i.e., the optimization of model parameters caused by
new task learning, meanwhile, often leads to decreased performance on previously learned old classes (Goodfellow
et al. 2013; Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; Lu et al. 2022).

Many studies are proposed to fight with catastrophic forgetting. They include: constraining weight changes (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; Zenke, Poole, and Ganguli 2017; Dhar
et al. 2019; Aljundi et al. 2018; Li and Hoiem 2017), retaining an extra memory that stores a certain amount of previous data (Parisi et al. 2019; De Lange et al. 2019; Castro
et al. 2018; Shin et al. 2017; Aljundi et al. 2018), synthesizing training data (Yu et al. 2020; Xiang et al. 2019; Zhu
et al. 2021, 2022), etc. Recently, the dynamic expansion architecture (DEA) is emerging as a promising paradigm (Fernando et al. 2017; Golkar, Kagan, and Cho 2019; Hung et al.
2019; Yan, Xie, and He 2021; Li et al. 2021; Douillard et al.
2022). It dynamically expands the network as the number of
tasks increases, where each task is associated with a dedicated sub-network and its weights are frozen when learning
a new task. It has the advantage of keeping the knowledge of
old tasks well. Currently, leaderboards of public benchmarks
are dominated by DEA-based models.

* Zhineng Chen is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

908

