The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Can Bad Teaching Induce Forgetting? Unlearning in Deep Networks Using an
Incompetent Teacher
Vikram S Chundawat* 1 , Ayush K Tarun* 1 , Murari Mandal2†‡ , Mohan Kankanhalli 3
1

Mavvex Labs, India
School of Computer Engineering, Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology Bhubaneswar
3
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
{vikram2000b, ayushtarun210}@gmail.com, murari.mandalfcs@kiit.ac.in, mohan@comp.nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract

a request for data deletion can be made to the ML model
owner. The owner company (of the ML model) is legally
obligated to remove the models/algorithms derived from using that particular data. As the ML models usually memorize
the training samples (Feldman 2020; Carlini et al. 2019), the
company either needs to retrain the model from scratch by
excluding the requested data or somehow erase the user’s information completely from the ML model parameters. The
algorithms supporting such information removal are known
as machine unlearning methods. Machine unlearning also
offers a framework to prove data removal from the updated
ML model.
The unlearning methods can be practically applied in
the following ways: (i) forgetting single-class or multiple
classes of data (Tarun et al. 2021), (ii) forgetting a cohort
of data from a single class (Golatkar, Achille, and Soatto
2020a,b), (iii) forgetting a random subset of data from multiple classes (Golatkar et al. 2021). In this paper, we investigate the utility of teacher-student framework with knowledge distillation to develop a robust unlearning method that
can support all the three modes, i.e. single/multiple classlevel, sub-class level and random subset-level unlearning.
Another important question we raise is how well the unlearned model has generalized the forgetting? Recent studies suggest that the unlearning methods may lead to privacy
leakage in the models (Chen et al. 2021). Therefore, it is
important to validate whether the unlearned models are susceptible to privacy attacks such as membership inference attacks. Moreover, the trade-off between the amount of unlearning and privacy exposure also should be investigated
for better decision-making on the part of the model owner.
We propose a new metric to evaluate the generalization ability of the unlearning method.
The existing unlearning methods for deep networks put
several constraints over the training procedure. For example, (Golatkar et al. 2021) train an additional mixed-linear
model along with the actual model which is used in their
unlearning method. Similarly, (Golatkar, Achille, and Soatto
2020a,b) strictly require SGD to be used in optimization during model training. These restrictions and the need for other
prior information make these methods less practical for realworld applications. We present a method that does not require any prior information about the training procedure. We

Machine unlearning has become an important area of research due to an increasing need for machine learning (ML)
applications to comply with the emerging data privacy regulations. It facilitates the provision for removal of certain set
or class of data from an already trained ML model without
requiring retraining from scratch. Recently, several efforts
have been put in to make unlearning to be effective and efficient. We propose a novel machine unlearning method by
exploring the utility of competent and incompetent teachers
in a student-teacher framework to induce forgetfulness. The
knowledge from the competent and incompetent teachers is
selectively transferred to the student to obtain a model that
doesn’t contain any information about the forget data. We experimentally show that this method generalizes well, is fast
and effective. Furthermore, we introduce the zero retrain forgetting (ZRF) metric to evaluate any unlearning method. Unlike the existing unlearning metrics, the ZRF score does not
depend on the availability of the expensive retrained model.
This makes it useful for analysis of the unlearned model after
deployment as well. We present results of experiments conducted for random subset forgetting and class forgetting on
various deep networks and across different application domains. Source code is at: https://github.com/vikram2000b/
bad-teaching-unlearning

Introduction
Machine learning (ML) models are being widely deployed for various applications across different organizations. These models are often trained with large-scale user
data. Modern data regulatory frameworks such as European Union GDPR (Voigt and Von dem Bussche 2017), and
California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) (Goldman 2020)
provide for citizens the right to be forgotten. It mandates
deletion-upon-request of user data. The regulations also require that user consent must be obtained prior to data collection. This consent for the use of an individual’s data in these
ML models may be withdrawn at any point of time. Thus,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work performed while at the School of Computing, National
University of Singapore
‡
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7210

