The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MDM: Molecular Diffusion Model for 3D Molecule Generation
Lei Huang1, 2 * , Hengtong Zhang2 † , Tingyang Xu2 , Ka-Chun Wong1 †
1

City University of Hong Kong
2
Tencent AI Lab
lhuang93-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, htzhang.work@gmail.com,
tingyangxu@tencent.com, kc.w@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

geometries (i.e., 2D graphs or 3D point clouds) from scratch,
has been proposed in the past decade.
Among those studies, 3D molecule generation has become an emerging research topic due to its capability of
directly generating 3D coordinates of atoms, which are important in determining molecules’ physical-chemical properties. Early studies on 3D molecule generation adopt autoregressive models such as normalized flow (Satorras et al.
2021) to determine the types and 3D positions of atoms
one by one. Nevertheless, these models suffer from deviation accumulations, especially when invalid structures are
generated in the early steps (i.e. initial condition vulnerability). Such a major drawback leads to unsatisfactory generation results in terms of molecule validity and stability.
Later, inspired by the success of diffusion models, (Hoogeboom et al. 2022) proposed a cutting-edge diffusion based
3D generation model that significantly improves the validity of generated molecules. The diffusion based generation
model (Hoogeboom et al. 2022) defines a Markov chain of
diffusion steps to add random noises to 3D molecule geometries and then learns a reverse process to construct desired
3D geometries step-by-step.
Nonetheless, diffusion-based 3D generation models still
suffer from two non-negligible drawbacks: First, unlike 2D
generation, in which chemical bonds are represented as
graph edges, molecular geometries in 3D generation are
represented as point clouds (Satorras et al. 2021; Gebauer,
Gastegger, and Schütt 2019; Hoogeboom et al. 2022).
Hence, it is difficult for 3D generative models to capture the
abundant local constraint relations between adjacent atoms
with no explicit indications for chemical bonds. Such a significant drawback leads to unsatisfactory performance on
datasets with large molecules, for instance, the GEOMDrugs dataset (Axelrod and Gomez-Bombarelli 2022) with
average 46 atoms per molecule.
Moreover, training diffusion models is essentially equivalent to a denoising score matching process with Langevin
dynamics as existing literature (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020;
Song et al. 2021) suggests, in which the elements in a geometry (i.e., points in a 3D point cloud) shift along the gradient of data density at each timestep. Thus, the generation
dynamics by given fixed initialized noise may concentrate
around a common trajectory and lead to similar generation
results, even with the standard Gaussian noise compensa-

Molecule generation, especially generating 3D molecular geometries from scratch (i.e., 3D de novo generation), has
become a fundamental task in drug design. Existing diffusion based 3D molecule generation methods could suffer from unsatisfactory performances, especially when generating large molecules. At the same time, the generated
molecules lack enough diversity. This paper proposes a novel
diffusion model to address those two challenges.
First, interatomic relations are not included in molecules’ 3D
point cloud representations. Thus, it is difficult for existing
generative models to capture the potential interatomic forces
and abundant local constraints. To tackle this challenge, we
propose to augment the potential interatomic forces and further involve dual equivariant encoders to encode interatomic
forces of different strengths. Second, existing diffusion-based
models essentially shift elements in geometry along the gradient of data density. Such a process lacks enough exploration
in the intermediate steps of the Langevin dynamics. To address this issue, we introduce a distributional controlling variable in each diffusion/reverse step to enforce thorough explorations and further improve generation diversity.
Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks demonstrate
that the proposed model significantly outperforms existing
methods for both unconditional and conditional generation
tasks. We also conduct case studies to help understand the
physicochemical properties of the generated molecules. The
codes are available at https://github.com/tencent-ailab/MDM

Introduction
De novo molecule generation, which automatically generates valid chemical structures with desirable properties, has
become a crucial task in the domain of drug discovery. However, given the huge diversity of atom types and chemical bonds, the manually daunting task in proposing valid,
unique, and property-restricted molecules is extraordinarily
costly. To tackle such a challenge, a multitude of generative
machine learning models (Zang and Wang 2020; Satorras
et al. 2021; Gebauer, Gastegger, and Schütt 2019; Hoogeboom et al. 2022), which automatically generate molecular
* This work is done when Lei Huang works as an intern in Ten-

cent AI Lab.
†
Corresponding authors: Hengtong Zhang and Ka-Chun Wong.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5105

