The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Graph Knows Unknowns: Reformulate Zero-Shot Learning as Sample-Level
Graph Recognition
Jingcai Guo1,2 , Song Guo1,2 , Qihua Zhou1 , Ziming Liu1 , Xiaocheng Lu1,3 , Fushuo Huo1
1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
{jc-jingcai.guo, song.guo}@polyu.edu.hk, {qi-hua.zhou, ziming.liu, xiaocheng.lu, fushuo.huo}@connect.polyu.hk
Abstract

Visual Space

Zero-shot learning (ZSL) is an extreme case of transfer learning that aims to recognize samples (e.g., images) of unseen classes relying on a train-set covering only seen classes
and a set of auxiliary knowledge (e.g., semantic descriptors).
Existing methods usually resort to constructing a visual-tosemantics mapping based on features extracted from each
whole sample. However, since the visual and semantic spaces
are inherently independent and may exist in different manifolds, these methods may easily suffer from the domain bias
problem due to the knowledge transfer from seen to unseen
classes. Unlike existing works, this paper investigates the
fine-grained ZSL from a novel perspective of sample-level
graph. Specifically, we decompose an input into several finegrained elements and construct a graph structure per sample
to measure and utilize element-granularity relations within
each sample. Taking advantage of recently developed graph
neural networks (GNNs), we formulate the ZSL problem to
a graph-to-semantics mapping task, which can better exploit
element-semantics correlation and local sub-structural information in samples. Experimental results on the widely used
benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed method
can mitigate the domain bias problem and achieve competitive performance against other representative methods.

Linear Transformation

Semantic Space

FB
Visual Space
Graph
Regression

D

ER-Pooling

Graph Space

Visual Space
FB

Element Decomposition Sample-Level Graph Constr. & Propagation
Conventional
Methods
FB

Feature
Backbone

D

Fine-grained
Methods

Our Method

Key-Point
Localization

Seen/Unseen
Semantic Rep.

Figure 1: A comparison of our method (red stream) with
conventional ZSL methods (blue stream) and fine-grained
ZSL methods (purple stream, zoom in for better view).

Introduction

the most closely related (e.g., by similarity metrics) description whose corresponding class is assigned to the sample. In
practice, the ZLS can be further restricted to the classic ZSL
and generalized ZSL (GZSL), where the former only considers the recognition of unseen classes during inference, while
the latter also classifies samples from seen classes.
In ZSL, one non-negligible issue is that the visual and
semantic spaces are inherently independent and may exist in entirely different manifolds. This issue brings about
the domain bias problem (Fu et al. 2015) when generalizing the learned knowledge from seen to unseen classes,
i.e., the mapped semantic features of unseen class samples
may be biased to seen classes. Recently, several works have
been proposed to mitigate the domain bias problem and obtained some promising results. For example, some methods consider doing the alignment between visual-semantic
spaces when constructing the mapping function (Zhang and
Saligrama 2015; Schonfeld et al. 2019; Guo and Guo 2020).
Differently, some methods try to synthesize unseen class
samples or features based on generative models, e.g., GANs

Recent years have seen a rise of interest in zero-shot learning (ZSL) which imitates the human ability to recognize unseen classes without observing real samples (Kodirov, Xiang, and Gong 2017; Yu et al. 2018; Guo and Guo 2019; Zhu
et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2021c; Liu et al. 2022; Kim, Shim,
and Shim 2022; Su et al. 2022; Khan et al. 2023). Specifically, ZSL takes utilization of seen classes with labeled
samples and auxiliary knowledge between seen and unseen
classes to achieve recognition. This knowledge, e.g., semantic descriptions that exist in a high-dimensional feature
space, can represent meaningful high-level and per-class information about samples. In ZSL, the common practice is to
map an unseen class sample from its original feature space,
e.g., visual space, to the semantic space by reusing a mapping function trained on seen classes. With such mapped
semantic features (representation), we can then search for
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7775

