The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Logic and Commonsense-Guided Temporal Knowledge Graph Completion
Guanglin Niu1 , Bo Li1,2 *
1
2

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou, China
{beihangngl, boli}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
A temporal knowledge graph (TKG) stores the events derived from the data involving time. Predicting events is extremely challenging due to the time-sensitive property of
events. Besides, the previous TKG completion (TKGC) approaches cannot represent both the timeliness and the causality properties of events, simultaneously. To address these
challenges, we propose a Logic and Commonsense-Guided
Embedding model (LCGE) to jointly learn the time-sensitive
representation involving timeliness and causality of events,
together with the time-independent representation of events
from the perspective of commonsense. Specifically, we design a temporal rule learning algorithm to construct a ruleguided predicate embedding regularization strategy for learning the causality among events. Furthermore, we could accurately evaluate the plausibility of events via auxiliary commonsense knowledge. The experimental results of TKGC
task illustrate the significant performance improvements of
our model compared with the existing approaches. More interestingly, our model is able to provide the explainability of
the predicted results in the view of causal inference. The appendix, source code and datasets of this paper are available at
https://github.com/ngl567/LCGE.

st
Ho

t,
isi
av

M

20

-06
-11
14

4

01

2
it,
vis

- 16
- 08

M

China

ak
es
ta

te m

ea
ak Express intent to settle dispute, 2014-01-01

Barack
Obama

Meet at a 'third' location, 2014-03-26
Consult, 2014-06-15

en
t,

20

14
-

08

-1

6

Xi
Jinping

Consult, 2014-11-11
(Xi Jinping, Express intent to settle
dispute, Barack Obama, 2014−01−01)
Independent
(Barack Obama, Meet at a ′third′
location, Xi Jinping, 2014−03−26)

(Xi Jinping, Express intent to
settle dispute, Barack Obama)
Causally Related
(Barack Obama, Meet at a
′third′ location, Xi Jinping)

Timeliness of Events

Causality of Events

Represent
TKGE models

Represent
Evolution-based models

Figure 1: A brief example of the TKG from ICEWS
dataset and the TKGC task predicting the missing event
(Xi Jingping, Consult, Barack Obama, 2014−06−15).
Besides, the existing TKGC models cannot jointly represent
the timeliness of events and the causality among events.

Introduction
Knowledge graph (KG) has been developed rapidly in recent
years, which stores facts in the form of (subject, predicate,
object). To further exploit the events involving time, temporal KG (TKG) represents each event as a quadruple (subject,
predicate, object, time) where the time information can be
formulated by a timestamp or time interval. For instance, an
event (Barack Obama, Consult, Xi Jinping, 2014-1111) in a TKG as shown in Figure 1 indicates that this event
occurs on the definite date of 2014-11-11.
Temporal KG completion (TKGC) is an essential technique to predict whether some potential events missing
in the TKG will occur, i.e., (Xi Jingping, Consult,
Barack Obama, 2014-06-15) shown in Figure 1. Particularly, an event is only valid at a specific time namely the
timeliness. The existing TKGC approaches can be classified
into two categories: (1) the evolution-based models are capable of representing the causality among events to reason

the future events, such as Know-Evolve (Trivedi et al. 2017)
RE-NET (Jin et al. 2020) and CyGNet (Zhu et al. 2021). As
the declaration of causality of events is shown in Figure 1,
when two events occur in certain time order, one event has an
impact on the other. The event occurring earlier is the reason
and the event occurring later is the result. (2) The TKG embedding (TKGE) models, which this paper focuses on, evaluate the plausibility of events via scoring events with embeddings of entities and predicates together with timestamps,
including TTransE (Leblay and Chekol 2018), HyTE (Dasgupta, Ray, and Talukdar 2018) and DE-SimplE (Goel et al.
2020). TKGE models regard the events that occur at different times are completely independent and these approaches
predict the events at the known time.
However, the previous models face several challenges: (1)
the existing TKGC models believe that any TKG simply
contains events involving time but they ignore the long-term
effective commonsense knowledge implied in the TKG. (2)

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4569

