The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fair Generative Models via Transfer Learning
Christopher T.H.Teo* , Milad Abdollahzadeh* , Ngai-Man Cheung†
Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD)
christopher teo@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, {milad abdollahzadeh, ngaiman cheung}@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract

, text-to-image synthesis (Zhang et al. 2017) and anomaly
detection (Schlegl et al. 2017; Lim et al. 2018).
In recent times, fairness in generative models has attracted increasing attention (Frankel and Vendrow 2020;
Choi et al. 2020; Humayun, Balestriero, and Baraniuk 2022;
Tan, Shen, and Zhou 2020). It is defined as the equal representation (Hutchinson and Mitchell 2019) of some selected
sensitive attribute (SA). For example, a generative model
that has an equal probability of producing male and female
samples is fair w.r.t. Gender. Generative models have been
increasingly adopted in various applications including highstakes areas such as criminal justice (Jalan et al. 2020) and
healthcare (Frid-Adar et al. 2018). This brings about concerns regarding potential biases and unfairness of these models. For example, generative models have been applied in
suspect facial profiling (Jalan et al. 2020). In this application, a generative model could result in wrongful incrimination of an individual if the model has biases w.r.t. certain SA such as Gender or Race. Furthermore, some generative models have been applied to create data for training downstream models e.g. classifiers for disease diagnosis (Frid-Adar et al. 2018). Such biases in generative models
can propagate to downstream models, exacerbating the situation.
Dataset biases are a major cause of unfairness in deep
generative models. Typically, generative models like GANs
are trained in an unsupervised manner to capture the underlying distribution of the given dataset, and then generate new
data from the same distribution. It is usually expected that
the training dataset is large and unbiased w.r.t. SAs. This assumption usually holds true when we follow good practices
for data collection, such as protocols adopted by biotech
companies, or governmental and international institutions
such as the World Bank (Choi et al. 2020; Katal, Wazid, and
Goudar 2013; Chizzola, Micheli, and Vingelli 2017). However, these protocols are usually unscalable, and collected
fair datasets are usually small in size (Choi et al. 2020).
Therefore, in order to collect the required large dataset, we
usually use alternative sources with a related distribution,
such as scrapping images from the internet (Muehlethaler
and Albert 2021). Collected data from these alternative resources are usually biased w.r.t. SAs (Le Quy et al. 2022;
Hwang 2020) , and these biases are easily picked up by the
generative models.

This work addresses fair generative models. Dataset biases
have been a major cause of unfairness in deep generative
models. Previous work had proposed to augment large, biased datasets with small, unbiased reference datasets. Under
this setup, a weakly-supervised approach has been proposed,
which achieves state-of-the-art quality and fairness in generated samples. In our work, based on this setup, we propose a
simple yet effective approach. Specifically, first, we propose
fairTL, a transfer learning approach to learn fair generative
models. Under fairTL, we pre-train the generative model with
the available large, biased datasets and subsequently adapt
the model using the small, unbiased reference dataset. Our
fairTL can learn expressive sample generation during pretraining, thanks to the large (biased) dataset. This knowledge is then transferred to the target model during adaptation, which also learns to capture the underlying fair distribution of the small reference dataset. Second, we propose
fairTL++, where we introduce two additional innovations to
improve upon fairTL: (i) multiple feedback and (ii) LinearProbing followed by Fine-Tuning (LP-FT). Taking one step
further, we consider an alternative, challenging setup when
only a pre-trained (potentially biased) model is available but
the dataset used to pre-train the model is inaccessible. We
demonstrate that our proposed fairTL and fairTL++ remains
very effective under this setup. We note that previous work
requires access to large, biased datasets and cannot handle
this more challenging setup. Extensive experiments show that
fairTL and fairTL++ achieve state-of-the-art in both quality
and fairness of generated samples. The code and additional
resources can be found at bearwithchris.github.io/fairTL/

Introduction
Deep generative models such as Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) are an active research area (Goodfellow et al.
2014; Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2019; Karras et al.
2020; Ojha et al. 2021). Various GAN-based approaches
have achieved outstanding results in many tasks, for example: image synthesis (Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019a; Yu
et al. 2019) , image transformation (Wang et al. 2018a) ,
super-resolution (Lucas et al. 2019; Nasrollahi et al. 2020)
* Equal Contribution

†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2429

