The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Event-Relevant Factors for Video Anomaly Detection
Che Sun1 , Chenrui Shi1 , Yunde Jia2,1 , Yuwei Wu1,2 *
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Machine Perception and Intelligent Computing, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, China
{sunche, shichenrui, jiayunde, wuyuwei}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract

event-irrelevant factors dominate anomaly predictions. Furthermore, the lack of annotated anomalies poses increasing
challenges on capturing the concept of event-relevant factors
for existing methods.
In this paper, we propose to explicitly learn event-relevant
factors to eliminate the interferences from event-irrelevant
factors on anomaly predictions. The basic idea is to increase the influence of event-relevant factors on anomaly
predictions and decrease the influence of event-irrelevant
factors. Specifically, we introduce a causal generative model
to separate the event-relevant factors and event-irrelevant

Most video anomaly detection methods discriminate events
that deviate from normal patterns as anomalies. However, these methods are prone to interferences from eventirrelevant factors, such as background textures and object
scale variations, incurring an increased false detection rate.
In this paper, we propose to explicitly learn event-relevant
factors to eliminate the interferences from event-irrelevant
factors on anomaly predictions. To this end, we introduce a
causal generative model to separate the event-relevant factors
and event-irrelevant ones in videos, and learn the prototypes
of event-relevant factors in a memory augmentation module.
We design a causal objective function to optimize the causal
generative model and develop a counterfactual learning strategy to guide anomaly predictions, which increases the influence of the event-relevant factors. The extensive experiments
show the effectiveness of our method for video anomaly detection.

Frames

Abnormal
Objects Score Maps

Introduction
Video anomaly detection aims to automatically discriminate abnormal events that do not conform to normal patterns (Chandola et al. 2009; Luo et al. 2021). Most current methods (Chen et al. 2022; Yao et al. 2022; Chang
et al. 2022) tackle the task by using deep neural networks
to discriminate events that deviate from the learned patterns as anomalies, and have achieved a good performance.
However, these methods are prone to interferences from
event-irrelevant factors in videos, which tends to increase
the false detection rate. For example, event-irrelevant factors, such as background textures and object scale variations
shown in Figure 1, may interfere with the baseline video
anomaly detection method HF2-VAD (Liu et al. 2021b).
Event-relevant factors, e.g., the appearances and motions of
objects in Figures 1a and 1b, are the causes of anomalies.
Existing methods unconsciously mix up event-relevant factors with event-irrelevant factors into a single abstract representation of an input video. They tend to extract an overly
simplistic representation which favors event-irrelevant factors due to “shortcut learning” (Geirhos et al. 2020), and thus

Ours HF2-VAD
Frames

(a)
Abnormal Score Maps
Objects

Ours HF2-VAD

(b)
Abnormal

Normal

Figure 1: Examples of interferences from event-irrelevant
factors. Frames with abnormal objects in orange boxes have
large interferences of (a) background textures and (b) object
scale variations. The score maps are normalized frame prediction errors in our method and the method HF2-VAD.

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2384

