The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Maximum Entropy Population-Based Training for
Zero-Shot Human-AI Coordination
Rui Zhao1∗ , Jinming Song1 , Yufeng Yuan1 ,
Haifeng Hu1 , Yang Gao2 , Yi Wu2 , Zhongqian Sun1 , Wei Yang1
2

1
Tencent AI Lab
Tsinghua University

Abstract

sist humans and augment our capabilities (Engelbart 1962;
Carter and Nielsen 2017) more achievable.
An efficient scheme for training AI agents in collaborative
or competitive settings is through self-play reinforcement
learning (Tesauro 1994; Silver et al. 2017). Due to its training paradigm, self-play-trained agents are very specialized
since they only encounter their own policies during training
and assume their partners will behave in a particular way.
Therefore, those agents can suffer significantly from distributional shift when paired with humans. For example, in the
Overcooked game, the self-play-trained agents only use a
specific pot and ignore the other pots while humans use all
pots. As a consequence, the AI agent ends up waiting unproductively for the human to deliver a soup from the specific
pot, even though the human has instead decided to fill up the
other pots (Carroll et al. 2019).
In this paper, we propose a robust and efficient approach
Maximum Entropy Population-based training (MEP), to
train agents for zero-shot human-AI coordination based on
the advances in maximum entropy RL (Haarnoja et al.
2018b), diversity (Eysenbach et al. 2019), and Multi-agent
RL (Lowe et al. 2017; Foerster et al. 2018). To encourage
the diversity and explorability of policies of the individual
agent in the population, we utilize the maximum entropy objectives (Ziebart et al. 2008; Toussaint 2009; Ziebart 2010;
Rawlik, Toussaint, and Vijayakumar 2013; Fox, Pakman,
and Tishby 2015; Haarnoja et al. 2017, 2018b; Zhao, Sun,
and Tresp 2019) for the individual policies. To acquire diverse and distinguishable behaviors (Eysenbach et al. 2019)
between agents in the population, we further utilize the average Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between all agent
pairs in the population to promote pairwise diversity. We
define this combination of individual diversity and pairwise
diversity as Population Diversity (PD) and derive a safe and
computationally efficient surrogate objective Population Entropy (PE), which is the lower bound of the original PD objective with linear runtime complexity. Analogous to maximum entropy RL training, each agent in the population is
rewarded to maximize the centralized population entropy.
With this diverse population, we train a best response agent
by pairing it with the agents sampled from this population
with a prioritization scheme based on the difficulty to collaborate with (Schaul et al. 2016; Vinyals et al. 2019; Han et al.
2020). By doing so, this newly trained AI agent encounters

We study the problem of training a Reinforcement Learning
(RL) agent that is collaborative with humans without using
human data. Although such agents can be obtained through
self-play training, they can suffer significantly from the distributional shift when paired with unencountered partners,
such as humans. In this paper, we propose Maximum Entropy Population-based training (MEP) to mitigate such distributional shift. In MEP, agents in the population are trained
with our derived Population Entropy bonus to promote the
pairwise diversity between agents and the individual diversity
of agents themselves. After obtaining this diversified population, a common best agent is trained by paring with agents in
this population via prioritized sampling, where the prioritization is dynamically adjusted based on the training progress.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method MEP, with
comparison to Self-Play PPO (SP), Population-Based Training (PBT), Trajectory Diversity (TrajeDi), and Fictitious CoPlay (FCP) in both matrix game and Overcooked game environments, with partners being human proxy models and
real humans. A supplementary video showing experimental
results is available at https://youtu.be/Xh-FKD0AAKE.

Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has gained many successes against humans in competitive games, such as
Go (Silver et al. 2017), Dota (OpenAI 2019), and StarCraft (Vinyals et al. 2019). However, it remains a challenge
to build AI agents that can coordinate and collaborate with
humans that the agents have not encountered during training (Kleiman-Weiner et al. 2016; Lerer and Peysakhovich
2017; Carroll et al. 2019; Shum et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2020;
Knott et al. 2021). This challenging problem, namely zeroshot human-AI coordination, is particularly important for
real-world applications, such as cooperative games (Carroll
et al. 2019), communicative agents (Foerster et al. 2016),
self-driving vehicles (Resnick et al. 2018), and assistant
robots (Akkaya et al. 2019), because it removes the onerous and expensive step of involving human or human data
in AI training. Thus, studying this problem could potentially
make our ultimate goal of building AI systems that can as∗

Correspondence to: Rui Zhao {rui.zhao.ml@gmail.com}.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6145

