The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

The Role of Heuristics and Biases During Complex Choices with an AI Teammate
Nikolos Gurney1 , John H. Miller2,3 , David V. Pynadath1
1

Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California
2
Carnegie Mellon University
3
Santa Fe Institute
gurney@ict.usc.edu, pynadath@ict.usc.edu, JM7T@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract

relying on traditional empirical approaches: either simple
choice experiments (e.g., Logg, Minson, and Moore 2019,
in which the authors use their evidence to motivate the need
for further research, particularly in settings where AI are in
use) or in situ (in which there are entire sub-fields, such as
human-robot interaction). We argue that a middle ground
is needed where the experimental setting matches the technological capabilities of AI but avoids the contextual challenges of in situ experimentation.
We present results from such an experiment in which participants work with an AI helper to search through complex
choice options. We find classic behavioral biases, specifically anchoring and framing effects, are still present in the
choice behavior. These biases also predict choice outcomes
and highlight opportunities to develop AI helpers that can
improve outcomes by accounting for these biases. Critically,
we engineered the experimental environment such that it
generates AI-friendly data. This feature creates future opportunities for training AI helpers using data from an experimental paradigm in which known artifacts of human cognition are present.

Behavioral scientists have classically documented aversion to
algorithmic decision aids, from simple linear models to AI.
Sentiment, however, is changing and possibly accelerating
AI helper usage. AI assistance is, arguably, most valuable
when humans must make complex choices. We argue that
classic experimental methods used to study heuristics and biases are insufficient for studying complex choices made with
AI helpers. We adapted an experimental paradigm designed
for studying complex choices in such contexts. We show that
framing and anchoring effects impact how people work with
an AI helper and are predictive of choice outcomes. The evidence suggests that some participants, particularly those in
a loss frame, put too much faith in the AI helper and experienced worse choice outcomes by doing so. The paradigm also
generates computational modeling-friendly data allowing future studies of human-AI decision making.

Introduction
The superiority of passive, algorithmic decision making is
dogma in the behavioral sciences (Dawes and Corrigan
1974; Dawes, Faust, and Meehl 1989). This reality is unsurprising given that even poorly-tuned models outperform
humans (Dawes 1979). Nevertheless, researchers have documented a strong aversion to relying on algorithms (Dietvorst, Simmons, and Massey 2015; Burton, Stein, and
Jensen 2020). There is increasing evidence, however, that
people are more open to input from algorithmic decision
aids (Logg, Minson, and Moore 2019). This shift towards
a more trusting stance aligns with intuition: combining the
proliferation of algorithmic decision aids and the insight that
repeated exposure to stimuli can alter the ways in which people respond to them (Zajonc 1968; Bornstein and D’agostino
1992) creates a scenario in which it would be surprising if
people did not exhibit more trust.
Increasingly, decision aids rely on adaptive rather than
passive algorithms. These artificial intelligence (AI) helpers
are optimized to function in settings where passive algorithms, such as linear models, underperform relative to human decision making. Although these technologies function
and behave in fundamentally different ways from more passive predecessors, researchers largely still study them by

Related Works
Complex Choices
A blossoming corner of behavioral science is working to understand the nuance of human judgment and decision making during complex choice. A complex choice is one in
which the relationships between the variables under consideration are nonlinear. Such a relationship means that even
when only a few variables characterize a choice, their interactions can render optimization intractable (Gurney, Miller,
and Pynadath 2023). Obvious examples of complex choices
are home buying, career moves, and mate selection. In any
of these examples, changing a single choice variable can dramatically impact how other variables affect the choice. In the
case of buying a home, for example, the opportunity to work
remotely changes how commuting distance, home size, and
a host of other variables interact. It is not just monumental
choices that suffer from complexity. Filling a shopping cart
given a budget constraint, something that most adults regularly do, can be complex. A shopper must, for example, consider how the myriad of items they buy combine into meals,
when they will perish, whether they will satisfy their taste

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5993

