The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DMIS: Dynamic Mesh-Based Importance Sampling for Training
Physics-Informed Neural Networks
Zijiang Yang1,2 , Zhongwei Qiu1,2,3 , Dongmei Fu1,2,4
School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing
2
Beijing Engineering Research Center of Industrial Spectrum Imaging
3
The University of Sydney
4
Shunde Innovation School, University of Science and Technology Beijing
{zijiangyang, qiuzhongwei}@xs.ustb.edu.cn, fdm ustb@ustb.edu.cn
Abstract

100

Modeling dynamics in the form of partial differential equations (PDEs) is an effectual way to understand real-world
physics processes. For complex physics systems, analytical solutions are not available and numerical solutions
are widely-used. However, traditional numerical algorithms
are computationally expensive and challenging in handling
multiphysics systems. Recently, using neural networks to
solve PDEs has made significant progress, called physicsinformed neural networks (PINNs). PINNs encode physical
laws into neural networks and learn the continuous solutions
of PDEs. For the training of PINNs, existing methods suffer from the problems of inefficiency and unstable convergence, since the PDE residuals require calculating automatic
differentiation. In this paper, we propose Dynamic Meshbased Importance Sampling (DMIS) to tackle these problems. DMIS is a novel sampling scheme based on importance sampling, which constructs a dynamic triangular mesh
to estimate sample weights efficiently. DMIS has broad applicability and can be easily integrated into existing methods.
The evaluation of DMIS on three widely-used benchmarks
shows that DMIS improves the convergence speed and accuracy in the meantime. Especially in solving the highly nonlinear Schrödinger Equation, compared with state-of-the-art
methods, DMIS shows up to 46% smaller root mean square
error and five times faster convergence speed. Code is available at https://github.com/MatrixBrain/DMIS.

10-1

PINN-O
PINN-N
DMIS (ours)

100

PINN-O
PINN-N
DMIS (ours)

Prediction error

1

loss

10-2

10-1

10-3
10-4
10-5
0

20k

40k

60k

interations

80k

(a) Convergence curves

100k

10-2

0

20k

40k

60k

interations

80k

100k

(b) Prediction error

Figure 1: Comparison with stat-of-the-art methods (PINNO, PINN-N). DMIS achieves faster convergence speed and
better prediction accuracy.

simulation results. In general, data assimilation is the primary method to combine classical numerical algorithms and
observation data, but data assimilation introduces additional
uncertainties and seriously affects convergence.
Recently, with the rapid development of machine learning, the ability to extract features and mine information
from observation data has been dramatically improved.
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016).
As an effective supplement to classical numerical methods, Physics-informed Neural Networks (PINNs) formulate
the problem of solving PDEs into a parameter optimization
problem (Raissi, Perdikaris, and Karniadakis 2019). PINNs
encode PDEs into the loss function of neural networks. In
addition, boundary conditions and initial conditions are also
integrated into the loss function as soft constraints. PINNs
are mesh-free and learn continuous solutions of PDEs. Practices show that PINNs can be applied to solve different types
of PDEs(Raissi, Perdikaris, and Karniadakis 2019; Pang, Lu,
and Karniadakis 2019; Zhang, Guo, and Karniadakis 2020).
Since partial derivative terms of PDE residuals require automatic differentiation to calculate, the training of PINNs
is computationally expensive and unstable. Especially for
solving PDEs with high order partial derivative terms, these
defects are more prominent. Therefore, in the studies of
PINNs, it is a critical issue to design schemes to stabilize
training and improve training efficiency.

Introduction
Modeling the dynamics of real-world physics systems has
important guiding significance for production activities,
such as fluid mechanics and heat transfer. These physics systems are usually described by partial differential equations
(PDEs). Due to the highly nonlinear of these PDEs, in most
cases, analytical solutions are not available.
In the past decades, numerical algorithms for solving
PDEs have been greatly developed. Although classical numerical algorithms significantly promoted the development
of related fields, these algorithms are computationally expensive and face severe challenges in multiphysics and multiscale systems. With the improvement of data acquisition
capability, it is an important issue to use data to modify
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5375

