The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Intersection Coordination with Priority-Based Search for Autonomous Vehicles
Jiaoyang Li1 , The Anh Hoang2 , Eugene Lin3 , Hai L. Vu2 , Sven Koenig3
1
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
Department of Civil Engineering, Monash University, Australia
3
Computer Science Department, University of Southern California, USA
jiaoyangli@cmu.edu, the.hoang@monash.edu, eugenezlin@gmail.com, hai.vu@monash.edu, skoenig@usc.edu
2

Abstract

Boyles, and Patel 2016). For that reason, several studies proposed optimization-based strategies (Lee and Park 2012; Zohdy and Rakha 2016). Noticeably, Levin and Rey (2017)
developed a Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP)
model to determine the optimal coordination strategies for a
single intersection. It produced significantly better solutions
than the FCFS strategy but was computationally inefficient
and thus cannot be used in real-time. Refer to (Zhong, Nejad,
and Lee 2021) for a thorough survey on different coordination strategies for autonomous intersection management.
The core challenge here is to efficiently and effectively
resolve collisions among many vehicles, which is close
to Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) (Stern et al. 2019),
a problem widely studied in AI and robotics. Dozens of
MAPF algorithms have been proposed in recent years,
which, for example, can find optimal solutions for hundreds
of agents (Li et al. 2021a) and near-optimal solutions for a
thousand agents (Li, Ruml, and Koenig 2021) within just
a minute. Inspired by the MAPF algorithms, we propose
a three-level algorithm PBS-SIPP-LP (PSL): Level 1 uses
Priority-Based Search (PBS) (Ma et al. 2019) to resolve collisions between vehicles; Level 2 uses a modified version of
Safe Interval Path Planning (SIPP) (Phillips and Likhachev
2011) to plan optimal paths for individual vehicles; and
Level 3 uses a Linear Programming (LP) model to optimize
the entry time and speed of each vehicle.
Our main contribution is as follows: (1) We apply MAPF
algorithms to the intersection coordination problem and
show promise compared to the existing intersection coordination algorithms. Specifically, PSL runs significantly faster
than MILP and is suitable in real-time. It finds near-optimal
solutions, which are substantially better than the solutions
of FCFS. (2) We combine search- and optimization-based
methods to optimize the trajectories and speeds of the vehicles simultaneously (while existing MAPF algorithms do
not optimize speeds). (3) We prove that PSL is complete and
polynomial-time in the number of vehicles (while PBS for
MAPF is neither complete nor polynomial-time).

The development of connected and autonomous vehicles
opens an opportunity to manage intersections without signals.
One promising approach is to use a central autonomous intersection manager to optimize the movement of the vehicles
in the intersection. Existing work uses Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) to find optimal solutions for this
problem but is time-consuming and cannot be applied in realtime. On the other hand, the coordination of the vehicles is
essentially a Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) problem, for
which dozens of efficient algorithms have been proposed in
recent years. Inspired by these MAPF algorithms, we propose a three-level algorithm called PSL to solve the intersection coordination problem. Theoretically, PSL is complete
and polynomial-time in the number of vehicles. Empirically,
PSL runs significantly faster with only a slight compromise
in the solution quality than the optimal MILP method. It also
generates significantly better solutions with a slightly larger
runtime than the traditional First-Come-First-Served strategy.

Introduction
The development of Connected and Autonomous Vehicles
(CAVs) technology opens a new opportunity to manage vehicles on roads, particularly vehicles crossing intersections.
With the assumption that a full fleet of CAVs will be on the
road in the future, the concept of signal-free intersections
has attracted researchers in the transportation field (Dresner
and Stone 2004; Zhong, Nejad, and Lee 2021). The early
proposal of signal-free intersections was based on reservation strategies. All approaching vehicles communicate with
a central autonomous Intersection Manager (IM). The IM
receives reservation requests from vehicles and accepts a request if it has no collisions with the previous reservations.
An early implementation of the reservation-based strategies
was First Come First Served (FCFS) (Dresner and Stone
2004, 2008; Au and Stone 2010; Au, Shahidi, and Stone
2011; Li et al. 2013), where the IM assets the priority of the
vehicles using the temporal order of the received requests.
However, such FCFS strategies can lead to poor solution quality, particularly in the scenario with high traffic demands. For instance, FCFS was shown to increase delays
beyond conventional signals in specific scenarios (Levin,

Background
Intersection Setup
Levin and Rey (2017) introduced a conflict-point representation for single intersections and modeled the intersection co-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11578

