The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Polarization-Aware Low-Light Image Enhancement
Chu Zhou1 , Minggui Teng2 , Youwei Lyu3 , Si Li3 , Chao Xu1 , Boxin Shi2 *
1

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications

Abstract

Recent advances in single image low-light enhancement
(Chen et al. 2018; Jiang et al. 2021; Zheng, Shi, and Shi
2021; Guo et al. 2020) have shown effectiveness in imaging
in low-light conditions. They adopt neural networks to enhance the visual quality of images in the intensity domain by
extracting image features and priors from a large amount of
training data. However, when it comes to handling multiple
polarized low-light images of the same scene, they can only
process one of them at a time in a polarization-unaware manner (i.e., without considering the physical constraints among
the polarized images), so that the quality of the acquired DoP
and AoP are rather unreliable. This situation could be relieved by processing multiple polarized low-light images simultaneously (e.g., using IPLNet (Hu et al. 2020)), however,
operating in the intensity domain cannot make effective use
of the information provided by polarization.
Based on the fact that the polarization characteristics of
the incoming light to the sensor are fully encoded in the
Stokes parameters, we analyze the average error rates of
polarization-relevant variables (including the polarized images, AoP, DoP, and Stokes parameters) w.r.t. the image irradiacne reduction factor (caused by decreasing the exposure time or scene radiance) in the polarized low-light image formation model. We observe that the degradation in the
Stokes parameters is less severe than the polarized images in
low-light conditions, and therefore propose a new pipeline
to solve the problem in the Stokes domain instead of the intensity domain. Along this pipeline, we design a dual-branch
neural network based on the specific properties of the Stokes
parameters to perform enhancement in a polarization-aware
manner. We also present two application scenarios, including reflection removal (Lei et al. 2020) and shape from polarization (Deschaintre, Lin, and Ghosh 2021), to demonstrate the benefits of enhancing polarized low-light images.
To summarize, this paper makes contributions by proposing: (1) a Stokes-domain enhancement pipeline for polarized
low-light images; (2) a polarization-aware dual-branch network tailored to the pipeline; (3) two applications demonstrating the benefits of enhancing polarized low-light images.

Polarization-based vision algorithms have found uses in various applications since polarization provides additional physical constraints. However, in low-light conditions, their performance would be severely degenerated since the captured
polarized images could be noisy, leading to noticeable degradation in the degree of polarization (DoP) and the angle of
polarization (AoP). Existing low-light image enhancement
methods cannot handle the polarized images well since they
operate in the intensity domain, without effectively exploiting the information provided by polarization. In this paper,
we propose a Stokes-domain enhancement pipeline along
with a dual-branch neural network to handle the problem in
a polarization-aware manner. Two application scenarios (reflection removal and shape from polarization) are presented
to show how our enhancement can improve their results.

Introduction
Exploring polarimetric properties of light transport has benefited various vision applications, such as reflection removal
(Lei et al. 2020), shape from polarization (Deschaintre, Lin,
and Ghosh 2021), image dehazing (Zhou et al. 2021), etc.
Since these applications often need to take full advantage
of the physical constraints provided by the unique cues of
polarization, their accuracy is closely related to polarizationrelevant parameters, such as the degree of polarization (DoP)
and the angle of polarization (AoP) of the incoming light to
the sensor. With the development of polarization cameras,
capturing multiple polarized images of the same scene with
different polarizer angles in a snapshot becomes possible,
which brings convenience to the acquisition of the DoP and
AoP. However, when taking photos in low-light conditions
(e.g., capturing with limited illumination or setting a short
exposure time at a high frame rate), the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) degenerates due to low photon counts. In such a situation, since the captured polarized images are noisy, leading
to severely degenerated DoP and AoP, the performance of
corresponding applications is negatively affected (Hu et al.
2020). Therefore, it is of great interest to enhance multiple
polarized low-light images of the same scene for acquiring
the DoP and AoP accurately.

Related Work

* Corresponding author: shiboxin@pku.edu.cn

Generally, low-light image enhancement methods could
be divided into two categories: traditional methods and

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3742

