The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Revenue Maximization Using Posted Prices for Stochastic Strategic
Patient Buyers
Eitan-Hai Mashiah:1 , Idan Attias:2 , Yishay Mansour1,3
1

Tel Aviv University, Israel
Ben-Gurion University, Israel
3
Google Research, Israel
eitanhaimashiah@gmail.com, idanatti@post.bgu.ac.il, mansour.yishay@gmail.com
2

Abstract

is regarding online merchant who observe that a buyer has a
shopping bag that was not purchased. The merchant sometimes offers the buyer a limited time discount on the items
in the buyer’s shopping bag. The buyer has uncertainty regarding future prices after the discount terminates, the prices
might return to the original ones or there may be a new offer with an even larger discount. Our model of patient buyers abstracts this phenomena from the buyer perspective, the
ability to prolong the time to receive of the desired item.
Patient buyers were introduced in Feldman et al. (2016)
and later studied in (Koren, Livni, and Mansour 2017a,b).
They presented an adversarial online model where the buyers have a valuation and duration for the purchase, namely
the sequence of arrivals is controlled by an adversary. They
studied the regret compared to the best fixed price. In this
work we consider a stochastic setting, and we study the expected revenue from an optimal sequence of prices (rather
than a single fixed price).
Our model of patient buyers can be intuitively described
as follows. We have a seller that has an unlimited supply
from a single item, and would like to maximize her expected
revenue. Each buyer has a type pv, wq where v is his value
for the item and w P rŵs is his patience, where ŵ is the
maximum patience. A buyer of type pv, wq has a value v
for the item if it is purchased in the first w time steps from
his arrival. The types of the buyers are sampled i.i.d. from a
distribution D. The seller proposes a price for the buyer at
each time step, and observes whether the buyer bought the
item or continued to the next time step. Initially, the seller
commits to her pricing strategy and the buyer best respond
to it, i.e., this is a Stackelberg game where the seller is the
leader and the buyer is the follower. We consider both the
case where the distribution D is known and the case where
D is unknown.

We consider a seller faced with buyers which have the ability
to delay their decision, which we call patience. Each buyer’s
type is composed of value and patience, and it is sampled i.i.d.
from a distribution. The seller, using posted prices, would like
to maximize her revenue from selling to the buyer. In this paper, we formalize this setting and characterize the resulting
Stackelberg equilibrium, where the seller first commits to her
strategy, and then the buyers best respond. Following this, we
show how to compute both the optimal pure and mixed strategies. We then consider a learning setting, where the seller
does not have access to the distribution over buyer’s types.
Our main results are the following. We derive a sample complexity bound for the learning of an approximate optimal pure
strategy, by computing the fat-shattering dimension of this
setting. Moreover, we provide a general sample complexity
bound for the approximate optimal mixed strategy. We also
consider an online setting and derive a vanishing regret bound
with respect to both the optimal pure strategy and the optimal
mixed strategy.

1

Introduction

Pricing is ubiquitous, and it is the primary means by which
sellers and buyers interact. It is no surprise that revenue maximization pricing is the topic of a vast amount of literature
in economic theory and algorithmic game theory (see (Hartline 2021; Nisan et al. 2007)). In most of the literature the
seller and buyer interact instantaneously, and either a transaction occurs (the buyer purchases an item) or not. We are
interested in this work in the case where the buyer can potentially delay the purchase decision, depending on his type.
We call such buyers patient buyers.
There are many examples of patient buyers in the real
world. One example is shipping cost, where there are different costs depending on the duration of the shipping. Normally, same day delivery is more expensive than next day delivery, which is more expensive than two-day delivery, and
so on. Another example is an online merchant whose production cost varies with the delivery date. Items that have to
be shipped immediately cost more to produce than items that
need to be shipped after 10 business days. Another scenario

1.1

Our Contributions

We initially assume that the buyer’s type distribution D is
known and derive the following results.
• We show a separation between the best fixed price, the
best pure strategy, which is a fixed sequence of prices,
and the best mixed strategy, which is a distribution over
price sequences.
• We characterize the optimal pure strategy of the seller

:

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9090

