The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

InParformer: Evolutionary Decomposition Transformers with Interactive Parallel
Attention for Long-Term Time Series Forecasting
Haizhou Cao1,2 , Zhenhao Huang3 , Tiechui Yao1,2 , Jue Wang1,2,* , Hui He3 , Yangang Wang1,2
1

Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
North China Electric Power University, Beijing, China
{caohaizhou, yaotiechui}@cnic.cn, {wangjue, wangyg}@sccas.cn, {huangzhenhao, huihe}@ncepu.edu.cn
Abstract

(Shi and Yeung 2018) approaches suffer from error accumulation (Bengio et al. 2015), inefficient inference, and
tricky parallelization (Vaswani et al. 2017). CNNs or temporal convolutional networks (TCNs) have shown effectiveness in sequence modeling (Bai, Kolter, and Koltun 2018;
Sen, Yu, and Dhillon 2019), but are still limited by local
receptive fields. Similar to breakthroughs in NLP (Vaswani
et al. 2017; Devlin et al. 2018) and CV (Dosovitskiy et al.
2022; Liu et al. 2021) fields, LTSF has recently benefited
from the Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) architecture.
With the self-attention mechanism, Transformer-based models achieve superiority in capturing long-term dependencies, which is essential for LTSF. The canonical Transformer
with self-attention has quadratic computational and memory costs. Recent forecasting Transformers (Li et al. 2019;
Kitaev, Kaiser, and Levskaya 2020; Zhou et al. 2021) are
mainly committed to using a sparse scheme to improve the
efficiency of self-attention.
It is worth noting that the standard attention mechanism
was originally proposed to model human-generated language sequences. Each step token (i.e., word) is discrete and
highly semantic. Standard point-wise alignment schemes
(including their sparse versions) are reasonable when capturing semantic dependencies. However, most time series are
sequential and continuous numeric points, extremely dissimilar to sequences like language sentences. When the Transformer architecture is adopted for time series, there are three
key challenges:

Long-term time series forecasting (LTSF) provides substantial benefits for numerous real-world applications, whereas
places essential demands on the model capacity to capture
long-range dependencies. Recent Transformer-based models
have significantly improved LTSF performance. It is worth
noting that Transformer with the self-attention mechanism
was originally proposed to model language sequences whose
tokens (i.e., words) are discrete and highly semantic. However, unlike language sequences, most time series are sequential and continuous numeric points. Time steps with temporal redundancy are weakly semantic, and only leveraging
time-domain tokens is hard to depict the overall properties
of time series (e.g., the overall trend and periodic variations).
To address these problems, we propose a novel Transformerbased forecasting model named InParformer with an Interactive Parallel Attention (InPar Attention) mechanism. The
InPar Attention is proposed to learn long-range dependencies comprehensively in both frequency and time domains.
To improve its learning capacity and efficiency, we further
design several mechanisms, including query selection, keyvalue pair compression, and recombination. Moreover, InParformer is constructed with evolutionary seasonal-trend decomposition modules to enhance intricate temporal pattern
extraction. Extensive experiments on six real-world benchmarks show that InParformer outperforms the state-of-the-art
forecasting Transformers.

Introduction

1. Time series contain several steps with information redundancy (e.g., missing values can be obtained by interpolation in some cases). This indicates that performing fulllength queries is computationally redundant. Typically,
Informer (Zhou et al. 2021) proposes the ProbSparse attention which selects top-u dominant queries based on
query sparsity measurement. But this will limit the overall representation of time series. Moreover, compressing
the length of key-value pairs is also worth considering.
For example, a memory compressed attention (Liu et al.
2018) reduces the length by using a strided convolution
to process long texts. On the other hand, periodic time
series may have similar sub-processes. Autoformer (Wu
et al. 2021) develops an Auto-Correlation mechanism
that calculates series autocorrelation and selects top-k
possible time delays to conduct a sub-series level aggre-

As time series is increasingly complex and pervasive in the
era of big data, time series forecasting (TSF) has become an
integral part of numerous real-world applications in energy,
economics, traffic, weather, etc. Compared to ordinary TSF,
long-term time series forecasting (LTSF) offers stronger
assistance for long-term planning (e.g., in power systems
(Lindberg et al. 2019)) and early warning, but brings more
challenges. Typically, it requires a higher model capacity to
discover longer temporal dependencies and model tougher
nonlinear dynamics. Although RNN-based TSF models (Lai
et al. 2018; Rangapuram et al. 2018; Salinas et al. 2020)
have made notable strides, these iterated multi-step (IMS)
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6906

