The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Query-Aware Quantization for Maximum Inner Product Search
Jin Zhang1 , Defu Lian1,2 * , Haodi Zhang3 , Baoyun Wang4 , Enhong Chen1,2
1

University of Science and Technology of China
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, Hefei, China
3
Shenzhen University
4
Hisense
jinzhang21@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {liandefu, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn,
hdzhang@szu.edu.cn, wangbaoyun@hisense.com
2

Abstract

have been proposed to solve the approximate MIPS problem
efficiently, in which the quantization-based techniques have
shown strong performance. In (Guo et al. 2020), they developed a score-aware loss on assuming queries with uniform
spherical distributions, leading to the state-of-the-art vector
quantization that more greatly penalizes the parallel component of a datapoint’s residual relative to its orthogonal component. The score-aware loss with the above query assumption is called anisotropic quantization loss, which is considered more suitable for maximum inner product search. However, in real-world datasets, the distribution of queries does
not necessarily satisfy the assumption. It will lead to significant differences in the performance on different datasets.
Furthermore, we will show that it is not reasonable to penalize the parallel direction more when the distribution of
queries does not satisfy the assumption, which is not helpful
for a more accurate inner product calculation in the quantization methods.
Motivated by these shortcomings, in this paper, we propose Query-aware Quantization based on the sampled softmax by drawing samples from actual query distribution. Further, we introduce a general framework encompassing multiple quantization methods, including PQ, QUIP, ScaNN, and
Query-aware Quantization, elaborate on the insight of these
methods, and develop an effective optimization method for
the proposed general framework. The proposed method is
evaluated on three real-world datasets. The experimental results show that it outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines.
To summarize, we deliver the following contributions:

Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) plays an essential role in many applications ranging from information retrieval, recommender systems to natural language processing.
However, exhaustive MIPS is often expensive and impractical when there are a large number of candidate items. The
state-of-the-art quantization method of approximated MIPS
is product quantization with a score-aware loss, developed
by assuming that queries are uniformly distributed in the
unit sphere. However, in real-world datasets, the above assumption about queries does not necessarily hold. To this
end, we propose a quantization method based on the distribution of queries combined with sampled softmax. Further, we
introduce a general framework encompassing the proposed
method and multiple quantization methods, and we develop
an effective optimization for the proposed general framework. The proposed method is evaluated on three real-world
datasets. The experimental results show that it outperforms
the state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) has wide applicability in recommender systems, information retrieval, and
natural language processing. For example, the inner product
has been widely used in recommender systems to estimate
users’ preference for items (Li et al. 2017; Xue et al. 2017;
Krichene et al. 2018; Ghosh, Mitra, and Lan 2022), in information retrieval to evaluate the relevance between query and
response (Luan et al. 2021; Luo et al. 2022), and in natural
language processing to estimate the likelihood of the next
word given the context (Zhang et al. 2018; Fu et al. 2021),
and then return the results via MIPS.
To define the MIPS problem, consider a large set S of
collecting candidate items, where S ⊂ Rd , and a given
query point q ∈ Rd . The goal is to search for x ∈ S which
maximizes (or approximately maximizes) the inner product
⟨q, x⟩. Formally, we are interested in efficiently computing

• To improve the shortage of existing quantization methods, we propose Query-aware Quantization to promote
the advancement of approximate MIPS.
• We introduce a general framework encompassing multiple quantization methods, elaborate on the insight of
these methods, and develop an effective optimization
method for the proposed general framework.
• The proposed quantization method is evaluated on three
real-world datasets, where the results demonstrate that
our method outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines.

x∗ = arg max ⟨q, x⟩ .
x∈S

Exhaustive MIPS is often expensive and even impractical
when the cardinality of the set is large. Several techniques

Related Works

* Corresponding author

In this section, we briefly review the related works about
MIPS and quantization. The most related works with us will

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4875

