The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Model-Checking for Ability-Based Logics with Constrained Plans
Stéphane Demri1 , Raul Fervari2,3
1
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, ENS Paris-Saclay,
Laboratoire Méthodes Formelles, 91190, Gif-Sur-Yvette, France
2
FAMAF, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba & CONICET, Argentina
3
Guangdong Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, China

Abstract

and Weld 1998)). Thus, “knowing how” is given by the abilities described by the graph. The simplicity of the logical language is partly reflected by the fact that formulae of the form
Khpp, qq are global, no action symbol appears in formulae, a
single agent is considered, and no “knowing that” modality
is present. A complete axiomatisation is provided in (Wang
2018b) but more importantly, such a work has been a source
of inspiration for many others. Some variants include: multiple agents, other classes of plans, or admit “knowing that”
operators (see e.g. (Fervari et al. 2017; Li and Wang 2021b)).
Other approaches, related to strategic games and coalitions,
have been studied in (Naumov and Tao 2018c,a,b). Finally,
the logic studied in (Areces et al. 2021) (called herein LU )
is based on a notion of indistinguishability over plans. Arguably, such a proposal provides a more epistemic view of
knowing how than other approaches.
Substantial progress has been already done related to
philosophical motivations, axiom systems and combinations
with other epistemic operators. However, much less contributions exist about the possibility to constraint plans (for
instance, by adding budgets), or to perform the modelchecking task (instead of checking theoremhood). These issues are addressed in this paper.

We investigate the complexity of the model-checking problem for a family of modal logics capturing the notion of
“knowing how”. We consider the most standard abilitybased knowing how logic, for which we show that modelchecking is PSpace-complete. By contrast, a multi-agent
variant based on an uncertainty relation between plans in
which uncertainty is encoded by a regular language, is shown
to admit a PTime model-checking problem. We extend with
budgets the above-mentioned ability-logics, as done for ATLlike logics. We show that for the former logic enriched with
budgets, the complexity increases to at least ExpSpacehardness, whereas for the latter, the PTime bound is preserved. Other variant logics are discussed along the paper.

Introduction
Knowing How Logics. The epistemic concept of “knowing how” has received considerable attention lately, as a new
way of providing formal foundations to strategic reasoning in AI and automated planning (see e.g., (van Ditmarsch
et al. 2015)). Most formalisations for this notion are based
on simple combinations of standard knowledge modalities
and abilities (Herzig and Troquard 2006; van der Hoek and
Lomuscio 2003). However, arguably, such an approach does
not lead to a proper characterisation of “knowing how”, as
discussed in (Herzig 2015; Jamroga and Ågotnes 2007).
In (Wang 2018b), a novel proposal to reason about “knowing how” assertions was introduced. The logic (herein written Lkh ) includes a goal-direct knowing how modality
Khpp, qq, indicating that “the agent knows how to achieve
the goal q, whenever the initial condition p holds”. As
stated in (Wang 2018b), there is an explicit intention to keep
the logical language neat and to introduce simple semantical structures, namely labelled directed graphs. The interpretation of the new modality is ability-based: the formula
Khpp, qq holds whenever there is a plan σ (understood as a
finite sequence of actions) such that from all the states satisfying p, the execution of σ leads only to states satisfying q;
and any partial execution of σ can be extended to a complete execution of σ (known as the strong executability condition, directly inspired from conformant planning (Smith

Our Motivations. The need to investigate knowing how
logics with constrained plans is advocated in (Li 2017,
Ch. 3). This is our first motivation to revisit results about
numerical constraints (i.e. budgets) and/or regularity constraints about plans, over this family of logics. Moreover,
it is more natural to investigate model-checking instead of
the validity/satisfiability problem, not only because it is a
standard problem in formal verification, but also because
the power of adding constraints is best illustrated there.
This is due to the fact that the available plans are part
of the input, and a few clever tricks cannot be used anymore, such as guessing simply shaped plans witnessing the
truth of a formula, see e.g. the completeness proofs in (Li
2017; Areces et al. 2021). Also, most of the works are
dedicated to Hilbert-style axiomatisation and to the satisfiability problem, and relatively little was done on modelchecking, apart from the works (Li, Yu, and Wang 2017;
Areces et al. 2021; Li and Wang 2021a). Since the semantics of such logics involve complex conditions such as strong
executability, PTime upper bounds seemed more difficult to

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6305

