The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Quantization-Aware Interval Bound Propagation for Training Certifiably Robust
Quantized Neural Networks
Mathias Lechner1 , Ðord̄e Žikelić2 , Krishnendu Chatterjee2 , Thomas A. Henzinger2 , Daniela Rus1
1

2

Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)
mlechner@mit.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of training and certifying adversarially
robust quantized neural networks (QNNs). Quantization is a
technique for making neural networks more efficient by running them using low-bit integer arithmetic and is therefore
commonly adopted in industry. Recent work has shown that
floating-point neural networks that have been verified to be
robust can become vulnerable to adversarial attacks after quantization, and certification of the quantized representation is
necessary to guarantee robustness. In this work, we present
quantization-aware interval bound propagation (QA-IBP), a
novel method for training robust QNNs. Inspired by advances
in robust learning of non-quantized networks, our training
algorithm computes the gradient of an abstract representation
of the actual network. Unlike existing approaches, our method
can handle the discrete semantics of QNNs. Based on QAIBP, we also develop a complete verification procedure for
verifying the adversarial robustness of QNNs, which is guaranteed to terminate and produce a correct answer. Compared
to existing approaches, the key advantage of our verification
procedure is that it runs entirely on GPU or other accelerator
devices. We demonstrate experimentally that our approach
significantly outperforms existing methods and establish the
new state-of-the-art for training and certifying the robustness
of QNNs.

Introduction
Quantized neural networks (QNNs) are neural networks that
represent their weights and compute their activations using
low-bit integer variables. QNNs significantly improve the latency and computational efficiency of inferencing the network
for two reasons. First, the reduced size of the weights and
activations allows for a much more efficient use of memory
bandwidth and caches. Second, integer arithmetic requires
less silicon area and less energy to execute than floatingpoint operations. Consequently, dedicated hardware for running QNNs can be found in GPUs, mobile phones, and autonomous driving computers.
Adversarial attacks are a well-known vulnerability of neural networks that raise concerns about their use in safetycritical applications (Szegedy et al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2014). These attacks are norm-bounded input
perturbations that make the network misclassify samples,
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14964

despite the original samples being classified correctly and
the perturbations being barely noticeable by humans. For
example, most modern image classification networks can
be fooled when changing each pixel value of the input image by a few percent. Consequently, researchers have tried
to train networks that are provably robust against such attacks. The two most common paradigms of training robust
networks are adversarial training (Madry et al. 2018), and
abstract interpretation-based training (Mirman, Gehr, and
Vechev 2018; Wong and Kolter 2018). Adversarial training
and its variations perturb the training samples with gradient
descent-based adversarial attacks before feeding them into
the network (Madry et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019; Wu, Xia,
and Wang 2020; Lechner et al. 2021). While this improves
the robustness of the trained network empirically, it provides
no formal guarantees of the network’s robustness due to the
incompleteness of gradient descent-based attacking methods, i.e., gradient descent might not find all attacks. Abstract
interpretation-based methods avoid this problem by overapproximating the behavior of the network in a forward pass
during training. In particular, instead of directly training the
network by computing gradients with respect to concrete samples, these algorithms compute gradients of bounds obtained
by propagating abstract domains. While the learning process
of abstract interpretation-based training is much less stable
than a standard training procedure, it provides formal guarantees about the network’s robustness. The interval bound
propagation (IBP) method (Gowal et al. 2019) effectively
showed that the learning process with abstract interpretation
can be stabilized when gradually increasing the size of the
abstract domains throughout the training process.
Previous work has considered adversarial training and IBP
for floating-point arithmetic neural networks, however robustness of QNNs has received comparatively much less attention. Since it was demonstrated by (Giacobbe, Henzinger,
and Lechner 2020) that neural networks may become vulnerable to adversarial attacks after quantization even if they
have been verified to be robust prior to quantization, one
must develop specialized training and verification procedures
in order to guarantee robustness of QNNs. Previous works
have proposed several robustness verification procedures for
QNNs (Giacobbe, Henzinger, and Lechner 2020; Baranowski
et al. 2020; Henzinger, Lechner, and Žikelić 2021), but none
of them consider algorithms for learning certifiably robust

