The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Sharing Pattern Submodels for Prediction with Missing Values
Lena Stempfle, Ashkan Panahi, Fredrik D. Johansson
Chalmers University of Technology
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Gothenburg, Sweden
stempfle@chalmers.se, ashkan.panahi@chalmers.se, fredrik.johansson@chalmers.se
24

Missingness mask, )

Abstract
Missing values are unavoidable in many applications of machine learning and present challenges both during training
and at test time. When variables are missing in recurring patterns, fitting separate pattern submodels have been proposed
as a solution. However, fitting models independently does not
make efficient use of all available data. Conversely, fitting a
single shared model to the full data set relies on imputation
which often leads to biased results when missingness depends
on unobserved factors. We propose an alternative approach,
called sharing pattern submodels, which i) makes predictions
that are robust to missing values at test time, ii) maintains
or improves the predictive power of pattern submodels, and
iii) has a short description, enabling improved interpretability.
Parameter sharing is enforced through sparsity-inducing regularization which we prove leads to consistent estimation. Finally, we give conditions for when a sharing model is optimal,
even when both missingness and the target outcome depend
on unobserved variables. Classification and regression experiments on synthetic and real-world data sets demonstrate that
our models achieve a favorable tradeoff between pattern specialization and information sharing.

1

Patient 1
Patient 2
Patient 3

Δ!

Patient 4
Patient 5
Patient 6

Δ#

Patient 7
Patient 8
Patient 9

!
New patient
Main model #" = % + Δ! " (

Δ$
Pattern specialization, Δ!

Figure 1: Coefficient sharing between a main model θ and
pattern submodels for three clinics with different patterns
in missing values. Without specialization, ∆m , an average
prediction shared by clinics with different patterns may not
lead to an optimal solution for any of them. Conversely, fitting separate models for each clinic does not use all of the
available data efficiently and leads to high variance.

Pattern missingness emerges in data generating processes
(DGPs) where there are structural reasons for which variables are measured—samples are grouped by recurring patterns of measured and missing variables (Little 1993). In
Figure 1, we illustrate an example of this when observing
patients from three different clinics, each systematically collecting slightly different measurements. Assume for simplicity that the pattern of missing values is unique to each clinic.
In this way, a pattern-specific model is also site-specific.
Pattern submodels have been proposed for this setting, fitting a separate model to samples from each pattern (Mercaldo and Blume 2020; Marshall et al. 2002). This solution
does not rely on imputation and can improve interpretability
over black-box methods (Rudin 2019), but can suffer from
high variance, especially when the number of distinct patterns is large and the number of samples for a given pattern
is small. Moreover, if the fitted models differ significantly
between patterns, it may be hard to compare or sanity-check
their predictions. Notably, pattern submodels disregard the
fact that the prediction task is shared between each pattern.
However, in the context of Figure 1, using a shared model
for all clinics may also be suboptimal if clinics take different measurements, or treat patients differently (high bias).
We propose the sharing pattern submodel (SPSM) in
which submodels for different missingness patterns share

Introduction

Machine learning models are often used in settings where
model inputs are partially missing either during training or
at the time of prediction (Rubin 1976). If not handled appropriately, missing values can lead to increased bias or to
models that are inapplicable in deployment without imputing the values of unobserved variables (Liu, Zachariah, and
Stoica 2020; Le Morvan et al. 2020a). When missingness is
dependent on unobserved factors that are related also to the
prediction target, the fact that a variable is unmeasured can
itself be predictive—so-called informative missingness (Rubin 1976; Marlin 2008). Often, imputation of missing values
is insufficient, and it can be beneficial to let models make
predictions based on both the partially observed data and
on indicators for which variables are missing (Jones 1996;
Groenwold et al. 2012). As mentioned in Le Morvan et al.
(2020b), even the linear model—the simplest of all regression models—has not yet been thoroughly investigated with
missing values and still reveals unexpected challenges.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9882

