The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Integer Subspace Differential Privacy
Prathamesh Dharangutte1 , Jie Gao1 , Ruobin Gong2 , Fang-Yi Yu3
1

Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University
2
Department of Statistics, Rutgers University
3
Department of Computer Science, George Mason University
{ptd39, jg1555, ruobin.gong}@rutgers.edu, fangyiyu@gmu.edu

Abstract

paramount importance to a myriad of data products by official statistical agencies. One of the prominent example is the
Disclosure Avoidance System (DAS) of the 2020 Decennial
Census of the United States. The Census Bureau is mandated
to observe a set of invariants for its decennial census data
products, such as its constitutional obligation to enumerate
state populations for the apportionment house seats. As the
decennial census data products are count data, the bureau
must ensure that the sanitized release are also integer-valued.
In addition, the bureau strives to maintain the consistency of
the data products with common knowledge to various degrees,
such as the the non-negativity of count data and possible logical relationships between different tabulated quantities. The
challenge thus remains: how to design sanitized data products
that respect the pre-specified constraints, while maintaining
rigorous privacy and good statistical properties? This is the
central problem we address in this paper.
Our contribution. In this paper, we develop the integer
subspace differential privacy scheme, through which we formulate and implement mathematically rigorous privacy mechanisms that meet the following utility objectives: 1) respecting
mandated invariants, 2) maintaining integral characteristics,
and 3) achieving good statistical properties including unbiasedness, accuracy, as well as probabilistic transparency
of the mechanism specification. Invariants not only restrict
the universe of databases of interest, but also partially destroys the relevance of neighbors, since databases differing
by precisely one entry may or may not meet the same invariants. To this end, we adapt the classical differential privacy
definition to incorporate invariant constraints with two modifications (i) we limit the comparison of databases only to
those that satisfy the same invariants, in a manner similar
to pufferfish privacy (Kifer and Machanavajjhala 2014); and
(ii) for databases that meet the same invariants, we use their
metric distance as a multiplicative factor to the privacy loss
parameter under the more general smooth differential privacy
framework (Chatzikokolakis et al. 2013; Desfontaines and
Pejó 2019). We show that integer subspace differential privacy preserves composition and post-processing properties.
To design a differential privacy mechanism that simultaneously respects invariants and integer requirement poses a
number of new challenges. For additive mechanisms, the perturbation noise vector needs to be limited to the “null space”
of the invariants so as not to violate the constraints. When

We propose new differential privacy solutions for when external invariants and integer constraints are simultaneously
enforced on the data product. These requirements arise in real
world applications of private data curation, including the public release of the 2020 U.S. Decennial Census. They pose a
great challenge to the production of provably private data products with adequate statistical usability. We propose integer subspace differential privacy to rigorously articulate the privacy
guarantee when data products maintain both the invariants
and integer characteristics, and demonstrate the composition
and post-processing properties of our proposal. To address the
challenge of sampling from a potentially highly restricted discrete space, we devise a pair of unbiased additive mechanisms,
the generalized Laplace and the generalized Gaussian mechanisms, by solving the Diophantine equations as defined by the
constraints. The proposed mechanisms have good accuracy,
with errors exhibiting sub-exponential and sub-Gaussian tail
probabilities respectively. To implement our proposal, we design an MCMC algorithm and supply empirical convergence
assessment using estimated upper bounds on the total variation
distance via L-lag coupling. We demonstrate the efficacy of
our proposal with applications to a synthetic problem with intersecting invariants, a sensitive contingency table with known
margins, and the 2010 Census county-level demonstration data
with mandated fixed state population totals.

1

Introduction

Motivation. Differential privacy (DP) is a formal mathematical framework that quantifies the extent to which an adversary
can learn about an individual from sanitized data products.
However, data curators may be mandated, by law or by policy,
to release sanitized data products that obey certain externally
determined constraints, in a manner that existing differential
privacy solutions are not designed to address. Two challenging types of constraints are invariants (Ashmead et al. 2019),
which are exact statistics calculated from the confidential
data (such as sum, margins of a contingency table, etc), and
integer characteristics, pertaining to data of count nature. The
challenge is exacerbated when the sanitized data product is
required to respect both.
Data privatization that simultaneously satisfies mandated invariants and preserves integral characteristics is of
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7349

