The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Heuristic Search for Multi-Objective Probabilistic Planning
Dillon Z. Chen1 , Felipe Trevizan1 , Sylvie Thiébaux1,2
1

School of Computing, The Australian National University
2
LAAS-CNRS, ANITI, Université de Toulouse
{Dillon.Chen, Felipe.Trevizan, Sylvie.Thiebaux}@anu.edu.au

Abstract

Therefore, this paper focuses on heuristic search methods which explore only a small fraction of the state space
when guided with informative heuristics. Heuristic search
has been successfully applied to a range of optimal planning settings, including single objective (SO) or constrained
SSPs (Hansen and Zilberstein 2001; Bonet and Geffner
2003; Trevizan et al. 2017), and MO deterministic planning (Mandow and Pérez-de-la-Cruz 2010; Khouadjia et al.
2013; Ulloa et al. 2020). Moreover, a technical report by
Bryce et al. (2007) advocated the need for heuristic search
and outlined an extension of LAO* (Hansen and Zilberstein
2001) for finite horizon problems involving multiple objectives and partial observability. Convex Hull Monte-Carlo
Tree-Search (Painter, Lacerda, and Hawes 2020) extends the
Trial-Based Heuristic Tree Search framework (Keller and
Helmert 2013) to the MO setting but applies only to finitehorizon MOMDPs. Yet to the best of our knowledge there is
no investigation of heuristic search for MOSSPs.

Heuristic search is a powerful approach that has successfully
been applied to a broad class of planning problems, including
classical planning, multi-objective planning, and probabilistic
planning modelled as a stochastic shortest path (SSP) problem. Here, we extend the reach of heuristic search to a more
expressive class of problems, namely multi-objective stochastic shortest paths (MOSSPs), which require computing a coverage set of non-dominated policies. We design new heuristic
search algorithms MOLAO* and MOLRTDP, which extend
well-known SSP algorithms to the multi-objective case. We
further construct a spectrum of domain-independent heuristic functions differing in their ability to take into account
the stochastic and multi-objective features of the problem to
guide the search. Our experiments demonstrate the benefits
of these algorithms and the relative merits of the heuristics.

1

Introduction

Stochastic shortest path problems (SSPs) are the de facto
model for planning under uncertainty. Solving an SSP involves computing a policy which maps states to actions so
as to minimise the expected (scalar) cost to reach the goal
from a given initial state. Multi-objective stochastic shortest path problems (MOSSPs) are a useful generalisation of
SSPs where multiple objectives (e.g. time, fuel, risk) need to
be optimised without the user being able to a priori weigh
these objectives against each other (Roijers and Whiteson
2017). In this more complex case, we now aim to compute
a set of non-dominated policies whose vector-valued costs
represent all the possible trade-offs between the objectives.
There exist two approaches to solving MOMDPs (Roijers and Whiteson 2017), a special case of MOSSPs: inner
loop planning which consists in extending SSP solvers by
generalising single objective operators to the multi-objective
(MO) case, and outer loop planning which consists in solving a scalarised MOSSP multiple times with an SSP solver.
We focus on the former. The canonical inner loop method,
MO Value Iteration (MOVI) (White 1982) and its variants
(Wiering and de Jong 2007; Barrett and Narayanan 2008;
Roijers and Whiteson 2017), require enumerating the entire
state space of the problem and are unable to scale to the huge
state spaces typically found in automated planning.

This paper fills this gap in heuristic search for MOSSPs.
First, we characterise the necessary conditions for MOVI to
converge in the general case of MOSSPs. We then extend the
well-known SSP heuristic search algorithms LAO* (Hansen
and Zilberstein 2001) and LRTDP (Bonet and Geffner 2003)
to the multi-objective case, leading to two new MOSSP algorithms, MOLAO* and MOLRTDP, which we describe
along with sufficient conditions for their convergence. We
also consider the problem of guiding the search of these algorithms with domain-independent heuristics. A plethora of
domain-independent heuristics exist for classical planning,
but works on constructing heuristics for (single objective)
probabilistic or multi-objective (deterministic) planning are
much more recent (Trevizan, Thiébaux, and Haslum 2017;
Klößner and Hoffmann 2021; Geißer et al. 2022). Building
on these recent works, we investigate a spectrum of heuristics for MOSSPs differing in their ability to account for the
probabilistic and multi-objective features of the problem.
Finally, we conduct an experimental comparison of these
algorithms and of the guidance obtained via these heuristics.
We observe the superiority of heuristic search over value iteration methods for MOSSPs, and of heuristics that are able
to account for the tradeoffs between competing objectives.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11945

