The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Alternating Layered Variational Quantum Circuits Can Be Classically Optimized
Efficiently Using Classical Shadows
Afrad Basheer* , Yuan Feng, Christopher Ferrie, Sanjiang Li
Centre for Quantum Software and Information, University of Technology Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia
Afrad.M.Basheer@student.uts.edu.au, {Yuan.Feng, Christopher.Ferrie, Sanjiang.Li}@uts.edu.au

Abstract

fixed architecture. An ansatz is analogous to a classical NN
layer, and a VQA uses ansatzes that have the same architecture and differ only in selections of parameters. Many
different ansatzes have been proposed in the literature. Popular choices include the Hardware Efficient Ansatz (Kandala et al. 2017), Quantum Alternating Operator Ansatz
(QAOA) (Hadfield et al. 2019), etc.
Similar to classical NNs, recent works show that VQAs
also have the problem of trainability. Indeed, vanishing gradients, also called barren plateaus, were first theoretically
demonstrated for deep PQCs by McClean et al. (2018) and
then for shallow PQCs by Cerezo et al. (2021b). We may
need to impose restrictions on the ansatz and/or the cost
function to avoid this barren plateaus issue. One such solution is proposed by Cerezo et al. (2021b) using the alternating layered ansatz, which has a brick-like structure
and its two-qubit gates act on alternating pairs of neighboring qubits (see Fig. 1 for a simple example). It is proved
that barren plateaus can be avoided for alternating layered
VQAs provided that the depth of the PQC is O(log n),
where n is the number of qubits, and the cost function is
defined with local observables. Surprisingly, Nakaji and Yamamoto (2021) recently proved that the shallow alternating
layered ansatz is almost as expressive as the Hardware Efficient Ansatz. Thus the alternating layered ansatz is both
expressive and trainable. In addition, this ansatz has been
investigated or implemented in works such as Hinsche et al.
(2021), Wu et al. (2021), Arrasmith et al. (2021), Slattery,
Villalonga, and Clark (2022). In particular, Cerezo et al.
(2021b) has shown that quantum autoencoders can be optimized without any barren plateaus for up to 100 qubits using
the alternating layered ansatz.
This work introduces a training algorithm with an exponential improvement in the number of copies of input states
consumed during training an alternating layered VQA with
shallow depth and local observables, where, and in the remainder of this paper, the number of copies of the input
state equals the number of executions of the quantum device.
The reason is, during each execution, we have to measure
the quantum systems which inevitably destroy the quantum
states. Thus a fresh copy of the input state is needed for each
iteration. Moreover, the training can be done entirely on a
classical computer efficiently (with computational cost depending only polynomially on n) without the need to imple-

Variational quantum algorithms (VQAs) are the quantum
analog of classical neural networks (NNs). A VQA consists
of a parameterized quantum circuit (PQC) which is composed
of multiple layers of ansatzes (simpler PQCs, which are an
analogy of NN layers) that differ only in selections of parameters. Previous work has identified the alternating layered
ansatz as potentially a new standard ansatz in near-term quantum computing. Indeed, shallow alternating layered VQAs
are easy to implement and have been shown to be both trainable and expressive. In this work, we introduce a training
algorithm with an exponential reduction in training cost of
such VQAs. Moreover, our algorithm uses classical shadows
of quantum input data, and can hence be run on a classical
computer with rigorous performance guarantees. We demonstrate 2–3 orders of magnitude improvement in the training
cost using our algorithm for the example problems of finding
state preparation circuits and the quantum autoencoder.

Introduction
The past several years have seen tremendous progress in
quantum hardware and one of the state-of-the-art quantum
processors—IBM Osprey—now has 433 qubits (Gambetta
2022). However, it is widely believed that general-purpose
fault-tolerant quantum computers are unlikely to happen
soon. With a limited number of (noisy) qubits and nonperfect gates, near-term quantum devices like IBM Osprey
can only run quantum circuits with small depth. One may
wonder if quantum advantage can still be demonstrated in
practical applications using these near-term quantum devices. Variational Quantum Algorithms (VQAs) are the most
promising proposal for this purpose. VQAs encode a task
in a parametrized quantum circuit (PQC), evaluate it using
a near-term quantum computer, and optimize the parameters with a classical optimizer. For almost all applications
for which quantum computers are desired, VQAs have been
proposed. We refer the readers to Cerezo et al. (2021a) for
an excellent survey of VQAs.
VQAs can be regarded as the quantum analog of classical neural networks (NNs). A VQA is composed of multiple layers of ansatzes, which are smaller PQCs with a
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6770

