The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Deep Digging into the Generalization of Self-Supervised Monocular Depth
Estimation
Jinwoo Bae1 , Sungho Moon1 , and Sunghoon Im1
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, DGIST, Daegu, Korea
{sjg02122, byeol3325, sunghoonim}@dgist.ac.kr

Abstract

representation, recent researches (Geirhos et al. 2019; Morrison et al. 2021; Tuli et al. 2021) have revealed that CNNs
are strongly biased towards recognizing textures rather than
shapes. CNN-based models rationally classify labels even in
images with disrupted shape structures (Gatys, Ecker, and
Bethge 2017; Brendel and Bethge 2019). On the other hand,
CNN models fail to predict labels correctly in a textureremoved image whose shape is well-preserved (Ballester
and Araujo 2016).
Then, how does this observation affect the monocular
depth estimation task? Over the past decade, monocular
depth estimation has made significant progress using CNNs
(Xiong et al. 2021; Yin and Shi 2018; Zhou et al. 2021;
Godard et al. 2019; Guizilini et al. 2020a; Casser et al.
2019). These works show the remarkable performance on
the KITTI datasets (Geiger et al. 2013) even with the
model trained in a self-supervised manner. However, the
experiments have been conducted on only a few driving
scenes, mostly KITTI datasets, so the generality of these
methods has not been closely studied. In this paper, we
study the generalization performance of the state-of-theart methods and investigate how texture-biased representation from CNNs affects monocular depth estimation. We
evaluate state-of-the-art models trained on KITTI using six
public depth datasets (SUN3D, RGBD, MVS, Scenes11,
ETH3D, and Oxford Robotcar). We also conduct experiments on three different texture-shifted datasets including
texture-smoothed (Watercolor), textureless (Pencil-sketch),
and texture-transferred (Style-transfer) images. Through
these extensive experiments, we determine that texturebiased models are vulnerable to generality in monocular
depth estimation.
Recently, Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) have received a surge of attention for their outstanding performance
in the field of computer vision (Carion et al. 2020), despite
the lack of a spatial locality bias. Moreover, several works
(Zhang et al. 2022; Morrison et al. 2021; Park and Kim
2022) show that Transformers have a strong shape bias, unlike CNNs. We also investigate the Transformers, similar
to the experiments conducted for CNNs, and observe that
shape bias is key to generalize depth estimation. Thus, we
propose a CNN-Transformer hybrid network, called MonoFormer, which are highly complementary to each other. The
design intuition behind MonoFormer is to take the strong

Self-supervised monocular depth estimation has been widely
studied recently. Most of the work has focused on improving performance on benchmark datasets, such as KITTI,
but has offered a few experiments on generalization performance. In this paper, we investigate the backbone networks (e.g. CNNs, Transformers, and CNN-Transformer hybrid models) toward the generalization of monocular depth
estimation. We first evaluate state-of-the-art models on diverse public datasets, which have never been seen during the
network training. Next, we investigate the effects of texturebiased and shape-biased representations using the various
texture-shifted datasets that we generated. We observe that
Transformers exhibit a strong shape bias and CNNs do a
strong texture-bias. We also find that shape-biased models
show better generalization performance for monocular depth
estimation compared to texture-biased models. Based on
these observations, we newly design a CNN-Transformer hybrid network with a multi-level adaptive feature fusion module, called MonoFormer. The design intuition behind MonoFormer is to increase shape bias by employing Transformers while compensating for the weak locality bias of Transformers by adaptively fusing multi-level representations. Extensive experiments show that the proposed method achieves
state-of-the-art performance with various public datasets. Our
method also shows the best generalization ability among the
competitive methods.

1

Introduction

How do humans efficiently extract and recognize essential
information from complex scenes? The biological vision
system treats the object’s shape as the single most crucial
vision cue, compared with other cues like texture or color
(Landau, Smith, and Jones 1988). This enables humans,
even small children, to easily recognize an object from a line
drawing or a silhouette image. It is widely known that convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are designed with inspiration from the biological neural networks in living organisms (Hubel and Wiesel 1959; Fukushima 1988; Kriegeskorte 2015). CNNs extract the simple patterns (e.g. edges)
and then build complex patterns by successively composing
early neural responses. However, in contrast to human visual
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

187

