The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Store and Fetch Immediately: Everything Is All You Need for
Space-Time Video Super-resolution
Mengshun Hu1 * , Kui Jiang2 * , Zhixiang Nie1 , Jiahuan Zhou3 , Zheng Wang1†
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
Huawei Technologies, Cloud BU
3
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
{shunmh, niezhixiang, wangzwhu}@whu.edu.cn, jiangkui5@huawei.com, jiahuanzhou@pku.edu.cn
Abstract
Existing space-time video super-resolution (ST-VSR) methods fail to achieve high-quality reconstruction since they fail
to fully explore the spatial-temporal correlations, long-range
components in particular. Although the recurrent structure for
ST-VSR adopts bidirectional propagation to aggregate information from the entire video, collecting the temporal information between the past and future via one-stage representations inevitably loses the long-range relations. To alleviate the limitation, this paper proposes an immediate storeand-fetch network to promote long-range correlation learning, where the stored information from the past and future
can be refetched to help the representation of the current
frame. Specifically, the proposed network consists of two
modules: a backward recurrent module (BRM) and a forward recurrent module (FRM). The former first performs
backward inference from future to past, while storing future
super-resolution (SR) information for each frame. Following
that, the latter performs forward inference from past to future to super-resolve all frames, while storing past SR information for each frame. Since FRM inherits SR information
from BRM, therefore, spatial and temporal information from
the entire video sequence is immediately stored and fetched,
which allows drastic improvement for ST-VSR. Extensive experiments both on ST-VSR and space video super-resolution
(S-VSR) as well as time video super-resolution (T-VSR) have
demonstrated the effectiveness of our proposed method over
other state-of-the-art methods on public datasets.

Frame39

Frame40

Frame41

Frame42

Frame43

Frame44

Frame45

Frame46

Figure 1: input frames from Vid4 (Liu and Sun 2011) have
different characteristics for supplement each other.

To tackle ST-VSR task, as illustrated in Figure 2, the advanced ST-VSR methods are roughly divided into three categories: two-stage, one-stage and compact one-stage based
methods. The first category tries to decompose the ST-VSR
task into two sub-tasks: space video super-resolution (SVSR) and time video super-resolution (T-VSR), which independently and sequentially performs on LR and LFR videos,
to increase the spatial resolution (Zhang et al. 2018; Haris,
Shakhnarovich, and Ukita 2018, 2019; Wang et al. 2019)
and frame rates (Jiang et al. 2018; Niklaus, Mai, and Liu
2017; Bao et al. 2019; Choi et al. 2020) on image space and
vice versa. However, these methods barely consider the inherent spatial-temporal correlations (Haris, Shakhnarovich,
and Ukita 2020; Hu et al. 2022a) due to the individual processing of these two sub-tasks. Consequently, they are far
from producing satisfactory results, shown in Figure 2(a).
To alleviate this issue, as shown in Figure 2(b), one-stage
based methods explore spatial-temporal correlations by integrating S-VSR and T-VSR tasks into a unified framework
for the joint optimization (Xiang et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2021).
However, researchers in this line still separate out S-VSR
and T-VSR tasks on feature space, which fails to fully utilize spatial-temporal correlations of these two sub-tasks for
ST-VSR (Hu et al. 2022a; Zhou et al. 2021). Unlike the
one-stage based methods, compact one-stage based methods
shown in Figure 2(c), propose to simultaneously increase

Introduction
Space-time video super-resolution (ST-VSR), aiming to
generate the high-resolution (HR) and high-frame-rate
(HFR) photo-realistic video sequences from the given low
resolution (LR) and low-frame-rate (LFR) inputs, gradually
becomes the research hotspot in computer vision and machine learning communities (Kim, Oh, and Kim 2020). In
practice, ST-VSR technologies are widely applied to the
movie production (Xu et al. 2021; Haris, Shakhnarovich,
and Ukita 2020), high-definition television upgrades (Kang
et al. 2020) and video compression (Xiang et al. 2020), etc.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

863

