The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improving Distantly Supervised Relation Extraction by
Natural Language Inference
Kang Zhou, Qiao Qiao, Yuepei Li, Qi Li
Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA
{kangzhou, qqiao1, liyp0095, qli}@iastate.edu

Abstract
To reduce human annotations for relation extraction (RE)
tasks, distantly supervised approaches have been proposed,
while struggling with low performance. In this work, we propose a novel DSRE-NLI framework, which considers both
distant supervision from existing knowledge bases and indirect supervision from pretrained language models for other
tasks. DSRE-NLI energizes an off-the-shelf natural language
inference (NLI) engine with a semi-automatic relation verbalization (SARV) mechanism to provide indirect supervision and further consolidates the distant annotations to benefit multi-classification RE models. The NLI-based indirect
supervision acquires only one relation verbalization template from humans as a semantically general template for
each relationship, and then the template set is enriched by
high-quality textual patterns automatically mined from the
distantly annotated corpus. With two simple and effective
data consolidation strategies, the quality of training data
is substantially improved. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed framework significantly improves
the SOTA performance (up to 7.73% of F1) on distantly supervised RE benchmark datasets. Our code is available at
https://github.com/kangISU/DSRE-NLI.

1

Figure 1: Annotation examples of distant supervision (DS)
and indirect supervision (IS) for relation founders.

et al. 2019; Jia et al. 2019). A commonly adopted distant
annotation process for RE tasks is that if two entities participate in a relationship in the knowledge base, then all sentences in the training corpus with these two entities are labeled as positive examples of that relation (Mintz et al. 2009;
Riedel, Yao, and McCallum 2010).
Distantly supervised methods usually face high label
noise in training data due to the annotation process, since
not all sentences with the entity pair express the relationship. Figure 1 shows some examples of distant annotations
for the founders relationship. Since Akio Morita and
Sony have the founders relationship in the knowledge
base, all sentences with the two entities are labeled as positive, introducing the false positive problem (Sentence 3). On
the other hand, due to the limited coverage of the knowledge base, Sentence 5 is labeled as negative, introducing the
false negative problem. Therefore, existing distantly supervised methods are proposed to tackle the noise in training
data (Ma et al. 2021; Jia et al. 2019; Zheng et al. 2019; Lin
et al. 2016; Zeng et al. 2015).
Recently, indirectly supervised methods have taken advantage of pretrained models for other NLP tasks to
solve RE tasks in the zero-shot setting. For example, RE
tasks have been reformulated as question answering problems (Levy et al. 2017), as natural language inference (NLI)
tasks (Obamuyide and Vlachos 2018; Sainz et al. 2021),
and as text summarization tasks (Lu et al. 2022). Performance in the zero-shot setting, however, still has a significant gap, and highly relies on the quality and diversity of
relation paraphrase templates. For example, we apply the
NLI-based method (Sainz et al. 2021) with a relation verbalization template {subj} was founded by {obj}

Introduction

Relation extraction (RE) has been studied intensively in the
past years (Zhou and Chen 2021; Zhang et al. 2017; Zelenko, Aone, and Richardella 2003). It aims to extract the
relations among entities from text and plays an important
role in various natural language processing (NLP) tasks such
as knowledge graph construction (Distiawan et al. 2019),
question answering (Yu et al. 2017), and text summarization (Hachey 2009). In this paper, we define the RE task as
identifying the pre-defined relation for a pair of entity mentions in a given sentence.
Due to the cost of human annotations for RE tasks, researchers have been trying to develop alternative approaches
without requiring human annotations. Specially, two practically appealing learning strategies have shown promising results: distantly supervised learning using large noisy training
data and zero-shot learning using indirect supervision.
Distant supervision acquires massive annotations using
existing in-domain knowledge bases (Ma et al. 2021; Zheng
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14047

