The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

REMIT: Reinforced Multi-Interest Transfer for Cross-Domain Recommendation
Caiqi Sun1 , Jiewei Gu1,2 * , BinBin Hu1 , Xin Dong1 , Hai Li1 , Lei Cheng1 , Linjian Mo1
1

Ant Group
School of Data Science, Fudan University
{caiqi.scq, gujiewei.gjw, bin.hbb, zhaoxin.dx, tianshu.lh, lei.chenglei, linyi01}@antgroup.com
2

Abstract
Cold-start problem is one of the most challenging problems for recommender systems. One promising solution to
this problem is cross-domain recommendation (CDR) which
leverages rich information from an auxiliary source domain
to improve the performance of recommender system in the
target domain. In particular, the family of embedding and
mapping methods for CDR is very effective, which explicitly
learns a mapping function from source embeddings to target
embeddings to transfer users’ preferences. Recent works usually transfer an overall source embedding by modeling a common or personalized preference bridge for all users. However,
a unified user embedding cannot reflect the user’s multiple
interests in the auxiliary source domain. In this paper, we
propose a novel framework called REinforced Multi-Interest
Transfer for CDR (REMIT). Specifically, we first construct
a heterogeneous information network and employ different
meta-path based aggregations to get users’ multiple interests
in the source domain, then transform different interest embeddings with different meta-generated personalized bridge
functions for each user. To better coordinate the transformed
user interest embeddings and the item embedding in the target domain, we systematically develop a reinforced method to
dynamically assign weights to transformed interests for different training instances and optimize the performance of the
target model. In addition, the REMIT is a general framework
that can be applied upon various base models in the target domain. Our extensive experimental results on large real-world
datasets demonstrate the superior performance and compatibility of REMIT.

Figure 1: (a) gives an example of HIN. (b) plots user embeddings learned from meta-path uiu(purple), uiciu(green), and
uibiu(orange), which capture users’ interests.

target domain. To address the problem, the Embedding and
Mapping approach for CDR (EMCDR) (Man et al. 2017) is
very effective, which encodes users’ preferences of source
and target domains on items into two embeddings, respectively, and then explicitly learns a bridge function from
source embedding to target embedding with overlapping
users. With the advantage of EMCDR, many bridge-based
approaches (Kang et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2020, 2022) have
been proposed. For these methods, the key is to bridge users’
preferences in the source domain and the target domain, also
called preference transfer (Zhao et al. 2020). However, these
methods give an overall source embedding for each user,
which is hard to represent multiple interests in the source
domain.
More recently, Heterogeneous Information Networks
(HIN) (Shi et al. 2016) have been leveraged to enrich useritem interactions with complementary heterogeneous information. As shown in Figure 1(a), a toy HIN can be constructed for movie recommendation, which captures how the
items(movies) are related with each other via brand(actors)
and category(genres). On the HIN, higher-order graph structures like meta-paths (Sun et al. 2011), a relation sequence
connecting two objects, can effectively capture users’ interests. For instance, the meta-path user–item–brand–itemuser(uibiu) incorporates movies starring the same actor as a
facet of user preferences, which makes sense since the user
might be a fan of an actor and prefers most movies played by
the actor. Given different meta-paths, we can obtain multiple

Introduction
Recommender systems have been widely applied to many
online services such as e-commerce, advertising, and social
media to perform personalized information filtering (Covington, Adams, and Sargin 2016; Sun et al. 2022). However,
most of these recommender systems are hard to provide satisfying recommendations for newly joining users and newly
arriving items, forming the so-called cold-start problem.
Cross-domain recommendation (CDR) is a promising solution to address the cold-start problem, which aims to transfer knowledge from an informative source domain to the
* Work is done during internship at Ant Group.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9900

