The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Spearman Rank Correlation Screening for Ultrahigh-Dimensional Censored Data
Hongni Wang1 * , Jingxin Yan2 * , Xiaodong Yan345†
1

School of Statistics and Mathematics, Shandong University of Finance and Economics
2
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Zhongtai Securities Institute for Financial Studies, Shandong University
4
Shandong Province Key Laboratory of Financial Risk
5
Shandong National Center for Applied Mathematics
wanghongnisd@126.com, yanjingxin22@mails.ucas.ac.cn, yanxiaodong@sdu.edu.cn
Abstract

(SIS) for linear regression (Fan and Lv 2008), a maximummarginal-likelihood (MML) approach for generalized linear models (Fan and Song 2010), a nonparametric feature
screening method for missing response (Li et al. 2020),
a nonparametric independence screening (NIS) for additive models (Fan, Feng, and Song 2011), partially linear
models with missing responses (Tang, Xia, and Yan 2019),
and marginal empirical-likelihood screening (ELS) for linear regression (Chang, Tang, and Wu 2013). Model-free
feature-screening methods have been developed to overcome the limitation variable above models. These include
sure independent ranking and screening (SIRS) (Zhu et al.
2011), rank-correlation screening (RCS) (Li et al. 2012),
distance correlation screening (DCS) (Li, Zhong, and Zhu
2012; Chen, Chen, and Liu 2019), category-adaptive variable screening (Xie et al. 2020), quantile-adaptive screening (QAS) (He, Wang, and Hong 2013), fused Kolmogorov
filter screening (FKFS) (Mai and Zou 2015), conditional
quantile screening (CQS) (Wu and Yin 2015), and the fused
mean-variance (FMV) filter (Yan et al. 2018). Rank correlation can characterize the nonlinear relationship between two
variables.
However, the aforementioned screening procedures proposed a complete response failure in performing well for
the censored model because it cannot be estimated reliably. In particular, the performance will be dramatically
decreased under a high censoring rate or in the existence
of outliers in the predictors. Furthermore, several emerging
feature-screening procedures have been proposed for censored responses. The existing model-based screening methods mainly focus on the Cox model. These include the lassopenalization approach for prescreening (Tibshirani 1997),
the standardized-marginal-maximum partial-likelihood estimators (Zhao and Li 2012), and the marginal-sureindependence-screening procedure (Fan and Song 2010).
However, model-free screening methods with a censored
response, such as the censored quantile-adaptive screening procedure (He, Wang, and Hong 2013), the censoredrank-correlation screening (RCScen ) procedure with inverse probability-of-censoring weighted as Kendall’s τ
(Song et al. 2014), the conditional-quantile screening
(CQScen ) procedure for a covariate-independent censoring method (Wu and Yin 2015), the adjusted-distancecorrelation screening procedure (DCScen ) (Chen, Chen, and

Herein, we propose a Spearman rank correlation based
screening procedure for ultrahigh-dimensional data with censored response cases. The proposed method is model-free
without specifying any regression forms of predictors or response variables and is robust under the unknown monotone
transformations of these response variables and predictors.
The sure-screening and rank-consistency properties are established under some mild regularity conditions. Simulation
studies demonstrate that the new screening method performs
well in the presence of a heavy-tailed distribution, strongly
dependent predictors or outliers, and offers superior performance over the existing nonparametric screening procedures.
In particular, the new screening method works well when a
response variable is observed under a high censoring rate. An
illustrative example is provided.

Introduction
Ultrahigh-dimensional covariates are often encountered in
many fields of study, e.g., mechanical systems; genetic engineering (Zhou et al. 2021), and biomedical engineering. Under the “larger p smaller n” data framework, numerous penalized variable selection approaches have been developed
for high-dimensional Cox model (Zhang and Lu 2007; Zou
2008), additive hazard model (Chen and Cai 2018; Leng
and Ma 2007; Martinussen and Scheike 2009; Lin and Lv
2013), linear regression model (Huang, Horowitz, and Ma
2008; Wang et al. 2008) and unconditional moment model
(Tang, Yan, and Zhao 2018). However, the aforementioned
variable selection methods may not perform well because of
the simultaneous challenges of computational expediency,
statistical accuracy, sophisticated algorithm techniques and
strong model assumptions (Fan, Samworth, and Wu 2009;
Tang, Yan, and Zhao 2018). Therefore, developing new approaches to deal with ultrahigh-dimensional censored data
is necessary and urgent.
Emerging feature screening approaches have recently
been developed for a complete response with ultrahighdimensional covariates. The existing model-based featurescreening methods include sure independence screening
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10104

