The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Diverse, Relevant and Coherent Open-Domain Dialogue Generation via
Hybrid Latent Variables
Bin Sun1 , Yitong Li2,3 , Fei Mi2 , Weichao Wang2 , Yiwei Li1 , Kan Li1
1

School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Huawei Technologies Ltd.
{binsun,liyiwei,likan}@bit.edu.cn, {liyitong3,mifei2,wangweichao9}@huawei.com
Abstract
Conditional variational models, using either continuous or
discrete latent variables, are powerful for open-domain dialogue response generation. However, previous works show
that continuous latent variables tend to reduce the coherence
of generated responses. In this paper, we also found that discrete latent variables have difficulty capturing more diverse
expressions. To tackle these problems, we combine the merits
of both continuous and discrete latent variables and propose
a Hybrid Latent Variable (HLV) method. Specifically, HLV
constrains the global semantics of responses through discrete
latent variables and enriches responses with continuous latent
variables. Thus, we diversify the generated responses while
maintaining relevance and coherence. In addition, we propose Conditional Hybrid Variational Transformer (CHVT)
to construct and to utilize HLV with transformers for dialogue generation. Through fine-grained symbolic-level semantic information and additive Gaussian mixing, we construct the distribution of continuous variables, prompting the
generation of diverse expressions. Meanwhile, to maintain
the relevance and coherence, the discrete latent variable is
optimized by self-separation training. Experimental results
on two dialogue generation datasets (DailyDialog and
Opensubtitles) show that CHVT is superior to traditional transformer-based variational mechanism w.r.t. diversity, relevance and coherence metrics. Moreover, we also
demonstrate the benefit of applying HLV to fine-tuning two
pre-trained dialogue models (PLATO and BART-base).1

Context:
It’s rainy,
let’s go to eat hotpot!

Response 1: Ok, I love hotpot very much.
Response 2:What are you
talking about?
Response 3:No, I want to lose
weight.

(a) Continuous Latent Variables
Response 1: “Spider-man”, very
much.
Context:
Response 2:I really like watching
What’s your
comedies, like Friends.
favorite movie?
Response 3:What about you? Tell
me first.
(b) Discrete Latent Variables

Figure 1: A schematic representation of the continuous and
discrete latent variables.

from the perspective of their construction methods. Continuous latent variable models (Bowman et al. 2016; Zhao,
Zhao, and Eskénazi 2017; Chen et al. 2018; Gu et al. 2019;
Wang et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022) encode dialogue contexts and responses into a continuous latent space to capture diverse semantic features of dialogue
responses. In contrast, discrete latent variable models (Gao
et al. 2019a; Bao et al. 2020, 2021) design a fixed number of
learnable parameters to better capture the semantic relationship between responses and contexts. However, continuous
latent variables often face poor semantic correlation problem, where latent variables may not accurately reflect the semantics of the dialogue context (Gao et al. 2019b; Sun et al.
2021). While discrete latent variables are difficult to capture
fine-grained and diverse expressions due to the limitation of
their variable scale (demonstrated in §).
To tackle the aforementioned problems, we propose to
construct Hybrid Latent Variables (HLV). HLV employs discrete latent variables to constrain the semantic relevance
and uses the diverse features learned by continuous latent
variables to enrich the expressions of generated responses.
To capture richer semantic information, we compliment
the commonly used sentence-level continuous latent variables constructed by [CLS] (Lin et al. 2020) with multiple
token-level representations. More specifically, we first create

Introduction
In recent years, great efforts have been devoted to the task of
response generation in open domain dialogue. However, due
to the one-to-many and many-to-one phenomena (Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014; Csaky, Purgai, and Recski 2019), generative dialogue models often failed to generate diverse, relevant and coherent responses. Many existing methods (Bowman et al. 2016; Zhao, Zhao, and Eskénazi 2017; Chen et al.
2018; Gu et al. 2019; Gao et al. 2019a; Bao et al. 2020; Lin
et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021; Chen et al.
2022) introduce latent variables to alleviate these problems.
As shown in Figure 1, latent variables can be categorized
into continuous latent variables and discrete latent variables
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
A full version is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.01145.

13600

