The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Implicit Stochastic Gradient Descent for Training Physics-Informed Neural
Networks
Ye Li, Song-Can Chen, Sheng-Jun Huang
College of Computer Science and Technology/Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Nanjing, China
yeli20@nuaa.edu.cn, s.chen@nuaa.edu.cn, huangsj@nuaa.edu.cn

stay close to a function {θ(tn )}∞
n=0 where tn = nα. Variants based on GD/SGD, such as AdaGrad (Duchi, Hazan,
and Singer 2011), RMSMprop (Tieleman and Hinton 2012),
and Adam (Kingma and Ba 2014), have been developed in
recent years.
Despite its numerous successes in practical optimization
tasks such as optimizing deep neural networks, GD/SGD
may suffer from numerical instability in some key hyperparameters, such as the learning rate and batch size. For
example, if the learning rate is misspecified, GD/SGD may
numerically diverge, and the model training fails. The main
reason is the stiffness in the gradient flow dynamics. Typically, the gradient flow dynamics is called a stiff ODE when
the gap between the maximum and minimum eigenvalues
of the Hessian matrix is large (Wang, Teng, and Perdikaris
2021). We can simply perform a linearization for the gradient flow (2) and obtain

Abstract
Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) have effectively
been demonstrated in solving forward and inverse differential equation problems, but they are still trapped in training
failures when the target functions to be approximated exhibit
high-frequency or multi-scale features. In this paper, we propose to employ implicit stochastic gradient descent (ISGD)
method to train PINNs for improving the stability of training
process. We heuristically analyze how ISGD overcome stiffness in the gradient flow dynamics of PINNs, especially for
problems with multi-scale solutions. We theoretically prove
that for two-layer fully connected neural networks with large
hidden nodes, randomly initialized ISGD converges to a globally optimal solution for the quadratic loss function. Empirical results demonstrate that ISGD works well in practice
and compares favorably to other gradient-based optimization
methods such as SGD and Adam, while can also effectively
address the numerical stiffness in training dynamics via gradient descent.

d
θ̃(t) = −∇2θ L(θ̃(t)) · θ̃(t).
dt

Introduction

The largest eigenvalue of the Hessian dictates the fastest
time-scale of the ODEs. In the language of numerical analysis, to ensure the numerical stability of GD, we need α ≤
2/λmax (∇2θ L(θ)), where λmax (∇2θ L(θ)) is the maximum
eigenvalue of the Hessian matrix (Butcher 2016).
From the theory of numerical analysis, GD/SGD is not
suitable for stiff ODEs, because a very small learning rate
and very large number of iterations are required to maintain numerical stability. One of the outstanding first-order
solvers with strong stability for stiff ODEs is the implicit
(backward) Euler method:

Gradient descent (GD) and practical stochastic gradient descent with mini-batch gradients (SGD) are widely used optimization algorithms, especially in optimizing deep neural networks. Formally, the goal of optimization is to find
a weight vector θ̂ in parameter space Rm that minimizes a
loss L(θ). The GD algorithm is the updating procedure of
model weights in the direction of the steepest loss gradient:
θn+1 = θn − α · ∇L(θn ),

(1)

where α is the learning rate. The SGD replaces the gradient ∇L(θ) with a mini-batch gradient ∇L̂i (θ), where L̂i is
the loss computed on mini-batch data instead of the whole
dataset. The continuous gradient flow is defined as a curvature θ(t) that satisfies the following ordinary differential
equation (ODE):
d
θ(t) = −∇θ L(θ(t)).
dt

(3)

θn+1 = θn − α · ∇L(θn+1 ),

(4)

where a large learning rate can be used. Eq.(4) is also known
as the implicit gradient descent (IGD) or implicit stochastic
gradient descent (ISGD) method, as the next iteration θn+1
appears implicitly on the right side of Eq.(4), and cannot be
computed explicitly.
Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) are neural
networks with outputs constrained to approximately satisfy
a system of partial differential equations (PDEs) by using a
regularization functional R(uθ (x)) that typically represents
the residual of PDEs. A general loss function representation

(2)

It is easy to show that when the learning rate is sufficiently
small, the discrete updates {θn }∞
n=0 computed by Eq.(1)
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8692

