The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Computing Divergences between Discrete Decomposable Models
Loong Kuan Lee1 , Nico Piatkowski2 , François Petitjean1 , and Geoffrey I. Webb1
1

Department of Data Science and AI, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
2
Fraunhofer IAIS, Schloss Birlinghoven, 53757 Sankt Augustin, Germany
mail@lklee.dev

Abstract

is also possible to tractably compute the KL divergence between a general Markov network (MN) and a MN where
inference tasks are tractable (Koller and Friedman 2009).
However, there are situations where one might want
to compute divergences other than the KL divergence
(Nowozin, Cseke, and Tomioka 2016), in particular in the
variational inference community where they have been employed to derive alternative evidence lower bounds (Chen
et al. 2018; Li and Turner 2016; Dieng et al. 2017) or in the
context of generative models (Genevay, Peyre, and Cuturi
2018). Furthermore, in natural language processing, using
the KL divergence is problematic in the presence of uneven
word frequencies (Labeau and Cohen 2019). Even for fundamental problems like model selection, we show that considering different types of divergences can be beneficial.
Motivated by these considerations, in this paper we show
how to compute a wide family of divergences, the αβdivergences, between two decomposable models (DMs). In
the process of showing how the αβ-divergence can be computed between any two DMs, we will reach a more general
result. That is, we will show how one can compute, between
two DMs, the functional F defined in Definition 1:
Definition 1. (Functional F )
F (P, Q; g, h, g ∗ , h∗ )

X        
=
g P (x) h Q (x) L [g ∗ [P](x)] [h∗ [Q](x)]

There are many applications that benefit from computing the
exact divergence between 2 discrete probability measures, including machine learning. Unfortunately, in the absence of
any assumptions on the structure or independencies within
these distributions, computing the divergence between them
is an intractable problem in high dimensions. We show that
we are able to compute a wide family of functionals and divergences, such as the alpha-beta divergence, between two
decomposable models, i.e. chordal Markov networks, in time
exponential to the treewidth of these models. The alphabeta divergence is a family of divergences that include popular divergences such as the Kullback-Leibler divergence, the
Hellinger distance, and the chi-squared divergence. Thus, we
can accurately compute the exact values of any of this broad
class of divergences to the extent to which we can accurately
model the two distributions using decomposable models.

Introduction
Computing the divergence, i.e. the degree of “difference”,
between two joint probability distributions is a problem that
has many applications in the field of Machine Learning. For
instance, it can be used to estimate the divergence between
the underlying distributions of two data samples. This particular application is useful in the study of changing distributions, i.e. concept drift (Schlimmer and Granger 1986; Webb
et al. 2018), in the detection of anomalous regions in spatiotemporal data (Barz et al. 2019; Piatkowski, Lee, and Morik
2013), and in tasks related to the retrieval, classification, and
visualisation of time series data (Chen, Ye, and Li 2020).
Although there has been much work in estimating the divergence between 2 general high-dimensional discrete distributions (Bhattacharya, Kar, and Pal 2009; Abdullah et al.
2016), they do not compute the exact divergence between
these distributions as it is intractable to do so without any
knowledge or assumptions made regarding the structure
within these distributions. Instead, approaches that do take
advantage of some structural properties within the distributions for an efficient computation of divergences have
appeared in the literature before, e.g., for computing the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between Bayesian networks (BNs) (Moral, Cano, and Gómez-Olmedo 2021). It

x∈X

where, for any distribution P of a DM with
structure
Q graphP
G, L is any function with the property L ( r r) = r L(r),
and f ∈ {g, h, g ∗ , h∗ } are functionals with the property:


Y  
Y
f
PC  (xC ) =
f PC (xC )
(1)
C∈C(G)

C∈C(G)

An
functional is the power functional:
Q example of such a Q
[ C∈C(G) PC (xC )]2 = C∈C(G) PC (xC )2 .
This result implies the possibility for the computation of
divergences and functionals other than the αβ-divergence
between two DMs. In fact, we show that F can be computed
by running the junction tree algorithm (JTA) over a specifically constructed chordal graph and set of initial factors.
Proofs for our contributed theoretical results are deferred
to the technical appendix of the extended version of this paper at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.04583

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12243

