The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AutoInit: Analytic Signal-Preserving Weight Initialization for Neural Networks
Garrett Bingham1, 2 and Risto Miikkulainen1, 2
1

The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712
2
Cognizant AI Labs, San Francisco, CA 94105
bingham@cs.utexas.edu, risto@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract

with specific activation functions, topologies, or layer types.
Thus, researchers designing new models or activation functions have two options. The first option is to derive weight
initialization strategies manually for every architecture considered, which is generally difficult and time consuming. The
second option is to use existing initialization strategies in
new settings, where they may be incorrect and therefore misleading: A candidate model may appear poor when it is the
suboptimal initialization that makes training difficult.
To overcome this problem, this paper proposes AutoInit,
an algorithm that automatically calculates analytic mean- and
variance-preserving weight initialization for neural networks.
Since AutoInit is algorithmic, it relieves the researcher from
a difficult but consequential step in model design. It is no
longer necessary to use existing weight initialization strategies in incorrect settings: AutoInit provides an appropriate
default initialization automatically, resulting in better and
more reliable performance.

Neural networks require careful weight initialization to prevent
signals from exploding or vanishing. Existing initialization
schemes solve this problem in specific cases by assuming that
the network has a certain activation function or topology. It
is difficult to derive such weight initialization strategies, and
modern architectures therefore often use these same initialization schemes even though their assumptions do not hold.
This paper introduces AutoInit, a weight initialization algorithm that automatically adapts to different neural network
architectures. By analytically tracking the mean and variance
of signals as they propagate through the network, AutoInit
appropriately scales the weights at each layer to avoid exploding or vanishing signals. Experiments demonstrate that
AutoInit improves performance of convolutional, residual, and
transformer networks across a range of activation function,
dropout, weight decay, learning rate, and normalizer settings,
and does so more reliably than data-dependent initialization
methods. This flexibility allows AutoInit to initialize models
for everything from small tabular tasks to large datasets such as
ImageNet. Such generality turns out particularly useful in neural architecture search and in activation function discovery. In
these settings, AutoInit initializes each candidate appropriately,
making performance evaluations more accurate. AutoInit thus
serves as an automatic configuration tool that makes design of
new neural network architectures more robust. The AutoInit
package provides a wrapper around TensorFlow models and
is available at https://github.com/cognizant-ai-labs/autoinit.

1

2

Related Work

Weight initialization strategies attempt to solve the following
problem: How should weights be initialized so that the neural
network does not suffer from vanishing or exploding signals?
This section reviews previous research in neural network
weight initialization, which has focused on stabilizing signals
by accounting for specific components of neural networks
such as the activation function, topology, layer types, and
training data distribution.

Introduction

Proper weight initialization is crucial to achieve high performance with deep networks. A common motif in such
networks is repeated layers or building blocks. Thus, if a
given layer amplifies or diminishes the forward or backward
propagation of signals, repeated applications of that layer
will result in exploding or vanishing signals, respectively
(Hochreiter 1991; Hanin 2018). This phenomenon makes optimization difficult, and can even exceed machine precision.
The issue persists regardless of whether the weights are sampled to be uniform, normal, or orthogonal (Saxe, McClelland,
and Ganguli 2013; Hu, Xiao, and Pennington 2020).
While many initialization strategies have been proposed
in the past, these strategies apply only to neural networks

Activation-Function-Dependent Initialization As is common in the literature, fan in and fan out refer to the
number of connections feeding into and out of a node, respectively. LeCun et al. (2012) recommend sampling weights
from
√ a distribution with mean zero and standard deviation
fan in. This initialization encourages propagated signals
to have variance approximately one if used with an activation
function symmetric about the origin, like 1.7159 tanh 23 x
or tanh(x) + αx for some small choice of α. The standard
sigmoid f (x) = 1/(1+e−x ) induces a mean shift and should
not be used in this setting.
Glorot and Bengio (2010) proposed one initialization
strategy to ensure unit variance in the forward-propagated
signals and another to ensure unit variance for the
backward-propagated gradients. As a compromise between

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6823

