The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ImGCL: Revisiting Graph Contrastive Learning on
Imbalanced Node Classification
Liang Zeng1 , Lanqing Li2 * , Ziqi Gao3 , Peilin Zhao2 , Jian Li1 *
1

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences (IIIS), Tsinghua University
2
Tencent AI Lab
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
zengl18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {lanqingli, masonzhao}@tencent.com,
zgaoat@connect.ust.hk, lijian83@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Graph contrastive learning (GCL) has attracted a surge
of attention due to its superior performance for learning
node/graph representations without labels. However, in practice, the underlying class distribution of unlabeled nodes for
the given graph is usually imbalanced. This highly imbalanced class distribution inevitably deteriorates the quality of
learned node representations in GCL. Indeed, we empirically
find that most state-of-the-art GCL methods cannot obtain
discriminative representations and exhibit poor performance
on imbalanced node classification. Motivated by this observation, we propose a principled GCL framework on Imbalanced
node classification (ImGCL), which automatically and adaptively balances the representations learned from GCL without
labels. Specifically, we first introduce the online clustering
based progressively balanced sampling (PBS) method with
theoretical rationale, which balances the training sets based
on pseudo-labels obtained from learned representations in
GCL. We then develop the node centrality based PBS method
to better preserve the intrinsic structure of graphs, by upweighting the important nodes of the given graph. Extensive
experiments on multiple imbalanced graph datasets and imbalanced settings demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed framework, which significantly improves the performance of the recent state-of-the-art GCL methods. Further
experimental ablations and analyses show that the ImGCL
framework consistently improves the representation quality
of nodes in under-represented (tail) classes.

1

Figure 1: (a) Class distribution of the Amazon-Computers
dataset sorted in decreasing order, where pre-training sets
are highly imbalanced but testing sets are balanced. (b)
Compared to the GBT (Bielak, Kajdanowicz, and Chawla
2021) baseline model on Amazon-computers, ImGCL+GBT
substantially outperforms GBT on the overall accuracy.
On three splits (head/middle/tail) depicted in different colors (blue/yellow/red), ImGCL+GBT improves the performance on middle and tail classes by a large margin with a
slight sacrifice of accuracy on head classes.

methods first construct multiple graph views via stochastic
augmentation functions on the input graph and then learn
discriminative representations by maximizing the representation consistency between two views.
Despite the prevalence and effectiveness of such methods,
existing GCL methods mostly assume the datasets are carefully curated and well balanced across classes. However, unlabeled graph data randomly gathered in the wild often exhibits a highly imbalanced class distribution (Barabási and
Albert 1999; Liu, Nguyen, and Fang 2021) and thus implicitly deteriorates the quality of learned representations in
GCL methods (Jiang et al. 2021). For instance, Fig. 1(a)
illustrates the class distribution sorted in decreasing order
of the Amazon-Computers dataset (Shchur et al. 2018),
a network of co-purchase goods containing 10 classes.
In the pre-training set, we can clearly find that a small
fraction of classes take up massive samples (a.k.a., head
classes) and the rest of classes are assigned only a few samples (a.k.a., tail classes). Note that the highly imbalanced
property of label information within the training data is unknown to the GCL methods. This important property implicitly exists and is largely ignored by the current GCL
methods (Zhu et al. 2021a). However, to impose a fair eval-

Introduction

Recently, graph contrastive learning (GCL) has become
the de facto standard for self-supervised learning on
graphs (Zhu et al. 2021a) due to its superior performance
as compared to the supervised counterparts. (Thakoor et al.
2022; Bielak, Kajdanowicz, and Chawla 2021; You et al.
2020; Zhu et al. 2021b). Inheriting the advantage of selfsupervised learning, GCL frees the model from the reliance
on label information in the graph domain, where labels can
be costly and error-prone in practice (Yang and Xu 2020)
while unlabeled/partially labeled data is prevalent, such as
fraudulent user detection (Kumar et al. 2018) and molecular
property prediction (Ma et al. 2020). Typically, most GCL
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11138

