The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Referring Expression Comprehension Using Language Adaptive Inference
Wei Su1 , Peihan Miao2 , Huanzhang Dou1 , Yongjian Fu1 , Xi Li1,3,4 *
1

College of Computer Science & Technology, Zhejiang University
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
3
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study, Zhejiang University
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory
{weisuzju, peihan.miao, hzdou, yjfu, xilizju}@zju.edu.cn
A man holding a baby while on a skateboard

Abstract

FFN

MHSA

Different from universal object detection, referring expression comprehension (REC) aims to locate specific objects
referred to by natural language expressions. The expression
provides high-level concepts of relevant visual and contextual patterns, which vary significantly with different expressions and account for only a few of those encoded in the
REC model. This leads us to a question: do we really need
the entire network with a fixed structure for various referring
expressions? Ideally, given an expression, only expressionrelevant components of the REC model are required. These
components should be small in number as each expression
only contains very few visual and contextual clues. This paper explores the adaptation between expressions and REC
models for dynamic inference. Concretely, we propose a neat
yet efficient framework named Language Adaptive Dynamic
Subnets (LADS), which can extract language-adaptive subnets from the REC model conditioned on the referring expressions. By using the compact subnet, the inference can be
more economical and efficient. Extensive experiments on RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, RefCOCOg, and Referit show that the
proposed method achieves faster inference speed and higher
accuracy against state-of-the-art approaches.

A small girl in a green shirt being held by her father
MHSA

FFN

MHSA

FFN

The black car in the back

Visual Backbone

Modality Interaction

Figure 1: The schematic of the proposed language adaptive
dynamic subnet framework (LADS). Given an image and
several referring expressions, the LADS framework can select relevant components (i.e. filters and layers) from the entire REC network to construct language-adaptive subnets.

information varies widely for different expressions, and (2)
the visual and contextual patterns required for each expression are only a tiny fraction of the pattern set corresponding
to the dataset. Taking Fig. 1 as an example, the image is assigned three referring expressions, and the complexity of the
expressions varies greatly. In terms of the first characteristic, the second expression in Fig. 1 contains abundant information about the referred object, including three categories
(”girl”, ”father”, ”shirt”), two attributes (”small”, ”green”),
and the relationship (”held”). Conversely, the third expression is less informative, containing only one category (”car”)
and two attributes (”black”, ”back”). In terms of the second
characteristic, there are only 1-3 categories in each expression in Fig. 1, compared to 80 categories in RefCOCO (Yu
et al. 2016) and 238 categories in Referit (Kazemzadeh et al.
2014), which indicates that the category-relevant visual patterns required for each expression are only a tiny proportion
of those corresponding to the entire dataset. Similarly, the
contextual patterns also account for a very low proportion.
The diversity and low informativeness of referring expressions lead us to an interesting research question: Is the
entire REC network with a fixed structure necessary
for various referring expressions? Intuitively, we need a
dynamic inference framework in which we can construct
a language-adaptive REC network on the fly, conditioned

Introduction
Referring expression comprehension (REC) (Deng et al.
2021; Liao et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2020) aims at locating the
target object in an image according to a natural language description, which can facilitate not only human-machine interaction in the physical world but also the advancement of
tasks such as visual question answering (Li et al. 2018) and
image retrieval (Salvador et al. 2016). Different from object
detection (Carion et al. 2020), which only localizes objects
of predefined categories, REC needs to utilize the characteristics of the target object described by referring expressions, including visual patterns (e.g. category and attribute)
and contextual patterns (e.g. relative position and relationship), to locate the most matching region in the image.
As the referring expressions exclusively provide the visual and contextual clues about the referred objects, we
overview the REC datasets and summarize two main characteristics of the expressions: (1) the abundance of semantic
* indicates corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2357

