The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Knowledge-Bridged Causal Interaction Network for Causal Emotion Entailment
Weixiang Zhao, Yanyan Zhao * , Zhuojun Li, Bing Qin
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval
Harbin Insititute of Technology, China
{wxzhao, yyzhao, zjli, qinb}@ir.hit.edu.cn

Semantic Corr
elations

Abstract
Causal Emotion Entailment aims to identify causal utterances that are responsible for the target utterance with a nonneutral emotion in conversations. Previous works are limited in thorough understanding of the conversational context
and accurate reasoning of the emotion cause. To this end,
we propose Knowledge-Bridged Causal Interaction Network
(KBCIN) with commonsense knowledge (CSK) leveraged
as three bridges. Specifically, we construct a conversational
graph for each conversation and leverage the event-centered
CSK as the semantics-level bridge (S-bridge) to capture the
deep inter-utterance dependencies in the conversational context via the CSK-Enhanced Graph Attention module. Moreover, social-interaction CSK serves as emotion-level bridge
(E-bridge) and action-level bridge (A-bridge) to connect candidate utterances with the target one, which provides explicit
causal clues for the Emotional Interaction module and Actional Interaction module to reason the target emotion. Experimental results show that our model achieves better performance over most baseline models. Our source code is publicly available at https://github.com/circle-hit/KBCIN.

I really hate to say this, but don't
#1 go away mad, just go away.

PersonA
PersonB

I knew this would happen some
day.
#2
Then, why didn't you try to
#3prevent it in the beginning ?
Well. It's your fault, Anna. You
#4
are responsible.

I don't want to argue anymore.
PersonA tells #5 Please get out of my life!

PersonB to
I think we can still talk.
leave.
#6
Ha
pp
en
sA
fte #7 No way! Leave me alone!
r

ling
Fee

s

Target

As a result, others
feel angry.
Emotion: Angry

No way! Leave me alone!

#7

As a result, PersonA
wants to be alone.

Action T
endency

S-bridge
E-bridge
A-bridge

Figure 1: An example from RECCON-DD dataset (Poria
et al. 2021) for identifying the emotion cause with the help
of S-bridge, E-bridge and A-bridge.

dict which particular utterances in the conversation history
trigger the non-neutral emotion in the target utterance.
There are two main challenges in the CEE task. First, to
cope with the intermingling emotional dynamics among interlocutors, it is necessary to comprehend the deep semantic
correlations between contextual utterances via effective conversational context modeling. Second, it may be difficult to
accurately reason candidate utterances to the target emotion
because causal clues are not always explicitly mentioned in
the context but are supposed to be implied through reasoning
based inference, which results in a reasoning gap between
candidates and the target. However, Poria et.al (2021) simply
formulate CEE as an utterance-pair classification problem,
which is lack of sufficient conversational context modeling
and effective emotion cause reasoning. Thus, to deal with
such two challenges, we introduce commonsense knowledge
(CSK) (Hwang et al. 2021) into CEE.
On the one hand, the event-centered CSK, which manifests what may happen before or after the event mentioned in
an utterance, could be viewed as the semantics-level bridge
(S-bridge) to connect the development of a conversation and
enhance the semantic dependencies between relevant utterances, leading to the thorough understanding of the conver-

Introduction
Emotion analysis in conversations has become an emerging topic in natural language processing (NLP) community.
Most existing works mainly focus on Emotion Recognition
in Conversations (ERC), which aims at predicting the emotion label for each utterance in conversations (Majumder
et al. 2019; Ghosal et al. 2020; Shen et al. 2021). However,
emotion-reasoning task such as recognizing the cause behind emotions in conversations is yet under-explored. More
recently, Poria et.al (2021) holds that Recognizing Emotion
Cause in CONversations (RECCON) is beneficial to improve interpretability and performance in affect-based models. Also, it has potential applications in several areas such as
emotional support system (Peng et al. 2022) and empathetic
dialog system (Gao et al. 2021). Thus, Poria et.al (2021)
introduce a new task named RECCON with an annotated
dataset. It includes two different sub-tasks: Causal Span Extraction (CSE) and Causal Emotion Entailment (CEE). We
focus on the CEE sub-task in this paper and its goal is to pre* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14020

