The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Local Path Integration for Attribution
Peiyu Yang1 , Naveed Akhtar1 , Zeyi Wen* 2,3 , Ajmal Mian1
1
The University of Western Australia
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
peiyu.yang@research.uwa.edu.au, naveed.akhtar@uwa.edu.au, wenzeyi@ust.hk, ajmal.mian@uwa.edu.au
2

Abstract
Path attribution methods are a popular tool to interpret a visual
model’s prediction on an input. They integrate model gradients
for the input features over a path defined between the input
and a reference, thereby satisfying certain desirable theoretical properties. However, their reliability hinges on the choice
of the reference. Moreover, they do not exhibit weak dependence on the input, which leads to counter-intuitive feature
attribution mapping. We show that path-based attribution can
account for the weak dependence property by choosing the
reference from the local distribution of the input. We devise a
method to identify the local input distribution and propose a
technique to stochastically integrate the model gradients over
the paths defined by the references sampled from that distribution. Our local path integration (LPI) method is found to
consistently outperform existing path attribution techniques
when evaluated on deep visual models. Contributing to the
ongoing search of reliable evaluation metrics for the interpretation methods, we also introduce DiffID metric that uses the
relative difference between insertion and deletion games to alleviate the distribution shift problem faced by existing metrics.
Our code is available at https://github.com/ypeiyu/LPI.

Figure 1: Top: Conceptual difference between the proposed
Local Path Integration (LPI) and existing methods. Integrated
Gradients (IG) selects a zero image as reference. Expected
Gradients (EG) uses random points on the distribution. LPI
identifies local distribution of input point and stochastically
integrates over the paths defined by local samples. Bottom:
IG underestimates importance of darker pixels in the input.
EG overestimates the background. LPI consistently computes
accurate attribution. Input image is shown for reference.

Introduction

(Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017) chooses a black image as
the reference point, and defines a linear path from that to the
input. Integrating the model gradients along that path is used
for attribution mapping.
It is known that path-based mapping satisfies certain theoretical properties (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017), which
makes it particularly attractive for computing model-faithful
maps. However, reliability of the path attribution methods
heavily depends on the choice of the reference. Similar to
the cooperative game theory, the “reference” in these methods represents feature “absence”. IG chooses zero input as
the reference to simulate the absence. However, the zero reference causes the black pixels of the input to be assigned
zero attribution, see Fig. 1. Currently, the debate on the
reference selection for the path-based methods is not fully
settled (Shah, Jain, and Netrapalli 2021; Pan, Li, and Zhu
2021). Moreover, Srinivas and Fleuret (2019) also showed
that path-based methods with the dependence of the input in
general do not satisfy a so-called “weak dependence”, which
can lead them to compute counter-intuitive attribution maps.
Among the closely related methods to our work, Erion et al.

Feature attribution methods are widely used to explain
deep visual models (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman
2014; Binder et al. 2016; Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017;
Smilkov et al. 2017). They compute class-specific importance
scores for the input features to provide an attribution map for
post-hoc model interpretation. Faithfulness of the computed
maps to the model is the corner stone for these methods.
Compromising it can lead to misleading model explanations,
which can have severe consequences for the high-stake applications, e.g., medical diagnosis, which are often the primary
user domains of explainable Artificial Intelligence.
Path-based feature attribution is currently among the most
promising attribution techniques (Sundararajan, Taly, and
Yan 2017; Erion et al. 2021; Pan, Li, and Zhu 2021). For a
given sample, it integrates the model gradients with respect
to the input by moving along a certain path in the input space.
For instance, the seminal method of Integrated Gradients (IG)
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3173

