The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ConTextual Masked Auto-Encoder for Dense Passage Retrieval
Xing Wu1,2,3 * , Guangyuan Ma1,2 * , Meng Lin1,2 , Zijia Lin3 , Zhongyuan Wang3 , Songlin Hu1,2†
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Kuaishou Technology
{wuxing, maguangyuan, linmeng, husonglin}@iie.ac.cn, linzijia07@tsinghua.org.cn, wangzhongyuan@kuaishou.com
2

Abstract

space. Therefore, high-quality text representation based on
PLM is crucial for dense passage retrieval.
DPR(Karpukhin et al. 2020) successfully shows that
dense retrieval models can outperform BM25 methods.
Since then, some works have emerged to boost dense retrieval performance by improving the pre-training process
tailored for dense retrieval. (Lu et al. 2021; Gao and Callan
2021a; Liu and Shao 2022) encourage the encoder to improve the text representation modeling ability through auxiliary self-supervised reconstruction tasks. Auxiliary tasks
usually utilize a weak decoder to reconstruct the masked
text with the assistance of the text’s vector from the encoder, which forces the encoder to provide better text representations. Although these works have been shown to be
very effective and achieved some improvements in dense retrieval, they mainly focus on single-text internal modeling
without considering contextual information. (Chang et al.
2020; Gao and Callan 2021b; Ma et al. 2022) proposes
multi-source and multi-granularity contrastive span prediction tasks to model the semantic similarity between relevant
text spans during pre-training. These discriminative tasks
introduced in the pre-training improve dense retrieval and
the trained retrievers achieve state-of-the-art performance.
Meanwhile, in multimodal representation learning (Li et al.
2021, 2022), generative pre-training tasks, such as imagebased text decoding, have been proven effective, leaving
us with a question of how well span-level context-grounded
generative auxiliary task will boost the dense retrieval.
To improve text representation modeling for dense passage retrieval, this paper proposes a novel pre-training
method by further introducing semantic correlations between text spans in a generative manner. When modeling,
we jointly consider the semantics of the tokens inside a
text span and the semantical correlation between the text
spans. As shown in Figure 1-(a), we select two neighboring text spans TA and TB from a document with a sampling strategy to form a span pair. Then, as shown in Figure 1-(b), we use the masked auto-encoding to model the
whole process. First, we consider self-supervised masked
auto-encoding, which reconstructs a masked text span only
considering the unmasked tokens in the span on the encoder
side. As shown in the purple flow in Figure 1-(b), we apply masking operations to TA and TB respectively, feeding
the masked text to the encoder to reconstruct the original

Dense passage retrieval aims to retrieve the relevant passages of a query from a large corpus based on dense representations (i.e., vectors) of the query and the passages. Recent studies have explored improving pre-trained language
models to boost dense retrieval performance. This paper proposes CoT-MAE (ConTextual Masked Auto-Encoder), a simple yet effective generative pre-training method for dense passage retrieval. CoT-MAE employs an asymmetric encoderdecoder architecture that learns to compress the sentence
semantics into a dense vector through self-supervised and
context-supervised masked auto-encoding. Precisely, selfsupervised masked auto-encoding learns to model the semantics of the tokens inside a text span, and context-supervised
masked auto-encoding learns to model the semantical correlation between the text spans. We conduct experiments on
large-scale passage retrieval benchmarks and show considerable improvements over strong baselines, demonstrating
the high efficiency of CoT-MAE. Our code is available at
https://github.com/caskcsg/ir/tree/main/cotmae.

Introduction
Passage retrieval aims to retrieve the relevant passages of a
query from a large corpus, which benefits many downstream
applications, such as web search (Fan et al. 2021; Guo et al.
2022; Lin, Nogueira, and Yates 2021), question answering
(Karpukhin et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2021) and
dialogue systems (Gao et al. 2022a; Yu et al. 2021).
For a long time, sparse retrieval represented by BM25
(Robertson, Zaragoza et al. 2009) was the dominant retrieval
method. Recently, dense retrieval has received increasing attention with the development of pre-trained language models (PLM) (Devlin et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019). Dense retrieval models are generally based on pre-trained language
models with a siamese or dual-encoder architecture to encode queries and documents into low-dimensional vector
space for effective search (Hofstätter et al. 2021; Humeau
et al. 2019; Xiong et al. 2020; Zhan et al. 2021, 2020). The
relevances between queries and documents are calculated
with cosine similarity or dot-product function in the vector
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4738

