The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Linear Regularizers Enforce the Strict Saddle Property
Matthew Ubl, Matthew Hale, Kasra Yazdani
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 32611, USA.
m.ubl@ufl.edu, kasra.yazdani@ufl.edu, matthewhale@ufl.edu

Abstract

which the SSP is known to hold, or simply assumed the SSP
holds for a generic problem and derived convergence guarantees that result from it. However, verification of the SSP
for a general, unstructured problem is difficult in practice,
and there exist problems in machine learning for which the
SSP does not hold, such as training a neural network with at
least two hidden layers (Kawaguchi 2016).
Motivated by these challenges, we develop a linear regularization framework that will allow first-order methods to
escape saddle points that are not strict. Specifically, our approach is to enforce the SSP by regularizing problems when
in the vicinity of a non-strict saddle point, rather than simply assuming that the SSP holds. We show that this can
be done with a linear regularizer, motivated by John Milnor’s proof that almost all choices of such a term will render
a function Morse (and therefore enforce the SSP) (Milnor
1965). We are also motivated by the success of regularization techniques in convex optimization, where quadratic perturbations are used to provide strong convexity to objective
functions (Facchinei and Pang 2007), and we believe that the
linear regularizers we present are their natural counterparts
in the non-convex setting.

Satisfaction of the strict saddle property has become a standard assumption in non-convex optimization, and it ensures
that many first-order optimization algorithms will almost always escape saddle points. However, functions exist in machine learning that do not satisfy this property, such as the
loss function of a neural network with at least two hidden
layers. First-order methods such as gradient descent may
converge to non-strict saddle points of such functions, and
there do not currently exist any first-order methods that reliably escape non-strict saddle points. To address this need, we
demonstrate that regularizing a function with a linear term enforces the strict saddle property, and we provide justification
for only regularizing locally, i.e., when the norm of the gradient falls below a certain threshold. We analyze bifurcations
that may result from this form of regularization, and then we
provide a selection rule for regularizers that depends only
on the gradient of an objective function. This rule is shown
to guarantee that gradient descent will escape the neighborhoods around a broad class of non-strict saddle points, and
this behavior is demonstrated on numerical examples of nonstrict saddle points common in the optimization literature.

1

Introduction

1.1

Interest in non-convex optimization has grown in recent
years, driven by applications such as training deep neural
networks. Often, one seeks convergence to a local minimizer in such problems because finding global minima is
known to be NP complete (Murty and Kabadi 1987). To ensure convergence to minimizers, one research direction in
non-convex optimization has been the identification of problem properties for which particular algorithms escape saddle points. One such property, which has become common
in the non-convex optimization literature since its introduction in (Ge et al. 2015), is the strict saddle property (SSP),
which states that the Hessian of every saddle point of a function has at least one negative eigenvalue. It was later shown
that gradient descent and other first order methods almost
always escape saddle points of objective functions that satisfy the SSP (and other mild assumptions) (Lee et al. 2016;
Panageas and Piliouras 2017; Lee et al. 2019).
Because of this behavior, a growing body of non-convex
optimization research has either focused on problems for

Related Work

A large body of work exists on the convergence properties
of gradient descent and other first-order methods on problems with the SSP, including algorithms that consider deterministic gradient descent (Dixit, Gürbüzbalaban, and Bajwa 2023; Schaeffer and McCalla 2020), and those that incorporate noise into their updates (Xu, Jin, and Yang 2018;
Daneshmand et al. 2018; Yang, Hu, and Li 2017; Ge et al.
2015). These methods are shown to escape strict saddles, but
have not been shown to escape non-strict saddles, and therefore rely on the SSP.
While these methods are shown to escape strict saddles in
the limit, they can get stuck near strict saddles for exponential time, which can cause numerical slowdowns (Du et al.
2017). Attempts have been made to accelerate the escape
near strict saddle points (Jin et al. 2017; Agarwal et al. 2017;
Jin, Netrapalli, and Jordan 2018). However, first-order methods may actually converge to non-strict saddles, and such
accelerated methods do not escape.
Current research into escaping non-strict saddle points
uses higher-order information and/or algorithms. Perhaps

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10017

