The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Bidirectional Optical Flow NeRF: High Accuracy and High Quality
under Fewer Views
Shuo Chen, Binbin Yan* , Xinzhu Sang, Duo Chen, Peng Wang,
Xiao Guo, Chongli Zhong, Huaming Wan
State Key Laboratory of Information Photonics and Optical Communications,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{shuochen365, yanbinbin, xzsang, chenduo, wps1215,2014212810,zclda,wan huaming }@bupt.edu.cn
Abstract

synthesize photorealistic novel views. Some works optimize NeRF from the speed and quality of view synthesis(Barron et al. 2022; Niemeyer et al. 2022). At the same
time, NeRF is also used to solve camera pose, surface reconstruction(Oechsle, Peng, and Geiger 2021; Long et al. 2022),
dynamic scene reconstruction, inverse rendering(Yang et al.
2022), and other tasks. However, synthesizing novel views
with fewer views remains challenging. The main challenge
is depth ambiguity, which means the error depth will erroneously overfit the fewer input images scene. The ambiguity
leads to synthesizing wrong novel views.
To overcome such drawbacks of NeRF, current researchers mainly add depth images or depth estimation
networks before NeRF network input. Depth-supervised
NeRF (Deng et al. 2021) utilizes structure-from-motion
(SFM)(Schonberger and Frahm 2016a) to produce sparse
3D points that be used as depth supervision during training. However, SFM can only extract limited and erroneous
3D points in complex scenes, resulting in the inability of
NeRF to correctly estimate the scene geometry, thus affecting the quality of novel views. In addition, pixel-NeRF (Yu
et al. 2021b) uses the convolutional network to build images
feature volume to condition NeRF on the image input. MVSNeRF (Chen et al. 2021) leverages plane-swept cost volumes
for geometry-aware scene reasoning and then combines with
NeRF. However, both pixel-NeRF and MVSNeRF need to
construct image feature volumes to estimate the scene geometry, resulting in a large memory occupation.
In addition, existing methods also can’t effectively solve
the problem of novel view details loss in NeRF. Therefore,
this paper proposes the BOF-NeRF method to solve the
problem of poor view synthesis and novel view details loss
with fewer input views. Our approach significantly improves
the accuracy of NeRF’s scene geometry estimation and view
synthesis quality with fewer input views through the proposed optical flow supervision loss and view-enhanced fusion method.
The key to our method is to combine easily computable
2D image optical flow graphs as supervision to guide NeRF
to estimate scene geometry. More specifically, the forward
and backward optical flow graphs between 2D images are
computed to supervise left and right views to learn accurate
scene geometry. Since the optical flow graphs between 2D
images have errors in non-overlapping and complex back-

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) can implicitly represent 3Dconsistent RGB images and geometric by optimizing an underlying continuous volumetric scene function using a sparse
set of input views, which has greatly benefited view synthesis tasks. However, NeRF fails to estimate correct geometry
when given fewer views, resulting in failure to synthesize
novel views. Existing works rely on introducing depth images
or adding depth estimation networks to resolve the problem
of poor synthetic view in NeRF with fewer views. However,
due to the lack of spatial consistency of the single-depth image and the poor performance of depth estimation with fewer
views, the existing methods still have challenges in addressing this problem. So this paper proposes Bidirectional Optical Flow NeRF(BOF-NeRF), which addresses this problem
by mining optical flow information between 2D images. Our
key insight is that utilizing 2D optical flow images to design
a loss can effectively guide NeRF to learn the correct geometry and synthesize the right novel view. We also propose a
view-enhanced fusion method based on geometry and color
consistency to solve the problem of novel view details loss in
NeRF. We conduct extensive experiments on the NeRF-LLFF
and DTU MVS benchmarks for novel view synthesis tasks
with fewer images in different complex real scenes. We further demonstrate the robustness of BOF-NeRF under different baseline distances on the Middlebury dataset. In all cases,
BOF-NeRF outperforms current state-of-the-art baselines for
novel view synthesis and scene geometry estimation.

Introduction
Synthesizing novel views from sparse views is a classic illposed problem in computer vision, requiring explicit representation of the 3D scene. Unlike explicit 3D scene neural representation methods, implicit 3D scene representation
has recently become popular to represent 3D scenes and
synthesize novel views continuously. The core idea in implicit 3D scene representation is to use multilayer perceptrons(MLPs) to map 5D coordinates to color and volume
density continuously.
NeRF(Mildenhall et al. 2020) is the most representative method in implicit 3D scene representation, which can
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

359

