The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Emergence of Punishment in Social Dilemma with Environmental Feedback
Zhen Wang1,2, * , Zhao Song 1,2, * , Chen Shen3 , Shuyue Hu4
1 School of Mechanical Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University
2 School of Artifcial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University
3 Faculty of Engineering Sciences, Kyushu University
4 Shanghai Artifcial Intelligence Laboratory

songzhao@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, hushuyue@pjlab.org.cn
Abstract

Although common in both human societies and AI
systems, punishment, by itself, creates an evolutionary
puzzle—how punishment could possibly emerge given that
punishment is costly (i.e. punishing others generally incurs a
cost to punishers themselves). To address this puzzle, a number of models that leverage reciprocity (Raihani and Bshary
2015; Helbing et al. 2010; Nowak 2006), voluntary participation (Semmann, Krambeck, and Milinski 2003), and prior
commitment (Han, Pereira, and Lenaerts 2017; Han 2016)
have been proposed to account for the emergence of punishment. However, these models typically assume that environmental feedback does not exist, let alone influence punishment; put differently, whether to punish or not is independent of the state of the endogenous environment.
Different from the absence of environmental feedback in
most existing models, real-world systems, however, often
feature environmental feedback (Tilman, Plotkin, and Akçay
2020; Weitz et al. 2016): while strategic decisions of individuals may change the environment, the environment may
the other way around shape their decision making. For example, while global climate change is under the influence of
whether nations ratify an (e.g., Paris) agreement and be fined
when failing to meet the goals, long-term ecological damage may conversely alter their strategic incentives (Tilman,
Plotkin, and Akçay 2020). Likewise, as the well-known broken window experiments (Zimbardo 1969) hint, any visible
sign of disorder (e.g., norm violation, anti-social behaviours)
which goes untended encourages further disorder; this may,
in turn, silence social punishment (e.g., anger, social exclusion) in the environment (Wanders et al. 2021). Examples
from these diverse fields suggest that the effect of environmental feedback on punishment is non-trivial and perhaps
crucial under some scenarios as they may fundamentally
change dynamical predictions. This drives our motivating
questions:
Can environmental feedback, by itself, lead to the emergence of punishment in absence of any other mechanisms
previously studied? Under what conditions does environmental feedback promote or preclude punishment? How
much does environmental feedback affect the interplay between punishment and cooperation?
To address these questions, we propose a novel model
based on evolutionary game theory. We focus on the oneshot public goods game (PGG) with third-party punish-

Altruistic punishment (or punishment) has been extensively
shown as an important mechanism for promoting cooperation in human societies. In AI, the emergence of punishment
has received much recent interest. In this paper, we contribute
with a novel evolutionary game theoretic model to study the
impacts of environmental feedback. Whereas a population of
agents plays public goods games, there exists a third-party
population whose payoffs depend not only on whether to punish or not, but also on the state of the environment (e.g., how
cooperative the agents in a social dilemma are). Focusing on
one-shot public goods games, we show that environmental
feedback, by itself, can lead to the emergence of punishment.
We analyze the co-evolution of punishment and cooperation,
and derive conditions for their co-presence, co-dominance
and co-extinction. Moreover, we show that the system can
exhibit bistability as well as cyclic dynamics. Our findings
provide a new explanation for the emergence of punishment.
On the other hand, our results also alert the need for careful
design of implementing punishment in multi-agent systems,
as the resulting evolutionary dynamics can be somewhat complex.

Introduction
Altruistic punishment (or punishment) has been proved to be
an important mechanism for promoting cooperation in human societies as well as in AI systems (Dreber et al. 2008;
Bou, López-Sánchez, and Rodrı́guez-Aguilar 2006). Laboratory and field data show that human subjects across different cultures are eager to punish non-cooperators in social dilemma games even if this incurs a cost (Fehr and
Gächter 2002). In AI, punishment has also gained much
interest (Morris-Martin, De Vos, and Padget 2019; Giardini et al. 2014; Pereira et al. 2017). On one hand, punishment is a conceptually appealing tool to promote cooperative behaviours and to enforce norm compliance among
self-regarding agents (Mahmoud et al. 2015; Villatoro et al.
2011). On the other hand, it has been implemented in various multi-agent systems, such as e-marketplace (Liu et al.
2016), online virtual agent societies (Savarimuthu, Padget,
and Purvis 2013), and smart grids (Du et al. 2021); this renders the study of punishment to be of practical interest.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11708

