The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Optimal Sparse Recovery with Decision Stumps
Kiarash Banihashem, MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi, Max Springer
University of Maryland
kiarash@umd.edu, hajiagha@cs.umd.edu, mss423@umd.edu

Abstract

For example, tree based importance measures have been used
for prediction of financial distress (Qian et al. 2022), wireless
signal recognition (Li and Wang 2018), credit scoring (Xia
et al. 2017), and the discovery of genes in the field of bioinformatics (Breiman 2001; Bureau et al. 2005; Huynh-Thu
et al. 2012; Lunetta et al. 2004) to name a small fraction.
Despite this empirical success however, the theoretical
properties of these tree based methods for feature selection
are not well understood. While several papers have considered variants of this problem (see the Related Work section
for an overview), even in the simple linear case, the sample
complexity of the decision tree is not well-characterized.
In this paper, we attempt to bridge this gap and analyze
the variable selection properties of single-level decision trees,
commonly referred to as “decision stumps” (DS TUMP ). Considering both linear and non-linear settings, we show that
DS TUMP achieves nearly-tight sample complexity rates for a
variety of practical sample distributions. Compared to prior
work, our analysis is simpler and applies to different variants
of the decision tree, as well as more general function classes.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: in the
next section we introduce our main results on the finite sample guarantees of DS TUMP , in the Related Work section we
discuss important prior results in the field of sparse recovery
and where they fall flat, in the Algorithm Description section
we present the recovery algorithm, and in the subsequent
section we provide theoretical guarantees for the procedure
under progressively more general problem assumptions. The
proofs of these results are provided in the so-labeled section.
We supplement the theoretical results with computational
simulations in the Experimental Results and provide concluding remarks in the final section.

Decision trees are widely used for their low computational
cost, good predictive performance, and ability to assess the
importance of features. Though often used in practice for feature selection, the theoretical guarantees of these methods
are not well understood. We here obtain a tight finite sample
bound for the feature selection problem in linear regression
using single-depth decision trees. We examine the statistical
properties of these “decision stumps” for the recovery of the
s active features from p total features, where s ≪ p. Our
analysis provides tight sample performance guarantees on
high-dimensional sparse systems which align with the finite
sample bound of O(s log p) as obtained by Lasso, improving
upon previous bounds for both the median and optimal splitting criteria. Our results extend to the non-linear regime as
well as arbitrary sub-Gaussian distributions, demonstrating
that tree based methods attain strong feature selection properties under a wide variety of settings and further shedding light
on the success of these methods in practice. As a byproduct of
our analysis, we show that we can provably guarantee recovery
even when the number of active features s is unknown. We
further validate our theoretical results and proof methodology
using computational experiments.

Introduction
Decision trees are one of the most popular tools used in machine learning. Due to their simplicity and interpretability,
trees are widely implemented by data scientist, both individually, and in aggregation with ensemble methods such as
random forests and gradient boosting (Friedman 2001).
In addition to their predictive accuracy, tree based methods
are an important tool used for the variable selection problem:
identifying a relevant small subset of a high-dimensional feature space of the input variables that can accurately predict
the output. When the relationship between the variables is
linear, it has long been known that L ASSO achieves the optimal sample complexity rate for this problem (Wainwright
2009a). In practice, however, tree-based methods have been
shown to be preferable as they scale linearly with the size of
the data and can capture non-linear relationships between the
variables (Xu et al. 2014).
Notably, various tree structured systems are implemented
for this variable selection task across wide-spanning domains.

Our Results
We assume that we are given a dataset D = {(Xi,: , Yi )}ni=1
consisting ofP
n samples from the non-parametric regression
model Yi = k fk (Xi,k ) + Wi where i denotes the sample
number, Xi,: ∈ Rp is the input vector with corresponding
output Yi ∈ R, Wi ∈ R are i.i.d noise values and fk : R → R
are univariate functions that are s-sparse: A set of univariate
functions {fk }k∈[p] is s-sparse on feature set [p] if there
exists a set S ⊆ [p] with size s = |S| ≪ p such that fk =
0 ⇐⇒ k ∈
/ S. Given access to (Xi,: , Yi )ni=1 , we consider
the sparse recovery problem, where we attempt to reveal the

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6745

