The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Find Beauty in the Rare: Contrastive Composition Feature Clustering for
Nontrivial Cropping Box Regression
Zhiyu Pan1 * , Yinpeng Chen1 * , Jiale Zhang1 , Hao Lu1 , Zhiguo Cao1† , Weicai Zhong2
1 Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education School of Artificial Intelligence and

Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2 Huawei CBG Consumer Cloud Service Search Product & Big Data Platform Department

{zhiyupan, zgcao}@hust.edu.cn
Abstract
Automatic image cropping algorithms aim to recompose images like human-being photographers by generating the cropping boxes with improved composition quality. Cropping box
regression approaches learn the beauty of composition from
annotated cropping boxes. However, the bias of annotations
leads to quasi-trivial recomposing results, which has an obvious tendency to the average location of training samples. The
crux of this predicament is that the task is naively treated as a
box regression problem, where rare samples might be dominated by normal samples, and the composition patterns of rare
samples are not well exploited. Observing that similar composition patterns tend to be shared by the cropping boundaries
annotated nearly, we argue to find the beauty of composition
from the rare samples by clustering the samples with similar cropping boundary annotations, i.e., similar composition
patterns. We propose a novel Contrastive Composition Clustering (C2C) to regularize the composition features by contrasting dynamically established similar and dissimilar pairs.
In this way, common composition patterns of multiple images
can be better summarized, which especially benefits the rare
samples and endows our model with better generalizability to
render nontrivial results. Extensive experimental results show
the superiority of our model compared with prior arts.

（a）Quasi-trivial solution

（b）Our solution

（c）Samples with similar top cropping boundary GTs

Figure 1: An illustration of quasi-trivial solution and the
examples of our observation. (a) The cropping result from
CACNet (Hong et al. 2021). (b) The cropping result from
our approach. (c) Samples whose top cropping boundaries
locate relatively nearly at the original image coordinate. Red
and green boxes indicate the annotated and predicted cropping results respectively; Yellow dotted line indicates an
identical relative reference position.

Introduction
Automatic image cropping is an effective technology to improve composition quality of the input images. As one of the
key components of computational imaging, it has attracted
wide research interest (Chen et al. 2003; Islam, Lai-Kuan,
and Chee-Onn 2017). Provided human-annotated cropping
boxes (Wang, Shen, and Ling 2018; Zeng et al. 2019), automatic cropping can be formalized as a cropping box regression problem. However, as regression models are easily
affected by the bias of training set (Yang et al. 2021), recent
regression-based approaches (Hong et al. 2021; Pan et al.
2021b) are dominated by the normal samples and tend to
render quasi-trivial cropping boxes (Fig. 1(a)). The quasitrivial cropping boxes can be described as the central cropping boxes whose boundaries locate near the average location of training samples. When the quasi-trivial cropping

boxes just inherit the location bias of the annotated cropping
boundaries and ignore the composition patterns of the input images, the improvement of composition quality is little,
which limits the real-world application. Trying to generate
nontrivial cropping boxes, previous methods take extra data
with additional annotations, e.g., composition classification
dataset (Lee et al. 2018), into account. However, the predicament is hardly addressed. Therefore, we try to reveal the intrinsic cause of quasi-trivial solution. As shown in Fig. 2, by
analysing the CACNet baseline (Hong et al. 2021), we illustrate the cause of quasi-trivial solution: dominated by the
normal samples, the composition patterns of rare samples
are barely exploited. Hence, we argue to find the beauty of
composition by taking full advantage of rare samples rather

* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2011

