The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Quantum Multi-Agent Meta Reinforcement Learning
Won Joon Yun1 , Jihong Park2 , Joongheon Kim1
1
2

School of Electrical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
School of Information Technology, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC, Australia
ywjoon95@korea.ac.kr, jihong.park@deakin.edu.au, joongheon@korea.ac.kr

Abstract

tasks (Schuld et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020). Compared to
classical ML, QML is still in its infancy and too early to
demonstrate quantum supremacy in accuracy and scalability due to the currently limited number of qubits. Instead,
the main focus in the current research direction is to identify
possible challenges and novel potential in QNN-based QML
applications (Schuld and Killoran 2022).
Following this direction, in this article we aim to re-design
multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) using QML,
i.e., quantum MARL (QMARL). The key new element is to
leverage the novel aspect of the QNN architecture, having
two separate dimensions of trainable parameters. As analogous to training a classical NN by adjusting weight parameters, the standard way of training a QNN is optimizing its circuit parameters, or equivalently the rotation of the angle ϕ
of the parameter quantum circuit’s output qubit states that
are represented on the surface of the Bloch sphere (Bloch
1946). Unlike classical ML, the QNN’s output for the loss
calculation is not deterministic, but is measurable after projecting multiple observations with a projector on a Hilbert
space (Nielsen and Chuang 2010). According to the quantum kernel theory (Schuld and Killoran 2019), this projector
is represented as the pole θ of the Bloch sphere, and is tunable by rotating the pole, providing another dimension for
QNN training.
Interpreting such dyadic QNN trainability as metalearning capability (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017), we
propose a novel QMARL framework coined quantum meta
MARL (QM2ARL). As Fig. 1 visualizes, QM2ARL first
trains angle ϕ for meta Q-network learning, followed by
training pole θ for few-shot or local training. The latter step
is much faster in that θ has only two parameters (i.e., polar and azimuthal angles in spherical coordinates. When the
number of environments is limited, angle training may incur
overfitting, making the meta Q-network ill-posed. To avoid
this while guaranteeing convergence, we develop an angleto-pole regularization method that injects random noise into
the pole domain during angle training, and theoretically
proves the convergence of angle training under the presence
of angle-to-pole regularization.
Furthermore, it is remarkable that each locally-trained
QNN in QM2ARL can be uniquely represented only using
its pole deviation θ from the origin or equivalently the metatrained QNN. Inspired by this, we introduce the concept of

Although quantum supremacy is yet to come, there has recently been an increasing interest in identifying the potential of quantum machine learning (QML) in the looming
era of practical quantum computing. Motivated by this, in
this article we re-design multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) based on the unique characteristics of quantum
neural networks (QNNs) having two separate dimensions of
trainable parameters: angle parameters affecting the output
qubit states, and pole parameters associated with the output measurement basis. Exploiting this dyadic trainability as
meta-learning capability, we propose quantum meta MARL
(QM2ARL) that first applies angle training for meta-QNN
learning, followed by pole training for few-shot or local-QNN
training. To avoid overfitting, we develop an angle-to-pole
regularization technique injecting noise into the pole domain
during angle training. Furthermore, by exploiting the pole
as the memory address of each trained QNN, we introduce
the concept of pole memory allowing one to save and load
trained QNNs using only two-parameter pole values. We theoretically prove the convergence of angle training under the
angle-to-pole regularization, and by simulation corroborate
the effectiveness of QM2ARL in achieving high reward and
fast convergence, as well as of the pole memory in fast adaptation to a time-varying environment.

Introduction
Spurred by recent advances in quantum computing hardware
and machine learning (ML) algorithms, quantum machine
learning (QML) is closer than ever imagined. The noisy
intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) era has already been
ushered in, where quantum computers run with up to a few
hundred qubits (Cho 2020). Like the neural network (NN)
of classical ML, the parameterized quantum circuit (PQC),
also known as a quantum NN (QNN), has recently been introduced as the standard architecture for QML (Chen et al.
2020; Jerbi et al. 2021; Lockwood and Si 2020b). According
to IBM’s roadmap, it is envisaged to reach the full potential
of QML by around 2026 when quantum computers can run
with 100k qubits (Gambetta 2022).
Motivated by this trend, recent works have started reimplementing existing ML applications using QNNs, ranging from image classification to reinforcement learning (RL)
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11087

