The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Complexity of Probabilistic Inference in Random Dichotomous Hedonic Games
Saar Cohen, Noa Agmon
Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University, Israel
saar30@gmail.com, agmon@cs.biu.ac.il

Abstract

over those are certain. However, both often fail to hold for
real-world problems. Generally, participation in the game
does not depend only on strategic choices, but also on external factors. For instance, in a sports tournament, players
may not arrive to the game before its inception due to a last
minute injury, weather conditions or traffic jams.
In this paper, we thus lay the theoretical foundations for
studying the interplay between dichotomous hedonic games
(DHGs) and the complexity of probabilistic inference. Motivated by probabilistic inference in voting games (Bachrach
et al. 2011; Imber and Kimelfeld 2021), we propose random DHGs (RDHGs), where each player has an independent participation probability. For various classes of DHGs,
we explore the computational complexity of computing the
probability that coalitions and partitions are either optimal,
perfect or stable. We first examine coalitions and partitions
that maximize the number of approving players within them.
Then, we regard partitions which are either stable or perfect (where every agent is in an approved coalition). We
present cases that admit poly-time algorithms for some of
these problems: when agents approve at most one coalition; when agents approve at most one coalition size; when
agents are placed on a line and only approve intervals. Yet,
the above problems become computationally hard (#P-hard)
when the setting becomes non-linear. Accordingly, we show
cases where deciding whether the probability of optimality
is nonzero can be computed in poly-time, and computing
the probability of nonoptimality can be done up to a multiplicative approximation. Though DHGs are one of the very
few sub-classes of hedonic games that admit poly-time solutions (Peters 2016), our results put this property of DHGs
in question when it comes to a probabilistic setting.
Our model corresponds to counting variants of a new
type of manipulation in hedonic games: constructive control by adding players. Analogous to election control problems (Bartholdi et al. 1992), its goal is ensuring that a specified outcome satisfies a certain solution concept by adding
players. Unlike Sybil attacks (Vallée et al. 2014), players are
sincere and participate probabilistically. When players approve polynomially many coalitions, we supply a reduction
from control problems in elections with a polynomial and
binary positional scoring rule. We are thus provided with
a novel correlation between hedonic games and elections,
from which we deduce some of our complexity results. The

Hedonic games model cooperative games where agents desire
to form coalitions, and only care about the composition of the
coalitions of which they are members. Focusing on various
classes of dichotomous hedonic games, where each agent either approves or disapproves a given coalition, we propose the
random extension, where players have an independent participation probability. We initiate the research on the computational complexity of computing the probability that coalitions
and partitions are optimal or stable. While some cases admit
efficient algorithms (e.g., agents approve only few coalitions),
they become computationally hard (#P-hard) in their complementary scenario. We then investigate the distribution of
coalitions in perfect partitions and their performance in majority games, where an agent approves coalitions in which
the agent is friends with the majority of its members. When
friendships independently form with a constant probability,
we prove that the number of coalitions of size 3 converges in
distribution to a Poisson random variable.

Introduction
In several real-life scenarios arising from economics, politics, and sociology, we notice the phenomenon of coalition
formation, where each person, termed as agent, forms coalitions with others to get some benefit, experiencing a utility
that depends on the particular set of agents she joins. A popular game-theoretic approach to the study of coalition formation problems is Hedonic games (Dreze and Greenberg
1980), whose outcome is a partition of the agents into coalitions, over which the agents have preferences. One of their
main properties is non-externality: an agent minds only her
own coalition, regardless of how the others aggregate. Yet,
the number of coalitions an agent can be part of is exponential in the number of agents, and therefore it is desirable
to consider expressive, but succinctly representable classes
of hedonic games. One common approach is to restrict the
players’ possible preferences. As such, our work focuses on
dichotomous preferences, where each agent either approves
or disapproves of a given coalition (Aziz et al. 2016).
Two major underlying assumptions in hedonic games literature are that all agents are assured to participate in the
game, and the nature of their collaborations and preferences
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5573

