The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

UCoL: Unsupervised Learning of Discriminative Facial Representations via
Uncertainty-Aware Contrast
Hao Wang* 1 , Min Li* 1 , Yangyang Song1 , Youjian Zhang2 , Liying Chi1
1

ByteDance Inc.
The University of Sydney
haoww.wh@gmail.com

Abstract

100

1

LFW Accuracy

This paper presents Uncertainty-aware Contrastive Learning
(UCoL): a fully unsupervised framework for discriminative
facial representation learning. Our UCoL is built upon a momentum contrastive network, referred to as Dual-path Momentum Network. Specifically, two flows of pairwise contrastive training are conducted simultaneously: one is formed
with intra-instance self augmentation, and the other is to
identify positive pairs collected by online pairwise prediction. We introduce a novel uncertainty-aware consistency Knearest neighbors algorithm to generate predicted positive
pairs, which enables efficient discriminative learning from
large-scale open-world unlabeled data. Experiments show
that UCoL significantly improves the baselines of unsupervised models and performs on par with the semi-supervised
and supervised face representation learning methods.

95
90

CosFace ArcFace

PFC

DCQ

VirFace PseudoLabel

CDP

NRoLL
UCoL(Ours)

85

MoCo

80
75

FaceCycle

70

100
MegaFace Rank1

2

CosFace ArcFace

80
60
40

STAR-FC

CDP

DCQ
NRoLL
UCoL(Ours)

PseudoLabel

20
0

Supervised
Semi-supervised
Unsupervised

PFC

Supervised
Semi-supervised
Unsupervised

MoCo

Figure 1: The face recognition performance of
supervised/semi-supervised/unsupervised
learning
on
benchmarks (LFW and MegeFace). UCoL improves the
baseline of MoCo by a large margin and closes the gap
between unsupervised and supervised methods.

Introduction
However, they still depend on face identity labels to capture
biases in facial affinity graphs (Yang et al. 2020). Clustering
requires processing the entire dataset for pseudo label generation, making online end-to-end learning challenging. Additionally, assuming no overlap between pseudo labels and
original identities is not always valid in supervised face clustering methods (RoyChowdhury et al. 2020).
In this work, we present a simple framework to approach
unsupervised discriminative facial representation learning,
namely Uncertainty-aware Contrastive Learning (UCoL).
The objective of contrastive loss is incorporated to separate positive and negative pairs to improve the discriminative
power of face representations. We show that the contrastivebased model enables online self-training and efficiently exploits massive unlabeled face images for open-world largescale unsupervised representation learning.
Following the central idea of vallina MoCo (He et al.
2020), we first build a similar momentum contrast framework to train a self-supervised model on face datasets without identity labels. However, it fails to generate promising
results on face verification tasks. The reasons may lie in
the preprocessing of faces by strict alignment. Thus, we remove the alignment and compose stronger data augmentations. Accordingly, the performance can be boosted, yet still
lags behind the supervised models (See the performance of
MoCo in Figure 1). From this perspective, we hypothesize

Unsupervised visual representation learning has led to efficient training on many downstream vision tasks, driven by
recent advances such as the Contrastive Learning based (Wu
et al. 2018; Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018; Ye et al. 2019; Tian,
Krishnan, and Isola 2020; Chen et al. 2020a,b; He et al.
2020) and the Masked Image Modeling (MIM) based (He
et al. 2022; Xie et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022; Li et al.
2022) methods. However, most techniques cannot generalize well to face-related areas without further supervised finetuning (Bulat et al. 2022). On the other hand, the performance gains of face recognition are usually achieved at prohibitive annotation costs (Guo et al. 2016; An et al. 2021).
Scaling up the current annotation size to more identities
tends to suffer from annotation noises (Zhan et al. 2018;
Wang et al. 2018a) and may raise privacy concerns (Erkin
et al. 2009). Thus, the fundamental question on ”How to
learn effective and discriminative facial representation without any supervision?” remains unsolved.
Several prior studies on supervised face clustering (Yang
et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2020; Shen et al.
2021) stand the dominant approach for solving this problem,
where the goal is to apply a graph convolutional network
(GCN) to learn the cluster patterns based on identity-prior.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2510

