The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Finding Fair Allocations under Budget Constraints
Siddharth Barman1 , Arindam Khan1 , Sudarshan Shyam*1,2 , K. V. N. Sreenivas1
1

Department of Computer Science and Automation, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
2
Department of Computer Science, Aarhus University
barman@iisc.ac.in, arindamkhan@iisc.ac.in, sudarshans.iitkgp@gmail.com, venkatanaga@iisc.ac.in

Abstract

(Budish 2011; Othman, Sandholm, and Budish 2010), public
housing units (Deng, Sing, and Ren 2013), and inheritance
(Goldman and Procaccia 2015).
A distinguishing feature of discrete fair division is its development of fairness notions that are applicable in the context of indivisible goods. A focus on relaxations is necessitated by the fact that existential guarantees, under classic fairness notions, are scarce in the context of indivisible goods. The fundamental fairness criterion of envyfreeness—which requires that each agent values the bundle
assigned to her over that of any other agent—cannot be guaranteed in the indivisible-goods setting; consider the simple
example of a single indivisible good and multiple agents.
Interestingly, such pathology can be addressed by considering a natural relaxation: prior works have shown that, among
agents with monotone valuations, there necessarily exists an
allocation in which envy towards any agent can be resolved
by the removal of a good (Lipton et al. 2004; Budish 2011).
More generally, recent research in discrete fair division
has addressed existential and algorithmic questions related
to the notion of envy-freeness up to k goods (EFk); see, e.g.,
the survey (Suksompong 2021) and references therein. In an
EFk allocation, each agent prefers its own bundle over that
of any other agent, up to the removal of k goods from the
other agent’s bundle. A mature understanding has been developed in recent years specifically for allocations that are
envy-free up to one good (EF1), e.g., it is known that, under additive valuations, Pareto efficiency can be achieved in
conjunction with EF1 (Caragiannis et al. 2019; Barman, Krishnamurthy, and Vaish 2018).
However, most works on EF1, and further relaxations, assume that all possible assignments of the indivisible goods
(among the agents) are feasible. On the other hand, combinatorial constraints are an unavoidable requirement in many
resource-allocation settings. As an illustrative example to
highlight the significance of constraints in discrete fair division settings, consider a curator tasked with fairly partitioning artwork among different museums (i.e., among different
agents).1 Each artifact (indivisible good) has an associated
value and a space requirement (depending on its size). Note
that the artifacts assigned to a particular museum must fit

We study the fair allocation of indivisible goods among
agents with identical, additive valuations but individual budget constraints. Here, the indivisible goods—each with a specific size and value—need to be allocated such that the bundle
assigned to each agent is of total size at most the agent’s budget. Since envy-free allocations do not necessarily exist in the
indivisible goods context, compelling relaxations—in particular, the notion of envy-freeness up to k goods (EFk)—have
received significant attention in recent years. In an EFk allocation, each agent prefers its own bundle over that of any
other agent, up to the removal of k goods, and the agents
have similarly bounded envy against the charity (which corresponds to the set of all unallocated goods). It has been
shown in prior work that an allocation that satisfies the budget constraints and maximizes the Nash social welfare is 1/4approximately EF1. However, the computation (or even existence) of exact EFk allocations remained an intriguing open
problem.
We make notable progress towards this by proposing a simple, greedy, polynomial-time algorithm that computes EF2
allocations under budget constraints. Our algorithmic result
implies the universal existence of EF2 allocations in this fair
division context. The analysis of the algorithm exploits intricate structural properties of envy-freeness. Interestingly, the
same algorithm also provides EF1 guarantees for important
special cases. Specifically, we settle the existence of EF1 allocations for instances in which: (i) the value of each good is
proportional to its size, (ii) all goods have the same size, or
(iii) all the goods have the same value. Our EF2 result extends
to the setting wherein the goods’ sizes are agent specific.

1

Introduction

Discrete fair division is an actively growing field of research at the interface of computer science, mathematical
economics, and multi-agent systems (Brandt et al. 2016;
Aziz et al. 2022; Amanatidis et al. 2022). This study is motivated, in large part, by resource-allocation settings in which
the underlying resources have to be assigned integrally and
cannot be fractionally divided among the agents. Notable
examples of such settings include fair allocation of courses
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*Part of this work was conducted while the third author was at
the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore.

1
This stylized example is adapted from (Gourvès, Monnot, and
Tlilane 2014)

5481

