The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Knowledge Amalgamation for Multi-Label Classification
via Label Dependency Transfer
Jidapa Thadajarassiri1 , Thomas Hartvigsen2 , Walter Gerych1 , Xiangnan Kong1 , Elke
Rundensteiner1
1
Worcester Polytechnic Institute,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{jthadajarassiri, wgerych, xkong, rundenst}@wpi.edu, tomh@mit.edu
2

Given

Abstract

Pre-Trained Multi-Label Models (Teachers)

Label

Label Dependency (bolder shows stronger)

Unlabeled
Instance

Multi-label classification (MLC), which assigns multiple labels to each instance, is crucial to domains from computer vision to text mining. Conventional methods for MLC require
huge amounts of labeled data to capture complex dependencies between labels. However, such labeled datasets are expensive, or even impossible, to acquire. Worse yet, these pretrained MLC models can only be used for the particular label
set covered in the training data. Despite this severe limitation,
few methods exist for expanding the set of labels predicted by
pre-trained models. Instead, we acquire vast amounts of new
labeled data and retrain a new model from scratch. Here, we
propose combining the knowledge from multiple pre-trained
models (teachers) to train a new student model that covers
the union of the labels predicted by this set of teachers. This
student supports a broader label set than any one of its teachers without using labeled data. We call this new problem
knowledge amalgamation for multi-label classification. Our
new method, Adaptive KNowledge Transfer (ANT), trains a
student by learning from each teacher’s partial knowledge of
label dependencies to infer the global dependencies between
all labels across the teachers. We show that ANT succeeds in
unifying label dependencies among teachers, outperforming
five state-of-the-art methods on eight real-world datasets.

garage

car

Predicted label set
garage,
car

tree
Teacher 1
Pre-trained from rural images on: tree, garage, car
car
street

building

Predicted label set
building

Teacher 2
Pre-trained from urban images on: car, street, building

Output
Legend
Neural Networks
Model’s Knowledge

garage
tree

Student

street

car
building

Predicted label set
garage,
car,
street,
building

Figure 1: Knowledge amalgamation for multi-label classification. Given pre-trained multi-label models (teachers) and
unlabeled data, the task is to train a student that accurately
classifies labels in the union of teachers’ specialized labels.

bels. These approaches (Chen et al. 2018; Nam et al. 2019)
use large RNNs to share parameters across label predictions.
However, these works (Zhang and Zhang 2010; Tsai and
Lee 2020) have only been developed for standard supervised
learning, requiring a massive amount of labeled data to sufficiently learn label dependencies. Despite the expensive cost
to gather such labeled data, the usability of the resulting
model is limited to only the specific label set that it was
pre-trained for and cannot adapt for use with broader label
sets. Instead, the model would need to be retrained on a new
labeled dataset, requiring practitioners to re-annotate all instances to consider also new labels or to acquire many more
labeled instances to cover the new possible label sets.
To alleviate these costs, Knowledge Amalgamation (KA)
(Ye et al. 2019) is a learning paradigm that, using only unlabeled data, combines the knowledge of multiple pre-trained
models (teachers) into one student. The student then handles
a broader task set than that of any of its teachers by covering
the union of their labels. Ideally, KA could be used to combine the knowledge of multi-label classifiers to extend their
knowledge-base without the expense of collecting more labeled data. This setting is depicted in Figure 1 where two

Introduction
Multi-label classification (MLC) is crucial for real-world applications where instances are associated with multiple labels simultaneously. Examples of these applications include
computer vision (Chen et al. 2019), text mining (Yang et al.
2018), and bioinformatics (Vens et al. 2008). The MLC task
requires sophisticated solutions, as any approach must overcome the hurdle caused by many possible label subsets—
which are exponential in the number of labels—that could
be applied to any instance (Dembszynski et al. 2010).
State-of-the-Art. Modern multi-label classifiers perform
remarkably well on this challenging task by exploiting dependencies between labels (Wang et al. 2016; Nam et al.
2017; Chen et al. 2018). To achieve this, recent methods
build on Classifier Chains (Dembszynski et al. 2010; Read
et al. 2011), which predict labels sequentially, conditioning
the prediction of each label on all previously predicted laCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9980

