The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Does It Pay to Optimize AUC?
Baojian Zhou1 , Steven Skiena2
1

Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Stony Brook University, New York, USA
bjzhou@fudan.edu.cn, skiena@cs.stonybrook.edu
2

Abstract

Le et al. 2010; Zhao et al. 2011; Gao et al. 2013; Ying,
Wen, and Lyu 2016; Eban et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2020) have
been proposed to optimize AUC approximately under different learning settings. Typically, these methods relax the
original nonconvex nondifferentiable objective to either convex or differentiable. Despite these advances, there exists no
strong evidence that these algorithms generally perform better than standard classifiers. Empirical observations (Rakotomamonjy 2004; Joachims 2005) from previous indicate
generally minor and statistically insignificant gains on particular datasets. This vagueness makes the question whether
the observed results are due to the inherent limitations of the
metric or the inadequate quality of optimization.
To better understand the virtues of optimizing for AUC,
we investigate it from both computational and algorithmic
viewpoints. Although AUC optimization is often reported to
be NP-hard for linear hypothesis classes (Gao et al. 2013;
Gao and Zhou 2015; Gultekin et al. 2020), we show that it
is polynomial-time solvable if the data dimension d is fixed.
We also prove that it is NP-complete if d is not fixed in advance. The key idea of our proof is a reduction from the open
hemisphere problem (Johnson and Preparata 1978).
With the hope of polynomial-time solvable of linear classifiers, we present an efficient algorithm, namely AUC-opt,
that can provably optimize AUC in R2 . A key observation
is that given any n training samples on the plane, the number of “interesting” classifiers is at most O (n+ n− ) where
n+ and n− are the number of positive and negative samples respectively. Inspired by the idea of the topological
sweep (Edelsbrunner and Guibas 1989), we calculate the
AUC for the “minimal” slope once and then iterate through
all other slopes by an ascending order using only constant
update-time per iteration, yielding an O(n+ n− log n) algorithm. Furthermore, our method can be naturally extended
to Rd in O((n+ n− )d−1 log(n)) by calling AUC-opt in lowdimensional spaces recursively. This algorithm as an exponential depends on d and hence will be impractical on
large real-world datasets where samples are usually highdimensional. Our goal here is not a general-purpose algorithm but to address whether the observed limitations
of previous AUC optimizers result from inadequate optimization of a convex function or are an inherent result
of the AUC objective criteria. Doing such experiments requires the exact optimization of AUC-opt, even if we are

The Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) is an important model
metric for evaluating binary classifiers, and many algorithms
have been proposed to optimize AUC approximately. It raises
the question of whether the generally insignificant gains observed by previous studies are due to inherent limitations of
the metric or the inadequate quality of optimization.
To better understand the value of optimizing for AUC,
we present an efficient algorithm, namely AUC-opt, to
find the provably optimal AUC linear classifier in R2 ,
which runs in O(n+ n− log(n+ n− )) where n+ and n−
are the number of positive and negative samples respectively. Furthermore, it can be naturally extended to Rd in
O((n+ n− )d−1 log(n+ n− )) by calling AUC-opt in lowerdimensional spaces recursively. We prove the problem is NPcomplete when d is not fixed, reducing from the open hemisphere problem.
Experiments show that compared with other methods, AUCopt achieves statistically significant improvements on between 17 to 40 in R2 and between 4 to 42 in R3 of 50 t-SNE
training datasets. However, generally the gain proves insignificant on most testing datasets compared to the best standard
classifiers. Similar observations are found for nonlinear AUC
methods under real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

The Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) (Hanley and McNeil 1982) is an important model evaluation metric that can
be applied to a wide range of learning tasks such as binary
classification (Bradley 1997), bipartite ranking (Freund et al.
2003), and recently fairness learning (Kallus and Zhou 2019;
Vogel et al. 2021). It is a generally more reliable quality
measure than the accuracy when the dataset is highly imbalanced, which often is the case in real-world problems.
Multiple studies (Cortes and Mohri 2004; Joachims 2005)
argue that optimizing classifiers for AUC may result in better classifiers than minimizing error rates.
A wide variety of algorithms (Provost and Fawcett 2001;
Ferri, Flach, and Hernández-Orallo 2002; Yan et al. 2003;
Cortes and Mohri 2004; Rakotomamonjy 2004; Herschtal
and Raskutti 2004; Brefeld and Scheffer 2005; Joachims
2005; Calders and Jaroszewicz 2007; Qin, Liu, and Li 2010;
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11408

