The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Back to the Future: Toward a Hybrid Architecture for Ad Hoc Teamwork
Hasra Dodampegama, Mohan Sridharan
Intelligent Robotics Lab, School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, UK
hhd968@student.bham.ac.uk, m.sridharan@bham.ac.uk

Abstract
State of the art methods for ad hoc teamwork, i.e., for collaboration without prior coordination, often use a long history
of prior observations to model the behavior of other agents
(or agent types) and to determine the ad hoc agent’s behavior. In many practical domains, it is difficult to obtain large
training datasets, and it is necessary to quickly revise the existing models to account for changes in team composition or
the domain. Our architecture builds on the principles of stepwise refinement and ecological rationality to enable an ad hoc
agent to perform non-monotonic logical reasoning with prior
commonsense domain knowledge and models learned rapidly
from limited examples to predict the behavior of other agents.
In the simulated multiagent collaboration domain Fort Attack,
we experimentally demonstrate that our architecture enables
an ad hoc agent to adapt to changes in the behavior of other
agents, and provides enhanced transparency and better performance than a state of the art data-driven baseline.

1

Figure 1: Screenshots from the fort attack environment.

There has been considerable research in AHT (Mirsky
et al. 2022). Initial methods had the ad hoc agent choose
from and execute encoded protocols for collaboration based
on the current state. State of the art methods include a datadriven component; they learn probabilistic or deep network
models and policies from a history of experiences to estimate the behavior of other agents (or agent “types”) and to
compute the ad hoc agent’s actions. These methods do not
fully leverage the available domain knowledge. Unlike existing work, our architecture draws on research in cognitive
systems, moves beyond just data-driven optimization, and
builds on the principles of step-wise refinement (Sridharan
et al. 2019) and ecological rationality (Gigerenzer 2016) to:
• Support non-monotonic logical reasoning with prior
commonsense domain knowledge, enabling an ad hoc
agent to plan and execute actions to achieve desired
goals, and provide relational descriptions of its decisions;
• Use reasoning to guide learning and revision of simple
anticipatory models that satisfactorily mimic the behavior of other agents from limited examples; and
• Use an algorithmic model of heuristic methods to identify attributes and heuristic methods that support reliable
and efficient reasoning and learning.
In the Fort Attack domain, we demonstrate that our architecture supports reliable, efficient, and transparent reasoning,
learning, and adaption, and better performance than a state
of the art data-driven baseline.

Introduction

Ad hoc teamwork (AHT) refers to the problem of enabling an agent to cooperate with others on the fly (Stone
et al. 2010). Figure 1 shows motivating scenarios from Fort
Attack, a simulated benchmark for multiagent collaboration (Deka and Sycara 2020). Three guards (in green) are
trying to protect a fort from three attackers (in red). An
episode ends when all members of a team are killed, an attacker reaches the fort, or guards protect the fort for a sufficient time period. Each agent can move in a particular direction with a particular velocity, or shoot over a particular
range. Each agent is aware of the world state (e.g., location,
status of each agent) at each step, but the agents have not
worked with each other before and do not communicate with
each other. This example is representative of many practical multiagent collaboration scenarios (e.g., disaster rescue), and poses knowledge representation, reasoning, and
learning challenges. An ad hoc agent, e.g., “1” in Figure 1,
has to reason with prior commonsense domain knowledge
(e.g., some domain and agent attributes, axioms governing change) and uncertainty, adapting its action choices to
changes in the domain or in the behavior of other agents.

2

Related Work

Research in AHT has existed under different names for at
least 15 years (Mirsky et al. 2022). Early work encoded spe-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3

