The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Contrastive Learning Reduces Hallucination in Conversations
Weiwei Sun1 , Zhengliang Shi1 , Shen Gao1 , Pengjie Ren1 , Maarten de Rijke2 , Zhaochun Ren1 *
1

Shandong University, Qingdao, China
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{weiwei.sun,shizhl}@mail.sdu.edu.cn, {shengao,renpengjie,zhaochun.ren}@sdu.edu.cn, m.derijke@uva.nl
2

Intrinsic hallucinations

Abstract

24

Pre-trained language models (LMs) store knowledge in
their parameters and can generate informative responses
when used in conversational systems. However, LMs suffer
from the problem of “hallucination:” they may generate
plausible-looking statements that are irrelevant or factually
incorrect. To address this problem, we propose a contrastive
learning scheme, named MixCL. A novel mixed contrastive
objective is proposed to explicitly optimize the implicit
knowledge elicitation process of LMs, and thus reduce
their hallucination in conversations. We also examine
negative sampling strategies of retrieved hard negatives
and model-generated negatives. We conduct experiments
on Wizard-of-Wikipedia, a public, open-domain knowledgegrounded dialogue benchmark, and assess the effectiveness
of MixCL. MixCL effectively reduces the hallucination of
LMs in conversations and achieves the highest performance
among LM-based dialogue agents in terms of relevancy
and factuality. We show that MixCL achieves comparable
performance to state-of-the-art KB-based approaches while
enjoying notable advantages in terms of efficiency and
scalability.

1

0%

Extrinsic hallucinations

27
25%

Others

49
50%

75%

100%

Figure 1: Results of a pilot experiment where annotators
were asked to label 200 responses generated by BART on
the Wizard-of-Wikipedia dataset for hallucination.

knowledge bases to ground open-domain dialogues (Zhao,
Wu, and Xu 2020). Such approaches, known as LM-based
methods, achieve promising performance in generating
informative responses and obviate the drawbacks of KBbased methods. However, LM-based methods have the
problem of “hallucination” (Shuster et al. 2021; Ji et al.
2022): they generate plausible-looking statements that are
irrelevant or factually incorrect.
To understand the severity of hallucinations of LMs,
we conduct a pilot experiment. We sample 200 responses
generated by BART (Lewis et al. 2020) on the Wizard-ofWikipedia dataset (Dinan et al. 2019) for various topics and
conversation turns. These responses are annotated by three
well-informed experts in terms of knowledge relevancy and
factuality. Based on the results, we group the hallucinations
of LMs into two types: intrinsic hallucinations and extrinsic
hallucinations. Intrinsic hallucinations are non-factual
statements, such as incorrectly predicting a celebrity’s
birthday. Extrinsic hallucinations are irrelevant or out-ofcontext responses, such as the a description of the history of
football when the user asks the number of teams currently
in the NFL. Fig. 1 summarizes the outcomes: intrinsic and
extrinsic hallucinations account for 24% and 27% of the
responses, respectively.
The problem of hallucinations is mainly attributable to
the optimization recipes: the commonly used maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE) with teacher forcing training
encourages the model to imitate the training data
blindly, leading to model hallucinations at inference
time (Kang and Hashimoto 2020). Most studies on tackling
hallucination in conversations focus on KB-based methods
and use pre-retrieval (Shuster et al. 2021) or post-editing
techniques (Dziri et al. 2021) to improve faithfulness; the
hallucination of LM-based agents in eliciting knowledge

Introduction

Open-domain dialogue agents have received increasing
attention in recent years (Freitas et al. 2020; Huang, Zhu,
and Gao 2020). In an engaging open-domain dialogue, a
large amount of knowledge, such as commonsense (Young
et al. 2018) and factual knowledge (Dinan et al. 2019), is
involved. To integrate knowledge into dialogue agents, KBbased methods have been proposed to explicitly acquire
knowledge from knowledge bases (Young et al. 2018;
Dinan et al. 2019). However, KB-based methods suffer
from problems of retrieval error (Liu et al. 2022) and
inefficiency (Xu et al. 2022). Meanwhile, recent years
have witnessed a rapid development of pre-trained language
models (LMs) (Devlin et al. 2019; Brown et al. 2020) and
their applications to dialogue tasks (Thoppilan et al. 2022).
Large LMs implicitly store knowledge in their parameters
during the pretraining stage (Petroni et al. 2019; Zhou
et al. 2020) and thus, to some extent, they can serve as
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13618

