The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Domain-Adapted Dependency Parsing for Cross-Domain
Named Entity Recognition
Chenxiao Dou1 , Xianghui Sun2 , Yaoshu Wang* 3 , Yunjie Ji2 , Baochang Ma2 , Xiangang Li2
1

Nanhu Academy of Electronics and Information Technology
2
Beike
3
Shenzhen Institute of Computing Sciences, Shenzhen University
douchenxiao@cnaeit.com, {sunxianghui002,jiyunjie001,mabaochang001,lixiangang002}@ke.com, yaoshuw@sics.ac.cn
Abstract

industry. In recent years, Multi-Task Learning (MTL) (Caruana 1997) is widely used in solving cross-domain NER.
Researchers claim that cross-domain NER task can benefit
greatly from the contextual representations learned from related cross-domain NLP tasks, such as Entity Type Prediction (Qian et al. 2021) and Language Modeling (Liu et al.
2018). Shared knowledge across different tasks and different domains is regarded as the key factor to the success of
Multi-Task Learning on cross-domain NER.
Dependency Parsing (DP) (Dozat and Manning 2017) is
a classical NLP task to retrieve a syntactic structure from
sentence, named as Dependency Tree which discloses longdistance and pairwise-relation information of words. Many
studies show the effectiveness of adopting dependency-tree
information on improving NER (Jie, Muis, and Lu 2017; Li
et al. 2021; Guo, Zhang, and Lu 2019). Compared to other
auxiliary NLP tasks commonly used in Multi-Task Learning, DP seems to be more promising in introducing shared
cross-task knowledge to NER, because the boundary of a
named entity often corresponds to the boundary of a sub dependency tree in sentence-level. For example, in Figure 1,
given the named entity The Cape of Good Hope, we can
easily observe that its start position and end position are the
same to the start position and end position of the sub dependency tree rooted at Cape. Certainly, such boundary knowledge learned from DP has great value to be used across tasks
to help finding named-entity boundary. However, there exists a practical problem to join DP and NER, that DP annotation is not an inherent part of natural-language sentences
and is barely provided in NER corpora. Apparently, it is unrealistic to manually label dependency relations for target
data, which is time-consuming and labor-intensive.
To address the DP labelling problem, a promising solution
is to adopt cross-domain DP as the auxiliary task to jointly
learn with NER. By utilizing Domain Adaptation (DA) techniques (Wang and Deng 2018), cross-domain DP is able to
transfer learned DP knowledge from high-resource domains
to low-resource domains. In this way, with limited DP labels, useful cross-task knowledge from cross-domain DP
can be acquired for NER. Furthermore, with relatively invariant syntactic features learned through DP domain adaptation, cross-domain DP can also be used to bridge different domains for cross-domain NER. Intuitively, compared
to other NLP tasks, such as NER whose data distribution

In recent years, many researchers have leveraged structural
information from dependency trees to improve Named Entity
Recognition (NER). Most of their methods take dependencytree labels as input features for NER model training. However, such dependency information is not inherently provided
in most NER corpora, making the methods with low usability in practice. To effectively exploit the potential of worddependency knowledge, motivated by the success of MultiTask Learning on cross-domain NER, we investigate a novel
NER learning method incorporating cross-domain Dependency Parsing (DP) as its auxiliary learning task. Then, considering the high consistency of word-dependency relations
across domains, we present an unsupervised domain-adapted
method to transfer word-dependency knowledge from highresource domains to low-resource ones. With the help of
cross-domain DP to bridge different domains, both useful
cross-domain and cross-task knowledge can be learned by
our model to considerably benefit cross-domain NER. To
make better use of the cross-task knowledge between NER
and DP, we unify both tasks in a shared network architecture for joint learning, using Maximum Mean Discrepancy
(MMD). Finally, through extensive experiments, we show our
proposed method can not only effectively take advantage of
word-dependency knowledge, but also significantly outperform other Multi-Task Learning methods on cross-domain
NER. Our code is open-source and available at https://github.
com/xianghuisun/DADP.

Introduction
Named Entity Recognition (NER) is the foundation for
many tasks of information extraction, aiming to locate and
identify named entities in natural-language sentences, such
as Person and Location (Li et al. 2022). The extracted named
entities carry rich semantic information which plays an important role in downstream NLP tasks, such as Entity Resolution and Question Answering (Li et al. 2022). In practice, the main challenge of NER comes from the sparsity
issue of data annotation, which may cost unaffordable efforts from human experts to label named entities in text corpora. Due to the high cost of manual labelling, cross-domain
NER has attracted widespread attention from academy and
* Yaoshu Wang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12737

