The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

De-biased Teacher: Rethinking IoU Matching for Semi-supervised Object
Detection
Kuo Wang1 * , Jingyu Zhuang1 * , Guanbin Li1† , Chaowei Fang2 , Lechao Cheng3 , Liang Lin1 , Fan
Zhou1†
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Research Institute of Sun Yat-sen University in Shenzhen, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
3
Zhejiang Lab, Zhejiang, China
Elephant
{wangk229, zhuangjy6}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, Background
chaoweifang@outlook.com,
chenglc@zhejianglab.com, linliang@ieee.org, isszf@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Background

Abstract

Elephant 0.95
Elephant

Most of the recent research in semi-supervised object detection follows the pseudo-labeling paradigm evolved from
the semi-supervised image classification task. However, the
training paradigm of the two-stage object detector inevitably
makes the pseudo-label learning process for unlabeled images full of bias. Specifically, the IoU matching scheme used
for selecting and labeling candidate boxes is based on the
assumption that the matching source (ground truth) is accurate enough in terms of the number of objects, object position and object category. Obviously, pseudo-labels generated
for unlabeled images cannot satisfy such a strong assumption, which makes the produced training proposals extremely
unreliable and thus severely spoil the follow-up training.
To de-bias the training proposals generated by the pseudolabel-based IoU matching, we propose a general framework
– De-biased Teacher, which abandons both the IoU matching and pseudo labeling processes by directly generating favorable training proposals for consistency regularization between the weak/strong augmented image pairs. Moreover, a
distribution-based refinement scheme is designed to eliminate the scattered class predictions of significantly low values for higher efficiency. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that the proposed De-biased Teacher consistently outperforms other state-of-the-art methods on the MS-COCO and
PASCAL VOC benchmarks. Source codes are available at
https://github.com/wkfdb/De-biased-Teracher.

Background

Background
Elephant 0.95

(a) Low recall rate of pseudo
labels leads to many objects
in candidates be incorrectly labeled as background by IoU
matching.

Teddy
bear

Teddy bear
Teddy bear 0.9
Dog
Dog

Teddy
Dogbear
0.9

Teddy
bear

bearinformation
0.9
(b) TheTeddy
noisy
(incorrect Dog
position or category) in
Dog
one single pseudo label will be
propagated
Dog 0.9 to all the matched
candidates by IoU matching.

Figure 1: Possible detrimental analysis of IoU matching
with the pseudo label. The red solid boxes are the pseudolabels adopted by the model during training, and the yellow dashed boxes are the training proposals generated during IoU matching.

tasks (Sohn et al. 2020a), and there are still many unsolved
problems in generalizing them to object detection.
Recent research on semi-supervised object detection
(SSOD) basically follows the paradigm of pseudo-labeling,
that is, by generating pseudo-labels for weakly-augmented
unlabeled images to supervise the training of their strongly
augmented version. However, a simple generalization of this
scheme in the field of object detection fails to achieve stunning performance comparable to classification tasks (Sohn
et al. 2020a). In this work, we deeply dissect the training
design of the two-stage object detectors and discover IoU
matching, the culprit that inevitably causes biased training
proposals based on pseudo labels of unlabeled images.
According to the default training design of Faster-RCNN,
a number of candidate boxes from RPN are sent to the ROI
head while the model does not use all of them for training. Instead, the process of IoU matching is applied to select training proposals from those candidates according to
their overlapping with the ground truth. However, by treating pseudo labels as ground truth for unlabeled images, the
IoU matching process will inevitably assign noisy category

Introduction
Benefiting from the availability of large-scale annotated
datasets, supervised learning has achieved astounding performance on various computer vision tasks. However, large
amounts of annotations are expensive and time-consuming
to collect, particularly for object detection. To alleviate this
issue, Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) which is designed
to fully exploit the potential of unlabeled data to facilitate
model learning has received much attention. Yet, the majority of the advanced SSL methods come from classification
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2573

