The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Modeling Human Trust and Reliance in AI-Assisted Decision Making:
A Markovian Approach
Zhuoyan Li* , Zhuoran Lu* , Ming Yin
Purdue University, USA
li4178@purdue.edu, lu800@purdue.edu, mingyin@purdue.edu

Abstract

Many important efforts have been made to obtain these
understandings. For example, experimental studies have
been conducted, through which a wide range of factors that
influence decision makers’ reliance on AI models in AIassisted decision making have been identified (Yin, Wortman Vaughan, and Wallach 2019; Zhang, Liao, and Bellamy
2020; Bansal et al. 2019a). More recently, researchers go beyond the empirical understandings and start to explore how
to computationally model human decision makers’ reliance
on AI models in AI-assisted decision making, taking multiple influencing factors into account (Wang, Lu, and Yin
2022; Kumar et al. 2021; Bansal et al. 2021a). Interestingly,
in these studies, humans’ decisions on whether to rely on an
AI model or not are often modeled as an analytical process,
that is, people make their reliance decision by estimating the
“utility” of accepting or rejecting the AI recommendation
and completing a cost-benefit analysis. Meanwhile, conceptual models proposed in the psychology literature suggest
that people’s reliance behavior can be largely controlled by
their emotions, such as their trust in the AI model. It is thus
natural to ask, can we computationally model people’s affective process underlying their reliance decisions, and how
well can these models fit people’s real-world reliance behavior in AI-assisted decision making?
To answer these questions, in this paper, we propose a hidden Markov model to characterize the dynamics of decision
makers’ latent trust in the AI model in AI-assisted decision
making, as well as their adjustment of reliance decisions
based on the trust. Specifically, building upon a few conceptual models in the psychology literature (Lee and See 2004;
Hoff and Bashir 2015), our proposed model consists of three
components—an initial trust model, a trust dynamics model,
and a decision model. The initial trust model captures how
people’s trust in AI is influenced by their own characteristics
and some contextual factors prior to their interactions with
the AI model. On the other hand, the trust dynamics model
and the decision model specify that during the interactions,
how decision makers’ trust changes over time, or the relationships between trust and reliance, depend on contextual
factors and their interaction experiences.
To evaluate the performance of the proposed model in
capturing people’s reliance behavior in AI-assisted decision
making, we collect data on real human subjects’ reliance decisions in AI-assisted income prediction tasks through a ran-

The increased integration of artificial intelligence (AI) technologies in human workflows has resulted in a new paradigm
of AI-assisted decision making, in which an AI model provides decision recommendations while humans make the final
decisions. To best support humans in decision making, it is
critical to obtain a quantitative understanding of how humans
interact with and rely on AI. Previous studies often model
humans’ reliance on AI as an analytical process, i.e., reliance
decisions are made based on a cost-benefit analysis. However,
theoretical models in psychology suggest that the reliance decisions can often be driven by emotions like humans’ trust in
AI models. In this paper, we propose a hidden Markov model
to capture the affective process underlying the human-AI interaction in AI-assisted decision making, by characterizing
how decision makers adjust their trust in AI over time and
make reliance decisions based on their trust. Evaluations on
real human behavior data collected from human-subject experiments show that the proposed model outperforms various
baselines in accurately predicting humans’ reliance behavior in AI-assisted decision making. Based on the proposed
model, we further provide insights into how humans’ trust
and reliance dynamics in AI-assisted decision making is influenced by contextual factors like decision stakes and their
interaction experiences.

Introduction
With the rapid development of artificial intelligence (AI)
technologies in recent years, AI models have been increasingly adopted to help people make better decisions in various domains ranging from finance to healthcare. The nature of many decisions involving high stakes and the need
to maintain human agency in decision making have led to
the paradigm of AI-assisted decision making, that is, an AI
model makes a decision recommendation to humans, who
will then make the final decision. Designing an AI model
to best support human decision makers in such a paradigm
requires thorough understandings of how humans factor AI
recommendations into their final decisions, for example,
through deciding whether to rely on the AI model or not
in each decision making case.
* Li and Lu have made equal contributions to this work.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6056

