The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Practical Cross-System Shilling Attacks with Limited Access to Data
Meifang Zeng1 , Ke Li2 , Bingchuan Jiang2 , Liujuan Cao1 , Hui Li1 *
1

School of Informatics, Xiamen University
PLA Strategic Support Force Information Engineering University
zengmeifang@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {like19771223, jbc021}@163.com, {caoliujuan, hui}@xmu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Although much effort has been devoted to developing new
shilling attack methods (Gunes et al. 2014; Deldjoo, Noia,
and Merra 2021), we find existing shilling attack approaches
are still far from practical1 . The main reason is that most of
them require the complete knowledge of the RS data, which
is not available in real shilling attacks. A few works study attacking using incomplete data (Zhang et al. 2021a) or transferring knowledge from other sources to attack the victim
RS (Fan et al. 2021). Nevertheless, they still request a large
portion of the target data or assume other data sources share
some items with the victim RS.
In this paper, we study the problem of designing a practical shilling attack approach. We believe a practical shilling
attack method should have the following nice properties:
• Property 1: Do not require any prior knowledge of the
victim RS (e.g., model architecture or parameters in the
model).
• Property 2: When training the attacker, other data
sources (e.g., public RS datasets) instead of the data of
the victim RS can be used. Do not assume the training
data contain any users or items that exist in the victim
RS.
• Property 3: The attacker should use as little information
of the data in the victim RS as possible. Required information should be easy to access in practice.
Our idea is that limiting the access to the target RS data
does not mean that the attacker cannot leverage a large volume of other public RS data to train the attack model. We
propose a new concept of Cross-system Attack: Thanks to
the prosperous development of RS research, many real RS
datasets are available and can be used for extracting knowledge and training the attacker to launch shilling attacks.
Along this direction, we design a Practical Cross-system
Shilling Attack (PC-Attack) framework that requires little
information on the victim RS model and the target RS data.
The contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
1. We analyze the inadequacy of existing shilling attack
methods and propose the concept of cross-system attack
for designing a practical shilling attack model.
2. We design PC-Attack for shilling attacks. PC-Attack is
trained to capture graph topology knowledge from pub-

In shilling attacks, an adversarial party injects a few fake user
profiles into a Recommender System (RS) so that the target
item can be promoted or demoted. Although much effort has
been devoted to developing shilling attack methods, we find
that existing approaches are still far from practical. In this
paper, we analyze the properties a practical shilling attack
method should have and propose a new concept of Crosssystem Attack. With the idea of Cross-system Attack, we
design a Practical Cross-system Shilling Attack (PC-Attack)
framework that requires little information about the victim
RS model and the target RS data for conducting attacks. PCAttack is trained to capture graph topology knowledge from
public RS data in a self-supervised manner. Then, it is finetuned on a small portion of target data that is easy to access to construct fake profiles. Extensive experiments have
demonstrated the superiority of PC-Attack over state-of-theart baselines. Our implementation of PC-Attack is available
at https://github.com/KDEGroup/PC-Attack.

1

Introduction

Recommender System (RS) has become an essential tool in
various online services. However, its prevalence also attracts
attackers who try to manipulate RS to mislead users for gaining illegal profits. Among various attacks, Shilling Attack
is the most subsistent and profitable one (Lin et al. 2022).
RS allows users to interact with the system through various operations such as giving ratings or browsing the page
of an item. In shilling attacks, an adversarial party injects
a few fake user profiles into the system to hoax RS so that
the target item can be promoted or demoted (Gunes et al.
2014). This way, the attacker can increase the possibility that
the target item can be viewed/bought by people or impair
the competitors by demoting their products. In experiments,
shilling attacks are able to spoof real-world RS, including
Amazon, YouTube and Yelp (Xing et al. 2013; Yang, Gong,
and Cai 2017). In practice, services of various large companies were affected by shilling attacks (Lam and Riedl 2004).
Studying how to spoof RS has become a hot direction (Deldjoo, Noia, and Merra 2021) as it gives insights into the defense against malicious attacks.
* Hui Li is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4864

The detailed analysis is provided in Sec. 2.2.

