The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning the Finer Things: Bayesian Structure Learning at the Instantiation Level
Chase Yakaboski, Eugene Santos, Jr.
Thayer School of Engineering at Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH
{chase.th, esj}@dartmouth.edu

Abstract

Katsirelos 2021), and scalings (Scanagatta et al. 2015) are
presented at major AI conferences every year. This is because
BNs and affliated structures like Markov (Koller and Friedman 2009) and Dependency Networks (DNs) (Heckerman
et al. 2000) offer a quality that other methods such as deep
learning do not; explainability (Došilović, Brčić, and Hlupić
2018; Burkart and Huber 2021).
The optimization that occurs in Probabilistic Graphical
Model (PGM) structure learning is

Successful machine learning methods require a trade-off between memorization and generalization. Too much memorization and the model cannot generalize to unobserved examples.
Too much over-generalization and we risk under-fitting the
data. While we commonly measure their performance through
cross validation and accuracy metrics, how should these algorithms cope in domains that are extremely under-determined
where accuracy is always unsatisfactory? We present a novel
probabilistic graphical model structure learning approach that
can learn, generalize and explain in these elusive domains
by operating at the random variable instantiation level. Using
Minimum Description Length (MDL) analysis, we propose
a new decomposition of the learning problem over all training exemplars, fusing together minimal entropy inferences
to construct a final knowledge base. By leveraging Bayesian
Knowledge Bases (BKBs), a framework that operates at the instantiation level and inherently subsumes Bayesian Networks
(BNs), we develop both a theoretical MDL score and associated structure learning algorithm that demonstrates significant
improvements over learned BNs on 40 benchmark datasets.
Further, our algorithm incorporates recent off-the-shelf DAG
learning techniques enabling tractable results even on large
problems. We then demonstrate the utility of our approach
in a significantly under-determined domain by learning gene
regulatory networks on breast cancer gene mutational data
available from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA).

G∗ = argmax F (G, D)
G

subject to G ∈ Ω

Introduction
Since popularization by Pearl (1986), learning Bayesian Networks (BNs) has solidified into a steadfast research area for
40 years. It has become an important paradigm for modeling and reasoning under uncertainty and has seen applications from stock market prediction (Malagrino, Roman, and
Monteiro 2018) and medical diagnosis (Shih, Choi, and Darwiche 2018) to Gene Regulatory Networks (GRNs) (Sauta
et al. 2020). Despite Bayesian Network Structure Learning
(BNSL) being NP-hard (Chickering, Heckerman, and Meek
2004) and even simpler structures like polytrees being NPhard(er) (Dasgupta 1999), new constraints (Grüttemeier and
Komusiewicz 2020), improvements (Trösser, de Givry, and
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
For appendices visit: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04339.
For source code visit: https://github.com/di2ag/pybkb.

10693

where D is a database, G is a graph structure such as a BN,
F is a scoring function that yields the goodness of fit of the
structure G, and Ω is the set of allowed structures for G; for
BNs this would be the space of all possible Directed Acyclic
Graphs (DAGs).
Scoring functions are essential to the structure learning
problem and should have a theoretical justification in information theory or otherwise. For instance, the most common scoring functions such as Bayesian Information Criteria
(BIC) (Schwarz 1978), Minimum Description Length (MDL)
(Rissanen 1978), and Akaike Information Criterion (Akaike
1974) are all based on information theoretic criteria or can be
viewed from this perspective. While we will spend part of this
paper in theoretically justifying our model scoring approach,
our goal is not to present a better scoring function. Instead,
our goal is to illustrate that no matter the scoring function
or learning algorithm, an over-generalization is encountered
when modeling at the Random Variable (RV) level.
By operating at the RV level, models force a complete
distribution, as is the case with BNs. While a complete
distribution is often desired, this has an unintended overgeneralization consequence, particularly in under-determined
domains. This phenomenon even occurs in deep learning systems, and is generally referred to as fooling (Szegedy et al.
2014; Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune 2015; Kardan and Stanley
2018). However, we will limit our scope to PGMs as our end
goal is to analyze and/or hypothesize structural dependency
relationships. Given this goal, such over-generalization could
yield non-optimal structures, biasing analysis and derived
hypotheses leading to misguided conclusions. To illustrate

