The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Generative Image Inpainting with Segmentation Confusion Adversarial Training
and Contrastive Learning
Zhiwen Zuo, Lei Zhao* , Ailin Li, Zhizhong Wang
Zhanjie Zhang, Jiafu Chen, Wei Xing, and Dongming Lu
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{zzwcs, cszhl, liailin, endywon, cszzj, chenjiafu, wxing, ldm}@zju.edu.cn

valid/generated

Abstract
This paper presents a new adversarial training framework
for image inpainting with segmentation confusion adversarial training (SCAT) and contrastive learning. SCAT plays an
adversarial game between an inpainting generator and a segmentation network, which provides pixel-level local training
signals and can adapt to images with free-form holes. By
combining SCAT with standard global adversarial training,
the new adversarial training framework exhibits the following three advantages simultaneously: (1) the global consistency of the repaired image, (2) the local fine texture details of
the repaired image, and (3) the flexibility of handling images
with free-form holes. Moreover, we propose the textural and
semantic contrastive learning losses to stabilize and improve
our inpainting model’s training by exploiting the feature representation space of the discriminator, in which the inpainting images are pulled closer to the ground truth images but
pushed farther from the corrupted images. The proposed contrastive losses better guide the repaired images to move from
the corrupted image data points to the real image data points
in the feature representation space, resulting in more realistic
completed images. We conduct extensive experiments on two
benchmark datasets, demonstrating our model’s effectiveness
and superiority both qualitatively and quantitatively.

real/fake
𝐷!"#$%"

Input image
(a) CE

real/fake
𝐷!"#$%"

𝐷"#&%"

Input image
(b) GLCIC

real/fake

real/fake

𝐷'%(&)

𝐷!"#$%"

Input image
(c) DeepFillv2

𝑆.,&
,-&
𝐷,-&
𝑆
'*+,"

Input image
(d) Proposed

Figure 1: Different adversarial training frameworks of GANbased inpainting models. In addition to a global discriminator, we introduce a segmentation netowrk S in our model,
which tries to label the valid and the generated regions in
the input image.

ods perform considerably well in tasks like background inpainting, they lack the understanding of high-level semantics
and can not capture the global structure of the image, thus
failing to generalize when the missing regions are large or
contain unique image statistics. In contrast, recent deep generative approaches (Pathak et al. 2016; Iizuka, Simo-Serra,
and Ishikawa 2017; Yu et al. 2018, 2019), trained on largescale datasets, benefit from the rich hierarchical features
learned by the deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014; Szegedy et al. 2015; He et al. 2016)
and the powerful generative capacity of generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014), capable of
synthesizing semantically correct and visually plausible inpainting results.
Among the deep generative inpainting methods, Context
Encoder (CE) (Pathak et al. 2016) first proposed to train an
encoder-decoder inpainting network with a combination of
a reconstruction loss and an adversarial loss, showing the
significance of adversarial training in bringing sharper predictions. Since then, exploring and designing more advanced
and sophisticated adversarial training frameworks have become an important research direction for improving GANbased inpainting models. For example, as CE only used a
global context discriminator to distinguish real images from
completed ones as a whole, GLCIC (Iizuka, Simo-Serra, and

Introduction
Image inpainting is the task that aims at estimating the missing pixels in corrupted images, which has a wide impact
on many image editing applications such as object removal,
image denoising, and image restoration, to name a few. As
one of the most important research areas in computer vision, image inpainting has drawn a significant amount of attention in the community for a long time and yet remains
an open challenge, for it is an inherently ill-posed problem.
Prior to the recent dominance of deep generative inpainting methods, early traditional inpainting methods (Barnes
et al. 2009; Bertalmio et al. 2000, 2003; Criminisi, Pérez,
and Toyama 2004; Huang et al. 2014) typically utilize lowlevel features to fill holes by either propagating surroundings
to the missing regions in a diffusive manner or iteratively
searching for the best-matched patches in the internal image contexts or external image datasets. Though these meth* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3888

