The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PDRF: Progressively Deblurring Radiance Field for Fast Scene Reconstruction
from Blurry Images
Cheng Peng and Rama Chellappa
Johns Hopkins University
cpeng26@jhu.edu

Abstract
We present Progressively Deblurring Radiance Field (PDRF),
a novel approach to efficiently reconstruct high quality radiance fields from blurry images. While current State-ofThe-Art (SoTA) scene reconstruction methods achieve photorealistic renderings from clean source views, their performances suffer when the source views are affected by blur,
which is commonly observed in the wild. Previous deblurring
methods either do not account for 3D geometry, or are computationally intense. To addresses these issues, PDRF uses
a progressively deblurring scheme for radiance field modeling, which can accurately model blur with 3D scene context.
PDRF further uses an efficient importance sampling scheme
that results in fast scene optimization. We perform extensive
experiments and show that PDRF is 15X faster than previous
SoTA while achieving better performance on both synthetic
and real scenes.

Figure 1: Comparisons of radiance field modeling methods
from blurry images. Our proposed PDRF significantly outperforms previous methods in speed and performance. Results are aggregated from Table 1.

Introduction
Reconstructing a 3D scene from 2D images is a longstanding research problem with extensive applications in
robotics, site model construction, AR/VR, e-commerce,
etc. Significant progress has been observed recently with
developments in differentiable rendering and implicit
function representation, e.g. Neural Radiance Field, or
NeRF (Mildenhall et al. 2020). In this approach, scene radiance is represented as a neural network, i.e. a MultiLayer Perceptron (MLP), which maps 3D coordinates to
their respective density and color. By incorporating the MLP
into ray tracing, scene radiance is optimized with a selfsupervised photometric loss to satisfy multi-view observations; therefore, only calibrated images are required. This
formulation produces photo-realistic scene rendering, models scene geometry, and accounts for view dependent effects.
While NeRF, along with other implicit function-based
methods (Park et al. 2019; Mescheder et al. 2019; Chen
and Zhang 2019; Sitzmann, Zollhöfer, and Wetzstein 2019),
marks a significant step towards photo-realistic scene reconstruction, its application in the real world is still limited.
Images acquired in the wild are often affected by factors
like object motion, camera motion, incorrect focus, or low

light conditions. These factors can significantly impact radiance field modeling due to information loss and multi-view
inconsistency. There often exists enough information within
images in the wild to model high quality radiance field, despite the sub-optimal acquisitions. To this end, subsequent
works (Mildenhall et al. 2022; Park et al. 2021a,b; Pumarola
et al. 2021; Tretschk et al. 2021; Martin-Brualla et al. 2021)
attempt to account for these conditions with domain knowledge and estimate a robust NeRF.
In this work, we seek to better address camera motion and
defocus blur in radiance field modeling, which is commonly
observed. Prior works have two drawbacks: a lack of 3D
context in modeling blur and a time-consuming optimization
process. In particular, Deblur-NeRF (Ma et al. 2022) models
a blurry observation by blending P clean pixels with a blur
kernel; however, the pixel-wise blur is predicted based on
2D image coordinates. As we will show, this limits DeblurNeRF’s blur modeling capacity due to the lack of scene context. Since P pixels need to be ray-traced to render a single
blurry pixel, Deblur-NeRF is also P times slower than NeRF
in rendering the same number of pixels. As shown in Fig. 1,
this make Deblur-NeRF very computationally demanding.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2029

