The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Task-Adaptive Meta-Learning Framework for Advancing Spatial Generalizability
Zhexiong Liu1 , Licheng Liu2 , Yiqun Xie3 , Zhenong Jin2 , Xiaowei Jia1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260 USA
2
The University of Minnesota, Twin City, Minnesota 55108 USA
3
The University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742 USA
{zhexiong.liu, xiaowei}@pitt.edu, {lichengl, jinzn}@umn.edu, xie@umd.edu

Abstract
Spatio-temporal machine learning is critically needed for a
variety of societal applications, such as agricultural monitoring, hydrological forecast, and traffic management. These applications greatly rely on regional features that characterize
spatial and temporal differences. However, spatio-temporal
data often exhibit complex patterns and significant data variability across different locations. The labels in many realworld applications can also be limited, which makes it difficult to separately train independent models for different locations. Although meta learning has shown promise in model
adaptation with small samples, existing meta-learning methods remain limited in handling a large number of heterogeneous tasks, e.g., a large number of locations with varying
data patterns. To bridge the gap, we propose task-adaptive
formulations and a model-agnostic meta-learning framework
that transforms regionally heterogeneous data into locationsensitive meta tasks. We conduct task adaptation following
an easy-to-hard task hierarchy in which different meta models are adapted to tasks of different difficulty levels. One major advantage of our proposed method is that it improves the
model adaptation to a large number of heterogeneous tasks.
It also enhances the model generalization by automatically
adapting the meta model of the corresponding difficulty level
to any new tasks. We demonstrate the superiority of our proposed framework over a diverse set of baselines and state-ofthe-art meta-learning frameworks. Our extensive experiments
on real crop yield data show the effectiveness of the proposed
method in handling spatial-related heterogeneous tasks in real
societal applications.

Figure 1: Normalized average corn yields in 21 consecutive
years from 2000 to 2020 across 630 counties in Illinois, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, Indiana, Ohio, Michigan, North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, Kentucky, and Tennessee in the United States. Dark blue means
low-yield regions while light green represents high-yield regions. Geographically, corn yields are highly correlated to
spatial locations that are complex to model with contemporary machine learning methods.

model trained over large regions may not perform well for
every individual county (Karpatne et al. 2018). In addition, it
is often expensive to collect a large number of labeled samples in real-world societal applications, which makes it challenging to train advanced deep neural network models separately for each location. Therefore, the development of effective machine learning techniques for spatial-related tasks
with strong spatial variability is urgently needed.
Transfer learning methods have been widely explored for
adapting machine learning models across space. For example, previous works use a Long-Short Term Memory
(LSTM) structure with the attention mechanism to transfer
spatial-related information (Nigam et al. 2019; Sharma, Rai,
and Krishnan 2020; Jiang et al. 2022). However, these methods directly learn on global data but do not consider regional
discrepancy across space. Recent deep learning-based domain adaptation approaches (Nevavuori, Narra, and Lipping
2019; Elavarasan and Vincent 2020) have demonstrated success on several tasks when trained with sufficiently labeled

Introduction
The explosive growth of spatio-temporal data emphasizes the needs for automatically discovering spatial-related
knowledge (Shekhar et al. 2003). Spatio-temporal data are
complex due to inherent data characteristics such as implicit
spatial relationships between variables and the data variability across locations (Huang et al. 2018; Zheng et al. 2020;
Huang et al. 2020). For example, Figure 1 shows the normalized average corn yield for every county in the Midwestern United States. The yield data exhibit a strong spatial
variability due to the variation in weather, soils, and management practices across different counties. Hence, a global
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14365

