The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AutoCost: Evolving Intrinsic Cost for Zero-Violation Reinforcement Learning
Tairan He, Weiye Zhao, Changliu Liu

Abstract
Safety is a critical hurdle that limits the application of deep
reinforcement learning (RL) to real-world control tasks. To
this end, constrained reinforcement learning leverages cost
functions to improve safety in constrained Markov decision
processes. However, such constrained RL methods fail to
achieve zero violation even when the cost limit is zero. This
paper analyzes the reason for such failure, which suggests
that a proper cost function plays an important role in constrained RL. Inspired by the analysis, we propose AutoCost,
a simple yet effective framework that automatically searches
for cost functions that help constrained RL to achieve zeroviolation performance. We validate the proposed method and
the searched cost function on the safe RL benchmark Safety
Gym. We compare the performance of augmented agents that
use our cost function to provide additive intrinsic costs with
baseline agents that use the same policy learners but with only
extrinsic costs. Results show that the converged policies with
intrinsic costs in all environments achieve zero constraint violation and comparable performance with baselines.

1

1.50

CPO
PPO-Lagrangian
Cost limit

1.25
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

0.5

1.0

1.5

TotalEnvInteracts

(a) Cost limit = 0.5

1e7

AverageEpGroundtruthCost

AverageEpGroundtruthCost

Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{tairanh, weiyezha, cliu6}@andrew.cmu.edu

1.50

PPO-Lagrangian
CPO
Cost limit

1.25
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

0.5

1.0

1.5

TotalEnvInteracts

1e7

(b) Cost limit = 0

Figure 1: Average episodic extrinsic cost of safe RL baselines with different limit. CPO and PPO-Lagrangian both
fail to achieve zero violation even with a zero cost limit

RL baselines (Achiam et al. 2017; Chow et al. 2017) in the
commonly used safe RL benchmark Safety Gym.
Note that though the average extrinsic cost reduces to 0.5
when the cost limit is set as 0.5, both safe RL baselines
with zero cost limit fail to obtain a zero-violation policy
even after convergence. Nevertheless, in safety-critical applications, reducing the number of safety violations may not
be sufficient since one violation may lead to unacceptable
catastrophes. How to eliminate all violations and achieve
zero violation remains a challenge for RL.
To break this barrier, in this paper, we conduct an empirical analysis on why safe RL methods fail to achieve zero
violation. We find that the reason is closely related to the
design of cost functions, where a proper cost function could
drive the converged safe RL policies to achieve zero violation. However, designing cost functions has the same issues as designing reward functions (Hong et al. 2018; Faust,
Francis, and Mehta 2019), which requires extensive human
efforts. To this end, instead of handcrafting a cost function
with expert knowledge, we propose AutoCost which automatically searches for proper cost functions with the aim of
obtaining a zero-violation policy, relieving researchers from
such tedious work. AutoCost formulates the problem as a
bi-level optimization where we try to find the best intrinsic
cost function, which, to the most extent, helps train a zeroviolation RL agent. Specifically, AutoCost utilizes an evolutionary strategy to search the parameters of cost function.
We apply the evolutionary intrinsic cost search to an environment in Safety Gym (Ray, Achiam, and Amodei 2019),

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable progress in board games (Mnih et al. 2015),
card games (Brown and Sandholm 2018) and video
games (Vinyals et al. 2019). Despite its impressive success
so far, the lack of safety guarantees limits the application
of RL to real-world physical tasks like robotics. This is
particularly concerning for safety-critical scenarios such
as robot-human collaboration or healthcare where unsafe
controls may lead to fatal consequences.
Many safe RL methods leverage cost functions defined
in constrained Markov decision process (CMDP) (Altman
1999) to formulate safety. Recent approaches usually adopt
indicator cost functions where a positive signal deems a state
as unsafe and zero deems a state safe. However, under such
a design of cost functions, state-of-the-art safe RL methods still fail to achieve zero violation even with sufficiently
enough interactions with the environment (Ma et al. 2021).
For example, Figure 1 illustrates the average episodic extrinsic cost (i.e., constraint violations in CMDP) of two safe
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14847

