The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Variational Wasserstein Barycenters with C-cyclical Monotonicity Regularization
Jinjin Chi1,2 , Zhiyao Yang1,2 , Ximing Li1,2 * , Jihong Ouyang1,2 , Renchu Guan1,2
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, China
chijinjin616@gmail.com, yangzy9529@gmail.com, liximing86@gmail.com, ouyj@jlu.edu.cn, guanrenchu@jlu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Wasserstein barycenter, built on the theory of Optimal Transport (OT), provides a powerful framework to aggregate probability distributions, and it has increasingly attracted great attention within the machine learning community. However, it
is often intractable to precisely compute, especially for high
dimensional and continuous settings. To alleviate this problem, we develop a novel regularization by using the fact that
c-cyclical monotonicity is often necessary and sufficient conditions for optimality in OT problems, and incorporate it into
the dual formulation of Wasserstein barycenters. For efficient
computations, we adopt a variational distribution as the approximation of the true continuous barycenter, so as to frame
the Wasserstein barycenters problem as an optimization problem with respect to variational parameters. Upon those ideas,
we propose a novel end-to-end continuous approximation
method, namely Variational Wasserstein Barycenters with
c-Cyclical Monotonicity Regularization (VWB-CMR), given
sample access to the input distributions. We show theoretical convergence analysis and demonstrate the superior performance of VWB-CMR on synthetic data and real applications
of subset posterior aggregation.

Figure 1: Top: four distributions. Bottom left: Euclidean average of distributions. Bottom right: Wasserstein barycenter.
fields. The barycenter of multiple given probability distributions under Wasserstein distance is defined as Wasserstein barycenter, i.e., a distribution minimizing the sum of
Wasserstein distances to all input distributions. Due to geometric properties, the Wasserstein barycenter can better capture the underlying geometric structure than the barycenter
with respect to other popular distances, e.g., Euclidean distance, see Figure 1. Consequently, it has a broad range of applications in text mixing (Rabin et al. 2011), imaging (Bonneel, Peyré, and Cuturi 2016), and model ensemble (Dognin
et al. 2019).
Despite its impressive performance, it is often intractable
to precisely compute Wasserstein barycenters, especially for
high dimensional and continuous settings (Peyré, Cuturi
et al. 2019; Korotin et al. 2021a; Daaloul et al. 2021). The
existing studies (Agueh and Carlier 2011; Álvarez-Esteban
et al. 2016; Dvurechenskii et al. 2018; Ge et al. 2019; Lin
et al. 2020) on Wasserstein barycenter of continuous distributions require discretization of all input distributions or the
barycenter itself, so they scale poorly to high-dimensional
settings (Staib et al. 2017; Claici, Chien, and Solomon 2018;
Dvurechenskii et al. 2018; Izzo, Silwal, and Zhou 2021).
Moreover, the discretization techniques are commonly undesirable since they lack the inherently continuous nature of
data distributions and the ability of generating new samples
if needed. To the best of our knowledge, very few works

Introduction
Summarizing, combining, and comparing probability distributions defined on a metric are fundamental yet vital tasks
in machine learning, statistics, and computer science. For instance, in Bayesian inference, given massive data one may
perform posterior inference in parallel on different machines
with data subsets, and then aggregate subset posterior distributions via their barycenter as an approximation to the full
data posterior (Srivastava et al. 2015). Besides, the barycenter of a collection of distributions has been widely studied in
various real applications, such as image processing (Rabin
et al. 2011) and clustering (Ho et al. 2019).
The theory of Optimal Transport (OT) (Monge 1781;
Kantorovitch 1942; Villani 2008; Le et al. 2021; BackhoffVeraguas et al. 2022) provides a powerful framework to
carry out such aggregation. OT equips the space of distributions with a distance metric known as the Wasserstein distance, which has gained substantial popularity in different
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7157

