The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Similarity Metrics for Volumetric Simulations with Multiscale CNNs
Georg Kohl, Li-Wei Chen, Nils Thuerey
Technical University of Munich
{georg.kohl, liwei.chen, nils.thuerey}@tum.de

Abstract

dimensionality, this situation becomes significantly worse for
systems that are modeled with dense grid data, as the number
of interactions grows exponentially with a linearly increasing
number elements. Such data representations are widely used,
e.g. for medical blood flow simulations (Olufsen et al. 2000),
climate and weather predictions (Stocker et al. 2014), and
even the famous unsolved problem of turbulence (Holmes
et al. 2012). Another downside of element-wise metrics is
that each element is weighted equally, which is typically
suboptimal; e.g. smoke plumes behave differently along the
vertical dimension due to gravity or buoyancy, and small key
features like vortices are more indicative of the fluid’s general
behavior than large areas of near constant flow (Pope 2000).
In the image domain, neural networks have been employed
for similarity models that can consider larger structures, typically via training with class labels that provide semantics, or
with data that encodes human perception. Similarly, physical
systems exhibit spatial and temporal coherence due to the
underlying laws of physics that can be utilized. In contrast to
previous work on simulation data (Kohl, Um, and Thuerey
2020), we derive an entropy-based similarity model to robustly learn similarity assessments of scalar and vectorial
volumetric data. Overall, our work contributes the following:
• We propose a novel similarity model based on the entropy of physical systems. It is employed to synthesize
sequences of volumetric physical fields suitable for metric
learning.
• We show that our Siamese multiscale feature network
results in a stable metric that successfully generalizes to
new physical phenomena. To the best of our knowledge
this is the first learned metric inherently designed for the
similarity assessment of volumetric fields.
• The metric is employed to analyze turbulence in a case
study, and its invariance to rotation and scale are evaluated.
In addition, we analyze correlation-based loss functions
with respect to their tradeoff between batch size and accuracy of correlation computation.
The central application of the proposed VolSiM metric is the
similarity assessment of new physical simulation methods,
numerical or learning-based, against a known ground truth.1

Simulations that produce three-dimensional data are ubiquitous in science, ranging from fluid flows to plasma physics. We
propose a similarity model based on entropy, which allows for
the creation of physically meaningful ground truth distances
for the similarity assessment of scalar and vectorial data, produced from transport and motion-based simulations. Utilizing
two data acquisition methods derived from this model, we
create collections of fields from numerical PDE solvers and
existing simulation data repositories. Furthermore, a multiscale CNN architecture that computes a volumetric similarity
metric (VolSiM) is proposed. To the best of our knowledge
this is the first learning method inherently designed to address the challenges arising for the similarity assessment of
high-dimensional simulation data. Additionally, the tradeoff
between a large batch size and an accurate correlation computation for correlation-based loss functions is investigated, and
the metric’s invariance with respect to rotation and scale operations is analyzed. Finally, the robustness and generalization
of VolSiM is evaluated on a large range of test data, as well as
a particularly challenging turbulence case study, that is close
to potential real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Making comparisons is a fundamental operation that is essential for any kind of computation. This is especially true for the
simulation of physical phenomena, as we are often interested
in comparing simulations against other types of models or
measurements from a physical system. Mathematically, such
comparisons require metric functions that determine scalar
distance values as a similarity assessment. A fundamental
problem is that traditional comparisons are typically based on
simple, element-wise metrics like the L1 or L2 distances, due
to their computational simplicity and a lack of alternatives.
Such metrics can work reliably for systems with few elements
of interest, e.g. if we want to analyze the position of a moving object at different points in time, matching our intuitive
understanding of distances. However, more complex physical
problems often exhibit large numbers of degrees of freedom,
and strong dependencies between elements in their solutions.
Those coherences should be considered when comparing
physical data, but element-wise operations by definition ignore such interactions between elements. With the curse of

1

Our source code, datasets, and ready-to-use models are available at https://github.com/tum-pbs/VOLSIM. For a version of this
work with an appendix also see https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.04109.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8351

