The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

The Sufficiency of Off-Policyness and Soft Clipping:
PPO Is Still Insufficient according to an Off-Policy Measure
Xing Chen1,4 , Dongcui Diao6 , Hechang Chen1,4,* , Hengshuai Yao2,* , Haiyin Piao3 , Zhixiao Sun 3 ,
Zhiwei Yang1,4 , Randy Goebel2,5 , Bei Jiang5,6 , Yi Chang1,4,*
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, Changchun, China
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
3
School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian, China
4
Engineering Research Center of Knowledge-Driven Human-Machine Intelligence, Ministry of Education, China
5
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
6
Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
xingchen19@mails.jlu.edu.cn, {chenhc,yichang}@jlu.edu.cn, hengshu1@ualberta.ca
2

Abstract

any state. This means we can evaluate a target policy using a
behavior policy that generates experience (Precup, Sutton,
and Dasgupta 2001; Sutton, Maei, and Szepesvári 2009).
Moreover, the paradigm seems characteristic and general
enough for obtaining skills from other sources. With offpolicy learning, one agent can reuse experience from itself
or even the other agents, where the samples are collected
with methods that are different from real-time on-policy interaction. Off-policy learning holds significant promise, but
it is tricky in practice. The mismatch between the distribution of the behavior policy and that of the target policy poses
a big stability challenge for the learning process. Even for
policy evaluation, following the temporal difference update
easily diverges in the linear function approximation (Bertsekas 1995; Boyan and Moore 1994; Gordon 1995; Tsitsiklis and Van Roy 1997).
Precup, Sutton, and Singh (2000) et. al. were the first to
use importance sampling for off-policy learning. They used
an online updated product of importance sampling ratios to
correct the distribution of the behavior policy to that of the
target policy, and developed an algorithm that gives a consistent estimation for off-policy evaluation in the lookup table
setting. 1 However, importance sampling suffers from high
variances, especially when the behavior and target policies
are very different. For policy gradient methods, it is hard to
see there is a difference. In particular, the importance sampling ratios, widely adopted in recent popular policy gradient algorithms, can be problematic too.
In this context, the Conservative Policy Iteration (CPI) objective (Kakade and Langford 2002) is a key element in the
recent spectrum of popular algorithms, including Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) (Schulman et al. 2015),
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al. 2017)
and many others. CPI is based on the importance sampling
ratio between the new and the old policy, which can often cause high variances and lead to poor gradient estimation and unstable performances for policy gradient methods.

The popular Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) algorithm
approximates the solution in a clipped policy space. Does
there exist better policies outside of this space? By using a
novel surrogate objective that employs the sigmoid function
(which provides an interesting way of exploration), we found
that the answer is “YES”, and the better policies are in fact
located very far from the clipped space. We show that PPO
is insufficient in “off-policyness”, according to an off-policy
metric called DEON. Our algorithm explores in a much larger
policy space than PPO, and it maximizes the Conservative
Policy Iteration (CPI) objective better than PPO during training. To the best of our knowledge, all current PPO methods
have the clipping operation and optimize in the clipped policy
space. Our method is the first of this kind, which advances the
understanding of CPI optimization and policy gradient methods. Code is available at https://github.com/raincchio/P3O.

Introduction
Real-world problems like medication dosing and autonomous driving pose a great challenge for Artificial Intelligence (AI) with an expectation to improve human life and
safety. Applications like these require significant interaction
with the environment to make learning algorithms effective.
Humans can learn from others, by observing their experience to quickly pick up new skills, even without exposure
on one’s own. Subsequently, when there is a chance to practice, the skills obtained from previous experience or others
can be quickly adapted and improved. But it is clear that we
are still far from obtaining this remarkable learning ability
in AI.
In our context, we consider problems where the environment state cannot be reset, which is also true in real life. In
such situations, we can only sample a limited number of possible trajectories, which easily results in failure of learning.
Off-policy learning is one promising paradigm to address
this challenge, and it provides an effective discipline of
learning by sampling the potential trajectories starting from

1
There is another class of off-policy learning methods, which
does not require importance sampling but to stabilize the underlying ordinary differential equation, e.g., see (Sutton, Maei, and
Szepesvári 2009; Sutton et al. 2009).

*Corresponding authors: Hechang Chen, Hengshuai Yao and Yi
Chang. Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7078

