The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improving the Cross-Lingual Generalisation in Visual Question Answering
Farhad Nooralahzadeh, Rico Sennrich
Department of Computational Linguistics, University of Zurich
fahrad.nooralahzadeh@uzh.ch, sennrich@cl.uzh.ch

Abstract
While several benefits were realized for multilingual visionlanguage pretrained models, recent benchmarks across various tasks and languages showed poor cross-lingual generalisation when multilingually pre-trained vision-language
models are applied to non-English data, with a large gap
between (supervised) English performance and (zero-shot)
cross-lingual transfer. In this work, we explore the poor performance of these models on a zero-shot cross-lingual visual question answering (VQA) task, where models are finetuned on English visual-question data and evaluated on 7
typologically diverse languages. We improve cross-lingual
transfer with three strategies: (1) we introduce a linguistic
prior objective to augment the cross-entropy loss with a similarity-based loss to guide the model during training, (2) we
learn a task-specific subnetwork that improves cross-lingual
generalisation and reduces variance without model modification, and (3) we augment training examples using synthetic
code-mixing to promote alignment of embeddings between
source and target languages. Our experiments on xGQA using the pretrained multilingual multimodal transformers UC2
and M3P demonstrate the consistent effectiveness of the proposed fine-tuning strategy for 7 languages, outperforming existing transfer methods with sparse models.

Figure 1: A standard setup (Bugliarello et al. 2022; Pfeiffer
et al. 2022) to perform VQA task using UC2 or M3P.

Introduction
Multimodal pretraining has established state-of-the-art performance for many multimedia tasks such as image-text retrieval, visual question, and answering, video localization,
speech recognition, etc. Pretraining models outperforms traditional methods by providing stronger representation of different modalities learned in an unsupervised training fashion (e.g. Radford et al. 2021; Schneider et al. 2019; Sun
et al. 2019). However, progress in this area has been limited mostly to the English language, whereas the main multimodal datasets consist only of English data. In order to
generalize this achievement to non-English languages, recent works (e.g. Zhou et al. 2021; Ni et al. 2021; Liu et al.
2021; Bapna et al. 2022) attempt to learn universal representations to map objects that occurred in different modalities
or texts expressed in various languages into shared semantic
space.

IGLUE (Bugliarello et al. 2022), a recent benchmark
spanning various tasks and languages has shown that performance degrades significantly when existing multilingual
vision-language models are applied to non-English data, and
there is a large gap between supervised performance and
(zero-shot) cross-lingual transfer. This gap is most noticeable for resource-poor languages and languages that are distinct from English, attributed mostly to misalignment of text
embeddings between the source and target languages (Liu
et al. 2021; Pfeiffer et al. 2022).
In this work, we address a number of deficiencies in
how these multilingual vision-language models are trained
and evaluated on xGQA (Pfeiffer et al. 2022), a multilingual evaluation benchmark for the visual question answering
task, where the source English dataset is extended to 7 typologically diverse languages. Specifically, we address the fol-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13419

