The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Do Invariances in Deep Neural Networks Align with Human Perception?
Vedant Nanda1,2 , Ayan Majumdar2 , Camila Kolling2 , John P. Dickerson1 , Krishna P. Gummadi2 ,
Bradley C. Love3,4 , Adrian Weller3,5
1
University of Maryland, College Park, USA
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems (MPI-SWS), Germany
3
The Alan Turing Institute, London, England
4
University College London, London, England
5
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, England
{vnanda, ayanm, ckolling, gummadi}@mpi-sws.org, john@cs.umd.edu, b.love@ucl.ac.uk, adrian.weller@eng.cam.ac.uk
2

Abstract

and diagnosing issues such as lack of robustness to distribution shifts (Recht et al. 2019), adversarial attacks (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015) or using undesirable features
for a downstream task (Buolamwini and Gebru 2018).
One test of human-machine alignment is whether different
images that map to identical internal network representation
are also judged as identical by humans. To study alignment
with human perception, prior works have used the approach
of representation inversion (Mahendran and Vedaldi 2014).
The key idea is the following: given an input to a neural
network, the approach first finds identically represented inputs (IRIs), i.e. inputs which have similar representations on
some given layer(s) of the neural network. In the second step,
the inputs that are perceived similarly by the neural network
are checked by humans for visual similarity. Thus, the approach relies on estimating whether a transformation of the
inputs which is representation invariant to a neural network
is also an invariant transformation to the human eye, i.e. it
checks whether models and humans have shared or aligned
invariances.
Prior works use gradient-based methods to generate IRIs
for a given target input starting with a random seed input.
These works revealed exciting insights: (a) Feather et al. studied representational invariance for different layers of DNNs
trained over ImageNet data (using the standard cross-entropy
loss). They showed that while later layer representations of
DNNs do not share any invariances with human perception,
the earlier layers are somewhat better aligned with human
perception (Feather et al. 2019). (b) Engstrom et al. found
that, unlike standard DNNs, adversarially robust DNNs, i.e.,
DNNs trained using adversarial training (Madry et al. 2019),
learn representations that are well aligned with human perception, even in later layers (Engstrom et al. 2019b). This
was also confirmed by other works (Kaur, Cohen, and Lipton
2019; Santurkar et al. 2019). However, some of these findings
are contradicted when differently regularized methods are
used for generating IRIs, which show that even later layers
of DNNs learn human aligned representations (Mahendran
and Vedaldi 2014; Olah, Mordvintsev, and Schubert 2017).
We seek to make sense of these confusing earlier results,
and thereby to better understand alignment. We show that
when we evaluate alignment of DNNs’ invariances and human perception using IRIsgenerated using different loss functions, we can arrive at very different conclusions. For ex-

An evaluation criterion for safe and trustworthy deep learning
is how well the invariances captured by representations of deep
neural networks (DNNs) are shared with humans. We identify
challenges in measuring these invariances. Prior works used
gradient-based methods to generate identically represented
inputs (IRIs), i.e., inputs which have identical representations
(on a given layer) of a neural network, and thus capture invariances of a given network. One necessary criterion for a
network’s invariances to align with human perception is for
its IRIs look “similar” to humans. Prior works, however, have
mixed takeaways; some argue that later layers of DNNs do not
learn human-like invariances yet others seem to indicate otherwise. We argue that the loss function used to generate IRIs can
heavily affect takeaways about invariances of the network and
is the primary reason for these conflicting findings. We propose
an adversarial regularizer on the IRI-generation loss that finds
IRIs that make any model appear to have very little shared
invariance with humans. Based on this evidence, we argue that
there is scope for improving models to have human-like invariances, and further, to have meaningful comparisons between
models one should use IRIs generated using the regularizerfree loss. We then conduct an in-depth investigation of how different components (e.g. architectures, training losses, data augmentations) of the deep learning pipeline contribute to learning
models that have good alignment with humans. We find that
architectures with residual connections trained using a (selfsupervised) contrastive loss with `p ball adversarial data augmentation tend to learn invariances that are most aligned with
humans. Code: github.com/nvedant07/Human-NN-Alignment.
We strongly recommend reading the arxiv version of this
paper: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.14726.

1

Introduction

The ability to train deep neural networks (DNNs) which learn
useful features and representations is key for their widespread
use (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015). In domains where
DNNs are used for tasks that previously required human intelligence (e.g. image classification) and where safety and
trustworthiness are important considerations, it is helpful to
assess the alignment of the learned representations with human perception. Such assessments can help in understanding
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9277

