The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Decentralized Stochastic Multi-Player Multi-Armed Walking Bandits
Guojun Xiong, Jian Li
SUNY-Binghamton University
{gxiong1,lij}@binghamton.edu

Abstract

with her neighbors. Two popular settings have been widely
studied: a collision setting, where a player collects the full
reward from the selected arm only if no other players pull
the same arm, as motivated by radio channel assignment in
cognitive radios (Jouini et al. 2009); and a collaborative setting, where players receive independent reward when they
pull the same arm, and cooperatively solve a MAB, as motivated by sequential decisions in social networks (Landgren,
Srivastava, and Leonard 2016). In this work, we focus on the
former setting, and simply refer to it as the MPMAB.
However, the basic model for MPMAB in most prior works
assumes that players have full access to all K arms in each
time. This neglects several important factors of systems for
many real-world applications, where each player can only
access a subset of arms that dynamically changes over time
(i.e., an arm could sometimes be “walking” and not accessible to the player). For example, consider the problem of content placement in next-generation wireless networks (e.g.,
5G/6G) (Andrews et al. 2014) where N cache-enabled base
stations (players) serve a region where mobile users request
for K contents (arms), e.g., movies, videos, etc. Users receive a large reward (e.g., a short latency) if the requested
content is stored in the nearest base station, otherwise they
are served by farther base stations with a small reward (e.g.,
a larger latency). The base stations initially have no information about users’ content requests and contents’ global popularity since each base station only have access to a subset of
contents due to its constrained cache size. In reality, users’
content requests are highly dynamic and hence each base
station needs to repeatedly determine the subset of contents
to be cached so as to maximize the total reward of serving
users. Another application is mobile edge computing (Ceselli, Premoli, and Secci 2017; Farhadi et al. 2021), where
edge clouds (arms) with computing resources form a shared
resource pool, which can be allocated among user requests
(players) that only have access to some edge clouds within
the same geographical region. Additional real-world applications where players only have access to a subset of arms
are presented in (Xiong and Li 2022).
In this paper, we introduce a new bandit model in formalizing the walking arms such that “each player only accesses a subset of arms that dynamically changes over time”.
Specifically, at time t, player i only has access to a subset
Si (t) ⊆ K of arms, where Si (t) is changing over time. As a

Multi-player multi-armed bandit is an increasingly relevant
decision-making problem, motivated by applications to cognitive radio systems. Most research for this problem focuses
exclusively on the settings that players have full access to
all arms and receive no reward when pulling the same arm.
Hence all players solve the same bandit problem with the
goal of maximizing their cumulative reward. However, these
settings neglect several important factors in many real-world
applications, where players have limited access to a dynamic
local subset of arms (i.e., an arm could sometimes be “walking” and not accessible to the player). To this end, this paper
proposes a multi-player multi-armed walking bandits model,
aiming to address aforementioned modeling issues. The goal
now is to maximize the reward, however, players can only
pull arms from the local subset and only collect a full reward
if no other players pull the same arm. We adopt Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) to deal with the exploration-exploitation
tradeoff and employ distributed optimization techniques to
properly handle collisions. By carefully integrating these two
techniques, we propose a decentralized algorithm with nearoptimal guarantee on the regret, and can be easily implemented to obtain competitive empirical performance.

Introduction
The multi-armed bandit (MAB) framework has been widely
adopted for studying sequential decision-making problems
(Robbins 1952; Lai and Robbins 1985; Auer, Cesa-Bianchi,
and Fischer 2002; Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi 2012) in a variety of applications. In a classic MAB setting, the decision
maker chooses one arm from the set of K = {1, · · · , K}
arms at each time and receives a random reward according to
unknown reward distributions. The rewards of different arms
are assumed to be independent and identically distributed
over time. The goal of the decision maker is to maximize the
cumulative reward in the face of unknown mean rewards.
Recently, there has been an increased interest in studying
the MAB in multi-player settings, dubbed as MPMAB, where
the problem gets more intricate as N independent decision
makers (i.e., players) are involved. At each discrete time t,
each player selects one arm from K, receives some feedback about this arm and possibly shares some “information”
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10528

