The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Show Me the Way!
Bilevel Search for Synthesizing Programmatic Strategies
David S. Aleixo1 , Levi H. S. Lelis2
1

2

Departamento de Informática, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Brazil
Department of Computing Science, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), University of Alberta, Canada

Abstract

to a program might not turn it into a winning one, they might
represent steps in the direction of achieving a winning program. Self-play functions are unable to capture this progress.
An alternative approach is to use an oracle to provide a
richer search signal to guide the search in the programmatic
space (Bastani, Pu, and Solar-Lezama 2018; Verma et al.
2018, 2019). In addition to an oracle strategy not always being available, imitating an oracle strategy might lead to weak
strategies due to a possible representation gap (Qiu and Zhu
2022). That is, there might not exist a programmatic strategy
in the program space that is able to mimic the oracle.
In this paper, we introduce an algorithm for synthesizing programmatic strategies that simultaneously searches
in two spaces. Our goal with this bilevel search is to enhance the search signal self-play algorithms such as IBR
provide in the context of two-player zero-sum games. Our
algorithm, Bilevel Synthesis (Bi-S), searches in the program space defined by a domain-specific language and in the
space of domain-dependent game features. Each iteration of
the search in the feature space defines a complete assignment
of a set of feature-variables. Such an assignment is provided
as input to the search in the program space. While searching
in the program space, the algorithm uses the self-play algorithm’s function to guide the search. In case of a tie between
two programs (e.g., both are defeated by a target strategy),
then the search prefers the program that reaches game states
with features that are more similar to those encoded in the
variable assignment provided by the feature-space search.
The evaluations the program-space search performs with
respect to the self-play function are then used to inform the
search in the feature space. That is, the feature space search
attempts to learn the combination of feature values that leads
to programs optimizing the self-play function. We hypothesize that this bilevel scheme allows for a more informed
search in the program space than the search that uses only
the signal from self-play algorithms.
We evaluated Bi-S in MicroRTS, a real-time strategy
game. Our results show that Bi-S using either IBR or Fictitious play (Brown 1951), another self-play algorithm, consistently outperforms baselines that search only in the program space. We also simulated a tournament of MicroRTS,
where we evaluated Bi-S as well as several other baselines,
including the programmatic strategies, written by human
programmers, that won the latest two MicroRTS competi-

The synthesis of programmatic strategies requires one to
search in large non-differentiable spaces of computer programs. Current search algorithms use self-play approaches to
guide this search. The issue with these approaches is that the
guiding function often provides a weak search signal. This is
because self-play functions only measure how well a program
performs against other programs. Thus, while small changes
to a losing program might not transform it into a winning
one, such changes might represent steps in the direction of a
winning program. In this paper we introduce a bilevel search
algorithm that searches concurrently in the space of programs
and in a space of state features. Each iteration of the search
in the space of features defines a set of target features that
the search in the program space attempts to achieve (i.e., features one observes while following the strategy encoded in
a program). We hypothesize the combination of a self-play
function and a feature-based one provides a stronger search
signal for synthesis. While both functions are used to guide
the search in the program space, the self-play function is
used to guide the search in the feature space, to allow for
the selection of target features that are more likely to lead
to winning programs. We evaluated our bilevel algorithm in
MicroRTS, a real-time strategy game. Our results show that
the bilevel search synthesizes stronger strategies than methods that search only in the program space. Also, the strategies
our method synthesizes obtained the highest winning rate in a
simulated tournament with several baseline agents, including
the best agents from the two latest MicroRTS competitions.

Introduction
Programmatic strategies are strategies encoded in humanreadable computer programs. Such a programmatic representation often allows one to not only understand, but also
modify the encoded strategy. On the downside, synthesizing programmatic strategies requires one to search over large
non-differentiable program spaces. Current methods for synthesizing such strategies use the search signal self-play algorithm such as Iterated-Best Response (IBR) provide (Mariño
et al. 2021; Medeiros, Aleixo, and Lelis 2022). However, the
search signal self-play algorithms provide tends to be weak.
This is because they only inform the utility of a strategy
while playing the game with another strategy. While changes
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4991

