The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Competition or Cooperation? Exploring Unlabeled Data via Challenging Minimax
Game for Semi-supervised Relation Extraction
Yu Hong1 , Jiahang Li1 , Jianchuan Feng1 , Chenghua Huang1 , Zhixu Li1 * , Jianfeng Qu2 , Yanghua
Xiao1,3∗ , Wei Wang1
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University
3
Fudan-Aishu Cognitive Intelligence Joint Research Center, Shanghai, China
{yhong17, jiahangli18, jcfeng20}@fudan.edu.cn, huangch22@m.fudan.edu.cn, zhixuli@fudan.edu.cn, jfqu@suda.edu.cn,
{shawyh, weiwang1}@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract
Semi-Supervised Relation Extraction aims at learning wellperformed RE models with limited labeled and large-scale
unlabeled data. Existing methods mainly suffer from semantic drift and insufficient supervision, which severely limit the
performance. To address these problems, recent work tends
to design dual modules to work cooperatively for mutual enhancement. However, the consensus of two modules greatly
restricts the model from exploring diverse relation expressions in unlabeled set, which hinders the performance as well
as model generalization. To tackle this problem, in this paper, we propose a novel competition-based method AdvSRE.
We set up a challenging minimax game on unlabeled data
between two modules, Generator and Discriminator, and assign them with conflicting objectives. During the competition game, one module may find any possible chance to beat
the other, which develops two modules’ abilities until relation expressions cannot be further explored. To exploit label
information, Discriminator is further asked to predict specific
relation for each sentence. Experiment results on two benchmarks show new state-of-the-art performance over baselines,
demonstrating the effectiveness of proposed AdvSRE.

Figure 1: An example of exploitation and exploration of
unlabeled sentences in SS-RE. Exploitation method tends
to search sentences with similar expressions (e.g. s1 and
s2 ) thus explores limited semantic space, while exploration
method tends to search sentences with diverse relation expressions (e.g. s3 -s5 ) which can cover the whole space.

Introduction
Relation Extraction (RE) plays an important role in natural language processing. It aims at extracting well-formed
knowledge from large amounts of unstructured texts and
has been widely used in many downstream tasks (Lin
et al. 2019a; Wang et al. 2019; Shen et al. 2020).
Given a sentence with two specified entities, the goal of
RE is to identify the relation between two entities. For
example, relation the writer of should be identified
for the entity pair (J. K. Rowling, Harry Potter) in the
sentence “J. K. Rowling writes the much-loved series of
Harry Potter novels”.
So far, plenty of neural RE methods are proposed, which
provide end-to-end solutions and achieve promising performance in supervised RE (Zeng et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2015;
Vu et al. 2016). However, supervised neural models rely
on large amounts of labeled data for effective training. Although distant supervision (Mintz et al. 2009) could allevi-

ate the requirement on manually labeling, it inevitably introduces noise. Given the drawbacks above on supervised and
distantly-supervised RE, Semi-Supervised Relation Extraction (SS-RE) arises to learn well-performed RE models with
limited labeled data and large amounts of unlabeled data
(Agichtein and Gravano 2000; Sun and Grishman 2012).
Recent work in SS-RE tends to introduce two cooperative modules to alleviate semantic drift and insufficient
supervision problems existing in conventional self-training
(Paass 1993; Rosenberg, Hebert, and Schneiderman 2005)
and self-ensembling (Tarvainen and Valpola 2017; Miyato
et al. 2018) methods. For instance, DualRE (Lin et al. 2019b)
takes sentence retrieval as a dual task of relation extraction, which trains the retrieval module jointly with the prediction module. Another work MetaSRE (Hu et al. 2021a)
focuses on learning a generation network to generate highquality pseudo labels for a relation classification network,
which helps in return to meta-optimize the generation network. By making two modules benefit and correct each
other, these so-called cooperation-based methods mitigate

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12872

