The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Analogical Inference Enhanced Knowledge Graph Embedding
Zhen Yao1 * , Wen Zhang1 * , Mingyang Chen2 , Yufeng Huang1 , Yi Yang4 , Huajun Chen2,3,5†
1

School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
3
Donghai Laboratory, Zhoushan 316021, China
4
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
5
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies
{yz0204, zhang.wen, mingyangchen, huangyufeng, huajunsir}@zju.edu.cn
yangyi193@huawei.com,
2

Abstract

called link prediction. One of the common approaches to
this problem is knowledge graph embedding (KGE) methods, which make prediction through a predefined triple score
function with learnt entity and relation embeddings as input.
Many KGE models have been proposed like TransE (Bordes
et al. 2013), DistMult (Yang et al. 2015), RotatE (Sun et al.
2019) and HAKE (Zhang et al. 2020). These methods have
gained great success in knowledge graph completion task.
For most KGE methods, the parametric learning paradigm
can be viewed as memorization regarding training data as
a book and predicting missing links as the close-book test
(Chen et al. 2022), which belongs to inductive inference.
However, the large knowledge graphs often contain incomplete triples that are difficult to be inductively inferred by
applying memorization paradigm. Nevertheless, the problem
may be well solved by using analogical inference method.
That is because analogical inference is a referential method,
which retrieves similar solutions to solve new problems,
similar to an open-book examination. For example, it seems
that most people could not remember even learn about what
company Ron Wayne founded. However, if they know that
Ron Wayne and Steve Jobs are the co-founders, i.e., Steve
Jobs and Ron Wayne are analogical objects in this context,
and it is well known that Steve Jobs founded Apple Inc.;
thus they could analogically infer that Ron Wayne founded
Apple Inc. .
In order to enhance KGEs with analogical inference capability, there are three problems should be solved: 1) How
to define the analogical objects of elements given a task? 2)
How to enable the model to map elements to analogical objects? 3) How to combine the original inductive inference
capability and enhanced analogical inference capability?
We propose AnKGE, a novel and general self-supervised
framework, which solves these problems very well and enhances well-trained KGEs with analogical inference capability. For problem 1, we think that an analogical object can
solve the given task well, and inspired by the nearest neighbor language model (Khandelwal et al. 2020), we propose an
analogical retriever covering objects of three levels, including entity, relation, and triple level. Specifically, we consider
the score function of KGEs as the assessment of the quality
of triples and regrade the replacement triples with the highest scoring as the appropriate analogical objects. For prob-

Knowledge graph embedding (KGE), which maps entities
and relations in a knowledge graph into continuous vector
spaces, has achieved great success in predicting missing links
in knowledge graphs. However, knowledge graphs often contain incomplete triples that are difficult to inductively infer
by KGEs. To address this challenge, we resort to analogical inference and propose a novel and general self-supervised
framework AnKGE to enhance KGE models with analogical inference capability. We propose an analogical object
retriever that retrieves appropriate analogical objects from
entity-level, relation-level, and triple-level. And in AnKGE,
we train an analogy function for each level of analogical inference with the original element embedding from a welltrained KGE model as input, which outputs the analogical
object embedding. In order to combine inductive inference
capability from the original KGE model and analogical inference capability enhanced by AnKGE, we interpolate the
analogy score with the base model score and introduce the
adaptive weights in the score function for prediction. Through
extensive experiments on FB15k-237 and WN18RR datasets,
we show that AnKGE achieves competitive results on link
prediction task and well performs analogical inference.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graphs (KGs) storing a large number of triples
in the form of (head entity, relation, tail entity), (h, r, t)
for short, are popular data structures for representing factual knowledge. Many knowledge graph projects such as
Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008), WordNet (Miller 1994),
YAGO (Suchanek, Kasneci, and Weikum 2007) and DBpedia (Lehmann et al. 2015) are significant foundations to
support artificial intelligence applications. They have been
successfully used in downstream applications such as word
sense disambiguation (Bevilacqua and Navigli 2020), question answering (Yasunaga et al. 2021), and information
extraction (Hu et al. 2021), gaining widespread attention.
However, most KGs are incomplete, so predicting the missing links between entities is a fundamental problem for KGs
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4801

