The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Mediated Cheap Talk Design
Itai Arieli, Ivan Geffner, Moshe Tennenholtz*
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
iarieli@technion.ac.il, ieg8@cornell.edu, moshet@technion.ac.il

Abstract

commitment leads to a lack of expressive power from the
sender and, as a result, may induce highly inefficient outcomes. For example, consider the classic market for lemons
example in (Akerlof 1978), in which a marketer tries to sell a
product to a customer that plays the role of the receiver. The
product can be of either good quality or bad quality with
equal probability. The customer would like to buy the product only if he believes that it is of good quality with a probability of at least 34 , and the sender always prefers that the
product is bought. In this case, under a cheap talk equilibrium, the sender has no way to signal credible information
to the receiver and the receiver never buys the product. This
is a typical situation that arises in marketplaces that match
sellers with buyers, or advertisers with consumers.
In our model there is a finite state space of size n, two
informed players (senders), and an additional uninformed
player (the receiver) that determines the outcome of the
game by playing a binary action from the set A := {0, 1}
(this could represent buying a product or not, passing a law
or not, etc.). The utility of each player is determined by the
game state and by the action played by the receiver, and
the incentives of the senders may not necessarily be aligned
(e.g., senders can be a car seller and a technician that tested
the car, or two parties who studied the monetary value of
a law, or two suppliers of a product, etc.). The state of the
game is drawn from a prior distribution that is common
knowledge among the players, but only the senders know its
exact value. Thus, the senders’ purpose is to reveal information to the receiver in such a way that the receiver plays the
action that benefits them the most. Since the senders have
no commitment power we are interested in cheap talk equilibria, in which it is never in the interest of the senders to
be dishonest, and it is always in the interest of the receiver
to play the action suggested by the protocol. As we show
in this work, the existence of a second informed sender dramatically enriches the set of cheap talk equilibria that can be
obtained.
We consider a mediated cheap talk setting of communication between the senders and the receiver. In this setting,
the senders communicate with a trusted mediator, and as a
function of the two messages that the mediator receives, he
sends an action recommendation (possibly at random) to the
receiver. Our first result provides a characterization of the
truthful equilibria that are implementable in the mediator

We study an information design problem with two informed
senders and a receiver in which, in contrast to traditional
Bayesian persuasion settings, senders do not have commitment power. In our setting, a trusted mediator/platform gathers data from the senders and recommends the receiver which
action to play. We characterize the set of implementable action distributions that can be obtained in equilibrium, and
provide an O(n log n) algorithm (where n is the number of
states) that computes the optimal equilibrium for the senders.
Additionally, we show that the optimal equilibrium for the
receiver can be obtained by a simple revelation mechanism.

Introduction
The extensive literature on information design and Bayesian
persuasion studies optimal information revelation policies
for the informed player. The two leading models of information revelation are cheap talk (Crawford and Sobel 1982)
and Bayesian persuasion (Kamenica and Gentzkow 2011).
The main distinction between these models is the underlying assumption that in the Bayesian persuasion models the
sender has commitment power in the way she discloses the
information.
Commitment power in the Bayesian persuasion model is
crucial (see, e.g., (Conitzer and Sandholm 2006)) and, while
it may hold in some real-world settings,1 it is often considered strong. Another fundamental assumption in Bayesian
persuasion models is that the informed player is also the one
that designs the information revelation policy. In practice,
however, information revelation can be determined by other
external or legal constraints. For example, information revealed to a potential customer about a product is determined
by the commerce platform based on information submitted
by different suppliers.
On the other hand, in the cheap talk model there is no
commitment power. However, in many cases, this lack of
* The work by Ivan Geffner and Moshe Tennenholtz was supported by funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme (grant agreement 740435).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The leading motivating example of (Kamenica and Gentzkow
2011) is of a prosecutor persuading a judge.

5456

