The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Stochastic Contextual Bandits with Long Horizon Rewards
Yuzhen Qin1 , Yingcong Li1 , Fabio Pasqualetti1 , Maryam Fazel2 , Samet Oymak1,3
1

University of California, Riverside
2
University of Washington
3
University of Michigan
{yuzhenq, yli692}@ucr.edu, fabiopas@engr.ucr.edu, mfazel@uw.edu, oymak@umich.edu
Abstract

taneous reward) or the one taken a certain number of steps
before (delayed rewards). However, in realistic decisionmaking scenarios, the reward generating process can have
a more complex, non-Markovian nature. Multiple prior actions can jointly affect the current reward. For instance,
whether a learner will take a course recommended by an
online education platform depends not only on that course,
but also on what combination of courses they have taken
before. Recommending courses in a complicated curriculum to users with diverse backgrounds and past experiences
requires accounting for the combined effects of past contexts on the current recommendation. Similarly, the attention
mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017) is finding increasing success in reinforcement learning and NLP applications (Chen
et al. 2021; Brown et al. 2020) and it makes predictions by
assessing the similarities between current and past contexts
(e.g., that correspond to words in a sentence or frames in a
video game) and creating a history-weighted adaptive context. In connection to this, the benefit of using a long context
history has been well acknowledged in RL and control theory (e.g. frame/state stacking practice (Hessel et al. 2018)).
These observations motivates the following central questions: Can we provably and efficiently learn from longhorizon rewards? What is the role of reward dependence
structure in sample efficiency? In this work, we thoroughly
address these questions for a novel variation of stochastic
linear contextual bandits, where the current reward depends
on a subset of prior contexts, up to a time horizon of h (see
Fig. 1 for an illustration). Specifically, the reward is determined by a filtered context that is a linear combination of
prior h selected contexts. Moreover, inspired by practical
decision making scenarios, we consider sparse interactions
where only s (s  h) of h prior contexts actually contributing to the current reward. Here s = 1 corresponds to the
special instance of delayed rewards. Crucially, we develop
strategies that leverage this sparse dependence structure and
establish regret guarantees for long horizon rewards.

The growing interest in complex decision-making and language modeling problems highlights the importance of
sample-efficient learning over very long horizons. This work
takes a step in this direction by investigating contextual linear bandits where the current reward depends on at most s
prior actions and contexts (not necessarily consecutive), up
to a time horizon of h. In order to avoid polynomial dependence on h, we propose new algorithms that leverage sparsity to discover the dependence pattern and arm parameters
jointly. We consider both the data-poor (T < h) and data-rich
(T ≥√h) regimes, and derive respective
regret upper bounds
√
Õ(d sT + min{q, T }) and Õ( sdT ), with sparsity s, feature dimension d, total time horizon T , and q that is adaptive to the reward dependence pattern. Complementing upper
bounds, we also show that learning over a single trajectory
brings inherent challenges: While the dependence pattern and
arm parameters form a rank-1 matrix, circulant matrices are
not isometric over rank-1 manifolds and sample complexity
indeed benefits from the sparse reward dependence structure.
Our results necessitate a new analysis to address long-range
temporal dependencies across data and avoid polynomial dependence on the reward horizon h. Specifically, we utilize
connections to the restricted isometry property of circulant
matrices formed by dependent sub-Gaussian vectors and establish new guarantees that are also of independent interest.

Introduction
Multi-armed bandits (MAB) serve as a prototypical model
to study exploration-exploitation trade-off in sequential
decision-making (e.g., see Bubeck et al. (2012)). The agent
needs to repeatedly make decisions by interacting with an
unknown environment, aiming to maximize the cumulative
reward. As a generalization of MAB, the contextual bandits
allow the agent to take actions based on contextual information (Langford and Zhang 2007). Extensive studies have
been conducted on contextual bandits due to its wide applications such as clinical trials, recommendation, and advertising (e.g., see Woodroofe (1979); Chu et al. (2011); Li et al.
(2017, 2010); Qin et al. (2022a,b)).
Most existing work on contextual bandits assume that
each reward only depends on a single action and the associated context. This action can be the one just taken (instan-

Related Work
Composite anonymous rewards. Pike-Burke et al.
(2018) considered bandits with composite anonymous rewards, where 1) the reward that the agent receives at each
round is the sum of the delayed rewards of an unknown subset of past actions, and 2) individual contributions of past

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9525

