The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Generic and Dynamic Graph Representation Learning for Crowd Flow Modeling
Liangzhe Han1 , Ruixing Zhang1 , Leilei Sun1 * , Bowen Du1 , Yanjie Fu2 , Tongyu Zhu1
1

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Central Florida, Florida, USA
{liangzhehan, 19373115, leileisun, dubowen, zhutongyu}@buaa.edu.cn, yanjie.fu@ucf.edu

Abstract
Many deep spatio-temporal learning methods have been proposed for crowd flow modeling in recent years. However,
most of them focus on designing a spatial and temporal convolution mechanism to aggregate information from nearby
nodes and historical observations for a pre-defined prediction task. Different from the existing research, this paper
aims to provide a generic and dynamic representation learning method for crowd flow modeling. The main idea of our
method is to maintain a continuous-time representation for
each node, and update the representations of all nodes continuously according to the streaming observed data. Along
this line, a particular encoder-decoder architecture is proposed, where the encoder converts the newly happened transactions into a timestamped message, and then the representations of related nodes are updated according to the generated message. The role of the decoder is to guide the representation learning process by reconstructing the observed
transactions based on the most recent node representations.
Moreover, a number of virtual nodes are added to discover
macro-level spatial patterns and also share the representations
among spatially-interacted stations. Experiments have been
conducted on two real-world datasets for four popular prediction tasks in crowd flow modeling. The result demonstrates
that our method could achieve better prediction performance
for all the tasks than baseline methods.

Figure 1: Generic representations for crowd flow modeling.

further step to consider stations or arbitrary-shaped regions
by the graph neural networks (GNN) (Geng et al. 2019; Shi
et al. 2020). For temporal relations along with time, previous
work basically aggregates historical data as snapshots, and
recurrent neural networks (RNN) (Wang et al. 2019), fusion
modules (Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017), and attention-based
modules (Wang et al. 2020) are designed on them to predict crowd flow in the future. For instance, STDN (Yao et al.
2019) utilizes CNN for spatial relations and LSTM for temporal relations to predict inflow and outflow for each gird;
GEML (Wang et al. 2019) combines GNN and LSTM to
predict OD flow between each pair of nodes. It can be seen
that most previous researches focus on designing temporal
and spatial convolutional modules. Additionally, most researches provide a particular prediction for a subset of tasks.
Different from previous studies, this paper aims to conduct generic and dynamic representation learning for crowd
flow modeling, as shown in Figure 1. On the one hand,
this idea provides a novel insight into crowd flow modeling.
Instead of focusing on spatial convolutions between traffic
nodes and temporal modules for multiple snapshots, it encodes spatial and temporal information with unique node
representations. On the other hand, generic representations
learned in this way can be leveraged to solve multiple types
of downstream tasks, including but not limited to the prevalent station-level flow prediction and OD flow prediction.
This characteristic makes it able to adapt to complex conditions and beneficial for a further range.
However, it is a non-trivial task to bond crowd flow mod-

Introduction
Crowd flow modeling aims to describe how citizens flow between traffic zones or stations. This subject is of great importance to urban planning and traffic control.
To achieve crowd flow modeling, there are multiple
types of tasks to solve, including inflow prediction, outflow prediction, origin-destination (OD) flow prediction, and
travel time estimation. In essence, the traveling behaviors
of citizens have momentous spatial dependence and temporal evolving patterns. Recently, a large of spatial-temporal
methods has been intuitively proposed on this subject. For
spatial relations between traffic nodes, some studies split
the area as grids and leverage convolutional neural networks
(CNN) to solve the prediction problem (Yao et al. 2018; Liu
et al. 2019a; Wang et al. 2020). Some other studies take a
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4293

