The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Conditional Diffusion Based on Discrete Graph Structures
for Molecular Graph Generation
Han Huang, Leilei Sun, Bowen Du* , Weifeng Lv
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, China
{h-huang, leileisun, dubowen, lwf}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

have been applied effectively to one-shot molecular graph
generation (Jo, Lee, and Hwang 2022), highlighting the advantages of flexible model architecture requirements and
graph permutation-invariant distribution modeling.
However, current diffusion-based models for molecular
graphs still suffer from generation quality and sampling
speed issues. In the work of Jo, Lee, and Hwang, the generated graph distribution faces an obvious distance from the
true distribution of datasets. Furthermore, their sampling
process relies heavily on extra Langevin correction steps
(Song et al. 2021) to diminish approximation errors, which
largely increases computational cost and inference time, implying insufficient expressiveness of the graph score estimate model. We argue that two major factors hinder the
practice of diffusion-based models for molecular graph generation. One is to focus on real-number graph formulation
(i.e., representing molecules as node feature and edge feature matrices) while neglecting the discrete graph structures,
making it difficult to extract accurate local motifs from noisy
real-number matrices for denoising and staying close to the
true graph distribution. The other is that a straightforward
graph neural network design may not be strong enough
to fully model the node-edge dependency from corrupted
graphs and further satisfy the complex generation requirements, such as local chemical valency constraints, atom type
proportion closeness, and global structure pattern similarity.
To address these issues, we propose a novel Conditional
Diffusion model based on discrete Graph Structures (CDGS)
for molecular graph generation. We find that considering
graph discreteness and designing suitable graph noise prediction models could boost the ability of diffusion models in
the graph domain, allowing for faster sampling and downstream applications.
Graph discreteness. We develop a simple yet effective
method for incorporating discrete graph structures without
using special discrete state spaces. Along with variables for
node and edge features, additional one-bit discrete variables
are added to indicate the existence of edges. We convert
them to real numbers and determine the quantization threshold. In our diffusion framework, the continuous forward process is applied directly to edge existence variables, but for
the reverse process, discrete graph structures are decoded
first and serve as the condition for each sampling step.
Graph noise prediction model. We design a hybrid graph

Learning the underlying distribution of molecular graphs and
generating high-fidelity samples is a fundamental research
problem in drug discovery and material science. However, accurately modeling distribution and rapidly generating novel
molecular graphs remain crucial and challenging goals. To
accomplish these goals, we propose a novel Conditional Diffusion model based on discrete Graph Structures (CDGS)
for molecular graph generation. Specifically, we construct
a forward graph diffusion process on both graph structures
and inherent features through stochastic differential equations
(SDE) and derive discrete graph structures as the condition
for reverse generative processes. We present a specialized
hybrid graph noise prediction model that extracts the global
context and the local node-edge dependency from intermediate graph states. We further utilize ordinary differential
equation (ODE) solvers for efficient graph sampling, based
on the semi-linear structure of the probability flow ODE.
We also combine the solvers with gradient guidance from
the molecule property predictor for similarity-constrained
molecule optimization. Experiments on diverse datasets validate the effectiveness of our framework. Particularly, the proposed method still generates high-quality molecular graphs in
a limited number of steps.

Introduction
Dating back to the early works of Erdős Rényi random
graphs (Erdős, Rényi et al. 1960), graph generation has
been extensively studied for applications in biology, chemistry, and social science. Recent graph generative models
make great progress in graph distribution learning by exploiting the capacity of neural networks. Models for molecular graph generation are notable for their success in representing molecule structures and restricting molecule search
space, which facilitates drug discovery and material design.
In terms of the sampling process of graph generative models, autoregressive generation constructs molecular graphs
step-by-step with decision sequences (You et al. 2018a; Jin,
Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2018; Shi et al. 2020; Luo, Yan, and
Ji 2021), whereas one-shot generation builds all graph components at once (Zang and Wang 2020; Lippe and Gavves
2021; Liu et al. 2021). Recently, diffusion-based models
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4302

