The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Evaluating Digital Agriculture Recommendations with Causal Inference
Ilias Tsoumas* 1,2 , Georgios Giannarakis* 1 , Vasileios Sitokonstantinou1 , Alkiviadis Koukos1 ,
Dimitra Loka3 , Nikolaos S. Bartsotas1 , Charalampos Kontoes1 , Ioannis Athanasiadis2
1

BEYOND Centre, IAASARS, National Observatory of Athens
2
Wageningen University & Research
3
Hellenic Agricultural Organization ELGO DIMITRA
{i.tsoumas, giannarakis, vsito, akoukos, nbartsotas, kontoes}@noa.gr,
{ilias.tsoumas, ioannis.athanasiadis}@wur.nl,
{dimitra.loka}@elgo.gr
Abstract

data that digitalization generates. However, the agricultural
sector experiences limited adoption of precision agriculture and smart farming technologies (Gabriel and Gandorfer
2022). This might seem odd at first sight, given the surge of
sophisticated digital tools that utilize Artificial Intelligence
(AI) techniques and combine remote sensing data with data
from Internet of Things (IoT) sensors to offer agricultural
information of great detail (Sharma et al. 2020; Nanushi
et al. 2022; Choumos et al. 2022). Yet farmers are skeptical about the effectiveness and actual contribution of these
tools to their revenues and daily work (Lowenberg-DeBoer
and Erickson 2019; Lioutas, Charatsari, and De Rosa 2021).
Traditionally, quantifying the impact of a service would
require the design and execution of a randomized experiment (Boruch 1997). Nevertheless, field experiments for the
evaluation of digital agriculture tools are seldom done since
they are costly and time-consuming, requiring specialized
designs and follow-up experiments for any changes in the
product (Vaessen 2010; Diggle and Chetwynd 2011). In addition, field experiments can jeopardize the crops and hence
the farmers’ livelihood; and if potential damages are not covered, no prudent farmer would want to participate. As a result, the providers of digital agriculture tools often resort to
unproven promises that unavoidably create customer mistrust. An observational causal inference framework (Pearl
2009) can fill this gap by emulating the experiment we
would have liked to run (Hernán and Robins 2016).

In contrast to the rapid digitalization of several industries,
agriculture suffers from low adoption of smart farming tools.
Even though recent advancements in AI-driven digital agriculture can offer high-performing predictive functionalities,
they lack tangible quantitative evidence on their benefits to
the farmers. Field experiments can derive such evidence, but
are often costly, time consuming and hence limited in scope
and scale of application. To this end, we propose an observational causal inference framework for the empirical evaluation of the impact of digital tools on target farm performance
indicators (e.g., yield in this case). This way, we can increase
farmers’ trust via enhancing the transparency of the digital
agriculture market, and in turn accelerate the adoption of
technologies that aim to secure farmer income resilience and
global agricultural sustainability against a changing climate.
As a case study, we designed and implemented a recommendation system for the optimal sowing time of cotton based
on numerical weather predictions, which was used by a farmers’ cooperative during the growing season of 2021. We then
leverage agricultural knowledge, collected yield data, and environmental information to develop a causal graph of the farm
system. Using the back-door criterion, we identify the impact
of sowing recommendations on the yield and subsequently
estimate it using linear regression, matching, inverse propensity score weighting and meta-learners. The results revealed
that a field sown according to our recommendations exhibited a statistically significant yield increase that ranged from
12% to 17%, depending on the method. The effect estimates
were robust, as indicated by the agreement among the estimation methods and four successful refutation tests. We argue
that this approach can be implemented for decision support
systems of other fields, extending their evaluation beyond a
performance assessment of internal functionalities.

Related Work
Causal inference with observational data has been the subject of recent work across diverse disciplines, including ecology (Arif and MacNeil 2022), public policy (Fougère and
Jacquemet 2019), and Earth sciences (Massmann, Gentine,
and Runge 2021; Runge et al. 2019). In agriculture, it has
been used to identify and estimate the effect of agricultural
practices on various agro-environmental metrics (Qian and
Harmel 2016; Deines, Wang, and Lobell 2019; Giannarakis
et al. 2022a,b). Using causal inference to test digital agriculture can provide reliable insights of superior socioeconomic
impact than of those inferred by naive descriptive studies,
including transparent benefits for the farmers, increased reliability, and honest pricing.

Introduction
The increasing global population and the changing climate
are putting pressure on the agricultural sector, demanding
the sustainable production of adequate quantities of nutritious food, feed and fiber. Nowadays, many industries enjoy
automated and effective decision-making via harnessing the
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14514

