The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Leveraging Contaminated Datasets to Learn Clean-Data Distribution with
Purified Generative Adversarial Networks
Bowen Tian1 , Qinliang Su1,2 * , Jianxing Yu3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangdong, China
tianbw@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {suqliang,yujx26}@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract

models are mostly established on the assumption of clean
training datasets, that is, all training instances are drawn
from the target distribution that we are interested in. But in
real-world applications, it is quite common to see that some
instances from an undesired distribution is mistakenly put
into the training dataset, resulting in a contaminated dataset.
This could be caused by the lack of sufficient expertise or
enough labor to correctly recognize every undesired instance
when building the dataset, or the high cost to clean a very
large contaminated dataset etc. For example, it has been reported that a tiny ratio of images in ImageNet were labelled
with incorrect categories, although their impacts on the final model trained on it is negligible due to their small proportion (Northcutt, Jiang, and Chuang 2021). But for many
applications, the quality of collected datasets could be much
poorer than ImageNet. When training on such datasets, generative models will only capture the distribution of the entire
dataset, that is, mixture of the target distribution and contamination distribution. However, as we use the generative
models, our primary intention is always to learn the distribution of desired instances (i.e. target distribution), which
can later be used to generate new desired instances or assist downstream tasks like anomaly detection (Schlegl et al.
2017; Zenati et al. 2018; Akcay, Atapour-Abarghouei, and
Breckon 2018), inpainting (Yu et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2021)
etc. Therefore, investigating how to learn a generative model
that only captures the distribution of desired instances from
a contaminated dataset is important both theoretically and
practically.

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are known for their
strong abilities on capturing the underlying distribution of
training instances. Since the seminal work of GAN, many
variants of GAN have been proposed. However, existing
GANs are almost established on the assumption that the training dataset is clean. But in many real-world applications, this
may not hold, that is, the training dataset may be contaminated by a proportion of undesired instances. When training
on such datasets, existing GANs will learn a mixture distribution of desired and contaminated instances, rather than the
desired distribution of desired data only (target distribution).
To learn the target distribution from contaminated datasets,
two purified generative adversarial networks (PuriGAN) are
developed, in which the discriminators are augmented with
the capability to distinguish between target and contaminated
instances by leveraging an extra dataset solely composed of
contamination instances. We prove that under some mild conditions, the proposed PuriGANs are guaranteed to converge
to the distribution of desired instances. Experimental results
on several datasets demonstrate that the proposed PuriGANs
are able to generate much better images from the desired distribution than comparable baselines when trained on contaminated datasets. In addition, we also demonstrate the usefulness of PuriGAN on downstream applications by applying it
to the tasks of semi-supervised anomaly detection on contaminated datasets and PU-learning. Experimental results show
that PuriGAN is able to deliver the best performance over
comparable baselines on both tasks.

Introduction

Generally, the goal above cannot be achieved by solely
leveraging the contaminated dataset, which is denoted by X .
In this paper, in addition to X , we also assume the availability of another small dataset X − that is only composed of
contamination instances. In many real-world applications, it
is often possible to collect a small number of representative
contamination instances, although collecting a large number of them may be difficult. For example, in the task of
anomaly detection, it is possible to collect some anomalies,
which can be seen as the contamination instances here. In
fact, several recent works have been proposed to introduce
an extra negative dataset and leverage it to boost the generation performance (Asokan and Seelamantula 2020; Sinha
et al. 2020). However, they are all restricted to the scenario
that the dataset X is clean. To only learn the distribution

Learning data distribution from a dataset can be applied
to various kinds of applications, like inpainting (Yu et al.
2018; Liu et al. 2021), anomaly detection (Schlegl et al.
2017; Zenati et al. 2018; Akcay, Atapour-Abarghouei, and
Breckon 2018), image translation (Isola et al. 2017; Liu,
Breuel, and Kautz 2017), AI medical diagnosis (Kazeminia et al. 2020; Izadi et al. 2018), etc. Among the existing methods of distribution learning, generative adversarial
networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) and variational
auto-encoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2014) are the two
most widely used ones. However, existing deep generative
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9989

