The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Was Fixing This Really That Hard?
On the Complexity of Correcting HTN Domains
Songtuan Lin, Pascal Bercher
School of Computing, The Australian National University
songtuan.lin@anu.edu.au, pascal.bercher@anu.edu.au

Abstract

revised a dialogue domain via model reconciliation (Sreedharan, Chakraborti, and Kambhampati 2021; Sreedharan,
Bercher, and Kambhampati 2022). Lin and Bercher (2021)
also studied the complexity of finding corrections to a flawed
domain model provided a plan that shall be a solution but
currently is not. Later, Lin, Grastien, and Bercher (2023)
developed a practical approach for solving this problem in
classical planning. Such an example-guided methodology
has been used in many disciplines, e.g., in theory revision
(Greiner 1999), and in explaining the unsolvability of a planning problem (Göbelbecker et al. 2010; Gragera, Garcı́aOlaya, and Fernández 2022) – the latter two can contribute
to modeling assistance if integrated into such a tool.
As another step towards such advanced modeling support,
we investigate theoretical foundations for correcting flawed
planning models in Hierarchical Task Network (HTN) planning (Erol, Hendler, and Nau 1996; Bercher, Alford, and
Höller 2019). For this, we follow and extend the approach
by Lin and Bercher (2021) where a plan serves as a test case
to witness the correctness of a planning domain. Concretely,
we follow the methodology of modifying a domain by preserving a set of white list plans while rejecting a set of black
list plans. So, given a flawed planning domain, a set of white
list plans, and a set of black list plans, we want to output a
sequence of changes to the domain such that all plans in the
white list are solutions in the modified domain and all plans
in the black list are not. Barták et al. (2021) studied a similar
scenario where they corrected a plan instead of a domain.
Our contribution is twofold. First, we clarify every hardness source that makes correcting an HTN problem to preserve a set of white list plans NP-hard in partial order HTN
planning. This generalizes the results by Lin and Bercher
(2021) which are restricted to total order (TO) HTN planning with only one white list plan being given. They also do
not investigate the different causes for hardness, which we
identify. Most importantly, one hardness source we found,
namely that deciding whether a task sequence is a valid
linearisation of a (partially ordered) task network is NPcomplete, is of great relevance to many other disciplines involving partial order, e.g., HTN plan verification or partial
order causal link (POCL) planning, and hence can serve as
a basis for complexity studies in those fields as well. Second, we provide lower and upper complexity bounds for the
problem when considering both a white list and a black list.

Automated modeling assistance is indispensable to the AI
planning being deployed in practice, notably in industry and
other non-academic contexts. Yet, little progress has been
made that goes beyond smart interfaces like programming
environments. They focus on autocompletion, but lack intelligent support for guiding the modeler. As a theoretical
foundation of a first step towards this direction, we study the
computational complexity of correcting a flawed Hierarchical
Task Network (HTN) planning domain. Specifically, a modeler provides a (white) list of plans that are supposed to be
solutions, and likewise a (black) list of plans that shall not be
solutions. We investigate the complexity of finding a set of
(optimal or suboptimal) model corrections so that those plans
are (resp. not) solutions to the corrected model. We factor out
each hardness source that contributes towards NP-hardness,
including one that we deem important for many other complexity investigations that go beyond our specific context of
application. All complexities range between NP and Σp2 , raising the hope for efficient practical tools in the future.

Introduction
AI planning shows great potential for many application areas
outside of academia like automated factories (Helmert and
Lasinger 2010), robotics (Karpas and Magazzeni 2020), or
assistance systems (Bercher et al. 2021; Grover et al. 2020).
In spite of the many advantages automated planning brings
with it, we still don’t see a large-scale application in industry. We believe that one of the biggest obstacles in AI planning becoming applied more broadly in practice is to model
the respective application domain in the first place. In order to make planning more accessible, tools have been developed for modeling assistance, e.g., the successful online
PDDL editor Planning.Domains. However, most of the tools
like this only aim at providing a user-friendly programming
environment, e.g., via syntax checking (Strobel and Kirsch
2020), visualization (Roberts et al. 2021), or interactive user
interfaces (Vaquero et al. 2012; Viola et al. 2019).
To our best knowledge only a few approaches exist that
provide further AI-based support. Lindsay et al. (2020), for
example, refined an inaccurate hybrid domain to capture the
environment more accurately, and Sreedharan et al. (2020)
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12032

