The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning from Good Trajectories in Offline Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Qi Tian1 , Kun Kuang1, * , Furui Liu2 , Baoxiang Wang3
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Beijing, China
3
School of Data Science, Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China
{tianqics,kunkuang}@zju.edu.cn, liufurui2@huawei.com, bxiangwang@cuhk.edu.cn

Episode 1 1/2K K
agent!
(a) Single agent data
(Online)

Offline multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) aims
to learn effective multi-agent policies from pre-collected
datasets, which is an important step toward the deployment of
multi-agent systems in real-world applications. However, in
practice, each individual behavior policy that generates multiagent joint trajectories usually has a different level of how
well it performs. e.g., an agent is a random policy while other
agents are medium policies. In the cooperative game with
global reward, one agent learned by existing offline MARL
often inherits this random policy, jeopardizing the performance of the entire team. In this paper, we investigate offline MARL with explicit consideration on the diversity of
agent-wise trajectories and propose a novel framework called
Shared Individual Trajectories (SIT) to address this problem.
Specifically, an attention-based reward decomposition network assigns the credit to each agent through a differentiable
key-value memory mechanism in an offline manner. These
decomposed credits are then used to reconstruct the joint offline datasets into prioritized experience replay with individual trajectories, thereafter agents can share their good trajectories and conservatively train their policies with a graph attention network (GAT) based critic. We evaluate our method
in both discrete control (i.e., StarCraft II and multi-agent particle environment) and continuous control (i.e., multi-agent
mujoco). The results indicate that our method achieves significantly better results in complex and mixed offline multiagent datasets, especially when the difference of data quality
between individual trajectories is large.

Episode 1 1/2K K
agent!
agent "

Episode 1 1/2K K
agent!
(b) Single agent data
(Offline)

agent #
(c) Multi-agent data
(Offline)

Episode 1 1/2K K
agent!

Episode 1 1/2K K
agent!

agent "

agent "

agent #

agent #

(d) Multi-agent data (e) Multi-agent data
(Offline, balanced) (Offline, imbalanced)

Low-quality agent trajectory
generated by random policies
Medium-quality agent trajectory
generated by medium policies
Multi-agents share a total reward
at each timestep of each episode
Online medium joint policy
(agent-wise balanced)
Online random joint policy
(agent-wise balanced)
Behavior (agent-wise imbalanced)
ICQ
ICQ (exchange)
Ours
Episode return

Abstract

Hundred step

(f) Episode return in 3z_vs_5z
map of StarCraft II

Figure 1: (a)∼(e) Data composition of data replay in
episodic online/offline RL/MARL, where the online learning agents in (a) and (c) are assumed to be medium policies.
(f) Episode return in 3z vs 5z map of StarCraft II with the
offline data structure of (e).

Recently, Yang et al. (2021) first investigated offline
MARL and found that multi-agent systems are more susceptible to extrapolation error (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup
2019), i.e., a phenomenon in which unseen state-action pairs
are erroneously estimated, compared to offline single-agent
reinforcement learning (RL) (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup
2019; Kumar et al. 2019; Wu, Tucker, and Nachum 2019;
Kumar et al. 2020; Fujimoto and Gu 2021). Then they proposed implicit constraint Q-learning (ICQ), which can effectively alleviate this problem by only trusting the state-action
pairs given in the dataset for value estimation.
In this paper, we point out that in addition to extrapolation
error, the diversity of trajectories in the offline multi-agent
dataset also deserves attention since the composition of this
dataset is much more complex than its single-agent version.
For better illustration, we briefly summarize the data quality of data replay in episodic online/offline RL/MARL as is
shown in Figure 1. In online settings, since the data replay is
updated rollingly based on the learning policy, the quality of
all data points is approximately the same as is shown in Figure 1(a) and Figure 1(c), where line connections in Figure

Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has shown its
powerful ability to solve many complex decision-making
tasks. e.g., game playing (Samvelyan et al. 2019). However, deploying MARL to practical applications is not easy
since interaction with the real world is usually prohibitive,
costly, or risky (Garcıa 2015), e.g., autonomous driving
(Shalev-Shwartz, Shammah, and Shashua 2016). Thus offline MARL, which aims to learn multi-agent policies in the
previously-collected, non-expert datasets without further interaction with environments, is an ideal way to cope with
practical problems.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11672

