The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

GradPU: Positive-Unlabeled Learning via Gradient Penalty and Positive
Upweighting
Songmin Dai, Xiaoqiang Li* , Yue Zhou, Xichen Ye, Tong Liu,
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, China
{laodar, xqli, yuez, yexichen0930, tong_liu}@shu.edu.cn

Abstract

Du Plessis, Niu, and Sugiyama 2015). The sample-selection
methods heavily rely on the heuristic algorithm for filtering
out or downweighting the positive data in U data (denoted as
P′ data) while keeping the negative data in U data (denoted
as N′ data). The cost-sensitive methods view the classification risk using all U data as the negative class as a biased
estimation of the ideal PN risk, and they correct the bias by
canceling out the extra risk caused by P′ data using labeled P
data.
Despite these successes, we find the overfitting of P class
caused by the conflicting fitting targets of the P and P′ data is
not fully solved so far. To address it, we derive more useful
generalization error bounds via Wasserstein distances. Based
on the theoretical analysis about the generalization error, we
propose a gradient-based regularization and an unnormalized
positive upweighting mechanism. The gradient-based regularization penalizes the gradient norms in the regions between
P and U samples, which leads to a better generalization of
the P class. The positive upweighting mechanism assigns
larger weights to those positive samples that are hard, notwell-fitted, and less frequently labeled. It forces each labeled
P sample to have a small training error although the nearby
P′ samples could hinder this. It is often assumed the labeled
positive are Selected Completely At Random (SCAR) for
most PUL methods (Kiryo et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2020;
Bekker and Davis 2018; Hou et al. 2018). However, in many
practical situations, the distribution of labeled P data may
differ from the P′ due to a selection bias (Kato, Teshima, and
Honda 2018; Na et al. 2020; Hammoudeh and Lowd 2020).
See Figure 1 for a depiction of these two scenarios. The proposed positive upweighting mechanism can compensate for
the selection bias and make our method also work on biased
positive labeling scenarios. The proposed method is easy to
implement and proved effective by experimental results.

Positive-unlabeled learning is an essential problem in many
real-world applications with only labeled positive and unlabeled data, especially when the negative samples are difficult
to identify. Most existing positive-unlabeled learning methods will overfit the positive class to some extent due to the
existence of unidentified positive samples. This paper first
analyzes the overfitting problem and proposes to bound the
generalization errors via Wasserstein distances. Based on that,
we develop a simple yet effective positive-unlabeled learning
method, GradPU, which consists of two key ingredients: A
gradient-based regularizer that penalizes the gradient norms in
the interpolated data region, which improves the generalization
of positive class; An unnormalized upweighting mechanism
that assigns larger weights to those positive samples that are
hard, not-well-fitted and less frequently labeled. It enforces
the training error of each positive sample to be small and increases the robustness to the labeling bias. We evaluate our
proposed GradPU on three datasets: MNIST, FashionMNIST,
and CIFAR10. The results demonstrate that GradPU achieves
state-of-the-art performance on both unbiased and biased positive labeling scenarios.

Introduction
Positive-Unlabeled Learning (PUL) aims to learn a binary
classifier with only labeled positive (P) and unlabeled (U)
data, where the U data consist of both unidentified P and
unidentified negative (N) data. It naturally arises in many
real-world applications where a certain class of data is costly
to be annotated or difficult to be identified (Bekker and
Davis 2020). Such applications include disease gene identification (Yang et al. 2012), remote sensing data (Li, Guo,
and Elkan 2010), recommender systems (Ren, Ji, and Zhang
2014), and semi-supervised anomaly detection (Zhang et al.
2018b). In recent years, it has also been used to improve
the performance of object detection (Yang, Liang, and Carin
2020; Guo et al. 2021), contrastive learning (Chuang et al.
2020), and reward learning (Xu and Denil 2021).
Most previous PUL works can be classified into two categories: sample-selection method (Zhang and Zuo 2009; Luo
et al. 2021) and cost-sensitive method (Kiryo et al. 2017;

Related Work
d

Let X ∈ R and Y ∈ {+1, −1} be the input and output
random variables. Let p(x, y) be the underlying joint density
of (X, Y ). Let pp (x) denote the positive marginal density
p(x|Y = +1) and pn (x) denote negative marginal density
p(x|Y = −1). Let πp = p(Y = +1) and πn = p(Y = −1) =
1 − πp be the class-prior probabilities. In PUL, the training
dataset X consists of a positive set Xp and an unlabeled
set Xu , where each unlabeled example x has the probability

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7296

