The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Infusing Definiteness into Randomness:
Rethinking Composition Styles for Deep Image Matting
Zixuan Ye1,† , Yutong Dai2,† , Chaoyi Hong1 , Zhiguo Cao1 , Hao Lu1, *
1

School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide, Australia
hlu@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
We study the composition style in deep image matting, a
notion that characterizes a data generation flow on how
to exploit limited foregrounds and random backgrounds to
form a training dataset. Prior art executes this flow in a
completely random manner by simply going through the
foreground pool or by optionally combining two foregrounds
before foreground-background composition. In this work,
we first show that naive foreground combination can be
problematic and therefore derive an alternative formulation
to reasonably combine foregrounds. Our second contribution
is an observation that matting performance can benefit from
a certain occurrence frequency of combined foregrounds and
their associated source foregrounds during training. Inspired
by this, we introduce a novel composition style that binds
the source and combined foregrounds in a definite triplet.
In addition, we also find that different orders of foreground
combination lead to different foreground patterns, which
further inspires a quadruplet-based composition style. Results
under controlled experiments on four matting baselines
show that our composition styles outperform existing ones
and invite consistent performance improvement on both
composited and real-world datasets. Code is available at:
https://github.com/coconuthust/composition styles

Figure 1: Two foregrounds can generate two additional
combined foregrounds. Two source foregrounds and a
combined one can construct a definite triplet. The combined
one also has a twin combination of different foreground
patterns, but shares the same alpha matte, which can be
further used to form a quadruplet. They build the core of
our proposed composition styles.
alpha mattes to support the training of deep matting models
has become a fundamental problem.
A common strategy is to use image composition as
in Eq. (1) to synthesize samples. To form a training
dataset, image composition is repetitively used following
a data generation flow or a composition rule. For
ease of exposition, we define such flows or rules
as composition styles, featured by foreground selection
and foreground-background composition. In the open
literature, two composition styles are widely used, say
DIM-style composition (Xu et al. 2017) and GCA-style
composition (Li and Lu 2020). Thereinto, DIM-style
composition iterates through the foreground pool; each
time a chosen foreground is composited with a random
background. GCA-style composition further introduces an
optional process of foreground combination (Tang et al.
2019) to generate the combined foreground (Fig. 1). To
distinguish from foreground-background composition, we
slightly abuse the term foreground combination to indicate
the composition between two foregrounds. Different from
general-purpose augmentations that enhance appearance
diversity, foreground combination boosts pattern diversity.
However, we find that the naive combination of foregrounds
(NCF) used in GCA-style composition can be problematic.
As shown in Fig. 2, it fails to filter out the noise and
generates artifacts in the new foreground.
By probing NCF, we find that it treats the second

Introduction
Large-scale datasets provide essential ingredients for
training deep neural networks (Deng et al. 2009). This sense
also applies to deep image matting whose goal is to estimate
the accurate alpha matte α that satisfies the matting equation
I = αF + (1 − α)B ,

(1)

such that the foreground F can be separated from the
background B given an image I. In particular, high-quality
alpha mattes with accurate annotations are vital for training
deep matting models. However, large-scale matting datasets
are difficult to collect. So far only a few datasets (Xu et al.
2017; Qiao et al. 2020; Li, Zhang, and Tao 2021) with
limited number of high-quality alpha mattes are publicly
available. Therefore, how to maximize the value of limited
* Corresponding author.
†

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3259

