The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Resilient Binary Neural Network
Sheng Xu1 * , Yanjing Li1 * , Teli Ma3 * , Mingbao Lin4 ,
Hao Dong5 , Baochang Zhang1,2† , Peng Gao3 , Jinhu Lu1,2
1
Beihang University, Beijing, P.R.China
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, P.R.China
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, P.R.China
4
Tencent, P.R.China
5
Peking University, Beijing, P.R.China
shengxu@buaa.edu.cn, yanjingli@buaa.edu.cn, mateli@pjlab.org.cn, linmb001@outlook.com, hao.dong@pku.edu.cn,
bczhang@buaa.edu.cn, gaopeng@pjlab.org.cn, lvjinhu@buaa.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Binary neural networks (BNNs) have received ever-increasing
popularity for their great capability of reducing storage burden as well as quickening inference time. However, there is a
severe performance drop compared with real-valued networks,
due to its intrinsic frequent weight oscillation during training.
In this paper, we introduce a Resilient Binary Neural Network
(ReBNN) to mitigate the frequent oscillation for better BNNs’
training. We identify that the weight oscillation mainly stems
from the non-parametric scaling factor. To address this issue,
we propose to parameterize the scaling factor and introduce
a weighted reconstruction loss to build an adaptive training
objective. For the first time, we show that the weight oscillation is controlled by the balanced parameter attached to the
reconstruction loss, which provides a theoretical foundation
to parameterize it in back propagation. Based on this, we
learn our ReBNN by calculating the balanced parameter based
on its maximum magnitude, which can effectively mitigate
the weight oscillation with a resilient training process. Extensive experiments are conducted upon various network models,
such as ResNet and Faster-RCNN for computer vision, as well
as BERT for natural language processing. The results demonstrate the overwhelming performance of our ReBNN over prior
arts. For example, our ReBNN achieves 66.9% Top-1 accuracy
with ResNet-18 backbone on the ImageNet dataset, surpassing
existing state-of-the-arts by a significant margin. Our code is
open-sourced at https://github.com/SteveTsui/ReBNN.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have dominated the recent
advances of artificial intelligence from computer vision
(CV) (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Russakovsky
et al. 2015) to natural language processing (NLP) (Wang
et al. 2018; Qin et al. 2019) and many beyond. In particular, large pre-trained models, e.g., ResNet (He et al. 2016)
and BERT (Devlin et al. 2018), have continuously broken
many records of the state-of-the-art performance. However,
the achievement also comes with tremendous demands for

memory and computation resources. These demands pose
a huge challenge to the computing ability of many devices,
especially resource-limited platforms such as mobile phones
and electronic gadgets. In light of this, substantial research
efforts are being invested in saving memory usage and computational power for an efficient online inference (He et al.
2018; Rastegari et al. 2016; Qin et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022).
Among these studies, network quantization is particularly
suitable for model deployment on resource-limited platforms
for its great reduction in parameter bit-width and practical
speedups supported by general hardware devices.
Binarization, an extreme form of quantization, represents
weights and activations of CNNs using a single bit, which
well decreases the storage requirements by 32× and computation cost by up to 58× (Rastegari et al. 2016). Consequently,
binarized neural networks (BNNs) are widely deployed on
various tasks such as image classification (Rastegari et al.
2016; Liu et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2022) and object detection (Wang et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2021a, 2022b), and have the
potential to be deployed directly on next-generation AI chips.
However, the performance of BNNs remains largely inequal
to the real-valued counterparts, due primarily to the degraded
representation capability and trainability.
Conventional BNNs (Rastegari et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2020)
are often sub-optimized, due to their intrinsic frequent weight
oscillation during training. We first identify that the weight
oscillation mainly stems from the non-parametric scaling
factor. Fig. 1(a) shows the epoch-wise oscillation1 of ReActNet, where weight oscillation exists even when the network
is convergent. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the conventional ReActNet (Liu et al. 2020) possesses a channel-wise tri-modal
distribution in the 1-bit convolution layers, whose peaks respectively center around the {−1, 0, +1}. Such distribution
leads to a magnified scaling factor α, and thus the quantized
weights ±α are quite larger than the small weights around
0, which might cause the weight oscillation. As illustrated
in Fig. 1(c), in BNNs, the real-valued latent tensor is binarized by the sign function and scaled by the scaling factor

* These authors contributed equally.
1

†

A toy example of weight oscillation: From iteration t to t+1, a
misleading weight update occurs causing an oscillation from −1 to
1, and from iteration t+1 to t+2 causes an oscillation from 1 to −1.

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10620

