The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DarkFeat: Noise-Robust Feature Detector and Descriptor for Extremely
Low-Light RAW Images
Yuze He1 , Yubin Hu1 , Wang Zhao1 , Jisheng Li1 , Yong-Jin Liu1 * , Yuxing Han2 , Jiangtao Wen3
1

2

Tsinghua University
Research Institute of Tsinghua University in Shenzhen
3
Eastern Institute for Advanced Study

Abstract

Despite existing local feature detection and description
methods function well, it is difficult to adapt them to extremely low-light scenarios. Classical methods (Bay, Tuytelaars, and Gool 2006; Lowe 1999; Rublee et al. 2011; Shi
et al. 1994) designed hand-crafted features based on local
gradients or color distributions, which can be seriously affected by strong noise in dark images. Neural network based
methods learn to detect and describe keypoints in the feature space with different strategies, which can effectively
overcome lighting changes, blurs and low-textures (DeTone,
Malisiewicz, and Rabinovich 2018; Revaud et al. 2019; Luo
et al. 2020). However, none of these methods explicitly consider strong noise, which is an crucial factor cannot be neglected in extremely low-light scenarios.
To improve performance in dark environments, recent
works utilize images in RAW format instead of the common
RGB images. Although a considerable measure of noise
still exists, RAW images have larger bit widths and retain
richer original information than RGB images, which are processed by the image signal processing (ISP) module within
cameras. Recently, based on RAW images, a benchmark
called MID (Song et al. 2021) with a denoise-then-detect
pipeline is proposed, which first denoises RAW images using BM3D (Dabov et al. 2007) or SID (Chen et al. 2018)
and then applies feature detection, description and matching
algorithms. Nevertheless, existing denoising algorithms are
usually very time-consuming and sometimes introduce artifacts that hinder accurate keypoint detection, which limit the
application of this denoise-then-detect pipeline.
In order to effectively detect and describe features in
extremely low-light scenarios, we present an end-to-end
framework called DarkFeat with noise-resistant oriented
training constraints. To identify and exclude areas that are
not salient or susceptible to noise, we propose Noise Robustness Map, which is learned by the average matching accuracy of pairs of noisy and noise-free images. To extract
sufficient and reliable keypoints under noisy conditions, we
further introduce selective suppression constraints to reduce
keypoint scores in noisy or information-poor area. To train
the DarkFeat, we also propose a simulation pipeline that can
generate high-quality low-light RAW format image dataset
with corresponding JPEG images.
In summary, our contributions are three-fold:

Low-light visual perception, such as SLAM or SfM at night,
has received increasing attention, in which keypoint detection and local feature description play an important role. Both
handcraft designs and machine learning methods have been
widely studied for local feature detection and description,
however, the performance of existing methods degrades in the
extreme low-light scenarios in a certain degree, due to the low
signal-to-noise ratio in images. To address this challenge, images in RAW format that retain more raw sensing information
have been considered in recent works with a denoise-thendetect scheme. However, existing denoising methods are still
insufficient for RAW images and heavily time-consuming,
which limits the practical applications of such scheme. In this
paper, we propose DarkFeat, a deep learning model which
directly detects and describes local features from extreme
low-light RAW images in an end-to-end manner. A novel
noise robustness map and selective suppression constraints
are proposed to effectively mitigate the influence of noise and
extract more reliable keypoints. Furthermore, a customized
pipeline of synthesizing dataset containing low-light RAW
image matching pairs is proposed to extend end-to-end training. Experimental results show that DarkFeat achieves stateof-the-art performance on both indoor and outdoor parts of
the challenging MID benchmark, outperforms the denoisethen-detect methods and significantly reduces computational
costs up to 70%. Code is available at https://github.com/THULYJ-Lab/DarkFeat.

Introduction
Keypoint detection and local feature description are fundamental operations in computer vision. Recently, simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) and structure-frommotion (SfM) in extremely low-light scenes, e.g., capture
under moonlight with a video-rate exposure, has received
increasing attention with the rise of applications such as autonomous driving, in which low-light feature detection and
description play an important role. However, different from
common daylight images, strong noises exist in the captured
low-light images and it remains a great challenge to effectively detect and describe reliable keypoints on these images.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Trained on our synthesized dataset, DarkFeat is the first
826

