The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Heterogeneous Region Embedding with Prompt Learning
†

†

Silin Zhou1* , Dan He2* , Lisi Chen1 , Shuo Shang1 , Peng Han1
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
The University of Queensland, Australia
{zhousilinxy, jedi.shang}@gmail.com, d.he@uq.edu.au, lchen012@e.ntu.edu.sg, penghan study@hotmail.com

Abstract

bile computing technologies, an unprecedented amount of
urban data has become available, including taxi trajectories,
Point-of-Interest (POI). This abundance of data offers essential support for the study of region embeddings.
Many existing studies have attempted to introduce different urban data to facilitate region embedding (Pan et al.
2013; Wang and Li 2017; Yao et al. 2018; Zhang et al.
2019b; Fu et al. 2019; Hui et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020;
Wu et al. 2022). For instance, (Wang and Li 2017) constructs flow graph and spatial graph through human mobility to learn region embedding since human mobility can
directly reflect the commuting correlation between regions.
(Yao et al. 2018) extracts human mobility patterns from taxi
trajectories and uses the co-occurrence of source-destination
regions to learn region embeddings. (Wu et al. 2022) analyzes the mobility data of different periods to establish
the mobility pattern for region embedding. However, these
methods only consider inter-region data but fail to incorporate the intra-region data, resulting in decreased effectiveness for region embedding.
Intuitively, more city data bring more available information on region attributes (Shang et al. 2015; Wang et al.
2019), which induces the researchers to learn region embeddings integrating with multiple sources of data. Specifically, (Fu et al. 2019) constructs two types of graphs using inter-region data human mobility and intra-region data
POIs. These two graphs are simply flattened and concatenated as initial region vectors as input to the AutoEncoder
for learning final region embedding. Additionally, (Zhang
et al. 2019b) introduces the generative adversarial network
in AutoEncoder to learn region embedding, but still uses a
similar strategy to flatten and concatenate different graphs.
Later, (Zhang et al. 2020) considers several types of data
to construct different region-based graphs and adopts a
multi-graph fusion mechanism, resulting in improved performance. However, almost methods fail to explore the heterogeneous graph learning of region embedding. Furthermore, all of the above methods fail to explore how the
learned region embedding can be used more effectively in
downstream tasks.
Inspired by the idea of prompt learning for NLP, we
propose a novel framework named HREP (Heterogeneous
Region Embedding with Prompt learning), which mainly
includes two modules: Heterogeneous Region Embedding

The prevalence of region-based urban data has opened new
possibilities for exploring correlations among regions to improve urban planning and smart-city solutions. Region embedding, which plays a critical role in this endeavor, faces
significant challenges related to the varying nature of city data
and the effectiveness of downstream applications. In this paper, we propose a novel framework, HREP (Heterogeneous
Region Embedding with Prompt learning), which addresses
both intra-region and inter-region correlations through two
key modules: Heterogeneous Region Embedding (HRE) and
prompt learning for different downstream tasks. The HRE
module constructs a heterogeneous region graph based on
three categories of data, capturing inter-region contexts such
as human mobility and geographic neighbors, and intraregion contexts such as POI (Point-of-Interest) information.
We use relation-aware graph embedding to learn region
and relation embeddings of edge types, and introduce selfattention to capture global correlations among regions. Additionally, we develop an attention-based fusion module to
integrate shared information among different types of correlations. To enhance the effectiveness of region embedding in
downstream tasks, we incorporate prompt learning, specifically prefix-tuning, which guides the learning of downstream
tasks and results in better prediction performance. Our experiment results on real-world datasets demonstrate that our
proposed model outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
In recent years, the rapid growth of urban data has captured the attention of researchers in the field of urban studies(Crooks et al. 2015; Shang et al. 2016, 2017; Chen and
Shang 2019; Chen et al. 2019). As cities are composed of
diverse regions, including business districts, residential areas, etc, understanding the structures of cities requires effective learning of high-quality region embeddings. Developing such embeddings can facilitate the creation of smarter
and more sustainable cities (Wang et al. 2018). Moreover,
these embeddings have direct applications in various areas,
such as crime prediction, traffic flow prediction, and real estate price estimation. With the increasing prevalence of mo* These authors contributed equally.
†

Shuo Shang and Peng Han are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4981

