The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Rational Subgoals from Demonstrations and Instructions
Zhezheng Luo* 1 , Jiayuan Mao* 1 , Jiajun Wu2 ,
Tomás Lozano-Pérez1 , Joshua B. Tenenbaum1 , Leslie Pack Kaelbling1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
Stanford University

Abstract
We present a framework for learning useful subgoals that support efficient long-term planning to achieve novel goals. At
the core of our framework is a collection of rational subgoals
(RSGs), which are essentially binary classifiers over the environmental states. RSGs can be learned from weakly-annotated
data, in the form of unsegmented demonstration trajectories,
paired with abstract task descriptions, which are composed of
terms initially unknown to the agent (e.g., collect-wood then
craft-boat then go-across-river). Our framework also discovers dependencies between RSGs, e.g., the task collect-wood
is a helpful subgoal for the task craft-boat. Given a goal description, the learned subgoals and the derived dependencies
facilitate off-the-shelf planning algorithms, such as A∗ and
RRT , by setting helpful subgoals as waypoints to the planner, which significantly improves performance-time efficiency.
Project page: https://rsg.csail.mit.edu

Introduction
Being able to decompose complex tasks into subgoals is critical for efficient long-term planning. Consider the example
in Fig. 1: planning to craft a boat from scratch is hard, as it
requires a long-term plan going from collecting materials to
crafting boats, but it can be made easier if we know that having an axe and having wood are useful sub-goals. Planning
hierarchically with these subgoals can substantially reduce
the search required. It is also helpful to understand the temporal dependencies between these subgoals, such as having
wood being a useful subgoal to achieve prior to crafting boat
makes long-term planning much more efficient.
In this work, we propose Rational Subgoals (RSGs), a
framework for learning useful subgoals and their temporal
dependencies from demonstrations. Our system learns with
very weak supervision, in the form of a small number of unsegmented demonstrations of complex behaviors paired with
abstract task descriptions. The descriptions are composed of
terms that are initially unknown to the agent, much as an
adult might narrate the high-level steps when demonstrating
a cooking recipe to a child. These action terms indicate important subgoals in the action sequence, and our agent learns
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12068

to detect when these subgoals are true in the world, infer their
temporal dependencies, and leverage them to plan efficiently.
Illustrated in Fig. 1, our model learns from a dataset of
paired but unaligned low-level state-action sequences and
the corresponding abstract task description (collect-wood
then craft-boat then go-across-river). For each action term
o (e.g., collect-wood), our model learns a goal condition Go ,
which maps any state to a binary random variable, indicating whether the state satisfies the goal condition. Given the
training data, we decompose the observed trajectory into fragments, each of which corresponds to a “rational” sequence
of actions for achieving a subgoal in the description.
While this model-based approach enables great generality in generating behaviors, it suffers from the slow online
computation. To speed up online planning, we compute a dependency matrix whose entries encode which subgoals might
be helpful to achieve before accomplishing another subgoal
(e.g., having wood is a helpful subgoal for the task crafting
boat, and thus the entry (having wood, crafting boat) will
have a higher weight). During test time, given a final goal
(e.g., craft boat) and the initial state, a hierarchical search
algorithm is applied at both the subgoal level and the lower,
environmental-action level.
The explicit learning of subgoals and their dependency
structures brings two important advantages. First, the subgoal dependency allows us to explicitly set helpful subgoals
as waypoints for planners. This significantly improves their
runtime efficiency. Second, compared to alternative subgoal
parameterizations such as reward functions, subgoals in the
form of a state classifier allows us to use simple and efficient
planners. For example, in continuous spaces, we can use
Rapidly-exploring Random Trees (RRT) to search for plans
in the robot configuration space. These planers do not require
training and generalize immediately to novel environments.
We evaluate RSGs in Crafting World (Chen, Gupta, and
Marino 2021), an image-based grid-world domain with a
rich set of object crafting tasks, and Playroom (Konidaris,
Kaelbling, and Lozano-Perez 2018), a 2D continuous domain
with geometric constraints. Our evaluation shows that our
model clearly outperforms baselines on planning tasks where
the agent needs to generate trajectories to accomplish a given
task. Another important application of RSGs is to create a
language interface for human-robot communication, which
includes robots interpreting human actions and humans in-

