The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

See How You Read? Multi-Reading Habits Fusion Reasoning for Multi-Modal
Fake News Detection
Lianwei Wu1,2,3 , Pusheng Liu1 , Yanning Zhang1∗
1

National Engineering Laboratory for Integrated Aero-Space-Ground-Ocean Big Data Application Technology,
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
Research & Development Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University in Shenzhen, China
3
Chongqing Science and Technology Innovation Center of Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
wlw@nwpu.edu.cn, lps@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, ynzhang@nwpu.edu.cn
Abstract

The existing approaches based on different neural networks
automatically capture and fuse the multimodal semantics of
news, which have achieved great success for fake news detection. However, they still suffer from the limitations of both
shallow fusion of multimodal features and less attention to the
inconsistency between different modalities. To overcome them,
we propose multi-reading habits fusion reasoning networks
(MRHFR) for multi-modal fake news detection. In MRHFR,
inspired by people’s different reading habits for multimodal
news, we summarize three basic cognitive reading habits and
put forward cognition-aware fusion layer to learn the dependencies between multimodal features of news, so as to deepen
their semantic-level integration. To explore the inconsistency of
different modalities of news, we develop coherence constraint
reasoning layer from two perspectives, which first measures
the semantic consistency between the comments and different
modal features of the news, and then probes the semantic deviation caused by unimodal features to the multimodal news
content through constraint strategy. Experiments on two public
datasets not only demonstrate that MRHFR not only achieves
the excellent performance but also provides a new paradigm
for capturing inconsistencies between multi-modal news.

Introduction
The rapid development of social media has not only brought
great convenience to knowledge sharing and communication,
but also caused the widespread spread of massive fake news,
which has posed realistic threats to politics (Osmundsen et al.
2021), public health (Diseases 2020), etc. Especially, multimodal fake news is inherently more infectious, spreading deeper and farther, and causing more damage than unimodal (textual) fake news (Nielsen and McConville 2022). Therefore,
under such severe scenarios, how to automatically detecting
multimodal fake news already become a crucial issue.
The existing approaches to fake news detection could be
roughly divided into two categories based on news content,
i.e., unimodal-based and multimodal-based. The unimodal fake
news detection task has developed in two stages: 1) Feature
engineering stage focuses on extracting manually the surface
features (e.g., the number of repetitions of punctuation) from
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13736

text content (Castillo, Mendoza, and Poblete 2011) and collects
simple platform features from meta data (Wu et al. 2016); and
2) Automatic detection stage strives to construct reasonable
neural networks to learn semantic (Hu et al. 2021; Wu et al.
2021a), emotional (Zhang et al. 2021), stance-based (Wu et al.
2019; Xie et al. 2021), stylistic (Wu et al. 2021b) features
around news text content, and capture comment-based (Shu
et al. 2019), and propagation-based (Shu et al. 2020) features
around meta data, which has achieved satisfactory performance
and gained considerable development. At present, multimodal
fake news detection has received more and more attention with
the emergence of forged images or fake news with text and
images, which is primarily absorbed in two perspectives: 1)
Consistent alignment endeavours to promote the associations
of multimodal features through building entity alignment (Li
et al. 2021), relationship alignment (Zhou, Wu, and Zafarani
2020), and semantic alignment (Chen et al. 2022) for detection; and 2) Interaction fusion first extracts textual and visual
features, and then integrates the two types of features through
simple early fusion or late fusion strategies to detect fake news
(Wu et al. 2021c; Dhawan et al. 2022).
However, although these approaches have advanced the
progress of multimodal fake news detection, which still possess several dilemmas: 1) In terms of feature fusion, existing methods generally employ superficial fusion strategies
such as concatenation, addition, or simply neural networks
to integrate the features of different modalities, which is difficult to capture the internal dependencies between them;
and 2) In terms of interaction alignment, the great majority of methods emphasize mainly on capturing the similarity
semantics between different modalities through alignment
mechanism, but ignore the acquirement of extensive inconsistent semantics. These inconsistent semantics include abundant credibility-indicator features, which may be the key to
improve the performance of fake news detection task.
To overcome the challenges, we propose Multi-Reading
Habits Fusion Reasoning networks (MRHFR) by strengthening
both deep fusion and coherence reasoning. In detail, we know
that there is generally massive interaction when people read
a multimodal news, which is sufficient for the deep fusion of
textual and visual information. Inspired by people’s reading
habits facing multimodal news, we summarize three basic reading habits and construct cognition-aware fusion layer (CFU)
to model them so as to learn the dependencies between multi-

