The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Prototypical Partial Optimal Transport for Universal Domain Adaptation
Yucheng Yang* , Xiang Gu* , Jian Sun†
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
{ycyang, xianggu}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, jiansun@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

tation (PDA) (Cao et al. 2018a) assumes that target class
set is a subset of source class set, i.e., Ct ⊆ Cs . Open-set
domain adaptation (OSDA) (Saito et al. 2018) exploits the
situation where source class set is a subset of target class set
Cs ⊆ Ct . Universal domain adaptation (UniDA) (You et al.
2019) is a more general setting that both source and target
domains possibly have common and private classes. The setting of UniDA includes PDA, OSDA, and a mixture of PDA
and OSDA, i.e., open-partial DA (OPDA) (Panareda Busto
and Gall 2017), in which both source and target domains
have private classes. This paper focuses on the general
UniDA setting. The goal of UniDA is to classify target domain common class samples and detect target-private class
samples, meanwhile reducing the negative transfer possibly
caused by source private classes. To reduce the domain gap
in UniDA, we may use distribution alignment techniques as
in UDA methods (Courty et al. 2017; Ganin and Lempitsky
2015), to align the distributions of two domains. However,
matching all data of two domains may lead to the mismatch
of the common class data of one domain to the private class
data in the other domain, and cause negative transfer.
In this work, we propose a novel Prototypical Partial Optimal Transport (PPOT) approach to tackle UniDA. Specifically, we model distribution alignment in UniDA as a partial
optimal transport (POT) problem, to align a fraction of data
(mainly from common classes), between two domains using POT. We design a prototype-based POT, in which the
source data are represented as prototypes in POT formulation, which is further formulated as a mini-batch-based version, dubbed m-PPOT. We prove that POT can be bounded
by m-PPOT and the distances between source samples and
their corresponding prototypes, inspiring us to design a deep
learning model for UniDA by using m-PPOT as one training loss. Meanwhile, the transport plan of m-PPOT can be
regarded as a matching matrix, enabling us to utilize the
row sum and column sum of the transport plan to reweight
the source prototypes and target samples for distinguishing
“known” and “unknown” samples. Based on the transport
plan of m-PPOT, we further design reweighted cross-entropy
loss on source labeled data and reweighted entropy loss on
target data to learn a transferable recognition model.
In experiments, we evaluate our method on four UniDA
benchmarks. Experimental results show that our method performs favorably compared with the state-of-the-art methods

Universal domain adaptation (UniDA) aims to transfer
knowledge from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled
target domain without requiring the same label sets of both
domains. The existence of domain and category shift makes
the task challenging and requires us to distinguish “known”
samples (i.e., samples whose labels exist in both domains)
and “unknown” samples (i.e., samples whose labels exist
in only one domain) in both domains before reducing the
domain gap. In this paper, we consider the problem from
the point of view of distribution matching which we only
need to align two distributions partially. A novel approach,
dubbed mini-batch Prototypical Partial Optimal Transport
(m-PPOT), is proposed to conduct partial distribution alignment for UniDA. In training phase, besides minimizing mPPOT, we also leverage the transport plan of m-PPOT to
reweight source prototypes and target samples, and design
reweighted entropy loss and reweighted cross-entropy loss to
distinguish “known” and “unknown” samples. Experiments
on four benchmarks show that our method outperforms the
previous state-of-the-art UniDA methods.

Introduction
Deep Learning has achieved significant progress in image recognition (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Simonyan and Zisserman 2014). However, deep learning
based methods heavily rely on in-domain labeled data for
training, to be generalized to target domain data. Considering that collecting annotated data for every possible domain
is labour-intensive and time-consuming, a feasible solution
is unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) (Ben-David et al.
2010; Ganin and Lempitsky 2015; Long et al. 2018), which
transfers the knowledge from labeled source domain to unlabeled target domain by alleviating distribution discrepancy
between them. The most common setting in UDA is closedset DA which assumes the source class set Cs is identical to
the target class set Ct . This may be impractical in real-world
applications, because it is difficult to ensure that the target
dataset always has the same classes as the source dataset.
To tackle this problem, some works consider more general
domain adaptation tasks. For example, partial domain adap* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10852

