The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation for Histopathology Images Based on
Dataset Synthesis and Feature Consistency Constraint
Zijie Fang1 * , Yang Chen1 * , Yifeng Wang2 * , Zhi Wang1† , Xiangyang Ji3 , Yongbing Zhang2†
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
vison307@gmail.com, cy21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wangyifeng@stu.hit.edu.cn,
wangzhi@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, ybzhang08@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Composition

Tissue segmentation is a critical task in computational pathology due to its desirable ability to indicate the prognosis of
cancer patients. Currently, numerous studies attempt to use
image-level labels to achieve pixel-level segmentation to reduce the need for fine annotations. However, most of these
methods are based on class activation map, which suffers
from inaccurate segmentation boundaries. To address this
problem, we propose a novel weakly-supervised tissue segmentation framework named PistoSeg, which is implemented
under a fully-supervised manner by transferring tissue category labels to pixel-level masks. Firstly, a dataset synthesis
method is proposed based on Mosaic transformation to generate synthesized images with pixel-level masks. Next, considering the difference between synthesized and real images, this
paper devises an attention-based feature consistency, which
directs the training process of a proposed pseudo-mask refining module. Finally, the refined pseudo-masks are used to
train a precise segmentation model for testing. Experiments
based on WSSS4LUAD and BCSS-WSSS validate that PistoSeg outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. The code is
released at https://github.com/Vison307/PistoSeg.

Natural Images

Synthesized Image

Composition

Histopathology Images

Synthesized Image

Figure 1: Synthesis of histopathology images is convenient
due to the homogeneity of tissue sections, which is impossible for natural images because of not only the difficulty of
discriminating background from the foreground in natural
images but also the indivisible nature of natural objects.

annotations at the pixel level. However, the massive difference between the centimeter scale of histopathology sections and the sub-micron scale of cells makes the acquisition
of pixel-level annotations very time-consuming and laborious. In addition, only professional pathologists or those with
clinical backgrounds are competent for annotation, making
it hard to utilize popular annotation methods for natural images such as crowdsourcing (Wazny 2017), which further increases the difficulty of obtaining pixel-level annotated data.

Introduction
Benefiting from the rapid development of deep learning,
computational pathology has recently freed pathologists
from tedious tasks such as cancer diagnosis, subtyping, and
others. In computational pathology, automatic tissue segmentation is one of the most important studies, as tumor generation and development are closely related to the tumor microenvironment (TME), which is formed by the interaction
of various types of tissues (Arneth 2019). Accurate differentiation and segmentation of histopathological tissues can
indicate the prognosis of cancer patients, guide oncologists
in the medication decision, and help determine the clinical
therapy, which are essential in cancer treatment (Hinshaw
and Shevde 2019).
Currently, most automated tissue segmentation pipelines
are based on fully-supervised methods, which require fine

According to previous research (Han et al. 2022a), coarsegrained image labels can reduce over 95% of the annotation time compared to pixel-level annotations. This opens a
new research direction named weakly-supervised semantic
segmentation (WSSS). Currently, many WSSS methods are
based on the class activation map (CAM) (Zhou et al. 2016).
The basic idea of CAM is to use localization clues brought
by classification models to generate pixel-level pseudomasks. However, since classification tasks only need to focus on the most discriminative regions, a well-known drawback of CAM is its inability to depict exact object boundaries (Ahn and Kwak 2018). Furthermore, histopathology

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Co-corresponding authors: Yongbing Zhang and Zhi Wang.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

606

