The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

VideoDubber: Machine Translation with Speech-Aware Length Control for Video
Dubbing
Yihan Wu1 * , Junliang Guo2 , Xu Tan2 , Chen Zhang3 , Bohan Li3 , Ruihua Song1† ,
Lei He3 , Sheng Zhao3 , Arul Menezes4 , Jiang Bian2
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia,
3
Microsoft Azure Speech,
4
Microsoft Azure Translation
yihanwu@ruc.edu.cn, {junliangguo, xuta, zhangche, bohli, helei, szhao, arulm, jiang.bian}@microsoft.com
Abstract

Speech Recognition (ASR) (Yu and Deng 2016), Neural Machine Translation (NMT) (Vaswani et al. 2017a) and Textto-Speech (TTS) (Tan et al. 2021, 2022). Specifically, ASR
transcribes the original speech into text in the source language, which can be omitted when subtitles are available.
NMT aims to translate text in the source language to the
target language, and TTS finally synthesizes the translated
text into target speech. Different from speech-to-speech
translation (Wahlster 2013), video dubbing requires strict
isochronous constraints between the original source speech
and the synthesized target speech to ensure that the speech
matches the original video footage in terms of length and
thus provide immersive watching feeling, which brings additional challenges.
In the cascaded video dubbing system, both NMT and
TTS can determine the length of translated speech, i.e.,
the number of translated words is determined by the NMT
model, while the length of the synthesized speech can be
controlled by TTS via adjusting the pause and duration of
words. Previous automatic video dubbing systems control
the speech isochrony separately, by first controlling the number of generated target words/characters similar to that of
the source words, and then adjusting the speaking rate to
ensure the duration of synthesized speech similar to that of
the source speech. However, as the speech duration of words/characters in different languages varies, the same number
of words/characters in the source and target sentences does
not guarantee the same length of speech. Therefore, TTS has
to adjust the speaking rate of each word in a wide range to
match the total speech length, which will affect the fluency
and naturalness of synthesized speech (e.g., the speaking
rates may be inconsistent with those of adjacent sentences).
In this paper, we tackle the length control problem in a
systematic way. Our idea starts from a simple motivation:
matching the length of the synthesized speech with the original one while avoiding speaking rate inconsistency of adjacent sentences. To preserve high hearing quality, we should
assign the responsibility for length control more to NMT
and less to TTS, which requires NMT can be controlled by
original speech length while maintaining translation quality.
To achieve this goal, we propose the following techniques.
Firstly, to control the speech duration when translating the

Video dubbing aims to translate the original speech in a film
or television program into the speech in a target language,
which can be achieved with a cascaded system consisting of
speech recognition, machine translation and speech synthesis. To ensure the translated speech to be well aligned with
the corresponding video, the length/duration of the translated speech should be as close as possible to that of the
original speech, which requires strict length control. Previous works usually control the number of words or characters
generated by the machine translation model to be similar to
the source sentence, without considering the isochronicity of
speech as the speech duration of words/characters in different languages varies. In this paper, we propose VideoDubber,
a machine translation system tailored for the task of video
dubbing, which directly considers the speech duration of each
token in translation, to match the length of source and target
speech. Specifically, we control the speech length of generated sentence by guiding the prediction of each word with the
duration information, including the speech duration of itself
as well as how much duration is left for the remaining words.
We design experiments on four language directions (German
→ English, Spanish → English, Chinese ↔ English), and the
results show that VideoDubber achieves better length control ability on the generated speech than baseline methods.
To make up the lack of real-world datasets, we also construct
a real-world test set collected from films to provide comprehensive evaluations on the video dubbing task.

1

Introduction

Video dubbing1 aims to translate the original speech in a
movie or TV from a source language to the speech in a
target language. Generally, automatic video dubbing system consists of three cascaded sub-tasks, i.e., Automatic
* Work done during the first author is interning at Microsoft Research Asia.
†
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
There are usually two scenarios for video dubbing: 1) translating the speech of a video from one language to another; 2) generating speech in the same language according to the text transcripts
of a video. In this paper, we focus on the first video dubbing for
translation scenario.

13772

