The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

I’m Me, We’re Us, and I’m Us:
Tri-directional Contrastive Learning on Hypergraphs
Dongjin Lee1 and Kijung Shin1,2
1

2

School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST, South Korea
{dongjin.lee, kijungs}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

ich, and Leskovec 2016), ranking (Yu et al. 2021), and outlier detection (Lee, Choe, and Shin 2022).
Previous studies have largely focused on developing encoder architectures so-called hypergraph neural networks
for hypergraph-structured data (Feng et al. 2019; Yadati
et al. 2019; Dong, Sawin, and Bengio 2020; Bai, Zhang, and
Torr 2021; Arya et al. 2020), and in most cases, such hypergraph neural networks are trained in a (semi-)supervised
way. However, data labeling is often time, resource, and
labor-intensive, and neural networks trained only in a supervised way can easily overfit and may fail to generalize (Rong
et al. 2020), making it difficult to be applied to other tasks.
Thus, self-supervised learning (Liu et al. 2022; Jaiswal
et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021), which does not require labels,
has become popular, and especially contrastive learning has
achieved great success in computer vision (Chen et al. 2020;
Hjelm et al. 2019) and natural language processing (Gao,
Yao, and Chen 2021). Contrastive learning has proved effective also for learning on (ordinary) graphs (Veličković
et al. 2018; Peng et al. 2020; Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020;
Zhu et al. 2020, 2021b; You et al. 2020), and a common approach is to (a) create two augmented views from the input
graph and (b) learn machine learning models to maximize
the agreement between the two views.
However, contrastive learning on hypergraphs remains
largely underexplored with only a handful of previous studies (Xia et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2021) (see
Section 2 for details). Especially, the following questions remain open: (Q1) what to contrast?, (Q2) how to augment a
hypergraph?, and (Q3) how to select negative samples?
For Q1, which is our main focus, we propose tridirectional contrast. In addition to node-level contrast,
which is the only form of contrast employed in the previous
studies, we propose the use of group-level and membershiplevel contrast. That is, in two augmented views, we aim to
maximize agreements (a) between the same node, (b) between the same group of nodes, and (c) between each group
and its members. These three forms of contrast are complementary, leading to representations that capture both nodeand group-level (i.e., higher-order) relations in hypergraphs.
In addition, for Q2, we demonstrate that combining two
simple augmentation strategies (spec., membership corruption and feature corruption) is effective. For Q3, we reveal
that uniform random sampling is surprisingly successful,

Although machine learning on hypergraphs has attracted considerable attention, most of the works have focused on (semi)supervised learning, which may cause heavy labeling costs
and poor generalization. Recently, contrastive learning has
emerged as a successful unsupervised representation learning method. Despite the prosperous development of contrastive learning in other domains, contrastive learning on
hypergraphs remains little explored. In this paper, we propose TriCL (Tri-directional Contrastive Learning), a general framework for contrastive learning on hypergraphs. Its
main idea is tri-directional contrast, and specifically, it aims
to maximize in two augmented views the agreement (a) between the same node, (b) between the same group of nodes,
and (c) between each group and its members. Together with
simple but surprisingly effective data augmentation and negative sampling schemes, these three forms of contrast enable
TriCL to capture both node- and group-level structural information in node embeddings. Our extensive experiments using
14 baseline approaches, 10 datasets, and two tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of TriCL, and most noticeably, TriCL
almost consistently outperforms not just unsupervised competitors but also (semi-)supervised competitors mostly by significant margins for node classification. The code and datasets
are available at https://github.com/wooner49/TriCL.

1

Introduction

Many real-world interactions are group-wise. Examples include collaborations of researchers, group conversations
on messaging apps, co-citations of documents, and copurchases of items. A hypergraph, which is a generalized
graph, allows an edge to join an arbitrary number of nodes,
and thus each such edge, which is called a hyperedge, naturally represents such group-wise interactions (Benson et al.
2018; Do et al. 2020; Lee, Ko, and Shin 2020).
Recently, machine learning on hypergraphs has drawn
a lot of attention from a broad range of fields, including social network analysis (Yang et al. 2019), recommender systems (Xia et al. 2021), and bioinformatics (Zheng
et al. 2019). Hypergraph-based approaches often outperform
graph-based ones on various machine learning tasks, including classification (Feng et al. 2019), clustering (Benson, GleCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8456

