The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Counterfactual Learning with General Data-Generating Policies
Yusuke Narita1 , Kyohei Okumura2 , Akihiro Shimizu3 , Kohei Yata4
1
Yale University,
Northwestern University,
3
Mercari, Inc.,
4
University of Wisconsin-Madison,
yusuke.narita@yale.edu, kyohei.okumura@u.northwestern.edu, akihiro-shimizu@mercari.com, yata@wisc.edu
2

Abstract

We provide a solution to this problem. Our proposed OPE
estimator is applicable not only to full support logging policies but also to deficient support ones. We also allow for hybrid stochastic and deterministic logging policies, i.e., logging policies that choose actions stochastically for some individuals and deterministically for other individuals. 1
Method. Our OPE estimator is based on a modification of
the Propensity Score (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983), which
we dub the “Approximate Propensity Score” (APS) (Narita
and Yata 2022). APS of action (arm) a at context (covariate) value x is the average probability that the logging policy chooses action a over a shrinking neighborhood around
x in the context space. If two actions have nonzero APS at
x, the logging policy chooses both actions locally around x.
This enables us to estimate the difference in the mean reward
between the two actions by exploiting the local subsample
around x. When the logging policy is deterministic, the subsample consists of individuals near the decision boundary
between the two actions. We then use the estimated reward
differences to construct an estimator for the performance of
any given counterfactual policy.
As the main theoretical result, we prove that our proposed
OPE estimator is consistent. That is, the estimator converges
in probability to the true performance of a counterfactual
policy as the sample size increases, under the assumption
that the mean reward differences are constant over the context space (Theorem 1). This result holds whether the logging policy is of full support or deficient support. The proof
exploits results from differential geometry and geometric
measure theory, which have not been applied in machine
learning research as far as we know.
Simulation Experiments. We validate our method with
two simulation experiments. The first considers a mix of full
support and deficient support policies as the logging policy.
Actions are randomly chosen for a small A/B test segment of
the population and are chosen by a deterministic supervised
learning algorithm for the rest of the population. For the task
of evaluating counterfactual policies, our method produces
smaller mean squared errors than a baseline estimator that
only uses the A/B test subsample. The second experiment
considers a situation in which we have a batch of data gen-

Off-policy evaluation (OPE) attempts to predict the performance of counterfactual policies using log data from a different policy. We extend its applicability by developing an
OPE method for a class of both full support and deficient
support logging policies in contextual-bandit settings. This
class includes deterministic bandit (such as Upper Confidence Bound) as well as deterministic decision-making based
on supervised and unsupervised learning. We prove that our
method’s prediction converges in probability to the true performance of a counterfactual policy as the sample size increases. We validate our method with experiments on partly
and entirely deterministic logging policies. Finally, we apply
it to evaluate coupon targeting policies by a major online platform and show how to improve the existing policy.

1

Introduction

In bandit and reinforcement learning, off-policy (batch)
evaluation attempts to estimate the performance of some
counterfactual policy given data from a different logging
policy. Off-policy evaluation (OPE) is essential when deploying a new policy might be costly or risky, such as in education, medicine, consumer marketing, and robotics. OPE
relates to other fields that study counterfactual/causal reasoning, such as statistics and economics.
Most existing OPE studies focus on full support logging policies, which take all actions with positive probability in any context, such as stochastic bandit (e.g. -greedy
and Thompson Sampling) and random A/B testing. However, real-world decision-making often uses deficient support logging policies, including deterministic bandit (e.g.
Upper Confidence Bound) as well as deterministic decisionmaking based on predictions obtained from supervised and
unsupervised learning. An example in the latter group is a
policy that greedily chooses the action with the largest predicted reward. OPE is difficult with a deficient support logging policy, since its log data contain no information about
the reward from actions never chosen by the logging policy.
There appears to be no established OPE estimator for deficient support logging policies (Sachdeva, Su, and Joachims
2020).

1
The full version of the paper, which includes technical appendices, can be found at https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.01925.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9286

