The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Online Hyperparameter Optimization for Class-Incremental Learning
Yaoyao Liu1, 2 , Yingying Li3 , Bernt Schiele1 , Qianru Sun4
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
2
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University
3
Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology
4
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University
yliu538@jhu.edu, yingli2@caltech.edu, schiele@mpi-inf.mpg.de, qianrusun@smu.edu.sg

Training from scratch (TFS)

Abstract
Class-incremental learning (CIL) aims to train a classification model while the number of classes increases phase-byphase. An inherent challenge of CIL is the stability-plasticity
tradeoff, i.e., CIL models should keep stable to retain old
knowledge and keep plastic to absorb new knowledge. However, none of the existing CIL models can achieve the optimal
tradeoff in different data-receiving settings—where typically
the training-from-half (TFH) setting needs more stability, but
the training-from-scratch (TFS) needs more plasticity. To this
end, we design an online learning method that can adaptively
optimize the tradeoff without knowing the setting as a priori. Specifically, we first introduce the key hyperparameters
that influence the tradeoff, e.g., knowledge distillation (KD)
loss weights, learning rates, and classifier types. Then, we
formulate the hyperparameter optimization process as an online Markov Decision Process (MDP) problem and propose
a specific algorithm to solve it. We apply local estimated rewards and a classic bandit algorithm Exp3 to address the issues when applying online MDP methods to the CIL protocol. Our method consistently improves top-performing CIL
methods in both TFH and TFS settings, e.g., boosting the average accuracy of TFH and TFS by 2.2 percentage points on
ImageNet-Full, compared to the state-of-the-art. Code is provided at https://class-il.mpi-inf.mpg.de/online/

Ours

65
60

RMM

55

iCaRL

50

LUCIR

LwF

45

AANets
45

50

55

60

65

Training from half (TFH)

70

75

Figure 1: Average accuracy (%) on CIFAR-100 25phase, using two data-receiving settings: 1) training-fromhalf (TFH): a large amount of data is available beforehand
to pre-train the encoder; 2) training-from-scratch (TFS):
classes come evenly in each phase. Dark blue and orange
indicate the baselines and our method, respectively. Lightcolor circles are confidence intervals. Notice that methods
with strong KD losses, e.g., LUCIR (Hou et al. 2019),
AANets (Liu et al. 2021a), and RMM (Liu et al. 2021b), tend
to provide worse performance in TFS than TFH, while methods with weak KD losses, e.g., iCaRL (Rebuffi et al. 2017)
and LwF (Li et al. 2016), tend to provide worse performance
in TFH than TFS. Our method uses an online learning algorithm to produce the key hyperparameters, e.g., the weights
that control which KD losses are used. Thus, our method
achieves the highest performance in both TFS and TFH.

Introduction
Real-world problems are ever-changing, with new concepts
and new data being continuously observed. Ideal AI systems
should have the ability to learn new concepts from the new
data, also known as plasticity, while maintaining the ability to recognize old concepts, also known as stability. However, there is a fundamental tradeoff between plasticity and
stability: too much plasticity may result in the catastrophic
forgetting of old concepts, while too much stability restricts
the ability to adapt to new concepts (McCloskey et al. 1989;
McRae et al. 1993; Ratcliff 1990). To encourage related research, Rebuffi et al. (2017) defined the class-incremental
learning (CIL) protocol, where the training samples of different classes come to the model phase-by-phase and most
of the past data are removed from the memory.
Recently, many methods have been proposed to balance
the stability-plasticity tradeoff for different data-receiving

settings of CIL. For example, the strong feature knowledge distillation (KD) loss function is usually adopted when
a large amount of data is available beforehand (e.g., the
training-from-half (TFH) setting) since it encourages stability (Hou et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2021a,b); while the weak logit
KD loss function is popular when data and classes are received evenly in each phase (e.g., the training-from-scratch
(TFS) setting) since it provides more plasticity (Rebuffi et al.
2017; Belouadah et al. 2019; Li et al. 2016).
Most CIL algorithms pre-fix the tradeoff balancing methods, usually according to which data-receiving setting will
be used in the experiments. However, in real-world scenar-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8906

