The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Exploring CLIP for Assessing the Look and Feel of Images
Jianyi Wang, Kelvin C.K. Chan, Chen Change Loy*
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{jianyi001, chan0899, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Measuring the perception of visual content is a long-standing
problem in computer vision. Many mathematical models have
been developed to evaluate the look or quality of an image.
Despite the effectiveness of such tools in quantifying degradations such as noise and blurriness levels, such quantification is loosely coupled with human language. When it comes
to more abstract perception about the feel of visual content,
existing methods can only rely on supervised models that
are explicitly trained with labeled data collected via laborious user study. In this paper, we go beyond the conventional
paradigms by exploring the rich visual language prior encapsulated in Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP)
models for assessing both the quality perception (look) and
abstract perception (feel) of images without explicit taskspecific training. In particular, we discuss effective prompt
designs and show an antonym prompt pairing strategy to harness the prior. We also provide extensive experiments on controlled datasets and Image Quality Assessment (IQA) benchmarks. Our results show that CLIP captures meaningful priors
that generalize well to different perceptual assessments.

Introduction
The look and feel are two contributing factors when humans
interpret an image, and the understanding of these two elements has been a long-standing problem in computer vision. The look of an image is often related to quantifiable
attributes that directly affect the content delivery, such as
exposure and noise level. In contrast, the feel of an image
is an abstract concept immaterial to the content and cannot
be easily quantified, such as emotion and aesthetics. It is of
common interest to explore the possibility of a universal understanding of both look and feel, as it can not only save efforts on manual labeling but also facilitate the development
of vision tasks such as restoration (Zhang et al. 2019; Jo,
Yang, and Kim 2020; Wenlong et al. 2021; Hui et al. 2021).
Considerable efforts have been devoted to the assessment
of both the quality perception (i.e., look) and the abstract
perception (i.e., feel) of images1 . Earlier methods (Mittal,

Figure 1: We explore the potential of CLIP for visual perception. We find that CLIP is capable of assessing quality
(e.g., “overall quality”, “brightness”, etc) as shown in (a).
CLIP can be extended to the challenging task of abstract
perception (e.g., “aesthetic”, “happy”, etc) in (b). The assessment is done without explicit task-specific training using the proposed antonym prompts to harness prior in CLIP.

Moorthy, and Bovik 2012; Saad, Bovik, and Charrier 2012;
Mittal, Soundararajan, and Bovik 2012; Zhang, Zhang, and
Bovik 2015; Ma et al. 2017a) design image-level features,
such as natural scene statistics (Ruderman 1994), for quality
assessment. Despite the success of these methods, the optimality of hand-crafted features is often in doubt, and the
correlation to human perception is inferior in general. To alleviate the problem, later methods (Ma et al. 2017b; Ke et al.
2021; Kong et al. 2016; Sheng et al. 2018; Jin et al. 2022;

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The notions of quality perception and abstract perception are
used in this paper mainly to facilitate our analysis.

2555

