The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MRCN: A Novel Modality Restitution and Compensation Network for
Visible-Infrared Person Re-identification
Yukang Zhang1 , Yan Yan1 , Jie Li2 , Hanzi Wang1, 3 *
1
2

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China.
Video and Image Processing System Laboratory, School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China.
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China.
zhangyk@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {yanyan, hanzi.wang}@xmu.edu.cn, leejie@mail.xidian.edu.cn
Abstract

MRM

VIS Input

Visible-infrared person re-identification (VI-ReID), which
aims to search identities across different spectra, is a challenging task due to large cross-modality discrepancy between
visible and infrared images. The key to reduce the discrepancy is to filter out identity-irrelevant interference and effectively learn modality-invariant person representations. In this
paper, we propose a novel Modality Restitution and Compensation Network (MRCN) to narrow the gap between the
two modalities. Specifically, we first reduce the modality discrepancy by using two Instance Normalization (IN) layers.
Next, to reduce the influence of IN layers on removing discriminative information and to reduce modality differences,
we propose a Modality Restitution Module (MRM) and a
Modality Compensation Module (MCM) to respectively distill modality-irrelevant and modality-relevant features from
the removed information. Then, the modality-irrelevant features are used to restitute to the normalized visible and infrared features, while the modality-relevant features are used
to compensate for the features of the other modality. Furthermore, to better disentangle the modality-relevant features and
the modality-irrelevant features, we propose a novel CenterQuadruplet Causal (CQC) loss to encourage the network
to effectively learn the modality-relevant features and the
modality-irrelevant features. Extensive experiments are conducted to validate the superiority of our method on the challenging SYSU-MM01 and RegDB datasets. More remarkably, our method achieves 95.1% in terms of Rank-1 and
89.2% in terms of mAP on the RegDB dataset.

VIS modality
information

MCM

NIR modality
information

MCM

VIS Embeddings
NIR Embeddings

Feature Embeddings

NIR Input

MRM
Addition

Remove

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed method. The person
images captured from different modalities have large modality gap. To narrow this gap, we propose a novel MRCN
to disentangle the modality-relevant and modality-irrelevant
features and reduce the modality discrepancy between the
VIS and NIR images.

et al. 2018; Tay, Roy, and Yap 2019; Hou et al. 2019; Gao
et al. 2020; Miao et al. 2019). However, when the light conditions are not desirable, the surveillance system usually automatically switches from the visible (VIS) modality to the
near-infrared (NIR) modality to cope with the problem of
low illumination (Fu et al. 2019, 2021c,b). Therefore, it is
necessary to consider the crucial problem of visible-infrared
person ReID (VI-ReID). The goal of VI-ReID is to match
persons captured by the VIS and NIR cameras with different
spectra. Compared with the widely studied single-modality
person ReID, the VI-ReID is much more challenging due to
additional cross-modality discrepancy between the VIS and
NIR images (Ye et al. 2020b; Zhang et al. 2021).
To reduce the modality discrepancy between the VIS and
NIR images, two popular types of methods have been proposed. One type is the image-level methods (Wang et al.
2019b, 2020a, 2019a; Choi et al. 2020), which aim to translate a NIR (or VIS) image into its VIS (or NIR) counterpart by using the GANs (Goodfellow et al. 2014). Despite
their success in reducing modality discrepancy, generating
cross-modality images is usually accompanied by noises due
to the lack of VIS-NIR image pairs. The other type is the
feature-level methods (Wu et al. 2017; Dai et al. 2018; Ye

Introduction
Person re-identification (person ReID) is attracting more and
more attention due to its great application potential in intelligent surveillance systems. Given a query image, the goal of
person ReID is to match the most relevant person in a nonoverlapping camera surveillance system (Sun et al. 2018;
Wang et al. 2018; Zheng et al. 2019; Tan et al. 2022). Existing person ReID methods mainly focus on solving challenges related to variations in human pose, background and
illumination. The desirable performance of those methods
largely depends on good visible light conditions to clearly
catch the appearance characteristics of humans (Kalayeh
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3498

