The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fair Short Paths in Vertex-Colored Graphs
Matthias Bentert, Leon Kellerhals, Rolf Niedermeier
Technische Universität Berlin, Algorithmics and Computational Complexity
{matthias.bentert, leon.kellerhals}@tu-berlin.de

Abstract
s

The computation of short paths in graphs with arc lengths
is a pillar of graph algorithmics and network science. In a
more diverse world, however, not every short path is equally
valuable. For the setting where each vertex is assigned to
a group (color), we provide a framework to model multiple natural fairness aspects. We seek to find short paths in
which the number of occurrences of each color is within some
given lower and upper bounds. Among other results, we prove
the introduced problems to be computationally intractable
(NP-hard and parameterized hard with respect to the number of colors) even in very restricted settings (such as each
color should appear with exactly the same frequency), while
also presenting an encouraging algorithmic result (“fixedparameter tractability”) related to the length of the sought solution path for the general problem.

t

Figure 1: A graph with colored vertices (blue and green),
unit-length arcs, and two vertices s and t is depicted. The
highlighted path is a shortest path between s and t and contains five blue and five green vertices. Thus, it is balance-fair.
fairness constraint indeed generalizes upon multiple fairness
concepts introduced in the literature. We discuss these later
in this section.
Our contributions. We introduce and study two natural
fairness scenarios for one of the back-bone problems in network algorithmics: finding short paths. The problems in consideration are the following.
BALANCE -FAIR S HORTEST PATH
Input:
A directed graph G = (V, A), a vertex
coloring χ : V → [c], an arc-length function w : A → N, and two vertices s, t ∈ V .
Question: Is one of the shortest s-t-paths balance-fair,
that is, it visits the same number of vertices
of each color?

Introduction
Travel agency WhataWonderfulWorld offers adventure bus
trips from New Orleans to New York, making stops at
exciting country sites for impressive day trips throughout
the journey. To address environmental demands, the agency
wishes to minimize the overall travel distance, while at the
same time striving to maximize the variety and balance of
impressions gathered at the day trips. Clearly, such a sustainable travel from a starting point s to an endpoint t can
be modeled as finding an s-t-path in a graph with positive arc lengths. To model maximum variety and balance,
the vertices—the places to visit—are colored according to
agency-chosen categories, say blue vertices are interesting
for bathing, green vertices for hiking, et cetera. The quest
is to find a short travel path in which the colors are fairly
represented. Herein, what is to be considered fair may depend on the setting. In an idealistic (and hypothetical) setting, one may consider it fair to have the same amount of
beaches, hiking spots, and places of any other type on the
path. We call such paths balance-fair; an example for such
a path is depicted in Figure 1. Possibly, one has asked the
travelers beforehand about their preferences. With this, one
gains a better understanding on how many places of each
type should be visited and one may be able to give lower
and upper bounds for each type. The latter (more realistic)

S HORT PATH WITH L OWER AND U PPER B OUNDS
Input:
A directed graph G = (V, A), a vertex
coloring χ : V → [c], an arc-length function w : A → N, two vertices s, t ∈ V , and
integers ℓ, α1 , α2 , . . . , αc , β1 , β2 , . . . , βc .
Question: Is there an s-t-path P of length at most ℓ such
that the number of vertices in P of color i is
at least αi and at most βi for each i ∈ [c]?
Simply put, S HORT PATH WITH L OWER AND U PPER
B OUNDS allows for very general fairness constraints, while
BALANCE -FAIR S HORTEST PATH focuses on a seemingly
more simple (and possibly idealistic) constraint and only allows for shortest paths. Note that BALANCE -FAIR S HORTEST PATH is indeed a special case of S HORT PATH WITH
L OWER AND U PPER B OUNDS by setting ℓ = dist(s, t)
and fixing all lower and upper bounds to (ℓ − 1)/c. Al-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12346

