The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Combating Mode Collapse via Offline Manifold Entropy Estimation
Haozhe Liu1,2 , Bing Li1∗ , Haoqian Wu3,4 , Hanbang Liang4 , Yawen Huang2 ,
Yuexiang Li 2∗ , Bernard Ghanem1 , Yefeng Zheng2
1

AI Initiative, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia
2
Jarvis Lab, Tencent, Shenzhen 518057, China
3
YouTu Lab, Tencent, Shenzhen 518057, China
4
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China
{haozhe.liu;bing.li;bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa; lianghanbang2019@email.szu.edu.cn;
{linuswu;vicyxli;yawenhuang;yefengzheng}@tencent.com
mode collapse (or training instability) (Mangalam and Garg
2021; Saxena and Cao 2021), hindering their further development in the generative learning community and potential
applications.
To alleviate the mode collapse in GANs, many efforts
have been devoted to introducing prior knowledge or adding
noise on the generator side. For example, the conditional
GANs (Mirza and Osindero 2014; Odena, Olah, and Shlens
2017; Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2019) handle the
mode collapse via introducing class-level prior knowledge
into GANs. By splitting the generated distribution into several sub-distributions, the complexity of image synthesis
would be further reduced. As the distributions of different classes are quite different, mode collapse can be mitigated to some extent. However, annotating the image classes
is time-consuming and deviates from the unsupervised setting of GAN. Compared to conditional information, adding
noise into networks is a more flexible solution against mode
collapse. Specifically, Style-GANs (Karras, Laine, and Aila
2019; Karras et al. 2020b) add Gaussian noise to the output of each convolutional layer to increase the variance of
the generated samples. Despite the rapid progress of GANbased approaches, mode collapse remains an unsolved and
challenging problem in GANs.
Different from GANs, another kind of generative model,
namely Energy-Based Models (EBMs) (Grathwohl et al.
2021; Geng et al. 2021; LeCun et al. 2006; Xie et al. 2016;
Xie, Zhu, and Nian Wu 2017; Xie, Zhu, and Wu 2019;
Xie et al. 2018b), have shown remarkable performances in
circumventing the mode collapse. These methods have attracted increasing attention in recent years. Typically, EBMs
estimate the density of the target data distribution and are
trained via maximum likelihood. The partition function has
to be estimated during the training of EBMs by adopting
expensive Langevin dynamics, while the partition function
is generally intractable. Consequently, since training EBMs
is challenging, EMBs suffer from high computational complexity and cannot generate images with competitive fidelity.
In this paper, inspired by the success of EBMs in avoiding the mode collapse, we propose a novel pipeline named
MaEM-GANs (manifold entropy maximization) for training GANs through bridging Wasserstein GANs (WGANs)
and EBMs. By analyzing the connection between WGANs
and EBMs, we discover that mode collapse in GANs can

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have shown compelling results in various tasks and applications in recent
years. However, mode collapse remains a critical problem in
GANs. In this paper, we propose a novel training pipeline
to address the mode collapse issue of GANs. Different from
existing methods, we propose to generalize the discriminator
as feature embedding and maximize the entropy of distributions in the embedding space learned by the discriminator.
Specifically, two regularization terms, i.e., Deep Local Linear Embedding (DLLE) and Deep Isometric feature Mapping
(DIsoMap), are introduced to encourage the discriminator to
learn the structural information embedded in the data, such
that the embedding space learned by the discriminator can
be well-formed. Based on the well-learned embedding space
supported by the discriminator, a non-parametric entropy estimator is designed to efficiently maximize the entropy of embedding vectors, playing as an approximation of maximizing
the entropy of the generated distribution. By improving the
discriminator and maximizing the distance of the most similar samples in the embedding space, our pipeline effectively
reduces the mode collapse without sacrificing the quality of
generated samples. Extensive experimental results show the
effectiveness of our method which outperforms the GAN
baseline, MaF-GAN on CelebA (9.13 vs. 12.43 in FID) and
surpasses the recent state-of-the-art energy-based model on
the ANIMEFACE dataset (2.80 vs. 2.26 in Inception score).

Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have attracted extensive attention in recent years (Schmidhuber 1990, 1991,
2020; Goodfellow et al. 2020). Generally speaking, a GAN
consists of a generator network and a discriminator network, where the generator generates samples to fool the discriminator, and the discriminator is trained to discriminate
real and generated samples. With such adversarial learning, GANs have shown high-fidelity results in various tasks
such as image inpainting (Yu et al. 2018) and photo superresolution (Li et al. 2019). Nevertheless, GANs suffer from
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
This work was done when Haozhe Liu interned at Jarvis Lab.
Corresponding Authors: Bing Li and Yuexiang Li.
Code is available at https://github.com/HaozheLiu-ST/MEE.

8834

