The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

BETA-CD: A Bayesian Meta-Learned Cognitive Diagnosis Framework
for Personalized Learning
Haoyang Bi1, 2 , Enhong Chen∗1, 2 , Weidong He1, 2 , Han Wu1, 2 ,
Weihao Zhao1, 2 , Shijin Wang2,3 , Jinze Wu3
1

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application, University of Science and Technology of China
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
3
iFLYTEK AI Research, iFLYTEK CO., LTD.
bhy0521@mail.ustc.edu.cn, cheneh@ustc.edu.cn, {hwd, wuhanhan, zhaoweihao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{sjwang3, jzwu4}@iflytek.com
Abstract

Personalized learning is a promising educational approach
that aims to provide high-quality personalized services for
each student with minimum demands for practice data. The
key to achieving that lies in the cognitive diagnosis task,
which estimates the cognitive state of the student through
his/her logged data of doing practice quizzes. Nevertheless,
in the personalized learning scenario, existing cognitive diagnosis models suffer from the inability to (1) quickly adapt
to new students using a small amount of data, and (2) measure the reliability of the diagnosis result to avoid improper
services that mismatch the student’s actual state. In this paper, we propose a general Bayesian mETA-learned Cognitive
Diagnosis framework (BETA-CD), which addresses the two
challenges by prior knowledge exploitation and model uncertainty quantification, respectively. Specifically, we firstly
introduce Bayesian hierarchical modeling to associate each
student’s cognitive state with a shared prior distribution encoding prior knowledge and a personal posterior distribution
indicating model uncertainty. Furthermore, we formulate a
meta-learning objective to automatically exploit prior knowledge from historical students, and efficiently solve it with a
gradient-based variational inference method. The code will
be publicly available at https://github.com/AyiStar/pyat.

Student

Practice

Diagnosis

Service

Figure 1: Illustrative procedure of personalized learning in
intelligent tutoring systems.

achieve lower practice burden and higher service quality.
To this objective, the procedure of cognitive diagnosis is required to (1) rely on as few practice data as possible from
students and (2) provide as an informative result as possible
for downstream services. In the literature, massive efforts
have been devoted to developing cognitive diagnosis models (CDMs) (Embretson and Reise 2013; Wang et al. 2020).
However, existing works are faced with the following two
challenges in the personalized learning scenario.
Firstly, it is challenging for existing CDMs to quickly
adapt to new students within only a small amount of practice data. Typically, directly applying ordinary optimization
methods to the current student’s practice logs will bring severe overfitting problems. A major cause of such inability
for fast adaptation is the lack of the exploitation of prior
knowledge about the population of similar students. We take
the human teacher as an explanatory metaphor. In practice, a
proficient teacher can quickly judge a student’s state through
a few questions. A critical factor lies in the teacher’s rich
prior knowledge from her past teaching experience. For instance, assume that a student has only one correct response
on a question at difficulty level 4 (out of 10). Taking no prior
knowledge into consideration, since the student has a 100%
correct rate, we might overestimate the student’s ability to
extremely high, say level 9. Contrastively, the teacher can refer to all the students in the same class who also correctly answered this question, and then give a more reasonable result,
e.g., level 6, which is the average ability level of the similar
students. Hence, it is necessary to exploit prior knowledge
in cognitive diagnosis procedures for facilitating fast adaptation with limited data.

Introduction
In intelligent tutoring systems, personalized learning is a
promising educational approach which aims to deliver customized services based on the students’ personal states to
address their unique needs in study (Paramythis and LoidlReisinger 2003). As shown in Figure 1, each student has a
few personal practice logs used to estimate his/her cognitive state (e.g., how well he/she has mastered the specific
knowledge concepts), which is referred to as the procedure
of cognitive diagnosis (Wang et al. 2020). Then the system
is able to provide personalized services based on the diagnosis result, such as online course recommendation (Zhang
et al. 2019) and learning path planning (Liu et al. 2019).
Compared to conventional scenarios where students are provided with equally non-personalized practice questions and
educational services, personalized learning can essentially
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5018

