The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ProKD: An Unsupervised Prototypical Knowledge Distillation Network for
Zero-Resource Cross-Lingual Named Entity Recognition
Ling Ge1 , Chunming Hu1,2, * , Guanghui Ma1 , Hong Zhang3 , Jihong Liu4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
College of Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
National Computer Network Emergency Response Technical Team / Coordination Center of China, Beijing, China
4
School of Mechanical Engineering and Automation, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{geling, hucm, maguanghui, ryukeiko}@buaa.edu.cn, zhangh@isc.org.cn
Abstract

achieved by deep learning-based NER methods, these supervised methods are limited to a few languages with rich
entity labels, such as English, due to the reasonably large
amount of human-annotated training data required. In contrast, the total number of languages currently in use worldwide is about 7, 000 1 , the majority of which contain limited or no labeled data, constraining the application of existing methods to these languages (Wu et al. 2020c,b). Hence,
cross-lingual transfer learning is gaining increasing attention from researchers, which can leverage knowledge from
high-resource (source) languages(e.g., English) with abundant entity labels to overcome the data scarcity problem of
the low- (zero-) resource (target) languages (Liu et al. 2021).
In particular, this paper focuses on the zero-resource scenario, where there is no labeled data in the target language.
To improve the performance of zero-resource crosslingual NER, researchers have conducted intensive research
and proposed various approaches(Jain et al. 2019; Wu et al.
2020c; Pfeiffer et al. 2020). Among these, the knowledge
distillation-based approaches (Chen et al. 2021; Wu et al.
2020b,a) have recently shown encouraging results.These approaches typically train a teacher NER network using source
language data and then leverage the soft pseudo-labels produced by the teacher network for the target language data to
train the student NER network. In this way, the student network is expected to learn the language-independent knowledge from the teacher network and perform well on unlabeled target data (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015).
While significant progress has been achieved by knowledge distillation-based approaches for cross-lingual NER,
we argue that these approaches still have two limitations.
First, knowledge distillation relies heavily on the shared
language-independent knowledge acquired by the teacher
network across languages. As is known, there are differences
in the feature distribution between the source and target
languages, existing techniques employ only the source language for teacher network training. As a result, the teacher
network tends to learn source-language-specific knowledge
and cannot effectively grasp shared language-independent
knowledge. Second, under the knowledge distillation learning mechanism, the student network aims to match the
pseudo-soft labels generated by the teacher network for the

For named entity recognition (NER) in zero-resource languages, utilizing knowledge distillation methods to transfer language-independent knowledge from the rich-resource
source languages to zero-resource languages is an effective means. Typically, these approaches adopt a teacherstudent architecture, where the teacher network is trained
in the source language, and the student network seeks to
learn knowledge from the teacher network and is expected
to perform well in the target language. Despite the impressive performance achieved by these methods, we argue that
they have two limitations. Firstly, the teacher network fails
to effectively learn language-independent knowledge shared
across languages due to the differences in the feature distribution between the source and target languages. Secondly,
the student network acquires all of its knowledge from the
teacher network and ignores the learning of target languagespecific knowledge. Undesirably, these limitations would hinder the model’s performance in the target language. This paper proposes an unsupervised prototype knowledge distillation network (ProKD) to address these issues. Specifically,
ProKD presents a contrastive learning-based prototype alignment method to achieve class feature alignment by adjusting the distance among prototypes in the source and target
languages, boosting the teacher network’s capacity to acquire
language-independent knowledge. In addition, ProKD introduces a prototypical self-training method to learn the intrinsic
structure of the language by retraining the student network on
the target data using samples’ distance information from prototypes, thereby enhancing the student network’s ability to
acquire language-specific knowledge. Extensive experiments
on three benchmark cross-lingual NER datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach.

Introduction
Named Entity Recognition (NER) is a fundamental sub-task
of information extraction that aims to locate and classify
text spans into predefined entity classes such as locations,
organizations, etc (Ma et al. 2022b). It is often employed
as an essential component for tasks such as question answering (Cao et al. 2022) and coreference resolution(Ma
et al. 2022a). Despite the impressive performance recently
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

12818

https://www.ethnologue.com/guides/how-many-languages

