The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Compressing Transformers: Features Are Low-Rank, but Weights Are Not!
Hao Yu, Jianxin Wu*
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
yuh@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wujx2001@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

vious NLP research efforts (Noach and Goldberg 2020; Hsu
et al. 2022) focus on exploring the factorization of model
weights. These compression methods have been very successful in reducing model size and to speedup inference.
But, the accuracy drops dramatically, hence fine-tuning for
many epochs using the entire training set is needed to partly
recover from the accuracy loss. Nevertheless, to protect data
privacy and/or achieve rapid deployment, in many scenarios
there may be only the original model and a small number
of samples available under a tight compression time budget. Fine-tuning a deep learning model with limited data
will easily lead to overfitting, which invalidates these existing methods. Furthermore, these methods simply compress
the large transformer model itself, lacking the exploration of
how the compressed models perform on downstream tasks.
Lastly, automatically determining the compression ratio of
each layer is one of the main difficulties in low-rank decomposition, but efforts in this aspect remain scarce.
Hence, we believe that in order to successfully perform
low-rank approximation on transformers, we need an effective approach which can be easily applied in both NLP and
CV, which only requires few samples and short compression
time, adaptively determines the compression model structure and generalizes well to downstream tasks.
To fulfill these goals, our key finding is that although in
linear layers of transformers the weight matrices are almost
full rank (i.e., not suitable for decomposition), the features
(i.e., activations) are generally low-rank. Therefore, we propose a novel Atomic Feature Mimicking (AFM) approach to
replace traditional weight approximation methods locally.
Besides, since different layers have different compression
sensitivity, we design an adaptive search method to determine the compressed model architecture, namely Adaptive
AFM (AAFM), for low-rank decomposition. The approximation will accumulate errors along with the depth increment, so we propose Global Feature Mimicking (GFM) to
fine-tune the compressed models with only a small number
of unlabeled samples. Our contributions are:

Transformer and its variants achieve excellent results in various computer vision and natural language processing tasks,
but high computational costs and reliance on large training
datasets restrict their deployment in resource-constrained settings. Low-rank approximation of model weights has been
effective in compressing CNN models, but its application
to transformers has been less explored and is less effective. Existing methods require the complete dataset to finetune compressed models, which are both time-consuming and
data-hungry. This paper reveals that the features (i.e., activations) are low-rank, but model weights are surprisingly not
low-rank. Hence, AAFM is proposed, which adaptively determines the compressed model structure and locally compresses each linear layer’s output features rather than the
model weights. A second stage, GFM, optimizes the entire
compressed network holistically. Both AAFM and GFM only
use few training samples without labels, that is, they are fewshot, unsupervised, fast and effective. For example, with only
2K images without labels, 33% of the parameters are removed
in DeiT-B with 18.8% relative throughput increase, but only a
0.23% accuracy loss for ImageNet recognition. The proposed
methods are successfully applied to the language modeling
task in NLP, too. Besides, the few-shot compressed models
generalize well in downstream tasks.

Introduction
The transformer architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017) has been
widely used in the natural language processing (NLP) area
over the past years. Inspired by its excellent performance
in NLP, transformer-based models have established numerous new records in various computer vision (CV) tasks, such
as image classification (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) and object detection (Liu et al. 2021). Despite these progresses,
most of these transformer-based structures suffer from large
model sizes, huge run-time memory consumption and high
computational costs, which prohibit the model deployment
to resource-constrained platforms. Therefore, compressing
transformer-based models has attracted immense interests in
recent years.
Low-rank approximation is a useful technique to strike a
balance between model accuracy and model size. Some pre-

• We propose a novel and effective framework for lowrank approximation of transformers, with the key finding and novelty being mimicking the features rather than
the weights. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
methods can compress both vanilla transformers and its
variants in CV and NLP. With fewer parameters and

* J. Wu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11007

