The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CMVAE: Causal Meta VAE for Unsupervised Meta-Learning
Guodong Qi 1,2 , Huimin Yu 1,2,3,4
1

College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
ZJU-League Research & Development Center
3
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
4
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Information Processing, Communication and Networking
{guodong qi, yhm2005}@zju.edu.cn
Training images

Abstract
Unsupervised meta-learning aims to learn the meta knowledge from unlabeled data and rapidly adapt to novel tasks.
However, existing approaches may be misled by the contextbias (e.g. background) from the training data. In this paper, we abstract the unsupervised meta-learning problem into
a Structural Causal Model (SCM) and point out that such
bias arises due to hidden confounders. To eliminate the confounders, we define the priors are conditionally independent,
learn the relationships between priors and intervene on them
with casual factorization. Furthermore, we propose Causal
Meta VAE (CMVAE) that encodes the priors into latent codes
in the causal space and learns their relationships simultaneously to achieve the downstream few-shot image classification task. Results on toy datasets and three benchmark
datasets demonstrate that our method can remove the contextbias and it outperforms other state-of-the-art unsupervised
meta-learning algorithms because of bias-removal. Code is
available at https://github.com/GuodongQi/CMVAE.

Test images

D1
Sky√Wing√ Sky√Wing×

Sky√Wing√

Sky×Wing√ Sky×Wing√

Sky×Wing×

(a)

D2

X

...

Dd

Y

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of context-bias. (b) SCM of unsupervised meta-learning. The dashed line means that the relationship (DAG) need to be learned.

Regular meta-learning algorithms such as (Finn, Abbeel,
and Levine 2017; Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017) aim to
learn the meta knowledge to adapt to novel tasks quickly.
However, it requires various supervised tasks on large labeled datasets during the meta-training phase. Recently, researchers take great interest in unsupervised meta-learning
(Hsu, Levine, and Finn 2019; Khodadadeh et al. 2021).
Different from regular meta-learning, unsupervised metalearning contains unsupervised meta-training and supervised meta-test. It aims to learn a learning procedure with
unlabeled datasets in the meta-training and solve novel supervised human-crafted tasks in the meta-test.
Previous methods focus on the pseudo-label generation of
the task. However, they may ignore the bias. Figure 1a illustrates a binary-classification toy example where the background prior is one of bias. In the training images, the
“birds” are always together with the “sky” and the “airplanes” always park on the ground. As a result, the model
will take the “sky” as a part of the “bird”, and mistakenly
recognize the “airplane” test image as a “bird”. It is essential
to remove the effect of background prior i.e., context-bias.

However, discerning the context-bias is challenging, because the priors may not be independent. For example, in the
task of Figure 1a, the “wing” and the “sky” prior is not independent statistically1 . When the “sky” prior is removed, the
“wing” prior will be changed, and then the prediction will
be affected. In this case, the model will not know whether
the “sky” or “wing” prior is the context-bias.
To address the problems, we analyze, discern and remove the context-bias from a causal perspective via three
theories, i.e., Structural Causal Model (SCM) (Glymour,
Pearl, and Jewell 2016), Common Cause Principle (CCP)
(Schölkopf et al. 2021) and Independent Causal Mechanism
(ICM) (Schölkopf et al. 2012). Among them, SCM describes
the relevant concepts and how they interact with each other.
CCP reveals that if two observables are statistically dependent, then there exists a variable such that they are independent conditioned on the variable. ICM states that the conditional distribution of each prior given its causes does not
influence the others. In other words, SCM explains how the
bias affects predictions. CCP makes it reasonable to assume
the priors are conditionally independent. For example, in
Figure 1a there exists a “flying” prior, which causally affects “sky” and “wing” and makes them independent when
conditioned on the prior. ICM allows us to remove one
prior (e.g., p(sky|flying)) will not affect another prior (e.g.,
p(wing|flying)).
Specially, we build the SCM in Figure 1b. The bias

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
P (wing, sky) = 1/4, P (wing) = 3/4, P (sky) = 1/2, we
have P (wing, sky) ̸= P (wing)P (sky), so they are dependent.

1

Introduction

9480

