The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MMTN: Multi-Modal Memory Transformer Network for Image-Report
Consistent Medical Report Generation
Yiming Cao1,2 , Lizhen Cui1,2 * , Lei Zhang1,2 , Fuqiang Yu1,2 , Zhen Li3 , Yonghui Xu2∗
1

2

School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research (C-FAIR), Shandong University, Jinan, China
3
Department of Gastroenterology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, China
{caoyiming, leizh, yfq}@mail.sdu.edu.cn, {clz,qilulizhen}@sdu.edu.cn, xu.yonghui@hotmail.com
Findings：
A Is polyp was seen in the transverse colon,
about 2*2 mm in size, with smooth surface
mucosa, the same color as the surrounding
mucosa, and no echinoderm-like changes at
the base. The remaining transverse colon
mucosa was smooth, with a clear submucosal
vascular texture, with regular peristalsis.

Abstract
Automatic medical report generation is an essential task
in applying artificial intelligence to the medical domain,
which can lighten the workloads of doctors and promote
clinical automation. The state-of-the-art approaches employ
Transformer-based encoder-decoder architectures to generate reports for medical images. However, they do not fully
explore the relationships between multi-modal medical data,
and generate inaccurate and inconsistent reports. To address
these issues, this paper proposes a Multi-modal Memory
Transformer Network (MMTN) to cope with multi-modal
medical data for generating image-report consistent medical
reports. On the one hand, MMTN reduces the occurrence of
image-report inconsistencies by designing a unique encoder
to associate and memorize the relationship between medical images and medical terminologies. On the other hand,
MMTN utilizes the cross-modal complementarity of the medical vision and language for the word prediction, which further enhances the accuracy of generating medical reports. Extensive experiments on three real datasets show that MMTN
achieves significant effectiveness over state-of-the-art approaches on both automatic metrics and human evaluation.

Figure 1: An example of gastroenterology report, where
aligned image and report are marked in different colors and
medical terminology knowledge are underlined in red.

only leverage two types of data (i.e., images and text) to generate reports, ignoring essential medical knowledge. Some
works introduce medical knowledge (e.g., disease tags (Li
et al. 2019) and regions (Liu et al. 2021a)) to guide the report generation, without exploring the correlations between
knowledge and images or texts. These works do not fully
exploit medical data’s multi-modal nature and relationships.
2) The generated reports show a deficiency in both precision
and consistency. Most approaches (Yuan et al. 2019; You
et al. 2021) directly align image visual features and report
linguistic features to generate reports. The limitation of annotated correspondence between images and text results in
inaccuracies and inconsistencies in the sentences generated
by these methods. In addition, some essential medical terminologies in medical reports cannot be effectively generated.
To tackle the above limitations, in this paper, we propose
a Multi-modal Memory Transformer Network (MMTN) to
generate semantically coherent and consistent medical image reports. To take full advantage of the multi-modal nature of medical data, MMTN is capable of incorporating
and processing multi-modal medical data, i.e., medical image, terminology knowledge, and text report simultaneously,
and exploring the interactions between different modalities
to improve the quality of medical report generation. To make
the report cover important medical terminologies, we designed the MMTN encoder to capture and memorize the relationship between medical images and medical terminologies, which can assist in guiding the transformation from image visual features to report text features with the medium of
medical terminologies. Specifically, the grid module and terminology BERT module extract features from medical im-

Introduction
Medical image reports utilize free text to describe and explain the medical observations in images, which are mainly
written by doctors based on their medical knowledge and
experience. To alleviate the heavy workload of doctors, automatic report generation has become a critical task.
The state-of-the-art works in medical report generation
task adopt the encoder-decoder architecture (Zhang et al.
2020; Liu et al. 2021a) to automatically generate reports for
medical images. Although these works can generate textual
narratives for medical images, they are still limited in fully
exploiting the information from medical multi-modal data,
such as the consistent mapping bewteen medical images and
reports and the utilization of important medical terminology
knowledge, which is demonstrated in Figure 1. Therefore,
there are some issues that need to be further explored:
1) The relationships between multi-modal medical data are
not fully explored. Some works (Chen et al. 2020, 2021)
* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

277

