The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Test Time Augmentation Meets Post-hoc Calibration:
Uncertainty Quantification under Real-World Conditions
Achim Hekler1,3 , Titus J. Brinker1 , and Florian Buettner1,2,3
1

German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Heidelberg, Germany
2
German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Germany
3
Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany
{achim.hekler, titus.brinker, florian.buettner}@dkfz.de

Abstract
Communicating the predictive uncertainty of deep neural networks transparently and reliably is important in many safetycritical applications such as medicine. However, modern neural networks tend to be poorly calibrated, resulting in wrong
predictions made with a high confidence. While existing posthoc calibration methods like temperature scaling or isotonic
regression yield strongly calibrated predictions in artificial
experimental settings, their efficiency can significantly reduce in real-world applications, where scarcity of labeled data
or distribution shifts are commonly present. In this paper, we
first investigate the impact of these characteristics on post-hoc
calibration and introduce an easy-to-implement extension of
common post-hoc calibration methods based on test time augmentation. In extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our
approach results in substantially better calibration on various
architectures. We demonstrate the robustness of our proposed
approach on a real-world application for skin cancer classification and show that it facilitates safe decision-making under
real-world uncertainties.

Figure 1: Real-world distribution shift in skin cancer classification: recalibrated models make over-confident predictions. Left: in-distribution predictions by a model trained
on images taken in Barcelona are made correctly with high
confidence. Right: Under real-world distribution shift (image taken at a different hospital in Sidney) all models make
wrong predictions, but only our proposed approach has a low
confidence score reflecting model uncertainty.

Introduction

of the system.
For AI-based diagnostic systems to be applied routinely in
the clinic, the underlying neural networks need to be able to
transparently communicate the reliability of individual predictions throughout the entire life-cycle of the model. That
is, predictive uncertainties need to be calibrated not only for
in-distribution predictions, but also for distribution shift scenarios.
A variety of different post-hoc calibration methods have
been proposed to ensure well-calibrated models (Guo et al.
2017; Platt et al. 1999; Zhang, Kailkhura, and Han 2020).
These methods transform weakly calibrated model predictions such that in-distribution predictions are strongly calibrated. However, modern neural networks typically still
make highly overconfident predictions under distribution
shift, even after post-hoc calibration (Ovadia et al. 2019;
Tomani and Buettner 2021).
Recent studies have examined calibration of deep neural
networks under distribution shift typically on standard
computer vision benchmarks such as I MAGENET-C or
O BJECT N ET for I MAGE N ET. However, calibration in the
medical domain comes with requirements and challenges
that are substantially different from those in these bench-

Deep neural networks are increasingly applied in safetycritical applications such as autonomous driving (Grigorescu et al. 2020) or medical diagnosis (Aggarwal et al.
2021). Such systems require not only high accuracy but also
strongly calibrated uncertainty estimates. That is, the confidence score provided by the model should reflect its predictive uncertainty such that it matches the true likelihood of
the prediction.
A lighthouse application for neural network-based classification in medicine is to support dermatologists in the
diagnosis of skin cancer (Esteva et al. 2017). Studies have
shown that image classifiers based on convolutional neural
networks are on par or even superior to human experts in
experimental settings (Brinker et al. 2019). However, several challenges arise when translating such systems from research to clinical practice. Due to different lighting conditions, acquisition systems or digital post-processing steps,
the real-world deployment environment can generally be
slightly different from the training domain (see Fig. 1). As a
result, there may be a significant drop in the predictive power
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14856

