The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

When Congestion Games Meet Mobile Crowdsourcing: Selective Information
Disclosure
Hongbo Li, Lingjie Duan
Singapore University of Technology and Design
hongbo li@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, lingjie duan@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract

Teneketzis 2017; Sekar et al. 2019; Castiglioni et al. 2021).
However, these works largely assume that the social planner has full information of all traffic conditions, and limit
attentions to an one-shot static scenario to regulate.
In common practice, the traffic information dynamically
changes over time and is difficult to predict in advance
(Nikolova and Stier-Moses 2011). To obtain such timevarying information, emerging traffic navigation platforms
(e.g., Waze and Google Maps) crowdsource mobile users
to learn and share their observed traffic conditions on the
way (Vasserman, Feldman, and Hassidim 2015; Zhang et al.
2018). However, such platforms make all information public, and current users still make selfish routing decisions to
the path with shortest travel latency, instead of choosing diverse paths to learn more information for future users. As
a stochastic path’s traffic condition alternates between congestion states over time, the platforms may miss enough exploration to reduce the social cost.
There are some recent works studying information sharing among users in a dynamic scenario. For example, Meigs,
Parise, and Ozdaglar (2017) and Wu and Amin (2019)
make use of former users’ observation to help learn the future travel latency and converge to the Wardrop Equilibrium under full information. Similarly, Vu, Antonakopoulos, and Mertikopoulos (2021) design an adaptive information learning framework to accelerate convergence rates to
Wardrop equilibrium for stochastic congestion games. However, these works cater to users’ selfish interests and do not
consider mechanism design to motivate users to reach social optimum. To study the social cost minimization, multiarmed bandit (MAB) problems are also formulated to derive
the optimal exploitation-exploration policy among multiple stochastic arms (paths) (Gittins, Glazebrook, and Weber
2011; Krishnasamy et al. 2021). Recently, Bozorgchenani
et al. (2022) apply MAB models to predict the network congestion in a fast changing vehicular environment. However,
all of these MAB works strongly assume that users upon
arrival always follow the social planner’s recommendations
and overlook users’ deviation to selfish routing.
When congestion games meet mobile crowdsourcing,
how to incentive selfish users to listen to the social planner’s optimal recommendations is our key question in this
paper. As traffic navigation platforms seldom charge users,
we target at non-monetary mechanism design which satisfies

In congestion games, users make myopic routing decisions to
jam each other, and the social planner with the full information designs mechanisms on information or payment side to
regulate. However, it is difficult to obtain time-varying traffic conditions, and emerging crowdsourcing platforms (e.g.,
Waze and Google Maps) provide a convenient way for mobile users travelling on the paths to learn and share the traffic conditions over time. When congestion games meet mobile crowdsourcing, it is critical to incentive selfish users
to change their myopic routing policy and reach the best
exploitation-exploration trade-off. By considering a simple
but fundamental parallel routing network with one deterministic path and multiple stochastic paths for atomic users, we
prove that the myopic routing policy’s price of anarchy (PoA)
can be arbitrarily large as the discount factor approaches 1.
To remedy such huge efficiency loss, we propose a selective
information disclosure (SID) mechanism: we only reveal the
latest traffic information to users when they intend to overexplore the stochastic paths, while hiding such information
when they want to under-explore. We prove that our mechanism reduces PoA to less than 2. Besides the worst-case performance, we further examine our mechanism’s average-case
performance by using extensive simulations.

Introduction
In transportation networks of limited bandwidth, mobile
users are selfish to choose routing decisions myopically and
aim to minimize their own travel costs on the way. Traditional congestion games study such selfish routing to understand the efficiency loss using the concept of the price of
anarchy (PoA) (Roughgarden and Tardos 2002; Cominetti
et al. 2019; Bilò and Vinci 2020; Hao and Michini 2022).
To regulate atomic or non-atomic users’ selfish routing and
reduce social cost, various incentive mechanisms are designed by using monetary payments to penalize users travelling on undesired paths (Brown and Marden 2017; Ferguson, Brown, and Marden 2022; Li and Duan 2023). As
it may be difficult to implement such payments on users,
non-monetary mechanisms are also designed to provide information restriction on selfish users to change their routing decisions to approach the social optimum (Tavafoghi and
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5739

