The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Efficient Distribution Similarity Identification in Clustered Federated Learning via
Principal Angles Between Client Data Subspaces
Saeed Vahidian* 1 , Mahdi Morafah* 1 , Weijia Wang1 , Vyacheslav Kungurtsev2 ,
Chen Chen3 , Mubarak Shah3 , Bill Lin1
1
UC San Diego
Czech Technical University
3
UCF
{svahidia, mmorafah, wweijia, billlin}@ucsd.com, kunguvya@fel.cvut.cz, {chen.chen, shah}@crcv.ucf.edu
2

Abstract
Clustered federated learning (FL) has been shown to produce
promising results by grouping clients into clusters. This is
especially effective in scenarios where separate groups of
clients have significant differences in the distributions of their
local data. Existing clustered FL algorithms are essentially
trying to group together clients with similar distributions so
that clients in the same cluster can leverage each other’s
data to better perform federated learning. However, prior
clustered FL algorithms attempt to learn these distribution
similarities indirectly during training, which can be quite
time consuming as many rounds of federated learning may be
required until the formation of clusters is stabilized. In this
paper, we propose a new approach to federated learning that
directly aims to efficiently identify distribution similarities
among clients by analyzing the principal angles between
the client data subspaces. Each client applies a truncated
singular value decomposition (SVD) step on its local data in a
single-shot manner to derive a small set of principal vectors,
which provides a signature that succinctly captures the main
characteristics of the underlying distribution. This small set of
principal vectors is provided to the server so that the server can
directly identify distribution similarities among the clients to
form clusters. This is achieved by comparing the similarities of
the principal angles between the client data subspaces spanned
by those principal vectors. The approach provides a simple,
yet effective clustered FL framework that addresses a broad
range of data heterogeneity issues beyond simpler forms of
Non-IIDness like label skews. Our clustered FL approach also
enables convergence guarantees for non-convex objectives.

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan and Ramage 2017)
enables a set of clients to collaboratively learn a shared
prediction model without sharing their local data. Some
FL approaches aim to train a common global model for all
clients (McMahan et al. 2017; Li et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020;
Karimireddy et al. 2020; Mendieta et al. 2022). However, in
many FL applications where there may be data heterogeneity
among clients, a single relevant global model may not exist.
Alternatively, personalized FL approaches have been studied.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10043

One approach is to first train a global model and then allow
each client to fine-tune it via a few rounds of stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) (Fallah, Mokhtari, and Ozdaglar
2020; Vahidian et al. 2022; Liang et al. 2020a). Another
approach is for each client to jointly train a global model as
well as a local model, and then interpolate them to derive
a personalized model (Deng, Kamani, and Mahdavi 2020;
Mansour et al. 2020). In the former case, the approach often
fails to derive a model that generalizes well to the local
distributions of each client. In the latter case, when local
distributions and the average distribution are far apart, the
approach often degenerates to every client learning only
on its own local data. Recently, clustered FL (Ghosh et al.
2020; Sattler, Müller, and Samek 2021; Morafah et al. 2022;
Mansour et al. 2020) has been proposed to allow the grouping
of clients into clusters so that clients belonging to the same
cluster can share the same optimal model. Clustered FL has
been shown to produce significantly better results, especially
when separate groups of clients have significant differences
in the distributions of their local data. This possibly due to
distinct learning tasks or the mixture of distributions of the
local data considered, not necessarily limited to simpler forms
of data heterogeneity such as label skews from otherwise the
same dataset.
Essentially, what prior clustered FL algorithms are trying
to do is to group together clients with similar distributions
so that clients in the same cluster can leverage each other’s
data to perform federated learning more effectively. Previous
clustered FL algorithms attempt to learn these distribution
similarities indirectly when clients learn the cluster to which
they should belong as well as the cluster model during
training. For example, the clustered FL approach presented
in (Sattler, Müller, and Samek 2021) alternately estimates the
cluster identities of clients and optimizes the cluster model
parameters via SGD.
Unfortunately, the prior clustered FL approaches have the
following challenges which in turn limits their applicability in
real-world problems. 1) Since previous clustered FL training
algorithms start with randomly initialized cluster models
that are inherently noisy, the overall training process can be
quite time consuming as many rounds of federated learning
may be required until the formation of clusters is stabilized.
2) Approaches like IFCA (Ghosh et al. 2020) assumes a

