The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Tracking and Reconstructing Hand Object Interactions
from Point Cloud Sequences in the Wild
Jiayi Chen1, 2 * , Mi Yan1 * , Jiazhao Zhang1 , Yinzhen Xu1, 2 , Xiaolong Li3 ,
Yijia Weng4 , Li Yi5 , Shuran Song6 , He Wang1†
1
Peking University
Beijing Institute for General AI
3
Virginia Tech
4
Stanford University
5
Tsinghua University
6
Columbia University
{jiayichen, dorisyan, xuyinzhen.hi, hewang}@pku.edu.cn, {zhngjizh, halfsummer11, ericyi0124}@gmail.com,
lxiaol9@vt.edu, shurans@cs.columbia.edu
2

Abstract
In this work, we tackle the challenging task of jointly tracking
hand object pose and reconstructing their shapes from depth
point cloud sequences in the wild, given the initial poses at
frame 0. We for the first time propose a point cloud based
hand joint tracking network, HandTrackNet, to estimate the
inter-frame hand joint motion. Our HandTrackNet proposes a
novel hand pose canonicalization module to ease the tracking task, yielding accurate and robust hand joint tracking.
Our pipeline then reconstructs the full hand via converting
the predicted hand joints into a template-based parametric
hand model MANO. For object tracking, we devise a simple yet effective module that estimates the object SDF from
the first frame and performs optimization-based tracking. Finally, a joint optimization step is adopted to perform joint
hand and object reasoning, which alleviates the occlusioninduced ambiguity and further refines the hand pose. During
training, the whole pipeline only sees purely synthetic data,
which are synthesized with sufficient variations and by depth
simulation for the ease of generalization. The whole pipeline
is pertinent to the generalization gaps and thus directly transferable to real in-the-wild data. We evaluate our method on
two real hand object interaction datasets, e.g. HO3D and
DexYCB, without any finetuning. Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed method significantly outperforms the
previous state-of-the-art depth-based hand and object pose estimation and tracking methods, running at a frame rate of 9
FPS. We have released our code on https://github.com/PKUEPIC/HOTrack.

Figure 1: (a) We generate a large-scale hand-object interaction dataset, named SimGrasp, using simulated structure
light based depth sensor. (b) Trained only on SimGrasp, our
methods can be directly transferred to the challenging real
world datasets, i.e. HO3D and DexYCB, to track and reconstruct hand object interaction without any finetuning.

human-computer interaction, human-robot interaction, augmented reality, and learning from human demonstrations.
Driven by the great power of deep learning, recent years
have witnessed much progress in developing learning-based
methods for perceiving hand and object under a single frame
setting, e.g. 3D hand pose estimation from single RGB images (Xiong et al. 2019) and point clouds (Ge et al. 2018;
Cheng, Park, and Ko 2021) , instance-level and categorylevel 6D object pose estimation (Wang et al. 2019), and
joint hand object pose estimation (Doosti et al. 2020; Tekin,
Bogo, and Pollefeys 2019) and reconstruction (Hasson et al.
2019; Zhang et al. 2021a) for hand object interaction.
Despite many applications require temporally coherent
estimations and thus prefer tracking rather than single-frame
estimation, hand object pose tracking is still an underexplored area for learning-based methods. One reason is the
lack of large-scale annotated video data, given that only few

Introduction
Hand object interactions (HOI) are ubiquitous in our daily
life and form a major way for our humans to interact with
complex real-world scenes. As major approaches to perceive
human object interactions, pose tracking and reconstructing human object interaction in 3D are crucial research topics and can enable a broad range of applications, including
* These authors contributed equally.
†

He Wang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

304

