The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PPGenCDR: A Stable and Robust Framework for Privacy-Preserving
Cross-Domain Recommendation
Xinting Liao1 , Weiming Liu1 , Xiaolin Zheng1 , Binhui Yao2 , Chaochao Chen1 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
2
Midea Group, Foshan, China
{xintingliao, 21831010, xlzheng, zjuccc}@zju.edu.cn, tony.yao@midea.com

Abstract
Privacy-preserving cross-domain recommendation (PPCDR)
refers to preserving the privacy of users when transferring the
knowledge from source domain to target domain for better
performance, which is vital for the long-term development of
recommender systems. Existing work on cross-domain recommendation (CDR) reaches advanced and satisfying recommendation performance, but mostly neglects preserving privacy. To fill this gap, we propose a privacy-preserving generative cross-domain recommendation (PPGenCDR) framework for PPCDR. PPGenCDR includes two main modules,
i.e., stable privacy-preserving generator module, and robust
cross-domain recommendation module. Specifically, the former isolates data from different domains with a generative
adversarial network (GAN) based model, which stably estimates the distribution of private data in the source domain
with Ŕenyi differential privacy (RDP) technique. Then the
latter aims to robustly leverage the perturbed but effective
knowledge from the source domain with the raw data in target domain to improve recommendation performance. Three
key modules, i.e., (1) selective privacy preserver, (2) GAN
stabilizer, and (3) robustness conductor, guarantee the costeffective trade-off between utility and privacy, the stability
of GAN when using RDP, and the robustness of leveraging
transferable knowledge accordingly. The extensive empirical studies on Douban and Amazon datasets demonstrate that
PPGenCDR significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art recommendation models while preserving privacy.

Figure 1: An example of the necessity of PPGenCDR.

maintain different types of user-sensitive data, e.g., Amazon has rich user-commodity interaction data, while IMDb
is rich in user-movie interaction data. As shown in Fig. 1,
it assumes that directly transferring the knowledge without
privacy-preserving of a source domain (movie) to boost the
performance of a target domain (book) is accessible. However, constrained by legal regulations, a domain may not be
able to utilize the interaction data of other domains in plaintext. Therefore, privacy-preserving CDR (PPCDR) is vital
for the long-term development of recommender systems.
Recently, several work was proposed to preserve the privacy of recommender systems in two data storage locations,
i.e., (1) the end-user device that generates data, and (2) the
central database that legally collects data uploaded by the
end-user devices. The former avoids publishing user data to
the server by modeling the data locally, while unifying a
model globally for maintaining performance (Ammad-UdDin et al. 2019). However, the efficiency of the former is
limited by the frequent communications among local devices and central server (if any). The latter prevents privacy leakage from modeling data (Liu et al. 2022a), or transferring information among different central platforms (Gao
et al. 2019; Cui et al. 2021). Nevertheless, these methods
do not devote to protecting the interaction data of users in
CDR. PriCDR (Chen et al. 2022) directly applies differential privacy (DP) to interaction data in a source domain and
publishes the perturbed data to a target domain. However,
PriCDR causes looser privacy budget bound compared with
using Ŕenyi DP (RDP) (Mironov 2017) and can not perform
recommendation robustly (Gao et al. 2022).
To take advantage of interaction data, and bypass its disadvantage of leaking privacy, we devote to using privacypreserving data publishing in PPCDR, which which is a

Introduction
In recent years, cross-domain recommendation (CDR) is
boosting for its effectiveness in alleviating the sparsity problem by transferring informative knowledge across related
domains (Zhu et al. 2021a). On the one hand, the user-item
interaction data plays a vital role in enlightening the recommendation performance in CDR (Zhu et al. 2021b; Chen
et al. 2020; Li and Tuzhilin 2020). On the other hand, the
interaction data is closely related to user privacy.
Although existing work on CDR achieves advanced performance, most of them assume that it is accessible to transfer interaction data across domains in plaintext (Chen et al.
2020; Li and Tuzhilin 2020). In reality, different domains
* Chaochao Chen is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4453

