The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Facility Location Games with Entrance Fees
Mengfan Ma, Mingyu Xiao∗ , Tian Bai, Bakh Khoussainov
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
mengfanma1@gmail.com, myxiao@uestc.edu.cn, tian.bai.cs@outlook.com, bmk@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

the facility location game. They study strategyproof mechanisms for one-facility and two-facility games through the
lens of approximation ratio of the objective. Since then,
the facility location game has become one of the main
playgrounds for approximate mechanism design without
money and has attracted numerous follow-up research (Lu,
Wang, and Zhou 2009; Lu et al. 2010; Fotakis and Tzamos
2014). As shown by Fotakis and Tzamos (2014), when there
are more than two facilities, no deterministic strategyproof
mechanism can achieve a bounded approximation ratio. The
current status of the classical facility location games on the
real line with one or two facilities is summarized in Table 1.
After the introduction of the classical facility location
game, many variants have been studied flourishingly to accommodate more practical scenarios. The recent survey by
Chan et al. (2021) depicts the state of the art. Here, we mention some of the models: obnoxious facility games where
every agent wants to stay away from the facility (Cheng, Yu,
and Zhang 2013); heterogeneous facility games where the
acceptable set of facilities for each agent could be different (Li et al. 2020; Deligkas, Filos-Ratsikas, and Voudouris
2022); the games with different objectives or purposes (Cai,
Filos-Ratsikas, and Tang 2016); the game with capacitated
facilities (Aziz et al. 2020a,b; Walsh 2022); extensions to
trees, and other graphs (Alon et al. 2010); and so on.

The facility location game is an extensively studied problem
in mechanism design. In the classical model, the cost of each
agent is her distance to the nearest facility. In this paper, we
consider a novel model where each facility charges an entrance fee, which is a function of the facility’s location. Thus,
the cost of each agent is the sum of the distance to the facility and the entrance fee of the facility. The generalized model
captures more real-life scenarios. In our model, the entrance
fee function can be an arbitrary function, and the corresponding preferences of agents may not be single-peaked anymore:
this makes the problem complex and requires new techniques
in the analysis. We systematically study the model and design
strategyproof mechanisms with nice approximation ratios and
also complement these with nearly-tight impossibility results.
Specifically, for one-facility and two-facility games, we provide upper and lower bounds for the approximation ratios
given by deterministic and randomized mechanisms, with respect to the utilitarian and egalitarian objectives. Most of our
bounds are tight, and these bounds are independent of the entrance fee functions. Our results also match the results of the
classical model.

Introduction
Facility location games on real line. In one-dimensional
facility location problem, agents are located on real line, and
a planner is to build facilities on the line to serve the agents.
The cost of an agent is her distance to the nearest facility.
The problem asks for facility locations that minimize the total cost of all agents (the utilitarian objective) or the maximum cost among all agents (the egalitarian objective). It is
well-known that both optimization problems can be solved
in polynomial time. Over the past decade, these problems
have been intensively studied from the perspective of mechanism design. A key conversion in the models is that now
each agent becomes strategic and may misreport her position to decrease her cost. These new problems are called the
facility location games, which require to design mechanisms that truthfully elicit the positions of agents and (approximately) minimize the objective of total or maximum cost.
The seminal work of Procaccia and Tennenholtz (2009)
initiates the study of mechanism design without money for

Facility location games with entrance fees. In all the
above models, the cost of an agent is measured by her distance to the closest facility. This cost can be considered as
the travel fee. In innumerable real-life scenarios, except for
the travel fee, the agent may also need to pay a service or entrance fee to the facility, such as tickets for swimming pools
and museums. The entrance fees may differ for facilities in
different positions. An immediate example is that the cost to
build a facility in downtown would be more expensive than
in the suburbs. The entrance fee of the facility is decided
by the building cost and thus also decided by the position
where the facility is built. Another example is that the environment around the facility may have an impact on the
entrance fee. For example, the entrance fee of a facility in a
popular scenic spot can be higher than the entrance fee of the
same facility in a desolate place. Various non-geographical
settings also fit in the location-dependent entrance fee model: (1) The voters have a single-peaked preference over the

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5797

