The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

NuWLS: Improving Local Search for (Weighted) Partial MaxSAT
by New Weighting Techniques
Yi Chu1 , Shaowei Cai2,3 * , Chuan Luo4
2

1
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
4
School of Software, Beihang University, China
{chuyi,caisw}@ios.ac.cn, chuanluo@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

Real-world combinatorial problems usually involve both
hard and soft constraints, so encoding such problems into
(W)PMS is more flexible than encoding them into SAT
and MaxSAT. Indeed, (W)PMS has been applied to solving
many real-world problems, including scheduling (Thornton
and Sattar 1998), timetabling (Cha et al. 1997), set covering
(Naji-Azimi, Toth, and Galli 2010), computational protein
design (Allouche et al. 2012), and FPGA routing (Fu and
Malik 2006).

Maximum Satisfiability (MaxSAT) is a prototypical constraint optimization problem, and its generalized version is
the (Weighted) Partial MaxSAT problem, denoted as (W)PMS, which deals with hard and soft clauses. Considerable
progress has been made on stochastic local search (SLS) algorithms for solving (W)PMS, which mainly focus on clause
weighting techniques. In this work, we identify two issues of
existing clause weighting techniques for (W)PMS, and propose two ideas correspondingly. First, we observe that the
initial values of soft clause weights have a big effect on the
performance of the SLS solver for solving (W)PMS, and propose a weight initialization method. Second, we propose a
new clause weighting scheme that for the first time employs
different conditions for updating hard and soft clause weights.
Based on these two ideas, we develop a new SLS solver for
(W)PMS named NuWLS. Through extensive experiments,
NuWLS performs much better than existing SLS solvers on
all 6 benchmarks from the incomplete tracks of MaxSAT
Evaluations (MSEs) 2019, 2020, and 2021. In terms of the
number of winning instances, NuWLS outperforms state-ofthe-art SAT-based incomplete solvers on all the 6 benchmarks. More encouragingly, a hybrid solver that combines
NuWLS and an SAT-based solver won all four categories in
the incomplete track of the MaxSAT Evaluation 2022.

Related Work
There are two major categories of algorithms for solving
(W)PMS: complete algorithms and incomplete algorithms.
Complete algorithms can prove the optimality of the solutions. Among all complete methods, the method of iteratively calling SAT solvers (commonly referred to as the
SAT-based method) has experienced significant improvement. The core-guided algorithm was first introduced for
solving PMS in (Fu and Malik 2006), then the core-guided
method was used for solving WPMS in (Ansótegui, Bonet,
and Levy 2009; Ansótegui, Bonet, and Levy 2010). In recent years, much attention has been focused upon the improvement of the SAT-based method for (W)PMS, which
has resulted in much excellent work (Davies and Bacchus
2011; Koshimura et al. 2012; Ansótegui, Bonet, and Levy
2013; Narodytska and Bacchus 2014; Martins et al. 2014;
Ansótegui and Gabàs 2017; Berg, Demirovic, and Stuckey
2019; Joshi et al. 2019; Nadel 2019, 2020). In addition, in
the literature (Li et al. 2021), the authors propose a branchand-bound (BnB) MaxSAT solver named MaxCDCL by
combining clause learning and an efficient bounding procedure significantly increases the speed of the BnB MaxSAT
solvers.
Although incomplete algorithms, mainly stochastic local
search (SLS) ones, cannot prove the optimality of the solutions, they are very useful for many industrial problems
where the objective is not to find an optimal assignment
but aims to seek a good-quality assignment within a reasonable time (Luo et al. 2015). Interestingly, there is a gold line
through previous SLS solvers for (W)PMS, which involves
methods to maintain the clause weights. Essentially, SLS algorithms introduce weights to clauses (rather than the original weights), and guide the search mainly by maintaining the
weights. An early SLS method for PMS is a weighted ver-

Introduction
The maximum satisfiability (MaxSAT) problem is an optimization variant of the influential Boolean satisfiability
(SAT) problem, and plays an important role in computer science. Given a propositional formula in conjunctive normal
form (CNF), the objective of MaxSAT is to find an assignment that maximizes the number of satisfied clauses. The
partial MaxSAT (PMS) problem is a variant of MaxSAT: In
a partial CNF formula, clauses are divided into hard ones
and soft ones, and the task is to find an assignment that satisfies all hard clauses and maximizes the number of satisfied soft clauses. In the weighted partial MaxSAT (WPMS)
problem, each soft clause is assigned a positive integer as its
weight, and the goal is to seek an assignment that satisfies
all hard clauses and maximizes the total weight of satisfied
soft clauses.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3915

