The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Continual Graph Convolutional Network for Text Classification
Tiandeng Wu1∗ , Qijiong Liu2 * , Yi Cao1 , Yao Huang1 , Xiao-Ming Wu2† , Jiandong Ding1†
1
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., China
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
{wutiandeng1, caoyi23, huangyao11, dingjiandong2}@huawei.com,
jyonn.liu@connect.polyu.hk, xiao-ming.wu@polyu.edu.hk
2

Abstract

a document or a token, and each edge indicates a correlation
factor between two nodes. However, they commonly follow
a seen-token-seen-document (STSD) paradigm to construct
a fixed document-token graph with all seen documents (labeled or unlabeled) and tokens and perform transductive inference. Given a new document with unobserved tokens, the
trained model cannot make an inference because neither the
document nor the unseen tokens are included in the graph.
Hence, while these methods are effective in offline evaluations, they cannot be deployed in online systems to infer
streaming text data.
To address this challenge, in this paper, we propose a new
all-token-any-document (ATAD) paradigm to dynamically
construct a document-token graph, and based on which we
present a continual GCN model (ContGCN) for text classification. Specifically, we take the vocabulary of a pretrained
language model (PLM) such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019)
as the global token set, so a new document can be tokenized
into seen tokens from the vocabulary. We further form a document set which may contain any present documents (e.g.,
those in the current batch). The document-token graph then
consists of tokens in the global token set and documents in
the document set. The edge weights of the graph are dynamically calculated according to an occurrence memory module
with historical token correlation information, and document
embeddings are generated with pretrained semantic knowledge. In this way, ContGCN is enabled to perform inductive
inference on streaming text data.
Furthermore, to address data distribution shift (Luo et al.
2022) which is prevalent in online services, we design a
label-free online updating mechanism for ContGCN to save
the cost and effort for periodical offline updates of the model
with new text data. Specifically, we fine-tune the occurrence memory module according to the distribution shift of
streaming text data and update the network parameters with
a self-supervised contrastive learning objective.
ContGCN achieves favorable performance in both online and offline evaluations thanks to the proposed ATAD
paradigm and label-free online updating mechanism. We
have deployed ContGCN in an online text classification system – Huawei public opinion analysis system, which processes thousands of textual comments daily. A 3-month
A/B test shows ContGCN achieves 8.86% performance gain
compared with state-of-the-art methods. Offline evaluations

Graph convolutional network (GCN) has been successfully
applied to capture global non-consecutive and long-distance
semantic information for text classification. However, while
GCN-based methods have shown promising results in offline evaluations, they commonly follow a seen-token-seendocument paradigm by constructing a fixed document-token
graph and cannot make inferences on new documents. It is a
challenge to deploy them in online systems to infer steaming text data. In this work, we present a continual GCN
model (ContGCN) to generalize inferences from observed
documents to unobserved documents. Concretely, we propose
a new all-token-any-document paradigm to dynamically update the document-token graph in every batch during both the
training and testing phases of an online system. Moreover, we
design an occurrence memory module and a self-supervised
contrastive learning objective to update ContGCN in a labelfree manner. A 3-month A/B test on Huawei public opinion analysis system shows ContGCN achieves 8.86% performance gain compared with state-of-the-art methods. Offline
experiments on five public datasets also show ContGCN can
improve inference quality. The source code will be released
at https://github.com/Jyonn/ContGCN.

Introduction
As one of the fundamental tasks in natural language processing, text classification has been extensively studied for
decades and used in various applications (Xu et al. 2019;
Abaho et al. 2021). In recent years, graph convolutional network (GCN) has been successfully applied in text classification (Yao, Mao, and Luo 2019; Lin et al. 2021) to capture
global non-consecutive and long-distance semantic information such as token co-occurrence in a corpus.
A line of GCN-based methods (Li et al. 2019) perform
document classification by simply constructing a homogeneous graph with each document as a node and modeling
inter-document relations such as citation links, which however does not exploit document-token semantic information.
Another line of GCN-based methods constructs heterogeneous document-token graphs, where each node represents
* Equal contribution (co-first authors). Author order determined
by dice rolling.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13754

