The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

NAS-LID: Efficient Neural Architecture Search with Local Intrinsic Dimension
Xin He1,4 , Jiangchao Yao2,3 , Yuxin Wang1 , Zhenheng Tang1 , Ka Chun Cheung1,4 , Simon See2,4,6,7 ,
Bo Han1 , Xiaowen Chu 5,1 *
1

Hong Kong Baptist University
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory
4
NVIDIA AI Tech Center
5
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
6
Mahindra University
7
Coventry University
2

Abstract

High-acc Models

45

One-shot neural architecture search (NAS) substantially improves the search efficiency by training one supernet to
estimate the performance of every possible child architecture (i.e., subnet). However, the inconsistency of characteristics among subnets incurs serious interference in the optimization, resulting in poor performance ranking correlation of subnets. Subsequent explorations decompose supernet weights via a particular criterion, e.g., gradient matching,
to reduce the interference; yet they suffer from huge computational cost and low space separability. In this work, we
propose a lightweight and effective local intrinsic dimension
(LID)-based method NAS-LID. NAS-LID evaluates the geometrical properties of architectures by calculating the lowcost LID features layer-by-layer, and the similarity characterized by LID enjoys better separability compared with gradients, which thus effectively reduces the interference among
subnets. Extensive experiments on NASBench-201 indicate
that NAS-LID achieves superior performance with better efficiency. Specifically, compared to the gradient-driven method,
NAS-LID can save up to 86% of GPU memory overhead
when searching on NASBench-201. We also demonstrate the
effectiveness of NAS-LID on ProxylessNAS and OFA spaces.
Source code: https://github.com/marsggbo/NAS-LID.

Low-acc Models

40

LID

35
30
25
20
15
10
5

0.0

0.2

0.4
0.6
0.8
Relative Layer Depth

1.0

Figure 1: Layer-wise LID of sampled architectures in
NASBench-201. Each curve indicates a model. The LID
profiles of high-accuracy (>92%) models are arch-shaped
(i.e., first increasing and then decreasing), while those
of low-accuracy (<86%) models show an approximately
monotonically decreasing trend.

Recent works to reduce the interference among subnets
can be categorized into two groups. One is to treat all subnets
as student networks and use a well-designed teacher network to force the similarity of their layer-wise outputs (Peng
et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2022b; Bashivan, Tensen, and DiCarlo 2019). However, Liu et al. (2020) empirically showed
that the optimal student would be different under different
teachers even trained on the same task and dataset. In other
words, choosing a different teacher will lead to quite different results for the performance ranking of subnets. Instead,
few-shot NAS (Zhao et al. 2021; Hu et al. 2022) aggregates
the subnets with aligned inputs and outputs into the same
sub-supernet by splitting the supernet into multiple subsupernets. For example, GM-NAS (Hu et al. 2022) splits the
supernet via the gradient similarity between sub-supernets,
which achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance. However, the gradients are high-dimensional and sparse data that
inevitably encounter the curse of dimensionality on space
separability. Our experiments in Sec. show that the gradient similarities among sub-supernets are very close, leading

Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS) (Elsken, Metzen, and Hutter 2019; He, Zhao, and Chu 2021) has been widely used
to discover models automatically in various tasks (He et al.
2021; Liu et al. 2019; Ying et al. 2022; He et al. 2022).
Vanilla NAS (Zoph and Le 2017; Real et al. 2019) trains
and evaluates each architecture separately, which obtains the
true performance of all searched architectures at the cost of
substantial computations. One-shot NAS (Pham et al. 2018;
Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2019) drastically reduces the cost
by training only one supernet as an estimator of the performance of all subnets in the search space. However, the
subnets with inconsistent characteristics interfere with each
other during training in the shared supernet, resulting in inaccurate estimation (Bender et al. 2018).
* Corresponding author: xwchu@ust.hk
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7839

