The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Gift from Label Smoothing: Robust Training with
Adaptive Label Smoothing via Auxiliary Classifier under Label Noise
Jongwoo Ko1 * , Bongsoo Yi2∗ , Se-Young Yun1
1

2

Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Seoul, Korea
Department of Statistics and Operations Research, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{jongwoo.ko, yunseyoung}@kaist.ac.kr, bongsoo@unc.edu

Abstract

Sabuncu 2018; Wang et al. 2019). However, one of the
biggest challenges of LNL methods involves providing a dependable criterion for distinguishing clean data from noisy
data, such that clean data is fully exploited while filtering
noisy data. While these existing methods are partially effective in mitigating label noise, their criterion for identifying noisy examples uses biased posterior information from
a linear classifier or the penultimate layer of the corrupted
network. These unpredictable biases can lead to a reduction
in the network’s ability to separate clean and noisy instances
(Nguyen et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2021a).
To solve this undesired bias, several regularization methods (Xia et al. 2021; Cao et al. 2021) have been proposed
to enhance the robustness of the feature extractor. However,
while existing regularization-based learning frameworks alleviate the degradation, these methods require multiple training stages and considerable computational costs and are difficult to apply in practice. Cao et al. (2021) used two-stage
training to compute the relative data-dependent regularization power to conduct Lipschitz regularization (LR) on intermediate layers. Xia et al. (2021) identified and regularized
the non-critical parameters that tend to fit noisy labels and
require longer training time. Some studies (Zhang and Yao
2020; Zheltonozhskii et al. 2022) have designed contrastive
learning frameworks to generate high-quality feature extractors using unsupervised approaches, which require considerable computations for high performance.
To mitigate these impractical issues, we provide a simple yet effective learning framework for a robust feature extractor, Adaptive LAbel Smoothing via auxiliary ClAssifier
(ALASCA), with theoretical guarantee and small additional
computation. Our proposed method is robust to label noise
itself and can further enhance the performance of existing
LNL methods. Our main contributions are as follows:
• We theoretically explain that label smoothing (LS) implicitly induces LR, which is known to enable robust
training with noisy labels (Finlay et al. 2018; Cao et al.
2021). Through theoretical motivations, we empirically
show that adaptive LS (ALS) can regularize noisy examples while fully exploiting clean examples.
• To practically implement adaptive LR on the intermediate layers, we propose ALASCA, which combines ALS
with auxiliary classifiers. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first study to apply auxiliary classifiers under

As deep neural networks can easily overfit noisy labels, robust training in the presence of noisy labels is becoming an
important challenge in modern deep learning. While existing methods address this problem in various directions, they
still produce unpredictable sub-optimal results since they rely
on the posterior information estimated by the feature extractor corrupted by noisy labels. Lipschitz regularization successfully alleviates this problem by training a robust feature
extractor, but it requires longer training time and expensive
computations. Motivated by this, we propose a simple yet effective method, called ALASCA, which efficiently provides
a robust feature extractor under label noise. ALASCA integrates two key ingredients: (1) adaptive label smoothing
based on our theoretical analysis that label smoothing implicitly induces Lipschitz regularization, and (2) auxiliary classifiers that enable practical application of intermediate Lipschitz regularization with negligible computations. We conduct wide-ranging experiments for ALASCA and combine
our proposed method with previous noise-robust methods on
several synthetic and real-world datasets. Experimental results show that our framework consistently improves the robustness of feature extractors and the performance of existing
baselines with efficiency.

1

Introduction

While deep neural networks (DNNs) have high expressive
power that leads to promising performances, the success of
DNNs heavily relies on the quality of training data, in particular, accurately labeled training examples. Unfortunately,
labeling large-scale datasets is a costly and error-prone process, and even high-quality datasets contain incorrect labels (Nettleton, Orriols-Puig, and Fornells 2010; Zhang et al.
2017). Hence, mitigating the negative impact of noisy labels
is critical, and many approaches have been proposed to improve robustness against noisy data for learning with noisy
labels (LNL).
Robustness to label noise is typically pursued by identifying noisy samples to reduce their contribution to the
loss (Han et al. 2018; Mirzasoleiman, Cao, and Leskovec
2020), correcting labels (Yi and Wu 2019; Li, Socher, and
Hoi 2020), utilizing a robust loss function (Zhang and
* The two authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8325

