The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Semi-supervised Deep Large-Baseline Homography Estimation with Progressive
Equivalence Constraint
†

†

Hai Jiang1,3 * , Haipeng Li2,3 * , Yuhang Lu4 , Songchen Han1, , Shuaicheng Liu2,3,
1

Sichuan University
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Megvii Technology
4
University of South Carolina
{jianghai1@stu., hansongchen@}scu.edu.cn, {lihaipeng@std.,liushuaicheng@}uestc.edu.cn
{jianghai,lihaipeng,liushuaicheng}@megvii.com, yuhang@email.sc.edu
2

Abstract
Homography estimation is erroneous in the case of largebaseline due to the low image overlay and limited receptive
field. To address it, we propose a progressive estimation strategy by converting large-baseline homography into multiple
intermediate ones, cumulatively multiplying these intermediate items can reconstruct the initial homography. Meanwhile,
a semi-supervised homography identity loss, which consists
of two components: a supervised objective and an unsupervised objective, is introduced. The first supervised loss is acting to optimize intermediate homographies, while the second
unsupervised one helps to estimate a large-baseline homography without photometric losses. To validate our method,
we propose a large-scale dataset that covers regular and challenging scenes. Experiments show that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance in large-baseline scenes while
keeping competitive performance in small-baseline scenes.
Code and dataset are available at https://github.com/megviiresearch/LBHomo.

Figure 1: Comparison of our method with an unsupervised learning-based method, i.e., BasesHomo. The first row
shows two pairs of consecutive frames in different baseline
cases, we highlight the overlap region in red boxes. In the
second row, we superimpose the warped source image and
the target image, where misaligned pixels are visualized as
colored ghosts. Local details are enlarged in red and blue
boxes, where the latter is an error heatmap, the darker the
better. Our method can handle both situations, while BasesHomo fails in the large-baseline scene.

Introduction
Homography estimation is a basic task in computer vision
that has been widely used for a wide range of high-level vision tasks, such as image/video stitching (Guo et al. 2016),
video stabilization (Liu et al. 2013), SLAM (Du et al. 2020),
and HDR reconstruction (Liu et al. 2021b, 2022). Traditional methods typically use feature detection and matching algorithms (Lowe 2004; Rublee et al. 2011), and subsequently solve direct linear transform (DLT ) (Hartley and
Zisserman 2003) with outlier suppression to obtain a homography matrix. However, these methods are highly dependent on the extracted feature matches and may fail in
scenes that lack sufficient high-quality feature points. On the
other hand, learning-based methods take a pair of source and
target images as input and directly output the corresponding
homography matrix. They do not rely on matched key points
and thus are more robust than traditional methods. The
learning-based methods can be divided into two categories:

supervised methods (DeTone, Malisiewicz, and Rabinovich
2016) and unsupervised methods (Nguyen et al. 2018). The
supervised ones use synthetic image pairs for training due
to the lack of sufficient real-world image pairs with GT labels, lacking realistic scene parallax causes unsatisfactory
generalization ability. Unsupervised methods adopt labelfree training strategies that aim to minimize the photometric distance between the warped source images and target
images, being better generalized to various scenes. With the
assistance of photometric losses (Zhang et al. 2020; Ye et al.
2021), the unsupervised methods perform well in smallbaseline scenes where the non-overlap rate between two images is less than 10%. However, in large-baseline scenes
where the non-overlap rate is between 20% and 50%, the
warped source image contains a number of out-of-boundary
pixels due to the large appearance and viewpoint changes,
causing it hard to minimize the photometric distance. As
shown in Fig. 1, BasesHomo (Ye et al. 2021) can successfully align two images with large overlap but fails in

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1024

