The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Predict+Optimize for Packing and Covering LPs with
Unknown Parameters in Constraints
Xinyi Hu1 , Jasper C.H. Lee2 , Jimmy H.M. Lee1
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
Department of Computer Sciences & Institute for Foundations of Data Science, University of Wisconsin–Madison, WI, USA
{xyhu,jlee}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, jasper.lee@wisc.edu

Abstract

a high solution quality evaluated under the true parameters.
The recent framework of Predict+Optimize by Elmachtoub
and Grigas (2017; 2022) proposes to instead use the more
effective regret function as the loss function, capturing the
difference in objective between the estimated and true optimal solutions, both evaluated using the true parameters.
A number of prior works (Wilder, Dilkina, and Tambe
2019; Elmachtoub, Liang, and McNellis 2020; Guler et al.
2022) have developed algorithmic implementations of this
framework on a variety of classes of optimization problems.
Yet, all the prior works have focused on the case where
only the optimization objective contains unknown parameters, and never the constraints. This is for a simple technical
reason: if we had used some predicted parameters to solve
for an estimated solution, the solution might not even be feasible under the true parameters! On the other hand, some application scenarios allow for post-hoc correction of an estimated solution into a feasible solution after the true parameters are revealed, potentially at additional cost or penalty.
Using the product stocking example again, a hard constraint
is the available warehouse space, which needs to be predicted, depending on how well the already-bought products
sell. If a merchant buys in excess of the available space, they
always have the option to throw away some of the newlybought products, which would involve 1) paying a disposal
company as well as 2) losing out on the profit of the thrownaway products as a “penalty”.
The contributions of this paper are two-fold. First, we capture the above intuition and significantly generalize the Predict+Optimize framework, allowing us to address optimization problems with unknown parameters in both the objective and the constraints. Specifically, we introduce the process of post-hoc correction, which makes use of a correction function and a penalty function. The definition of regret
is enhanced to take into account the post-hoc correction of
a solution, and the associated cost and penalty. Second, we
propose an algorithmic implementation for this novel framework as applied to packing and covering linear programs
(LPs), a well-studied and significant class of practically relevant optimization problems. We give a general correction
function for packing and covering LPs, and demonstrate how
to learn a predictor in this setting using an approach inspired
by the work of Mandi and Guns (2020). We also apply our
approach on 3 benchmarks to demonstrate the superior em-

Predict+Optimize is a recently proposed framework which
combines machine learning and constrained optimization,
tackling optimization problems that contain parameters that
are unknown at solving time. The goal is to predict the unknown parameters and use the estimates to solve for an estimated optimal solution to the optimization problem. However, all prior works have focused on the case where unknown parameters appear only in the optimization objective
and not the constraints, for the simple reason that if the constraints were not known exactly, the estimated optimal solution might not even be feasible under the true parameters.
The contributions of this paper are two-fold. First, we propose a novel and practically relevant framework for the Predict+Optimize setting, but with unknown parameters in both
the objective and the constraints. We introduce the notion of
a correction function, and an additional penalty term in the
loss function, modelling practical scenarios where an estimated optimal solution can be modified into a feasible solution after the true parameters are revealed, but at an additional cost. Second, we propose a corresponding algorithmic approach for our framework, which handles all packing
and covering linear programs. Our approach is inspired by the
prior work of Mandi and Guns, though with crucial modifications and re-derivations for our very different setting. Experimentation demonstrates the superior empirical performance
of our method over classical approaches.

Introduction
Constrained optimization problems are ubiquitous in daily
life, yet, they often contain parameters that are unknown at
solving time. As an example, retail merchants wish to optimize their stocking of products in terms of revenue and
cost, and yet the precise demands for each product are not
known ahead of time. The goal, then, is to 1) predict the
unknown parameters and 2) solve the optimization problem
using these predicted parameters, in the hopes that the estimated solution is good even under the true parameters revealed later on. The classical approaches would learn a predictor for these unknown parameters using losses like the
mean squared error, which are independent of the optimization at hand. However, a small error for the predicted parameters in the parameter space does not necessarily guarantee
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3987

