The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Differentiable Meta Multigraph Search with Partial Message Propagation
on Heterogeneous Information Networks
Chao Li1,2, * , Hao Xu1,2, * , Kun He1,2,†
1

2

School of Computer Science, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China.
Hopcroft Center on Computing Science, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China.
{D201880880, M202173589, brooklet60}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

convolutional neural networks (CNNs), several works have
extended NAS to heterogeneous GNNs, based on the ability to automate the customization of neural architecture for
specific datasets and tasks.
However, there are some weaknesses in existing
NAS methods for heterogeneous GNNs. For instance,
GEMS (Han et al. 2020) uses an evolutionary algorithm
as the search strategy, making its search cost dozens of
times as training a single GNN. HGNAS (Gao et al. 2021),
employing reinforcement learning as the search strategy,
has the same issue of inefficiency. Inspired by the simplicity and computational efficiency of differentiable architecture search (Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2019) in CNNs,
DiffMG (Ding et al. 2021) proposes to search a meta graph
in a differentiable fashion, making the search cost on a par
with training a single GNN once. Yet, it suffers from performance instability and often finds architectures worse than
hand-designed models.
Besides, existing works have a common weakness of
inflexibility. For example, GEMS (Han et al. 2020) and
DiffMG (Ding et al. 2021) search for meta graphs to guide
how GNNs propagate messages. However, meta-paths and
meta graphs are initially defined for hand-designed heterogeneous GNNs with fixed patterns, so they are insufficient to
encode various rich semantic information on diverse HINs
and will restrict the searched architecture to inflexible topology. HGNAS (Gao et al. 2021) searches for message encoding and aggregation functions but propagates messages using predefined meta-paths or meta graphs. It motivates us to
propose a more expressive meta-structure for NAS on HINs.
To this end, we present a new method called PMMM
(Partial Message Meta Multigraph search), which is composed of a novel differentiable search algorithm for stable
search, namely partial message search, as well as an innovative meta-structure for flexible topology, namely meta multigraph. Specifically, to stabilize the differentiable search,
PMMM randomly selects partial candidate message passing steps to update per iteration to ensure that all candidate paths are equally and fully trained, as well as to decouple the joint optimization of paths. To derive flexible
topology, PMMM searches for a novel meta multigraph
by selecting the top-k most promising candidate message
passing types for aggregation. Searching for a meta multigraph is a free performance-enhancing strategy as it can en-

Heterogeneous information networks (HINs) are widely employed for describing real-world data with intricate entities
and relationships. To automatically utilize their semantic information, graph neural architecture search has recently been
developed on various tasks of HINs. Existing works, on the
other hand, show weaknesses in instability and inflexibility.
To address these issues, we propose a novel method called
Partial Message Meta Multigraph search (PMMM) to automatically optimize the neural architecture design on HINs.
Specifically, to learn how graph neural networks (GNNs)
propagate messages along various types of edges, PMMM
adopts an efficient differentiable framework to search for a
meaningful meta multigraph, which can capture more flexible
and complex semantic relations than a meta graph. The differentiable search typically suffers from performance instability,
so we further propose a stable algorithm called partial message search to ensure that the searched meta multigraph consistently surpasses the manually designed meta-structures,
i.e., meta-paths. Extensive experiments on six benchmark
datasets over two representative tasks, including node classification and recommendation, demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed method. Our approach outperforms the stateof-the-art heterogeneous GNNs, finds out meaningful meta
multigraphs, and is significantly more stable. Our code is
available at https://github.com/JHL-HUST/PMMM.

Introduction
Heterogeneous information networks (HINs) are widespread in the real world for abstracting and modeling complex systems for the rich semantic information provided by
heterogeneous relations consisting of multiple node types,
edge types, and node features. For instance, bibliographic
graphs (such as DBLP) with three types of nodes, i.e., author, paper, and venue, include multiple edge types, such as
co-authorships, co-citations, publishing in the same venue.
To model the heterogeneous structure, there have been numerous heterogeneous GNNs combining meta-paths to learn
with HINs (Schlichtkrull et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019a;
Wang et al. 2019a; Yun et al. 2019a). More recently, in light
of the achievement of neural architecture search (NAS) in
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8518

