The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

GraphSR: A Data Augmentation Algorithm
for Imbalanced Node Classification
Mengting Zhou1,2 , Zhiguo Gong1,2 *
1

State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City, University of Macau, Macao
2
Guangdong-Macau Joint Laboratory for Advanced and Intelligent Computing
yb97402@um.edu.mo, fstzgg@um.edu.mo

Abstract

neighbors directly in the spatial domain. However, most existing GNNs are trained under the assumption that the node
classes are balanced. Unfortunately, this assumption is not
true in many real-world situations where some classes may
have significantly few nodes than others in the training process. For example, the number of fraudsters in a social network is much smaller than that of benign ones in the fraud
detection task (Liu et al. 2021). The class-imbalanced problem may cause the algorithm to bias towards the majority
classes and ignore the minority classes in the representation
learning. Therefore, it is challenging to apply GNNs directly
to many real-world class-imbalanced graphs.
In fact, imbalance problem has been tackled for a long
time and some significant progresses have been made in
the area of machine learning. Generally speaking, the solutions can be summarized into three streams: data-level
approaches, algorithm-level approaches, and hybrid approaches. Data-level approaches attempt to balance the class
distribution by pre-processing training samples with oversampling (Chawla et al. 2002) or under-sampling (Kubat,
Matwin et al. 1997) techniques; algorithm-level approaches
take misclassification costs into consideration (Ling and
Sheng 2008) or modify the loss function (Cui et al. 2019)
to alleviate the impact of class-imbalanced issue; and hybrid approaches combine above both (Batista, Prati, and
Monard 2004). However, either data based or algorithm
based method still solely relies on those labelled training
data, therefore, inherently suffers from overfitting problem
caused by the extensively reusing some samples or raising
their weights.
Actually, graph data naturally present topological structures of nodes, which can be used to generate some virtual
nodes as data augmentation for the training algorithm. In this
respect, recently GraphSMOTE (Zhao, Zhang, and Wang
2021) extend SMOTE (Chawla et al. 2002) to perform interpolation between two minority nodes in the embedding
space to synthesize new samples, and exploit an edge predictor to determine the neighborhood of the synthetic samples as shown in Fig.1a. Nevertheless, such generated nodes
only rely on the minority nodes, which could not effectively
extend the minority classes outwards (can still cause overfitting). To further deal with this, GraphENS (Park, Song,
and Yang 2022) synthesize new minority nodes with their
one-hop neighbors by mixing some existing minority node

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have achieved great success
in node classification tasks. However, existing GNNs naturally bias towards the majority classes with more labelled data
and ignore those minority classes with relatively few labelled
ones. The traditional techniques often resort over-sampling
methods, but they may cause overfitting problem. More recently, some works propose to synthesize additional nodes
for minority classes from the labelled nodes, however, there
is no any guarantee if those generated nodes really stand for
the corresponding minority classes. In fact, improperly synthesized nodes may result in insufficient generalization of the
algorithm. To resolve the problem, in this paper we seek to
automatically augment the minority classes from the massive unlabelled nodes of the graph. Specifically, we propose
GraphSR, a novel self-training strategy to augment the minority classes with significant diversity of unlabelled nodes,
which is based on a Similarity-based selection module and
a Reinforcement Learning(RL) selection module. The first
module finds a subset of unlabelled nodes which are most
similar to those labelled minority nodes, and the second one
further determines the representative and reliable nodes from
the subset via RL technique. Furthermore, the RL-based module can adaptively determine the sampling scale according to
current training data. This strategy is general and can be easily combined with different GNNs models. Our experiments
demonstrate the proposed approach outperforms the state-ofthe-art baselines on various class-imbalanced datasets.

Introduction
Graph is regarded as one of the most powerful models for
describing complex relationships between objects in various fields, such as natural language processing (Yao, Mao,
and Luo 2019), computer vision (Chen et al. 2019), and recommendation systems (Wu et al. 2019). As the result, corresponding techniques for graph data analytics are receiving significant attention from the community. And GNNs
(Graph Neural Networks) is one of the most successful
techniques for node analysis. In principle, GCN (Kipf and
Welling 2016) aggregates node features in the spectral space
using Laplacian matrices, while GraphSAGE (Hamilton,
Ying, and Leskovec 2017) aggregates features from node
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4954

