The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Neural Policy Safety Verification via Predicate Abstraction: CEGAR
Marcel Vinzent1 , Siddhant Sharma2 , Jörg Hoffmann1,3
2

1
Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi, India
3
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Saarbrücken, Germany
{vinzent, hoffmann}@cs.uni-saarland.de, Siddhant.Sharma.ee119@ee.iitd.ac.in

Abstract

et al. 2019; Dutta, Chen, and Sankaranarayanan 2019). Recent work extends this thread to hybrid systems, addressing
smooth (tanh/sigmoid) activation functions by compilation
into such systems (Ivanov et al. 2021). Another thread explores bounded-length verification of neural controllers (Akintunde et al. 2018, 2019; Amir, Schapira, and Katz 2021).
Here we follow up on the work by Vinzent et al. (2022)
(henceforth: Vea22), which tackles NN policies π with
ReLU activation functions taking discrete action choices in
non-deterministic state spaces over bounded-integer state
variables. The approach extends predicate abstraction
(PA) (Graf and Saı̈di 1997; Ball et al. 2001; Henzinger et al.
2004) to what Vea22 baptise policy predicate abstraction
(PPA). Like PA, PPA builds an over-approximating abstraction defined through a set P of predicates, where each
p ∈ P is a linear constraint over the state variables (e.g.
x = 7 or x ≤ y). Unlike PA however, PPA abstracts not the
full state space Θ, but the policy-restricted state space Θπ ,
i.e., the state-space subgraph containing only the transitions
taken by π. Vea22’s method builds the fragment of ΘπP – the
predicate abstraction of Θπ – reachable from ϕ0 , and checks
whether ϕu is reached. If this is not the case, then π is safe.1
Compared to bounded model checking (BMC), which
iteratively checks length-L safety through an encoding into
SMT (de Moura and Bjørner 2008), the advantage of PPA
is that the required SMT calls are much cheaper. PPA uses
SMT to decide about the existence of individual abstract
state transitions. While many such SMT calls are needed,
each is local to a single NN decision, requiring a singly copy
of the NN π in the SMT encoding. In contrast, BMC requires
global SMT encodings pertaining to sequences of NN decision steps, with one copy of π in each step, which incurs a
blow-up prohibitive in L. Indeed, Vea22 show that PPA can
outperform a simple implementation of BMC.
The central weakness of this result, thus far, is that Vea22
supplied the underlying predicate sets P manually. They examined performance as a function of |P|, with predicate
sets scaled according to simple manually designed schemes.
Their positive results pertain to particular points in these
scaling schemes: particular instances of P that work well,

Neural networks (NN) are an increasingly important representation of action policies π. Recent work has extended
predicate abstraction to prove safety of such π, through policy predicate abstraction (PPA) which over-approximates the
state space subgraph induced by π. The advantage of PPA is
that reasoning about the NN – calls to SMT solvers – is required only locally, at individual abstract state transitions, in
contrast to bounded model checking (BMC) where SMT must
reason globally about sequences of NN decisions. Indeed,
it has been shown that PPA can outperform a simple BMC
implementation. However, the abstractions underlying these
results (i.e., the abstraction predicates) were supplied manually. Here we automate this step. We extend counterexampleguided abstraction refinement (CEGAR) to PPA. This involves dealing with a new source of spuriousness in abstract
unsafe paths, pertaining not to transition behavior but to the
decisions of the neural network π. We introduce two methods
tackling this issue based on the states involved, and we show
that global SMT calls deciding spuriousness exactly can be
avoided. We devise algorithmic enhancements leveraging incremental computation and heuristic search. We show empirically that the resulting verification tool has significant advantages over an encoding into the state-of-the-art model checker
nuXmv. In particular, ours is the only approach in our experiments that succeeds in proving policies safe.

1

Introduction

Neural networks (NN) are an increasingly important representation of action policies, in particular in planning (Issakkimuthu, Fern, and Tadepalli 2018; Groshev et al. 2018;
Garg, Bajpai, and Mausam 2019; Toyer et al. 2020). But
how to verify that such a policy is safe? Given a policy π,
a start condition ϕ0 , and an unsafety condition ϕu , how
to verify whether a state su |= ϕu is reachable from a state
s0 |= ϕ0 under π? Such verification is potentially very hard
as it compounds the state space explosion with the difficulty
of analyzing even single NN decision episodes.
Research on this question still is in its early stages. A
prominent line of works addresses neural controllers of dynamical systems, where the NN outputs a vector u of reals forming input to a continuous state-evolution function
f (Sun, Khedr, and Shoukry 2019; Tran et al. 2019; Huang

1
Note here that this safety result is specific to ϕ0 , i.e., checking
different start conditions requires to re-run PPA. The advantage is
that, given a fixed ϕ0 , we can leverage restricted reachability under
π. Vea22 show that this is crucial for PPA to be practicable.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15188

