The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Automated Verification of Propositional Agent Abstraction for Classical Planning
via CTLK Model Checking
Kailun Luo
School of Cyberspace Security, Dongguan University of Technology, Dongguan 523808, China
luokl@dgut.edu.cn

Abstract

case. A key problem towards full automation is the existence problem of agent abstraction, i.e., whether there exists
an abstract action theory being the desired abstraction,
when given a concrete action theory and a refinement
mapping which indicates an abstraction. Take the blocks
world for example, where an agent is re-assembling blocks
stacked on a table. We could specify a refinement mapping,
where an abstract action move to table means a concrete
program moving a block onto the table, and an abstract
fluent all ontable denotes a property that all the blocks
are on the table. We might want to know whether this
refinement mapping is correct, i.e., whether there exists
an abstract action theory (describing the precondition of
move to table and its effect on all ontable) such that if
performing move to table make all ontable hold, then
at the concrete level, there exists a sequence of actions
resulting in a scenario where all the blocks are on the table.
The existence problem of agent abstraction is natural,
as specifying a refinement mapping is easier than specifying an abstract action theory, without caring about the
preconditions and effects of abstract actions. In classical
planning, providing refinement mappings is relevant to
exploiting domain control knowledge [Baier, Fritz, and
McIlraith 2007] and hierarchical task networks [Nau et al.
2003]. Agent abstraction has its peculiarity, mainly in that
with a strong theoretical guarantee, a refinement mapping
can be reused clearly for any other planning problems if the
refinement mapping is verified to be correct for them.
In this paper, we focus on a propositional version of agent
abstraction, designed for finite-state systems and suitable for
domains in classical planning. We investigate the automated
verification of the existence of propositional agent abstraction, given a finite-state system and a refinement mapping.
We first formalize sound, complete and deterministic
properties of abstractions in a general framework for finitestate systems. It can be viewed as model-level abstractions
(compared to theory-level abstractions in agent abstraction).
Roughly speaking, sound abstraction says that if there
is a solution at the abstract level, then this solution can
be refined to a solution at the concrete level. Complete
abstraction says that if there is a solution at the concrete
level, and it is abstractable via the refinement mapping,
then this solution can be abstracted to a solution at the
abstract level. Deterministic abstraction means that at the

Abstraction has long been an effective mechanism to help
find a solution in classical planning. Agent abstraction,
based on the situation calculus, is a promising explainable
framework for agent planning, yet its automation is still far
from being tackled. In this paper, we focus on a propositional
version of agent abstraction designed for finite-state systems.
We investigate the automated verification of the existence
of propositional agent abstraction, given a finite-state
system and a mapping indicating an abstraction for it. By
formalizing sound, complete and deterministic properties
of abstractions in a general framework, we show that the
verification task can be reduced to the task of model checking
against CTLK specifications. We implemented a prototype
system, and validated the viability of our approach through
experimentation on several domains from classical planning.

Introduction
Abstraction has long been an effective mechanism to help
find a solution in classical planning. One trend is abstraction
refinement [Sacerdoti 1974; Knoblock 1994; Seipp and
Helmert 2018], whose idea is to first resort to an abstract
problem and obtain an abstract solution, and then refine it
to a concrete solution to the original problem.
Recently, an explainable abstraction framework called
agent abstraction was proposed by Banihashemi, Giacomo,
and Lespérance [2017]. It is a first-order framework based
on the situation calculus action theories [McCarthy and
Hayes 1969; Reiter 2001] and the ConGolog programming
language [Giacomo, Lespérance, and Levesque 2000]. The
key component is a refinement mapping, which associates
an abstract fluent to a concrete formula, and maps an
abstract action to a concrete ConGolog program. Thus one
can take an abstract view of an agent’s possible concrete
behaviour, suppressing the details and explaining the
meanings at a high level.
While agent abstraction is a promising framework for
the explainability of abstractions for classical planning,
its automation is still far from being tackled. Luo et al.
[2020] showed that agent abstraction can be characterized
theoretically via forgetting [Lin and Reiter 1994]. However,
an automated process is unknown, even in the propositional
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6475

