The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

KPT: Keyword-Guided Pre-training for Grounded Dialog Generation
Qi Zhu1 * , Fei Mi2† , Zheng Zhang1 , Yasheng Wang2 , Yitong Li2 ,
Xin Jiang2 , Qun Liu2 , Xiaoyan Zhu1 , Minlie Huang1†
1

CoAI Group, DCST, IAI, BNRIST, Tsinghua University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
zhu-q18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {z-zhang,zxy-dcs,aihuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn
{mifei2,wangyasheng,liyitong3,Jiang.Xin,qun.liu}@huawei.com
Abstract

Response

Incorporating external knowledge into the response generation process is essential to building more helpful and reliable dialog agents. However, collecting knowledge-grounded
conversations is often costly, calling for a better pre-trained
model for grounded dialog generation that generalizes well
w.r.t. different types of knowledge. In this work, we propose KPT (Keyword-guided Pre-Training), a novel selfsupervised pre-training method for grounded dialog generation without relying on extra knowledge annotation. Specifically, we use a pre-trained language model to extract the most
uncertain tokens in the dialog as keywords. With these keywords, we construct two kinds of knowledge and pre-train a
knowledge-grounded response generation model, aiming at
handling two different scenarios: (1) the knowledge should
be faithfully grounded; (2) it can be selectively used. For the
former, the grounding knowledge consists of keywords extracted from the response. For the latter, the grounding knowledge is additionally augmented with keywords extracted from
other utterances in the same dialog. Since the knowledge is
extracted from the dialog itself, KPT can be easily performed
on a large volume and variety of dialogue data. We considered
three data sources (open-domain, task-oriented, conversational QA) with a total of 2.5M dialogues. We conduct extensive experiments on various few-shot knowledge-grounded
generation tasks, including grounding on dialog acts, knowledge graphs, persona descriptions, and Wikipedia passages.
Our comprehensive experiments and analyses demonstrate
that KPT consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods
on these tasks with diverse grounding knowledge.

1

Transformer
Knowledge

Keywords

Context

Response

Pre-trained LM

Figure 1: An illustration of keyword-guided pre-training. We
extract the most uncertain tokens in a dialog (measured by
the bottom frozen pre-trained LM) as keywords and create
pseudo-knowledge from these keywords. The pre-training
objective (upper) is to generate the response according to
the context and knowledge.

the model’s few-shot learning ability to ground on new kinds
of knowledge. To this end, we propose Keyword-guided
Pre-Training (KPT), a self-supervised pre-training method
that only needs dialogs without any extra knowledge annotation but benefits multiple downstream dialog generation
tasks grounded on different knowledge sources.
Most of the previous dialog pre-training methods aim to
capture the coherence of dialog, such as predicting the next
utterance (Zhang et al. 2020), masked utterance (Mehri et al.
2019), and correct utterance order (Gu, Yoo, and Ha 2021).
However, for grounded dialog generation, learning to incorporate external knowledge for a given dialog context is
more critical. Recently proposed GODEL (Peng et al. 2022)
utilizes several annotated grounded dialog corpora for pretraining by concatenating the knowledge and context as input. In contrast, our proposed KPT can be performed on
any dialog corpus without requiring grounding annotation,
which could benefit more downstream tasks by including
more diverse dialogs in pre-training.
Pre-training a general knowledge-grounded dialog generation model faces two main challenges: the diverse knowledge types of downstream tasks and the lack of large annotated knowledge-grounded dialog datasets. To address
these challenges, we regard the keywords as the basic unit

Introduction

Grounding the response generation on external knowledge
is a necessary skill of an engaging and reliable dialog agent
(Shuster et al. 2021; Thoppilan et al. 2022; Shuster et al.
2022). Such a dialog agent could handle various scenarios by grounding on relevant knowledge such as common
sense knowledge graphs (Zhou et al. 2018), persona descriptions (Zhang et al. 2018), and Wikipedia passages (Dinan
et al. 2019). However, the collection of human-annotated
knowledge-grounded dialogs is expensive, which highlights
* Work done during an internship at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14065

