The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Human Joint Kinematics Diffusion-Refinement for Stochastic Motion Prediction
Dong Wei1 , Huaijiang Sun1 * , Bin Li2 , Jianfeng Lu1 , Weiqing Li1 , Xiaoning Sun1 , Shengxiang Hu1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
Tianjin AiForward Science and Technology Co., Ltd., Tianjin, China
{csdwei, sunhuaijiang, lujf, li weiqing, sunxiaoning, hushengxiang}@njust.edu.cn, libin@aiforward.com

Abstract
Stochastic human motion prediction aims to forecast multiple plausible future motions given a single pose sequence
from the past. Most previous works focus on designing elaborate losses to improve the accuracy, while the diversity is
typically characterized by randomly sampling a set of latent
variables from the latent prior, which is then decoded into
possible motions. This joint training of sampling and decoding, however, suffers from posterior collapse as the learned
latent variables tend to be ignored by a strong decoder, leading to limited diversity. Alternatively, inspired by the diffusion process in nonequilibrium thermodynamics, we propose
MotionDiff, a diffusion probabilistic model to treat the kinematics of human joints as heated particles, which will diffuse from original states to a noise distribution. This process
not only offers a natural way to obtain the “whitened” latents
without any trainable parameters, but also introduces a new
noise in each diffusion step, both of which facilitate more diverse motions. Human motion prediction is then regarded as
the reverse diffusion process that converts the noise distribution into realistic future motions conditioned on the observed
sequence. Specifically, MotionDiff consists of two parts: a
spatial-temporal transformer-based diffusion network to generate diverse yet plausible motions, and a flexible refinement
network to further enable geometric losses and align with the
ground truth. Experimental results on two datasets demonstrate that our model yields the competitive performance in
terms of both diversity and accuracy.

...

Reverse
Diffusion
Process

...
Condition

...

Past Motion

...

Future Motion

Diffusion
Process

Figure 1: Visualization of the diffusion and reverse process
of MotionDiff. For diffusion process, a new noise is gradually incorporated until the kinematic information is completely destroyed. In contrast, the reverse diffusion process
recovers the desired realistic future motion from noisy distribution conditioned on the observation via a Markov chain.

quences rather than only one output is gaining in popularity.
The latter, i.e., deterministic HMP, which is mostly based
on recurrent neural network or graph convolutional network,
cannot capture such stochastic behaviors. How to generate
accurate human motion predictions and at the same time
fully consider the diversity remains a challenging problem.
Recently, deep generative networks have made significant
progress in modeling the multi-modal data distribution (Barsoum, Kender, and Liu 2018; Yan et al. 2018; Aliakbarian
et al. 2020), such as Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)
and Variational AutoEncoder (VAE). Most of them obtain
diversity by randomly sampling a set of latent variables from
the latent prior, which requires additional neural networks
for training (i.e., the discriminator in GAN or the sampling
encoder in VAE). This process, however, will bring about
training instability or posterior collapse when jointly trained
with a powerful decoder (McCarthy et al. 2020). Unfortunately, in the particular case of human motion prediction, a
sufficiently high-capacity decoder is indispensable to keep
the predictions physically plausible. As a consequence, such
decoder tends to model the conditional density directly, giving the network possibility to learn to ignore the stochastic
latent variables, and thus limiting the diversity of future motions. To increase the diversity, recent progress on stochastic

Introduction
Human Motion Prediction (HMP) has received increasing
attention due to its broad applications such as human-robot
interaction (Bajcsy et al. 2021), autonomous driving (Paden
et al. 2016) and animation production (Park et al. 2019). The
ability to perform such predictions allows robots to understand the future plans of human beings, which is critical to
cooperate safely and reasonably with people. While encouraging results have been achieved in previous works (Aksan,
Kaufmann, and Hilliges 2019; Mao et al. 2019; Zhong et al.
2022), they neglect the fact that uncertainty and stochasticity are intrinsic properties of human motions. Given a single past observation, predicting multiple possible future se* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6110

