The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multi-Level Wavelet Mapping Correlation for Statistical Dependence
Measurement: Methodology and Performance
Yixin Ren1 , Hao Zhang1 , Yewei Xia1 , Jihong Guan2 , Shuigeng Zhou1*
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
2
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tongji University, China
{yxren21, ywxia21}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {haoz15, sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn, jhguan@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract

Thomas-Agnan 2011). The first proposed RKHS measure
is the kernel canonical correlation (KCC) (Bach and Jordan 2002), which mainly uses the maximum singular value
to measure dependency. Later, the constrained covariance
(COCO) (Gretton et al. 2005b) criterion without regularization was proposed. Some other empirical kernel quantities such as kernel mutual information (KMI) (Gretton,
Herbrich, and Smola 2003) and kernel generalized variance
(KGV) (Bach and Jordan 2002) use Parson’s window to estimate mutual information to measure dependence. One of
the most widely used kernel-based dependence measures,
the Hilbert Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) (Gretton et al. 2005a), uses the squared Hilbert-Schmidt norm
to detect dependence. The HSIC-based independence test
outperforms other RKHS measures in experimental performance with adequate feature mapping. However, this kernelbased method has at least quadratic computational complexity and has to choose the kernel bandwidth. Some pointwise
distance based methods (Székely and Rizzo 2009; Heller,
Heller, and Gorfine 2013; Lyons 2013) and copula based
methods (Schweizer and Wolff 1981; Zhang 2019) are also
widely used. A representative copula based method, the randomized dependence coefficient (Lopez-Paz, Hennig, and
Schölkopf 2013) (RDC), uses nonlinear random projections
to maximize the canonical correlation of the copula transformations corresponding to the random variables. Recently,
Chatterjee (Chatterjee 2021) proposed a correlation coefficient capable of measuring the strength of the nonlinear correlation between two variables.

We propose a new criterion for measuring dependence between two real variables, namely, Multi-level Wavelet Mapping Correlation (MWMC). MWMC can capture the nonlinear dependencies between variables by measuring their correlation under different levels of wavelet mappings. We show
that the empirical estimate of MWMC converges exponentially to its population quantity. To support independence test
better with MWMC, we further design a permutation test
based on MWMC and prove that our test can not only control
the type I error rate (the rate of false positives) well but also
ensure that the type II error rate (the rate of false negatives)
is upper bounded by O(1/n) (n is the sample size) with finite permutations. By extensive experiments on (conditional)
independence tests and causal discovery, we show that our
method outperforms existing independence test methods.

Introduction
Detecting dependence between two variables is a fundamental problem in the field of statistics, with applications
in a variety of areas such as statistical inference (Casella
and Berger 2021), independent principal component analysis (Comon 1994), and feature selection (Fukumizu, Bach,
and Jordan 2004). When two random variables are categorical, a class of non-parametric methods such as Pearson’s chisquare test (Plackett 1983), are used to determine whether
they are independent. However, when the density functions
of two random variables are both continuous, determining
the independence between them is considered to be a challenging task (Hoeffding 1948).
Pearson’s correlation coefficient (Benesty et al. 2009) is
widely used as a criterion for testing the independence of
continuous variables. However, since it can only measure
linear correlations between variables, there is no guarantee that all dependencies can be measured when the distributions of variables are non-Gaussian. In order to detect more complex nonlinear dependencies among random
variables, a class of kernel-based (Muller et al. 2001) independence criteria were proposed based on the framework established by Rényi (Rényi 1959). These criteria
are mainly derived from the cross-covariance operators in
the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) (Berlinet and

On the other hand, deep neural networks have also been
recently proposed to test independence. He et al. (He et al.
2021) developed a neural network-based independence test
method, which was used in their proposed continuous optimization algorithm DARING. For simplicity, we treat DARING and the proposed independence test method equally in
the following. DARING optimizes the parameterized function f (x) (x is a random variable) to maximize the correlation coefficient between f (x) and the random variable y by
using deep neural network. However, zero correlation between f (x) and y is theoretically insufficient to support independence according to the previous work (Daudin 1980). In
contrast to kernel-based independence tests, DARING is not
stable/robust, and is not easy to be applied to new scenarios,
due to a bunch of hyperparameters.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6499

