The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Entropy Regularization for Population Estimation
Ben Chugg1 , Peter Henderson2 , Jacob Goldin3 , Daniel E. Ho2
1

Carnegie Mellon University
2
Stanford University
3
University of Chicago
benchugg@cmu.edu, {phend, dho}@stanford.edu, jsgoldin@uchicago.edu

Abstract

and the variance of our estimator. Unfortunately, the variance formulation of such estimators is unwieldy and yields
an intractable optimization problem if directly incorporated
into the objective. Instead, we substitute the variance term
for an information-theoretic policy regularization term such
as entropy or KL divergence. Adding such terms yields analytically tractable optimization problems, while maintaining
our ability to smoothly navigate reward-variance trade offs.
In reinforcement learning (RL) settings, adding policy
regularization terms to the objective function has been
shown to consistently improve the performance of sequential decision-making algorithms (Williams and Peng 1991;
Ahmed et al. 2019; Xiao et al. 2019). Our ability to leverage
these tools in a different setting enables us to take advantage of well-established theory and insights in RL, indicating an exciting convergence between our problem, survey
sampling, and other areas of sequential decision-making.
In sum, our contributions are as follows: (i) We propose
novel algorithms to handle the dual objective of reward maximization and mean reward estimation in the structured bandit setting; (ii) characterize the bias of the estimators in our
setting, provide closed-form solutions for our proposed optimization problems, and relate entropy and KL sampling
strategies to the variance of the estimators; and (iii) demonstrate the improvement of our algorithms over baselines on
four datasets.

Entropy regularization is known to improve exploration in sequential decision-making problems. We show that this same
mechanism can also lead to nearly unbiased and lowervariance estimates of the mean reward in the optimize-andestimate structured bandit setting. Mean reward estimation
(i.e., population estimation) tasks have recently been shown
to be essential for public policy settings where legal constraints often require precise estimates of population metrics.
We show that leveraging entropy and KL divergence can yield
a better trade-off between reward and estimator variance than
existing baselines, all while remaining nearly unbiased. These
properties of entropy regularization illustrate an exciting potential for bridging the optimal exploration and estimation literatures.

Introduction
While most frameworks for online sequential decisionmaking focus on the objective of maximizing reward, in
practice this is rarely the sole objective. Other considerations may involve budget constraints, ensuring fair treatment, or estimating various population characteristics. There
has been growing recognition that these other constraints
must be formally integrated into sequential decision-making
frameworks, especially if such algorithms are to be used in
sensitive application areas (Henderson et al. 2021). In this
work, we focus on the problem of maximizing reward while
simultaneously estimating the population total (equivalently,
mean) in a structured bandit setting.
The most natural approach to this problem from a machine learning perspective is to use a model to predict the
mean. However, this method is subject to the problem that
adaptively collected data are subject to bias, which in turn
biases the model estimates (Nie et al. 2018). Natural tools
from survey sampling such as IPW estimators (also used
commonly in off-policy evaluation (OPE)) enable mean estimation if each observation has been sampled with some
known or estimable probability. However, in those settings
the probabilities are given a priori, and can yield highvariance estimates if the sampling distribution is skewed.
Here we seek to optimize over possible probability distributions in order to trade off between our expected reward

Related Work
The bandit literature is large. We focus on the most relevant
related works here, and relegate a prolonged discussion of
all peripheral work to Appendix A.
The closest work to ours is Henderson et al. (2022), who
introduce the optimize-and-estimate structured bandit setting which we adopt in this paper. They introduce Adaptive Bin Sampling (ABS) which we describe below and use
as our main baseline. The optimize-and-estimate setting is
closest to that in Abbasi-Yadkori, Pál, and Szepesvári (2011)
and Joseph et al. (2016), but extended to non-linear rewards
with a required estimation objective. Crucially, in this setting, arms may change from step to step and the agent must
instead rely on a per-arm context to determine which arms
to pull.
A number of works have sought to yield reduced-bias
(e.g., Nie et al. (2018)) or unbiased estimators (e.g., Zhang,

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12198

