The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Reducing Sentiment Bias in Pre-trained Sentiment Classification
via Adaptive Gumbel Attack
Jiachen Tian, Shizhan Chen, Xiaowang Zhang* , Xin Wang, Zhiyong Feng
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cognitive Computing and Application, Tianjin, China
{jiachen6677, shizhan, xiaowangzhang, wangx, zyfeng}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Pre-trained language models (PLMs) have recently enabled
rapid progress on sentiment classification under the pre-train
and fine-tune paradigm, where the fine-tuning phase aims to
transfer the factual knowledge learned by PLMs to sentiment
classification. However, current fine-tuning methods ignore
the risk that PLMs cause the problem of sentiment bias, that
is, PLMs tend to inject positive or negative sentiment from
the contextual information of certain entities (or aspects) into
their word embeddings, leading them to establish spurious
correlations with labels. In this paper, we propose an adaptive
Gumbel-attacked classifier that immunes sentiment bias from
an adversarial-attack perspective. Due to the complexity and
diversity of sentiment bias, we construct multiple Gumbelattack expert networks to generate various noises from mixed
Gumbel distribution constrained by mutual information minimization, and design an adaptive training framework to synthesize complex noise by confidence-guided controlling the
number of expert networks. Finally, we capture these noises
that effectively simulate sentiment bias based on the feedback
of the classifier, and then propose a multi-channel parameter updating algorithm to strengthen the classifier to recognize these noises by fusing the parameters between the classifier and each expert network. Experimental results illustrate
that our method significantly reduced sentiment bias and improved the performance of sentiment classification.

(a) Traditional

(b) Ours

Figure 1: Contextual word embedding of the target (i.e., Apple): traditional PLMs vs. our method.
context information to distinguish the semantics of the target and determine the sentiment polarity of the opinion.
With the development of large-scale pre-trained language models (PLMs) such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019),
RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019), ALBERT (Lan et al. 2020) and
ELECTRA (Clark et al. 2020), SC models based on finetuned PLMs have achieved state-of-the-art performances
due to their extraordinary context modeling ability. However, as shown in Figure 1(a), while most PLMs capture the
semantic properties of words under diverse contexts (Miaschi and Dell’Orletta 2020; Phan and Ogunbona 2020;
Michalopoulos et al. 2022), they also apply the sentiment
information of the context to representation learning, thus
the contextual word embeddings of some targets are biased
toward a specific sentiment. Consequently, spurious correlations between targets and labels are established as shortcuts
of decision-making, resulting in the SC model no longer determining the sentiment polarity of the opinion according
to the context. Unfortunately, current fine-tuning methods,
such as ULMFiT (Howard and Ruder 2018), ITPT (Sun et al.
2019), and IDPT (Sun et al. 2019), mainly focus on performing the cross-domain (or task) knowledge generalization, but
neglect to reduce sentiment bias of the target.
Based on the aforementioned, as shown in Figure 1(b), the
key point of reducing sentiment bias is to encourage PLMs
for encoding the target with the semantic information, without the sentiment information of its context. However, since
the self-supervised learning process of PLMs is hard to be
controlled, we only try to use adversarial examples to simulate sentiment bias and prompt the classifier to reduce sentiment bias. As shown in Figure 2(a), traditional adversar-

Introduction
Sentiment classification (SC) aims to automatically detect
the sentiment polarity of an opinion, e.g. positive, neutral,
or negative (Phan and Ogunbona 2020). An opinion can be
defined as a tuple <Target, Context>, where the target
refers to any entity or aspect of the entity on which the opinion has been expressed, and the context forms the setting
that the opinion expresses or implies the specific semantic
and sentiment towards the target (Liu 2012; Ito et al. 2020).
Taking the sentence “Apple’s apps are plentiful” as an example, the target is “Apple”, and the context is “ ’s apps
are plentiful” that clarifies the semantic of “Apple” being
a company and expresses positive sentiment. Therefore, an
effective SC model typically needs to make full use of the
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13646

