The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

LUCID: Exposing Algorithmic Bias through Inverse Design
Carmen Mazijn1,2 , Carina Prunkl 3 , Andres Algaba 1 , Jan Danckaert 2 , Vincent Ginis 1,2,4
1

Data Analytics Lab, Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Applied Physics, Vrije Universiteit Brussel
3
Institute for Ethics in AI, Oxford University
4
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
carmen.mazijn@vub.be, carina.prunkl@philosophy.ox.ac.uk, andres.algaba@vub.be,
jan.danckaert@vub.be, vincent.ginis@vub.be
2

Abstract

political notions of group fairness into a statistical metric (Makhlouf, Zhioua, and Palamidessi 2021). The model’s
output can then be analysed with respect to the chosen notion of group fairness and the model is judged to be “fair”
or “unfair”. There are several widely recognised issues with
output-based fairness evaluations of this kind. First, there
often is substantial philosophical disagreement as to what
ought to be considered a “fair” outcome distribution (Binns
2018; Gallie 2019). The now infamous controversy about the
alleged racism of the COMPAS recidivism risk algorithm
boiled down to such a disagreement. In this case, the two
fairness measures under debate were accuracy equality and
equalised odds with respect to race. Second, different notions of group fairness are incompatible with each other, except for highly special cases (Kleinberg, Mullainathan, and
Raghavan 2016). Third, the computation of fairness metrics
depends on a benchmark data set, which is often also used
to evaluate the model on other metrics such as accuracy.
The metrics do not assess the model’s fairness towards the
whole population after deployment (Northcutt, Athalye, and
Mueller 2021). Fourth, work on group fairness usually relies
on the evaluation of a limited number of prescribed protected
attributes, running the risk of missing discrimination either
against people who are at the intersection of different groups
or against groups that do not share a protected characteristic (Binns 2020; Crenshaw 1990; Wachter and Mittelstadt
2019). Finally, focussing exclusively on output distributions
to determine fairness is only one part of the story. In everyday life and when stakes are high, the output of a given
decision is not the only thing one typically cares about. We
are also interested in how the decision came about, e.g. why I
wasn’t granted the loan I applied for or why I didn’t receive
the job I interviewed for (High-Level Expert Group on AI
2019; Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2017). Understanding the reasoning behind a decision is not just relevant from
a moral point of view, it is equally important within a legal
context. Disparate treatment and direct discrimination both
aim at addressing cases in which similarly situated individuals are not treated alike on grounds of a legally protected
characteristic. In these cases, it becomes relevant both that
such individuals were treated differently and why they were
treated differently. Output-based fairness evaluations cannot
address these issues as they do not take into account the internal logic of the model in question.

AI systems can create, propagate, support, and automate bias
in decision-making processes. To mitigate biased decisions,
we both need to understand the origin of the bias and define
what it means for an algorithm to make fair decisions. Most
group fairness notions assess a model’s equality of outcome
by computing statistical metrics on the outputs. We argue that
these output metrics encounter intrinsic obstacles and present
a complementary approach that aligns with the increasing focus on equality of treatment. By Locating Unfairness through
Canonical Inverse Design (LUCID), we generate a canonical
set that shows the desired inputs for a model given a preferred
output. The canonical set reveals the model’s internal logic
and exposes potential unethical biases by repeatedly interrogating the decision-making process. We evaluate LUCID on
the UCI Adult and COMPAS data sets and find that some biases detected by a canonical set differ from those of output
metrics. The results show that by shifting the focus towards
equality of treatment and looking into the algorithm’s internal workings, the canonical sets are a valuable addition to the
toolbox of algorithmic fairness evaluation.1

Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) systems are used in decisionmaking processes throughout all aspects of human life, ranging from detecting child abuse, determining access to education or healthcare, and granting loans (Amrit et al. 2017;
Ledford 2019; Makhlouf, Zhioua, and Palamidessi 2021).
However, it is by now a well-established fact that algorithms
can be biased and lead to discrimination against already disadvantaged population groups (Barocas and Selbst 2016;
Buolamwini and Gebru 2018; Chouldechova and Roth 2018;
Whittaker et al. 2018). The sources of such biases are multiple and include problem specification, historical bias, unrepresentative data, biased measurement methods, or choice
of objective function (Barocas, Hardt, and Narayanan 2019;
Fazelpour and Danks 2021; Lee and Singh 2021b; Suresh
and Guttag 2021).
Recent efforts to identify algorithmic discrimination often focus on the statistical properties of a model’s output. The standard approach is to translate philosophical or
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code is available at https://github.com/IntegratedIntelligence-Lab/canonical sets.

14391

