The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SWBNet: A Stable White Balance Network for sRGB Images
Chunxiao Li, Xuejing Kang, Zhifeng Zhang, Anlong Ming *
School of Computer Science (National Pilot Software Engineering School), Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
{chunxiaol,kangxuejing,zhangzhifeng,mal}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
The white balance methods for sRGB images (sRGB-WB)
aim to directly remove their color temperature shifts. Despite
achieving promising white balance (WB) performance, the
existing methods suffer from WB instability, i.e., their results
are inconsistent for images with different color temperatures.
We propose a stable white balance network (SWBNet) to alleviate this problem. It learns the color temperature-insensitive
features to generate white-balanced images, resulting in
consistent WB results. Specifically, the color temperatureinsensitive features are learned by implicitly suppressing lowfrequency information sensitive to color temperatures. Then,
a color temperature contrastive loss is introduced to facilitate the most information shared among features of the same
scene and different color temperatures. This way, features
from the same scene are more insensitive to color temperatures regardless of the inputs. We also present a color temperature sensitivity-oriented transformer that globally perceives multiple color temperature shifts within an image
and corrects them by different weights. It helps to improve
the accuracy of stabilized SWBNet, especially for multiillumination sRGB images. Experiments indicate that our
SWBNet achieves stable and remarkable WB performance.

Figure 1: WB instability visualization. The closer and lower
∆E2000 values for the inputs with different color temperatures and same scene mean better WB stability and accuracy.

architecture trained in an end-to-end manner. Although
achieving promising WB accuracy, both categories of methods have inconsistent results for the images with different
color temperatures. That is, they suffer from WB instability, which limits the performances when applied to downstream tasks, such as TV broadcasting and image editing
(Vazquez-Corral and Bertalmı́o 2014). Fig.1 shows some
examples. Three representative sRGB-WB methods (KNNWB, MixedWB, DWB) are used to correct the sRGB images rendered with four typical color temperatures. Ideally,
regardless of the inputs, an effective sRGB-WB method
should generate white-balanced images with consistent neutral color temperature. However, for the single-illumination
inputs in Fig.1(a) (first four rows), the white-balanced images generated by three methods have inconsistent color
temperatures even if the scenes are fixed. This is reflected
in the visualizations and varying ∆E2000 values (Sharma,
Wu, and Dalal 2005) in Fig.1(b)-(d). Worse yet, for the
multi-illumination inputs in Fig.1(a) (last two rows), WB instability is severe, and WB accuracy is greatly degraded.
In this paper, we propose a stable white balance network

Introduction
White balance for sRGB images (sRGB-WB) aims at removing the color temperature shifts caused by the improper
or personalized white balance (WB) settings in image signal processing (ISP) (Afifi et al. 2019a). It is a burgeoning
research direction and has a great impact on some computer
vision tasks, such as semantic segmentation and image classification (Afifi and Brown 2019).
Since 2019, several sRGB-WB methods have been proposed, which can be divided into exemplar-based methods
and deep neural network (DNN)-based methods. Exemplarbased methods, such as KNN-WB (Afifi et al. 2019a) and
MixedWB (Afifi, Brubaker, and Brown 2022), compute nonlinear mappings for different color temperatures and then
correct the input images according to them. DNN-based
method, i.e., DWB (Afifi and Brown 2020a), builds a unified mapping for different color temperatures with the DNN
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1278

