The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Bellman Meets Hawkes: Model-Based Reinforcement Learning via Temporal
Point Processes
Chao Qu* 1 , Xiaoyu Tan* † 1 , Siqiao Xue1 , Xiaoming Shi1 , James Zhang1 , Hongyuan Mei2
1

Ant Group, Hangzhou, China.
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States.
chaoqu.technion@gmail.com,txywilliam1993@outlook.com, {siqiao.xsq,peter.sxm,james.z}@antgroup.com
hongyuan@ttic.edu
2

Abstract

and broadcasting others’ tweet to their friends and followers. Such stochastic events would steer the behaviors of
other tweet users (Rizoiu et al. 2017); the platform (agent)
may want to seek a policy to effectively mitigate the fake
news by optimizing the performance of real news propagation over the network (Farajtabar et al. 2017).
• Medical events. The stream of medical events would include the blood test, diagnosis, treatment and so on. To
cure the patients, a doctor (the agent) often seeks the optimal treatments based on the clinical conditions.
In the above problems, given the observed trajectories of
the event sequences in continuous-time, the agent can impose the intervention on the environment to maximize the
long term reward. For instance, the platform can post the
valid news in the social media to steer the spontaneous user
mitigation activities of fake news. In the RL context, the action is to post valid news and the observation is the users’
following behaviors such as retweet while the reward can be
quantified by event exposure counts. However, the following
characteristics of event sequences bring new challenges:
1. The inter-event time intervals are not constant while conventional RL considers the synchronized action and observations. For instance, the healthy patient with less severe symptoms would visit doctors occasionally, while
the unhealthy patients receive the test and treatment more
frequently. Thus it is crucial to predict both which events
are likely to happen next and when they will happen. Directly adapting conventional RL algorithm to its SemiMDP (SMDP) version can not address this issue well (see
our ablation study in Appendix. )
2. How to describe the dynamics of an abrupt event if the
agent imposes intervention? Note that these events may
help cause or prevent future events in a complex mechanism, e.g., in Figure 1, the platform posts the valid news
to steer the spontaneous user activities. In general, the
valid news and fake news can inhibit each other. Specifically, the dynamic system characterized by continuous
trajectories will be abruptly changed by discrete events.
However, the dynamic models of most model-based RL
methods are continuous without endogenous jumps (e.g.,
the jump corresponding to the spontaneous user activities), and therefore are not suitable for learning the continuous and discrete dynamics of such hybrid system.

We consider a sequential decision making problem where the
agent faces the environment characterized by the stochastic
discrete events and seeks an optimal intervention policy such
that its long-term reward is maximized. This problem exists
ubiquitously in social media, finance and health informatics
but is rarely investigated by the conventional research in reinforcement learning. To this end, we present a novel framework of the model-based reinforcement learning where the
agent’s actions and observations are asynchronous stochastic discrete events occurring in continuous-time. We model
the dynamics of the environment by Hawkes process with external intervention control term and develop an algorithm to
embed such process in the Bellman equation which guides
the direction of the value gradient. We demonstrate the superiority of our method in both synthetic simulator and real-data
experiments.

Introduction
The last several years have witnessed the great success of reinforcement learning (RL) including the video game playing
(Mnih et al. 2015), robot manipulation (Gu et al. 2017), autonomous driving (Shalev-Shwartz, Shammah, and Shashua
2016) and many others (Lazic et al. 2018; Dalal, Gilboa, and
Mannor 2016). Most of them focus on the problem where
the system of interest evolves continuously with time, e.g., a
trajectory of a robot arm.
However, the conventional research in RL may omit a category of system that evolves continuously and may be interrupted by stochastic events abruptly ( See the jumps at
t1 , t2 , t3 in Figure 1). Such system exists ubiquitously in the
social and information science and therefore necessitates the
research of reinforcement learning in these domains to extend its applicability in the real-world problems (Farajtabar
et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018), in which the agent seeks
an optimal intervention policy so as to improve the future
course of events. Concrete examples may include:
• Social media. Social media website allows users to create
and share content. Retweet can form as users resharing
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author. txywilliam1993@outlook.com
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9543

