The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Chemical Rules of Retrosynthesis with Pre-training
Yinjie Jiang1 , Ying Wei2 * , Fei Wu1,3∗ , Zhengxing Huang1 , Kun Kuang1 , Zhihua Wang3
1
Zhejiang University
City University of Hong Kong
3
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study of Zhejiang University
{jiangyinjie, wufei, zhengxinghuang, kunkuang, zhihua.wang}@zju.edu.cn, yingwei@cityu.edu.hk,
2

Abstract

of template-free methods is barely satisfactory because of
the lack of additional chemical information. After taking
a closer look at the results of previous models, we pinpoint three challenges in retrosynthesis prediction, especially for template-free methods (see Figure ??): 1) generated molecules are invalid. 2) generated reactants break Law
of Conservation of Atoms. 3) generated reactants do not react or do not produce the target product.

Retrosynthesis aided by artificial intelligence has been a very
active and bourgeoning area of research, for its critical role in
drug discovery as well as material science. Three categories
of solutions, i.e., template-based, template-free, and semitemplate methods, constitute mainstream solutions to this
problem. In this paper, we focus on template-free methods
which are known to be less bothered by the template generalization issue and the atom mapping challenge. Among several
remaining problems regarding template-free methods, failing
to conform to chemical rules is pronounced. To address the
issue, we seek for a pre-training solution to empower the pretrained model with chemical rules encoded. Concretely, we
enforce the atom conservation rule via a molecule reconstruction pre-training task, and the reaction rule that dictates reaction centers via a reaction type guided contrastive pre-training
task. In our empirical evaluation, the proposed pre-training
solution substantially improves the single-step retrosynthesis
accuracies in three downstream datasets.

To address the three challenges, we propose a Pre-trained
Model for Single-step Retrosynthesis (PMSR) where we design three pre-training tasks. Besides auto-regression, we
propose a molecule recovery task with regional masks for
the first two challenges. The masked elements are recovered by other surrounding visible elements, which helps the
model generate valid molecules. These masked elements are
also expected to be predicted by the given product, encouraging the model to follow the conservation of atoms. Additionally, it is widely accepted that the reaction type as prior
knowledge greatly improves the performance of retrosynthesis. Thus, we propose a supervised contrastive task in
PMSR to force the model to focus more on reaction centers.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows.

Introduction
Firstly formulated by Corey and Wipke (1969), Retrosynthesis is the task to design synthesis routes of target products,
which plays a significant role in chemistry and pharmacy.
With the increasing number of chemical reactions, even experienced and professional chemists spend much time on
retrosynthesis. Automated retrosynthesis machines are urgently needed. Thus, single-step retrosynthesis prediction
which serves as the foundation of the retrosynthesis route
planning becomes a critical juncture for the intersection of
machine learning and chemistry.
Existing machine learning works on retrosynthesis prediction are mainly divided into three categories: templatebased methods (Segler and Waller 2017; Dai et al. 2019; Sun
et al. 2021; Seidl et al. 2021), semi-template-based methods (Yan et al. 2020; Shi et al. 2020; Somnath et al. 2021;
Seo et al. 2021), and template-free methods (Schwaller
et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2021). Templatebased and semi-template-based methods heavily depend on
templates or Atom-Atom-Mappings, which are also unsolved challenges in chemistry. Meanwhile, the performance

• We summarize three challenges of single-step retrosynthesis prediction and propose three solutions to these
challenges, i.e., masked element recovery, masked fragment recovery, and reaction classification.
• We design three pre-training tasks customized to retrosynthesis, including auto-regression, molecule recovery, and contrastive rection classification. The three pretraining tasks solve the three challenges and improve the
performance of retrosynthesis. We also introduce the
pointer-generator architecture and data augmentation in
PMSR, both of which further benefit retrosynthesis.
• After fine-tuning on USPTO-50K (Schneider, Stiefl, and
Landrum 2016), USPTO-FULL (Dai et al. 2019) and Pistachio (Mayfield, Lowe, and Sayle 2017), our model surpasses previous methods by a large margin. We also conduct experiments to generate all precursors, including reactants and reagents, on USPTO-50K (Schneider, Stiefl,
and Landrum 2016) and USPTO-MIT (Jin et al. 2017).
PMSR also achieves satisfactory results, which shows the
power of our pre-training tasks.

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5113

