The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Structurally Restricted Fragments of Numeric Planning – a Complexity Analysis
Alexander Shleyfman1 , Daniel Gnad2 , Peter Jonsson2
1

2

The Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel
Department of Computer and Information Science, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden
alexash@biu.ac.il, daniel.gnad@liu.se, peter.jonsson@liu.se

Abstract

2004; Giménez and Jonsson 2008). We consider a restricted
but still expressive variant of the simple numeric planning
(SNP) formalism (Hoffmann 2003; Scala et al. 2016). While
SNP only allows linear expressions as numeric conditions
and additive constants as action effects, it is undecidable.
We disallow linear conditions involving several variables;
the resulting formalism is still undecidable. We study this
restricted formalism because the standard method to compile away such conditions introduces cyclic dependencies
between numeric variables and these cannot be handled by
our proposed approaches. This formalism equals the class
(Cc , Cc , E±c ) by Helmert (2002).
We focus completely on providing decidability results
in this paper and leave hardness results for future work.
One should note that almost every decidability result that
we present is in fact a PSPACE-membership result; such a
result implies that the problem under consideration is not
harder than classical propositional planning. We start with
tasks with a single numeric variable x, which provides a
necessary platform for more interesting structures. Our main
tool is Thm. 2: for every solvable one-variable task Πx one
can compute a bounded interval I s.t. there exists a plan π
that stays inside I during execution. The proof is based on
a nontrivial action reordering technique. To solve Πx , it is
thus sufficient to explore a finite part of the underlying infinite state space, and this finite part is so small that it proves
membership in PSPACE.
We continue our analysis with instances containing two
variables x and y s.t. y depends on x but not vice versa, i.e.
instances with CG x → y. If x or y is propositional, we show
that there exists a bounding interval for the numeric variable
implying a finite search space. Our proof technique is based
on guessing action sequences and analysing them via integer
programming and Thm. 2. This allows us to show that SNP
with an arbitrary number of numeric root or leaf variables
is decidable, and lies in PSPACE if all numeric variables
are (1) roots, or (2) leaves and the state space induced by
the propositional variables has a fixed size. This can be used
and extended in various ways. For instance, numeric planning with a fork or inverted-fork CG is decidable and often
can even be solved in polynomial space. Such CG structures
were first studied by Domshlak and Dinitz (2001) and their
tractability result has been highly influential when studying more complex structural properties in classical plan-

Numeric planning is known to be undecidable even under severe restrictions. Prior work has investigated the decidability
boundaries by restricting the expressiveness of the planning
formalism in terms of the numeric functions allowed in conditions and effects. We study a well-known restricted form of
Hoffmann’s simple numeric planning, which is undecidable.
We analyze the complexity by imposing restrictions on the
causal structure, exploiting a novel method for bounding variable domain sizes. First, we show that plan existence for tasks
where all numeric variables are root nodes in the causal graph
is in PSPACE. Second, we show that for tasks with only numeric leaf variables the problem is decidable, and that it is
in PSPACE if the propositional state space has a fixed size.
Our work lays a strong foundation for future investigations
of structurally more complex tasks. From a practical perspective, our method allows to employ heuristics and methods that
are geared towards finite variable domains (such as pattern
database heuristics or decoupled search) to solve non-trivial
families of numeric planning problems.

Introduction
In recent years, significant progress has been made in developing methods for planning with numeric variables (Hoffmann 2002; Shin and Davis 2005; Gerevini, Saetti, and Serina 2008; Eyerich, Mattmüller, and Röger 2009; Coles et al.
2013; Illanes and McIlraith 2017; Scala et al. 2017; Aldinger
and Nebel 2017; Li et al. 2018; Piacentini et al. 2018a,b;
Kuroiwa et al. 2021; Shleyfman, Kuroiwa, and Beck 2023).
From a theoretical perspective, the success of these methods
raises a conundrum since even very simple forms of numeric
planning are known to be undecidable (Helmert 2002; Gnad
et al. 2023). The important question in this context is obvious: how to restrict numeric planning to render it decidable?
Helmert’s seminal paper presents decidable cases based on
restricting the formalism itself, e.g. the allowed mathematical functions and relations. Our approach is different: we
identify decidable fragments based on their structural properties. To this end, we generalize causal graphs (CG) to numeric planning. The CG approach has been a major source
of complexity results for classical planning (Jonsson and
Bäckström 1998; Brafman and Domshlak 2003; Helmert
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12112

