The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Disentangled Representation for Causal Mediation Analysis
Ziqi Xu1 , Debo Cheng1,2 * , Jiuyong Li1 * , Jixue Liu1 , Lin Liu1 , Ke Wang3
1

University of South Australia
Guangxi Normal University
3
Simon Fraser University
ziqi.xu@mymail.unisa.edu.au,{Jiuyong.li,Jixue.Liu,Lin.Liu}@unisa.edu.au,chengdb2016@gmail.com,wangk@cs.sfu.ca
2

Abstract
Estimating direct and indirect causal effects from observational data is crucial to understanding the causal mechanisms
and predicting the behaviour under different interventions.
Causal mediation analysis is a method that is often used to reveal direct and indirect effects. Deep learning shows promise
in mediation analysis, but the current methods only assume
latent confounders that affect treatment, mediator and outcome simultaneously, and fail to identify different types of
latent confounders (e.g., confounders that only affect the mediator or outcome). Furthermore, current methods are based
on the sequential ignorability assumption, which is not feasible for dealing with multiple types of latent confounders.
This work aims to circumvent the sequential ignorability assumption and applies the piecemeal deconfounding assumption as an alternative. We propose the Disentangled Mediation
Analysis Variational AutoEncoder (DMAVAE), which disentangles the representations of latent confounders into three
types to accurately estimate the natural direct effect, natural
indirect effect and total effect. Experimental results show that
the proposed method outperforms existing methods and has
strong generalisation ability. We further apply the method to
a real-world dataset to show its potential application.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) A causal graph for the UC Berkeley admission
process example. T denotes gender (treatment), M denotes
discipline choice (mediator), and Y denotes acceptance rate
(outcome). (b) Causal graph for CMAVAE (Cheng, Guo, and
Liu 2022). T denotes treatment, M denotes mediator, Y denotes outcome, X denotes proxy attributes and Z denotes
the representation of latent confounders which affect T , M
and Y simultaneously.

The above example illustrates three essential ingredients
of CMA, the natural direct effect (NDE), the natural indirect effect (NIE) and the total effect (TE), respectively. We
use Figure 1a to illustrate the above example in terms of the
three types of effects. Here, TE measures the expected increase in the acceptance rate as gender changes from male to
female; NDE measures the expected increase in acceptance
rate as gender changes from male to female while setting the
discipline choice to whatever value it would have attained
prior to the change (i.e., under gender being male); NIE measures the expected increase in acceptance rate when gender
is male, and discipline choice changes to whatever value
it would have attained under gender being female (Pearl
2014). To be fair for all applicants, the NDE should be zero
since gender should not directly affect the acceptance rate,
while the NIE is allowed to be non-zero if discipline choice
is considered a non-sensitive attribute.
The major challenge in CMA is latent confounders. In the
above example, an applicant’s economic status affects his
or her discipline choice and acceptance rate, and without
measuring it, we cannot estimate NDE, NIE or TE. Fortunately, leveraging the strength of representation learning, researchers are able to learn the representations of latent confounders from other attributes. For example, the representation of the applicants’ economic status can be learned from
the collected information of their addresses and parental

Introduction
Causal mediation analysis (CMA) aims to reveal how other
attributes mediate the causal effect of a treatment on the
outcome. It can help understand how the mechanism works
and enable outcome prediction under various interventions
in practice. In recent years, CMA has been widely used in
operational decision (Yin and Hong 2019) and policy evaluation (Cheng, Guo, and Liu 2022). For example, in the UC
Berkeley admission process, it was found that female applicants were more likely to be rejected than male applicants (Bickel, Hammel, and O’Connell 1975). However, investigators through CMA understood that the choice of disciplines, as a mediator was affected by gender and affected
the acceptance rate. There was in fact no discrimination because female applicants preferred to apply for admission
into disciplines with a higher level of competition and lower
acceptance rates.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10666

