The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Adaptive Policy Learning for Offline-to-Online Reinforcement Learning
Han Zheng1 * , Xufang Luo2† , Pengfei Wei3 ,
Xuan Song4 , Dongsheng Li2 , Jing Jiang1
1

University of Technology Sydney,
2
Microsoft Research Asia,
3
National University of Singapore,
4
Southern University of Science and Technology
z.han0903@gmail.com,xufluo@microsoft.com
Abstract

paradigm with RL objectives, many offline RL methods have
been proposed and aroused much attention recently (Levine
et al. 2020). They try to learn policies from static datasets
which are pre-collected by arbitrary policies.
Existing offline RL studies mainly focus on remedying the
issue of distribution mismatch or out-of-distribution (OOD)
actions by employing a pessimistic update scheme (Kumar
et al. 2019, 2020) or in combination with imitation learning (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup 2019). However, when the
dataset is fixed and sub-optimal, it is nearly impossible for
offline RL to learn the optimal policy (Kidambi et al. 2020).
Even worse, when a large portion of actions or states is not
covered within the training set distribution, offline RL methods usually fail to learn good policies (Kumar et al. 2020;
Fu et al. 2020; Levine et al. 2020). Moreover, policy evaluation under the offline RL setting is also challenging. Although some methods, such as off-policy evaluation algorithms (Dann et al. 2014), are proposed for this problem,
they are still not ideal for the practical purpose.
Some recent works address the above issues by employing an offline-to-online setting. Such methods (Lee et al.
2021; Nair et al. 2020) focus on pre-training a policy using
the offline dataset and fine-tuning the policy through further online interactions. Even though their methods alleviate the above problems, they have not considered the different advantages of offline and online data and utilised both
well. Specifically, offline data can prevent agents from prematurely converging to sub-optimal policies thanks to the
potential data diversity, while online data can stabilize training and accelerate convergence (Nair et al. 2020; Sutton and
Barto 2018). They can contribute to better policy learning in
different ways. But prior methods only stress one of them.
For instance, Nair et al. (2020) employs a pessimistic strategy to update the policy, which may be problematic for improving policy performance during the online phase. Unlike Nair et al. (2020), Lee et al. (2021) only selects nearon-policy data from the offline dataset during online phase
to alleviate the distribution shift in transition from offline
to online. Such a strategy ignores a large part of the offline
dataset, whose potential data diversity is important for learning better policies.
To tackle the above problems, in this paper, we propose
that the advantage of online and offline data should be em-

Conventional reinforcement learning (RL) needs an environment to collect fresh data, which is impractical when online interactions are costly. Offline RL provides an alternative
solution by directly learning from the previously collected
dataset. However, it will yield unsatisfactory performance if
the quality of the offline datasets is poor. In this paper, we
consider an offline-to-online setting where the agent is first
learned from the offline dataset and then trained online, and
propose a framework called Adaptive Policy Learning for effectively taking advantage of offline and online data. Specifically, we explicitly consider the difference between the online and offline data and apply an adaptive update scheme
accordingly, that is, a pessimistic update strategy for the offline dataset and an optimistic/greedy update scheme for the
online dataset. Such a simple and effective method provides
a way to mix the offline and online RL and achieve the best
of both worlds. We further provide two detailed algorithms
for implementing the framework through embedding value or
policy-based RL algorithms into it. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on popular continuous control tasks, and
results show that our algorithm can learn the expert policy
with high sample efficiency even when the quality of offline
dataset is poor, e.g., random dataset.

Introduction
Conventional online reinforcement learning (RL) methods (Haarnoja et al. 2018; Fujimoto, van Hoof, and Meger
2018) usually learn from experiences generated by online
interactions with the environment. They are impractical in
some real-world applications, e.g., dialog (Jaques et al.
2019) and education (Mandel et al. 2014), where interactions are costly. Furthermore, many offline data have already been generated by one or more policies, but online
RL agents usually cannot utilize them directly (Fujimoto,
Meger, and Precup 2019). In contrast, supervised learning achieves remarkable successes across a range of domains (Kotsiantis et al. 2007; Brown et al. 2020) by directly leveraging existing large-scale datasets, such as ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009). To apply such data-driven learning
* This work was done when Han Zheng was interning with Mi-

crosoft Research Asia.
†
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11372

