The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Proof That Using Crossover Can Guarantee Exponential Speed-Ups in
Evolutionary Multi-Objective Optimisation
Duc-Cuong Dang1 , Andre Opris1 , Bahare Salehi1,2 , Dirk Sudholt1
1

Chair of Algorithms for Intelligent Systems, University of Passau, Passau, Germany
2
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Shiraz University, Shiraz, Iran
{duccuong.dang,andre.opris,dirk.sudholt}@uni-passau.de,salehi.bahaar@gmail.com

Abstract

preferring worse search points (Corus et al. 2021) or adapting mutation rates during the run (Doerr et al. 2019).
The importance of the crossover operator is not well understood, despite being a topic of intensive, ongoing research in evolutionary computation and in population genetics (Paixão et al. 2015). In single-objective optimisation
there is a body of works on the usefulness of crossover (Sudholt 2020, Section 8.4) on illustrative pseudo-Boolean example problems (Jansen and Wegener 2005; Storch and Wegener 2004; Kötzing, Sudholt, and Theile 2011; Dang et al.
2017; Sudholt 2017; Corus and Oliveto 2018; Doerr, Doerr,
and Ebel 2015) and problems from combinatorial optimisation such as shortest paths (Doerr, Happ, and Klein 2012),
graph colouring problems (Fischer and Wegener 2005; Sudholt 2005) and the closest string problem (Sutton 2021).
However, in EMO results are scarce. Understanding and
rigorously analysing the dynamic behaviour of EAs is hard
enough in single-objective optimisation. EMO brings about
additional challenges as there is no total order between
search points. Search points may be incomparable due to
trade-offs between different objectives. The most widely
used EMO algorithm NSGA-II (Deb et al. 2002) imposes a
total order by using non-dominated sorting (sorting the population according to ranks based on dominance) and a diversity score called crowding distance to break ties between
equal ranks. Understanding this ranking is non-trivial, and
the first rigorous runtime analyses of NSGA-II were only
published at AAAI 2022 (Zheng, Liu, and Doerr 2022).
Our contribution: We demonstrate the possible advantages of crossover for EMO by presenting an example of an
n-bit pseudo-Boolean function RRMO on which the use of
crossover has a drastic effect on performance: EMO algorithms like GSEMO and NSGA-II using crossover can find
the Pareto set of RRMO in expected time O(n4 ), whereas
if crossover is disabled, they require expected exponential
time to even find a single Pareto-optimal individual. To our
knowledge, this is the first proof of an exponential performance gap for the use of crossover for NSGA-II. In parallel
independent work, Doerr and Qu (2023) showed a polynomial gap for the use of crossover in NSGA-II.
Our result showcases the potential benefits of crossover
on a function designed to serve as a “royal road” for the success of crossover, that is, an illustrative example of a problem where the use of crossover is essential. The design of

Evolutionary algorithms are popular algorithms for multiobjective optimisation (also called Pareto optimisation) as they
use a population to store trade-offs between different objectives. Despite their popularity, the theoretical foundation of
multiobjective evolutionary optimisation (EMO) is still in its
early development. Fundamental questions such as the benefits of the crossover operator are still not fully understood.
We provide a theoretical analysis of well-known EMO algorithms GSEMO and NSGA-II to showcase the possible advantages of crossover. We propose a class of problems on
which these EMO algorithms using crossover find the Pareto
set in expected polynomial time. In sharp contrast, they and
many other EMO algorithms without crossover require exponential time to even find a single Pareto-optimal point. This is
the first example of an exponential performance gap through
the use of crossover for the widely used NSGA-II algorithm.

Introduction
Many optimisation problems have multiple conflicting objectives and the aim is to find a set of Pareto-optimal solutions. Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) are general-purpose
optimisers that use principles from natural evolution such as
mutation, crossover (recombination) and selection to evolve
a population (multi-set) of candidate solutions. EAs such as
the popular algorithm NSGA-II (Deb et al. 2002) are well
suited for this task due as they are able to use their population to store multiple trade-offs between objectives. However, the theoretical understanding of evolutionary multiobjective optimisation (EMO) is lagging far behind its success
in practice (Zheng, Liu, and Doerr 2022). There is little understanding on how the choice of search operators and parameters affects performance in multiobjective settings.
In single-objective evolutionary optimisation, a rigorous
theory has emerged over the past 25 years. It led to a better
understanding of the working principles of EAs via performance guarantees and it inspired the design of novel EAs
with better performance guarantees, e. g. choosing mutation rates from a heavy-tailed distribution to enable large
changes (Doerr et al. 2017), changing the order of crossover
and mutation and amplifying the probability of improving
mutations (Doerr, Doerr, and Ebel 2015), parent selection
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12390

