The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Universal Information Extraction as Unified Semantic Matching
Jie Lou1 * , Yaojie Lu2 * , Dai Dai1† , Wei Jia1 , Hongyu Lin2 ,
Xianpei Han2,3† , Le Sun2,3 , Hua Wu1
1
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
Chinese Information Processing Laboratory, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{loujie, daidai, jiawei07, wu hua}@baidu.com
{luyaojie, hongyu, xianpei, sunle}@iscas.ac.cn

2

Structuring

Abstract

utterance structure

Target Structures

The challenge of information extraction (IE) lies in the diversity of label schemas and the heterogeneity of structures. Traditional methods require task-specific model design and rely
heavily on expensive supervision, making them difficult to
generalize to new schemas. In this paper, we decouple IE into
two basic abilities, structuring and conceptualizing, which
are shared by different tasks and schemas. Based on this
paradigm, we propose to universally model various IE tasks
with Unified Semantic Matching (USM) framework, which
introduces three unified token linking operations to model
the abilities of structuring and conceptualizing. In this way,
USM can jointly encode schema and input text, uniformly
extract substructures in parallel, and controllably decode target structures on demand. Empirical evaluation on 4 IE tasks
shows that the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance under the supervised experiments and shows strong
generalization ability in zero/few-shot transfer settings.

Monet

Entity :

person

Relation :

Monet birth place
France

capital

country France
Paris
Paris

Monet

Paris

France

pair structure
(

Monet ， Paris

)(

France ， Paris

)

Conceptualizing

USM

utterance conceptualizing

person - Monet

country - France

birth place -

capital -

Paris

Paris

pair conceptualizing
Input Schema and Text

birth place - ( Monet ， Paris

[L] person [L] country [L] birth place [L] capital [T]
Monet was born in Paris, the capital of France.

capital - ( France ， Paris

)

)

Figure 1: The USM framework for UIE. USM takes label schema and text as input and directly outputs the target
structure through the Structuring and Conceptualizing operations.
Very recently, Lu et al. (2022) proposed the concept
of universal information extraction (UIE), which aims to
resolve multiple IE tasks using one universal model. To
this end, they proposed a sequence-to-sequence generation
model, which takes flattened schema and text as input, and
directly generates diversified target information structures.
Unfortunately, all associations between information pieces
and schemas are implicitly formulated due to the black-box
nature of sequence-to-sequence models (Alvarez-Melis and
Jaakkola 2017). Consequently, it is difficult to identify what
kind of abilities and knowledge are learned to transfer across
different tasks and schemas. Therefore we have no way of
diagnosing under what circumstances such transfer learning across tasks or schemas would fail. For the above reasons, it is necessary to explicitly model and learn transferable knowledge to obtain effective, robust, and explainable
transferability.
We find that, as shown in Figure 1, even with diversified tasks and extraction targets, all IE tasks can be fundamentally decoupled into the following two critical operations: 1) Structuring, which proposes label-agnostic basic
substructures of the target structure from the text. For example, proposing the utterance structure “Monet” for entity
mention and “born in” for event mention, the associated pair
structure (“Monet”, “Paris”) for relation mention, and (“born
in”, “Paris”) for event argument mention. 2) Conceptualiz-

Introduction
Information extraction aims to extract various information
structures from texts (Andersen et al. 1992; Grishman 2019).
For example, given the sentence “Monet was born in Paris,
the capital of France”, an IE system needs to extract various
task structures such as entities, relations, events, or sentiments in the sentence. It is challenging because the target
structures have diversified label schemas (person, work for,
positive sentiment, etc.) and heterogeneous structures (span,
triplet, etc.).
Traditional IE model leverages task- and schemaspecialized architecture, which is commonly specific to different target structures and label schemas. The expensive
annotation leads to limited predefined categories and small
data size in general domains for information extraction
tasks. From another perspective, task-specific model design
makes it challenging to migrate learned knowledge between
different tasks and extraction frameworks. The above problems lead to the poor performance of IE models in lowresource settings or facing new label schema, which greatly
restricts the application of IE in real scenarios.
*

Equally contribution.
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

13318

