The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Detecting Multivariate Time Series Anomalies with Zero Known Label
Qihang Zhou1 , Jiming Chen1 , Haoyu Liu1,2 * , Shibo He1,3 , Wenchao Meng1
1

Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China,
NetEase Fuxi AI Lab, Hangzhou, China,
3
Key Laboratory of Collaborative Sensing and Autonomous Unmanned Systems of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, China
{zqhang, cjm, haoyu liu, s18he, wmengzju}@zju.edu.cn, liuhaoyu03@corp.netease.com
2

Abstract

with all normal samples can be easily obtained (Ruff et al.
2021).
However, this assumption may not always hold in realworld scenarios (Goodge et al. 2021; Zhang, Zhao, and Li
2019; Zong et al. 2018; Qiu et al. 2022), leading to noisy
training datasets with the mixture of normal and abnormal
data instances. Meanwhile, it is already verified that model
training procedure is prone to overfitting noisy labels (Zhang
et al. 2021), so that the performance of those OCC-based
methods could be severely degraded (Wang et al. 2019;
Huyan et al. 2021). Therefore, it is rewarding to develop unsupervised MTS anomaly detection methods based on the
dataset with absolute zero known labels.
An effective unsupervised strategy is modeling the dataset
into a distribution, relying only on a widely accepted hypothesis that abnormal instances exhibit sparse densities than
the normal, i.e., the low-density regions consist of abnormal
samples and the high-density regions are formed by the normal samples (Gupta et al. 2013; Pang, Cao, and Aggarwal
2021; Wang et al. 2020). Methods have been explored along
side this strategy and the key challenge lies in the accurate
density estimation of the distribution. Time series density is
modeled as the parameterized probability distribution (Salinas et al. 2020; Rasul et al. 2021; Feng et al. 2022), while it
is still challenging to model a more complex data distribution. To improve the model capacity of density estimation,
Rasul et al. (Rasul et al. 2020) further exploits normalizing flow to model complex distribution for high-dimensional
MTS (Rasul et al. 2020). However, they neglect the interdependencies among constituent series which also play an
important role in accurate density estimation.
The most related work is GANF (Dai and Chen 2021),
which tackles the same MTS anomaly detection task. In
their design, the static directed acyclic graph (DAG) is leveraged to model intractable dependence among multiple entities, and normalizing flow (Dinh, Sohl-Dickstein, and Bengio 2016; Papamakarios, Pavlakou, and Murray 2017) is
employed to estimate an overall distribution for all entities together. Although GANF has achieved state-of-the-art
(SOTA) results previously, it still suffers from two drawbacks. First, rather than a static inter-relationship, in realworld applications, the mutual dependencies among entities
could not only be complex but also evolving. This dynamic
property can not be simply characterized via a DAG struc-

Multivariate time series anomaly detection has been extensively studied under the one-class classification setting, where
a training dataset with all normal instances is required. However, preparing such a dataset is very laborious since each
single data instance should be fully guaranteed to be normal. It is, therefore, desired to explore multivariate time series anomaly detection methods based on the dataset without
any label knowledge. In this paper, we propose MTGFlow,
an unsupervised anomaly detection approach for Multivariate
Time series anomaly detection via dynamic Graph and entityaware normalizing Flow, leaning only on a widely accepted
hypothesis that abnormal instances exhibit sparse densities
than the normal. However, the complex interdependencies
among entities and the diverse inherent characteristics of each
entity pose significant challenges to density estimation, let
alone to detect anomalies based on the estimated possibility
distribution. To tackle these problems, we propose to learn
the mutual and dynamic relations among entities via a graph
structure learning model, which helps to model the accurate
distribution of multivariate time series. Moreover, taking account of distinct characteristics of the individual entities, an
entity-aware normalizing flow is developed to describe each
entity into a parameterized normal distribution, thereby producing fine-grained density estimation. Incorporating these
two strategies, MTGFlow achieves superior anomaly detection performance. Experiments on five public datasets with
seven baselines are conducted, MTGFlow outperforms the
SOTA methods by up to 5.0 AUROC%.

Introduction
Multivariate time series (MTS) broadly exist in many important scenarios, such as production data produced by multiple devices in smart factories and monitoring data generated by various sensors in smart grids. Anomalies in MTS
exhibit unusual data behaviors at a specific time step or
during a time period. To identify these anomalies, previous methods mostly focus on training one-class classification (OCC) models from only normal data (Wu and Keogh
2021; Schölkopf et al. 1999; Su et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2021;
Deng and Hooi 2021; Xu et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2019).
They heavily rely on an assumption that the training dataset
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4963

