The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Partitioning Friends Fairly
Lily Li, Evi Micha, Aleksandar Nikolov, Nisarg Shah
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
{xinyuan, emicha, anikolov, nisarg}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

each agent in the coalition has strictly more utility for the
coalition than for her group in the given partition, and envyfreeness (George and Marvin 1958), which informally requires that no agent receive strictly more utility when swapping places with another agent in the given partition. However, this literature typically does not impose any restriction on the partition (including on the number of groups
it has). This would make our problem trivial because the
grand coalition — a single group containing all agents —
would trivially satisfy both the core and envy-freeness requirements. To study the core and envy-freeness meaningfully, this literature allows agents to have negative utility for
other agents. We are interested in the case where the utilities
are non-negative, but we require there to be exactly k groups
and the groups to be of approximately equal sizes.1
This problem can be viewed as a multi-dimensional generalization of the stable roommates problem (Irving 1985),
in which the goal is to partition 2n agents between n rooms
of capacity 2 each, and agents have preferences over who
they wish to have as a roommate. The core becomes a notion of stability: if a pair of agents prefer each other to their
assigned roommates, they may actually deviate and rent a
room by themselves. But the core has also been studied in
contexts where groups cannot really deviate, such as allocation of public resources (Aziz et al. 2017; Fain, Munagala,
and Shah 2018; Conitzer et al. 2019) and clustering (Chen
et al. 2019; Micha and Shah 2020). In such cases, it serves
as a notion of group fairness, generalizing proportionality (Steinhaus 1948), because it posits that each set of bn/kc
or dn/ke agents is entitled to be a group on its own and demands that the agents in the set be treated no worse than if
they were their own group. Envy-freeness, on the other hand,
serves as a notion of individual fairness and requires that no
agent envy another agent for the group they belong to.

We consider the problem of partitioning n agents in an undirected social network into k almost equal in size (differing by
at most one) groups, where the utility of an agent for a group
is the number of her neighbors in the group. The core and
envy-freeness are two compelling axiomatic fairness guarantees in such settings. The former demands that there be no
coalition of agents such that each agent in the coalition has
more utility for that coalition than for her own group, while
the latter demands that no agent envy another agent for the
group they are in. We provide (often tight) approximations to
both fairness guarantees, and many of our positive results are
obtained via efficient algorithms.

Introduction
The computer science department at University X is organizing a visit day for its newly admitted students. One of the
most anticipated activity is the campus tour, during which
the admitted students get to see the department they might
one day join. Due to COVID-19 related capacity restrictions,
the admitted students are divided into k separate tours. But
more tours means more volunteers. Luckily, n current graduate students have agreed to help. We want to partition them
almost equally between the k tours so that all the admitted
students have equal opportunity to socialize with the current
students. However, the current students have developed a social network and, to ensure a pleasant experience to encourage them to volunteer in the future, we would like to assign
volunteers to tours with as many of their friends as possible.
In this paper, we introduce and study a model that captures such real-life applications. Specifically, we consider
the problem of partitioning n agents into k almost equalsized groups (each with size either bn/kc or dn/ke), when
the agents are connected via an undirected social network
indicating friendships. An agent’s utility for being part of a
group is the number of her friends who are in that group.
Formally, this model sits within the hedonic games formalism in cooperative game theory with nontransferable
utilities (Aziz and Savani 2016). Two compelling axiomatic
guarantees that have received significant attention in this
literature are the core (Gillies 1953), which informally requires that there be no deviating coalition of agents such that

Our Results
For the core, we study bicriteria approximations of the form
(α, β)-core, where a deviating coalition must improve the
utility of each of its members by more than a multiplicative
1

In section Beyond Balancedness, we briefly consider imposing
only the former restriction, allowing k arbitrarily-sized non-empty
groups.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5747

