The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Training Meta-Surrogate Model for Transferable Adversarial Attack
Yunxiao Qin1, 2 , Yuanhao Xiong3 , Jinfeng Yi4 , Cho-Jui Hsieh3
1

State Key Laboratory of Media Convergence and Communication, Communication University of China, Beijing, China
2
Neuroscience and Intelligent Media Institute, Communication University of China, Beijing, China
3
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
4
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
qinyunxiao@cuc.edu.cn, jinfengyi.ustc@gmail.com, {yhxiong, chohsieh}@cs.ucla.edu.
Abstract

et al. 2018). In transfer attack (Demontis et al. 2019; Dong
et al. 2018; Naseer et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2020b), the attackers
commonly generate AEs by attacking one or an ensemble
of surrogate models and expect the obtained AEs can also
successfully fool the victim black-box model.
Although great efforts have been made to improve the
transferability of adversarial attacks (Wu et al. 2020a; Wang
et al. 2021a; Huang and Kong 2022), the transfer attackbased methods can only achieve poor success rates. This is
caused by a fundamental limitation of current approaches—
they all leverage the surrogate models trained by standard
learning tasks (e.g., classification, object detection), while
it is not always the case that attacks fooling such models
can be easily transferred, even though the optimization of
adversarial examples have been greatly improved. We thus
pose the following important question on transfer attack that
has not been well studied in the literature: Instead of using
standard (naturally trained) models as surrogate, can we find
a Meta-Surrogate Model (MSM) such that attacks to this
model can be easier transferred to other models?
We answer this question in the affirmative by developing a novel black-box attack pipeline called Meta-Transfer
Attack (MTA). Assume a set of source models (standard
surrogate models) are given, instead of directly attacking
these source models, our algorithm aims to obtain a “metasurrogate model (MSM)”, which is trained for the goal that
attacks to this model can be easier transferred to fool other
models, and conduct attacks on the MSM to obtain transferable AEs. We show that this goal can be mathematically formulated as a well-posed (bi-level-like) training objective by
unrolling the attacks on the MSM and defining an adversarial
loss to supervise the transferability of the resulting AEs. To
avoid discrete operations in the white-box attack, we propose
a Customized PGD attacker that enables back-propagation
through the whole MTA framework.
The proposed MTA differs greatly from existing transfer attacks, especially ensemble-based methods (Dong et al.
2019; Lin et al. 2020). The key difference is: Existing methods commonly generate AEs by directly attacking source
models (optimizing AEs on source models), and to improve
the transferability of AEs, they commonly propose some
ideas (e.g., gradient momentum (Dong et al. 2018), gradient on skip-connections (Wu et al. 2020a)) to implicitly improve the optimization of the AEs. Rather than implicitly

The problem of adversarial attacks to a black-box model when
no queries are allowed has posed a great challenge to the community and has been extensively investigated. In this setting,
one simple yet effective method is to transfer the obtained
adversarial examples from attacking surrogate models to fool
the target model. Previous works have studied what kind of
attacks to the surrogate model can generate more transferable adversarial examples, but their performances are still
limited due to the mismatches between surrogate models and
the target model. In this paper, we tackle this problem from a
novel angle—instead of using the original surrogate models,
can we obtain a Meta-Surrogate Model (MSM) such that
attacks to this model can be easily transferred to other models?
We show that this goal can be mathematically formulated as
a bi-level optimization problem and design a differentiable
attacker to make training feasible. Given one or a set of surrogate models, our method can thus obtain an MSM such
that adversarial examples generated on MSM enjoy eximious
transferability. Comprehensive experiments on Cifar-10 and
ImageNet demonstrate that by attacking the MSM, we can
obtain stronger transferable adversarial examples to deceive
black-box models including adversarially trained ones, with
much higher success rates than existing methods.

Introduction
The developments of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
have greatly promoted the advancements in Computer Vision.
However, previous works (Ganeshan, BS, and Babu 2019)
shown a critical robustness issue that CNN models are vulnerable to human-imperceptible perturbations of input images,
also known as adversarial examples (AEs). The design of
AEs is useful for revealing the security threats on machine
learning systems (Croce and Hein 2020b) and for understanding the representations learned by CNN (Ilyas et al. 2019).
In this paper, we consider the problem of black-box attack,
where the target victim model is entirely hidden from the
attacker. In this setting, standard white-box attacks (MoosaviDezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard 2016; Carlini and Wagner
2017) or even query-based black-box attacks (Cheng et al.
2020, 2019) cannot be used, and the prevailing way to attack
the victim is through transfer attack (Papernot et al. 2017; Wu
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9516

