The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Q-functionals for Value-Based Continuous Control
Samuel Lobel* 1 , Sreehari Rammohan* 1 , Bowen He* 1 , Shangqun Yu2 , George Konidaris1 ,
1
Brown University
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
bowen he@brown.edu, samuel lobel@brown.edu, sreehari rammohan@brown.edu,
shangqunyu@umass.edu, gdk@cs.brown.edu
2

Abstract

The gradient update for a policy network comes completely from the Q-function, and as such it essentially summarizes information about the Q-function for a given state
so as to efficiently produce high-value actions. For example,
standard practice is to train a policy network to estimate the
maximum-valued action for any given state(Lillicrap et al.
2015). The quantities policy networks estimate are difficult
to calculate on a per-state basis, so policy networks can be
thought of as amortizing the expensive computation of finding desirable actions: the training procedure is expensive,
but it allows actions to be identified with a single pass of
a neural network. There are two potential pitfalls of this
framework. First, since the policy network is not reinitialized after every Q-function update, at any given timestep
most of the policy training has been done on old versions of
the Q-function. The policy network is therefore maximizing
a stale estimate of action-value. Second, policies are generally either deterministic or sampled from a tight distribution
around the single highest valuable action. Therefore, it is
unlikely for the policy to sample two high-value actions if
they are too far apart from each other (Tessler, Tennenholtz,
and Mannor 2019). This may limit exploration as well as the
robustness of the value function. Perhaps most importantly,
we show later that even a well-trained policy network is less
effective than previously thought at its assigned task of maximizing Q-values.
We take a different perspective on this problem: instead of
training a network to amortize expensive action-value computations, we propose a network architecture that ensures
these evaluations are cheap to do in parallel. This opens up
a new avenue for action-selection: instead of using a policy network, we can simply evaluate many actions in parallel and choose from them one with high value. Since the
policy is directly derived from Q-values at each timestep it
always reflects the most current action-value estimates. In
addition, random sampling can easily generate high-value
actions from throughout the action-space.
We introduce a class of Q-functions we call Q-functionals
that allow for efficient sampling. A functional is a function
that returns another function; as such, a Q-functional transforms a state into a function over only the action space, such
that Q-values for many actions can be evaluated in parallel
and with little overhead. Specifically, we compute Q-values
as the dot product between state-dependent coefficients and

We present Q-functionals, an alternative architecture for continuous control deep reinforcement learning. Instead of returning a single value for a state-action pair, our network
transforms a state into a function that can be rapidly evaluated in parallel for many actions, allowing us to efficiently
choose high-value actions through sampling. This contrasts
with the typical architecture of off-policy continuous control, where a policy network is trained for the sole purpose of selecting actions from the Q-function. We represent
our action-dependent Q-function as a weighted sum of basis functions (Fourier, Polynomial, etc) over the action space,
where the weights are state-dependent and output by the Qfunctional network. Fast sampling makes practical a variety
of techniques that require Monte-Carlo integration over Qfunctions, and enables action-selection strategies besides simple value-maximization. We characterize our framework, describe various implementations of Q-functionals, and demonstrate strong performance on a suite of continuous control
tasks.

Introduction
The ultimate product of a successful reinforcement learning system is a policy that performs well in interacting
with the environment, as measured by expected cumulative
discounted reward. A dominant paradigm in reinforcement
learning is to derive policies from a Q-function (Watkins and
Dayan 1992) that estimates the expected cumulative reward
for taking a given action. When the number of actions available is finite, a strong policy can be derived by enumerating
all action-values for a given state and choosing the one with
the highest value. However, enumeration is impossible when
there are large or infinite possible actions, for example when
actions are drawn from a continuous vector space. This is the
natural description of, for example, robotic locomotion and
control; significant effort has therefore gone into alternative
approaches for action-selection in these domains (Gu et al.
2016; Asadi et al. 2021; Lillicrap et al. 2015). A common
framework for so-called continuous control problems is to
train a separate policy network that selects actions according
to some criteria of the Q-values (Fujimoto, van Hoof, and
Meger 2018; Haarnoja et al. 2018a).
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8932

