The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Leveraging Sub-class Discimination for Compositional Zero-Shot Learning
Xiaoming Hu, Zilei Wang*
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
cjdc@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Compositional Zero-Shot Learning (CZSL) aims at identifying unseen compositions composed of previously seen attributes and objects during the test phase. In real images, the
visual appearances of attributes and objects (primitive concepts) generally interact with each other. Namely, the visual
appearances of an attribute may change when composed with
different objects, and vice versa. But previous works overlook
this important property. In this paper, we introduce a simple
yet effective approach with leveraging sub-class discrimination. Specifically, we define the primitive concepts in different compositions as sub-classes, and then maintain the subclass discrimination to address the above challenge. More
specifically, inspired by the observation that the composed
recognition models could account for the differences across
sub-classes, we first propose to impose the embedding alignment between the composed and disentangled recognition to
incorporate sub-class discrimination at the feature level. Then
we develop the prototype modulator networks to adjust the
class prototypes w.r.t. the composition information, which
can enhance sub-class discrimination at the classifier level.
We conduct extensive experiments on the challenging benchmark datasets, and the considerable performance improvement over state-of-the-art approaches is achieved, which indicates the effectiveness of our method. Our code is available
at https://github.com/hxm97/SCD-CZSL.

Figure 1: Example of compositional zero-shot classification.
(a) Given training samples of colorful car and old building,
disentangled CZSL aims at learning an attribute recognition branch (orange line) and an object recognition branch
(green line). (b) The composed CZSL learns to generate
word embeddings of compositions using NLP techniques
(black line), and learns a visual recognition model for compositions (green line). The dotted line represents the recognition branches for unseen images.

Introduction
Current deep learning based image recognition algorithms
heavily rely on the enormous amount of manually-labeled
data. However, for real-world applications where the visual images follows long-tailed distribution, gathering the
supervisions for all classes becomes infeasible. Differently,
if a person has seen the images of a ’colorful car’ and an
’old building’, he can understand the concept of a ’colorful
building’ even without having seen it previously. Therefore,
the researchers are committed to integrating such Compositional Zero-shot Learning (CZSL) capability to the computer
vision systems (Nan et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2021).
Prior studies have proposed the generalized CZSL setting (Purushwalkam et al. 2019), where the model is evaluated on both seen and unseen compositions. In this paper,

we follow such a setting as it requires the model to simultaneously learn new concepts and preserve the discrimination
for seen compositions, thus providing a more comprehensive
evaluation. In addition, CZSL has the inductive and transductive settings. The inductive setting only uses the training data while the transductive setting uses the unlabeled
test data in the training stage (Xu, Kordjamshidi, and Chai
2021). We only take the inductive setting into consideration
since the test data is typically unavailable during training.
The main challenge in CZSL tasks is that the appearances
of attributes and objects highly interact with each other in
practical scenarios (Yang et al. 2020). As shown in Figure 1,
the attribute ’colorful’ appears differently in ’colorful car’
and ’colorful building’, since the car is orange and blue,
while the building is grey and brown. Besides, the ’building’ represents either as a church in the ’old building’ or as

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

890

