The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DARL: Distance-Aware Uncertainty Estimation for Offline Reinforcement Learning
Hongchang Zhang, Jianzhun Shao, Shuncheng He,Yuhang Jiang, Xiangyang Ji
Tsinghua University
hc-zhang19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

MC Dropout

Model Ensemble

To facilitate offline reinforcement learning, uncertainty estimation is commonly used to detect out-of-distribution data.
By inspecting, we show that current explicit uncertainty estimators such as Monte Carlo Dropout and model ensemble
are not competent to provide trustworthy uncertainty estimation in offline reinforcement learning. Accordingly, we propose a non-parametric distance-aware uncertainty estimator
which is sensitive to the change in the input space for offline
reinforcement learning. Based on our new estimator, adaptive truncated quantile critics are proposed to underestimate
the out-of-distribution samples. We show that the proposed
distance-aware uncertainty estimator is able to offer better
uncertainty estimation compared to previous methods. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed DARL method
is competitive to the state-of-the-art methods in offline evaluation tasks.

VAE

Our method

Introduction
Offline reinforcement learning (Levine et al. 2020) has gained
unprecedented attention recently, which is a remedy for
costly, time-consuming, and unsafe online reinforcement
learning (Dulac-Arnold, Mankowitz, and Hester 2019). However, applying traditional reinforcement learning methods
directly to offline settings usually faces the challenge that
the trained policy tends to diverge from the offline datasets
due to the optimistic estimation of the target value of unseen
state-action pairs (Munos 2003; Farahmand, Munos, and
Szepesvári 2010; Scherrer et al. 2015; Fujimoto, Meger, and
Precup 2019). This issue is commonly resolved by restricting
the trained policy to in-distribution regions with low uncertainty (Kumar et al. 2019). Therefore, accurate uncertainty
estimation is vital for offline reinforcement learning.
One way to tackle uncertainty estimation is to learn the
data distribution directly and regard samples far from the
distribution as uncertain. In offline reinforcement learning,
variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2013)
is commonly used to imitate the behavior policy (Fujimoto,
Meger, and Precup 2019; Kumar et al. 2019). However, VAE
cannot capture mixture distributions such as “medium-replay”
dataset in D4RL benchmark (Fu et al. 2020). Other works
choose to introduce explicit uncertainty estimators, such as
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11210

Figure 1: Visualization of uncertainty estimation for MC
Dropout, model ensemble, VAE, and our method on a lowdimensional environment. The orange points denote the samples in the dataset. Yellow indicates low uncertainty, while
blue indicates high uncertainty. X-axis and y-axis denote
state and action, respectively.
Monte Carlo (MC) Dropout (Gal and Ghahramani 2016)
and model ensemble (Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2016), into offline reinforcement learning. UWAC (Wu
et al. 2021) applies MC Dropout and down-weights the samples with high uncertainty. However, the label in reinforcement learning keeps evolving, which differs from supervised
learning and will introduce noise for uncertainty estimation.
MOPO (Yu et al. 2020) defines the uncertainty estimator as
the maximal standard deviation of an ensemble model. Nevertheless, (Liu et al. 2020a; Van Amersfoort et al. 2020) show
that the deep ensemble model is not aware of the distances
between unseen samples and training datasets, even in toy
examples. Fig.1 demonstrates that VAE, MC Dropout, and
model ensemble could not yield accurate uncertainty estimation, which corresponds to the distance between the data
points for a low-dimensional offline reinforcement learning
task. Note the dataset has more than one mode, which is
common for offline reinforcement learning, such as mixed
datasets in D4RL.

