The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AMOM: Adaptive Masking over Masking for
Conditional Masked Language Model
Yisheng Xiao1 , Ruiyang Xu1 , Lijun Wu2 , Juntao Li1 * , Tao Qin2 , Tie-Yan Liu2 , Min Zhang1
1

Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University
2
Microsoft Research Asia
{ysxiaoo, ryxu1}@stu.suda.edu.cn, {ljt, minzhang}@suda.edu.cn, {lijuwu, taoqin, tyliu}@microsoft.com

Abstract

To alleviate this problem, many recent works explore nonautoregressive (NAR) methods (Gu et al. 2018; Qian et al.
2021; Xiao et al. 2022) to predict a target sequence in parallel, which can dramatically increase inference speed. As the
cost of increasing decoding speed, NAR models remove the
internal dependency of the target sequence and perform each
decoding prediction depending entirely upon the source/input sequence. Inevitably, the generation quality of NAR
methods falls behind their AR counterparts without targetside information in decoding (Gu et al. 2018).
To achieve a better trade-off between inference speedup
and generation quality, the conditional masked language
model (CMLM) (Ghazvininejad et al. 2019) has been proposed and has already become one of the most competitive
and widely-used NAR frameworks, which exploits an iterative mask-predict decoding strategy. In the training stage,
CMLM leverages a masked language model objective to
generate the masked subset of the target sequence in parallel conditioned on the source input and unmasked part in
target sequence. During inference, CMLM first generates the
whole target sequence in parallel (the first iteration) and then
iteratively masks and predicts low-confidence tokens. Based
on CMLM, many recent works have achieved performance
improvements with advanced enhancement strategies from
different perspectives, e.g., improving the inference strategy (Kasai et al. 2020a; Geng, Feng, and Qin 2021), benefiting from the AT counterpart (Hao et al. 2021), training with
better criterion (Marjan et al. 2020; Du, Tu, and Jiang 2021),
introducing self-correction mechanism (Huang, Perez, and
Volkovs 2022) and pre-training (Li et al. 2022b).
In this paper, we further introduce a simple yet very effective strategy to enhance the refinement capability of CMLM
without changing the model structure and the inference algorithm, named adaptive masking over masking (AMOM).
Concretely, we present two adaptive masking operations for
both the source and target sequence based on the conventional one-time masking in CMLM. The masking operation
for the source sequence can make the encoder optimization
easier by adaptively masking a proportion of tokens based on
the masked target sequence. In contrast, the vanilla CMLM
constructs multiple masked target sequences for each source
sequence in model training, making the encoder difficult to
converge (Guo, Xu, and Chen 2020). Another potential merit
of the source-side masking is to improve the stability of the

Transformer-based autoregressive (AR) methods have
achieved appealing performance for varied sequence-tosequence generation tasks, e.g., neural machine translation,
summarization, and code generation, but suffer from low
inference efficiency. To speed up the inference stage, many
non-autoregressive (NAR) strategies have been proposed in
the past few years. Among them, the conditional masked
language model (CMLM) is one of the most versatile frameworks, as it can support many different sequence generation
scenarios and achieve very competitive performance on these
tasks. In this paper, we further introduce a simple yet effective adaptive masking over masking strategy to enhance the
refinement capability of the decoder and make the encoder
optimization easier. Experiments on 3 different tasks (neural
machine translation, summarization, and code generation)
with 15 datasets in total confirm that our proposed simple
method achieves significant performance improvement
over the strong CMLM model. Surprisingly, our proposed
model yields state-of-the-art performance on neural machine
translation (34.62 BLEU on WMT16 EN→RO, 34.82 BLEU
on WMT16 RO→EN, and 34.84 BLEU on IWSLT De→En)
and even better performance than the AR Transformer on 7
benchmark datasets with at least 2.2× speedup. Our code is
available at GitHub1 .

Introduction
Transformer-based models (Vaswani et al. 2017) have been
proven effective for various sequence to sequence generation tasks, such as machine translation (Wu et al. 2019;
Liang et al. 2021), text summarization (Savelieva, AuYeung, and Ramani 2020; Elsaid et al. 2022), dialogue systems (Zhang et al. 2020; Ma et al. 2020), code generation (Wang et al. 2020), etc. Despite the excellent performance of Transformer-based models, they usually adopt the
autoregressive (AR) decoding paradigm in which the decoding of a target sequence is decomposed into multi-step predictions in left-to-right order, i.e., the next prediction is conditioned on the previously generated part. Such an attribute
increases the inference time cost linearly with the target sequence length, which is time-consuming for long sequences.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/amom-nar/AMOM

13789

