The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning to Memorize Entailment and Discourse Relations for Persona-Consistent
Dialogues
Ruijun Chen1 , Jin Wang1 * , Liang-Chih Yu2 and Xuejie Zhang1
1

School of Information Science and Engineering, Yunnan University, Yunnan, China
2
Department of Information Management, Yuan Ze University, Taiwan
chenrj@mail.ynu.edu.cn, wangjin@ynu.edu.cn, lcyu@saturn.yzu.edu.tw, xjzhang@ynu.edu.cn

Entailment
Incoherent
Coherent
Persona (Human)
Persona (Model)
I attend church regularly.
I enjoy exercising.
I love to watch scary things.
I enjoy teaching things to children.
My favorite hobby is reading novels. I work for no money.
I work at a veterinarians office.
We have a boy and a girl.

Abstract
Maintaining engagement and consistency is particularly important in dialogue systems. Existing works have improved
the performance of dialogue systems by intentionally learning interlocutor personas with sophisticated network structures. One issue with this approach is that it requires more
personal corpora with annotations. Additionally, these models typically perform the next utterance prediction to generate a response but neglect the discourse coherence in the entire conversation. To address these issues, this study proposes
a method of learning to memorize entailment and discourse
relations for persona-consistent dialogue tasks. Entailment
text pairs in natural language inference dataset were applied
to learn latent entailment relations as external memories by
premise-to-hypothesis generation task. Furthermore, an internal memory with a similar architecture was applied to the
discourse information in the dialogue. Placing orthogonality
restrictions on these two memory spaces ensures that the latent entailment relations remain dialogue-independent. Both
memories collaborate to obtain entailment and discourse
representation for the generation, allowing a deeper understanding of both consistency and coherence. Experiments on
two large public datasets, PersonaChat and DSTC7-AVSD,
demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed method. Both
automatic and human evaluations indicate that the proposed
model outperforms several strong baselines in terms of both
persona consistency and response coherence. Our source
code is available at https://github.com/Chenrj233/LMEDR.

Hi, what do you do for fun?
I usually go to yoga a few times a week. What about you?
Well, i like going to watch scary movies and i love reading.
I am actually an english teacher.
It is good to know there are good people out there!
Thank you. That's what i try to instill in my kids.

How many kids do you have?
I have 2 of my own , as well as 30 in my class.

Figure 1: The conceptual diagram of introducing natural language inference in persona-based dialogue.

One solution that maintains consistency in a dialogue system is to provide a set of persona profiles that describe the
character and then generate responses according to the persona. Persona can be defined as the composition of identity
elements, such as profiles and background personal facts.
The expected outcome is that dialogue models generate a response consistent with the given persona. The PersonaChat dataset (Zhang et al. 2018), widely adopted to support the training of persona-consistent dialogues, was manually annotated by two annotators to act as part of a predefined persona and chat naturally to know each other during
the conversation. However, given the time and effort needed
to annotate more persona corpora to cover all possibilities, it
is difficult to extend the application of such persona-related
information to the daily usage of dialogue.
As humans, our knowledge of the concepts and the semantic relationship behind the language can allow us to rearrange unstructured data so that we can understand and analyze it. Essentially, we can robustly learn novel concepts
with minimal supervision, benefitting from the well-known
ability of natural language inference (NLI). Figure 1 shows
an example of introducing NLI in a persona-based dialogue.
Given a persona as a premise, we can determine whether

Introduction
Traditional chit-chat models lack specificity and personality consistency. Only when they access a sufficiently large
dataset will they have the opportunity to generate piecemeal
and uninformative responses in a chit-chat setting. For two
consecutive questions with similar meanings in a two-round
dialogue, that is, what is your job and what do you do, the
model replied to the former: I am a lawyer, while the latter: I am a doctor (Welleck et al. 2020). This issue arises
because of the lack of a consistent personality as well as
an explicit memory towards plausibility as they are typically
trained to produce a response given only recent dialogue history (Shum, He, and Li 2018).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12653

