The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CodeAttack: Code-Based Adversarial Attacks for Pre-trained Programming
Language Models
Akshita Jha and Chandan K. Reddy
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Arlington VA - 22203.
akshitajha@vt.edu, reddy@cs.vt.edu

Abstract
Pre-trained programming language (PL) models (such as
CodeT5, CodeBERT, GraphCodeBERT, etc.,) have the potential to automate software engineering tasks involving code
understanding and code generation. However, these models
operate in the natural channel of code, i.e., they are primarily
concerned with the human understanding of the code. They
are not robust to changes in the input and thus, are potentially susceptible to adversarial attacks in the natural channel. We propose, CodeAttack, a simple yet effective blackbox attack model that uses code structure to generate effective, efficient, and imperceptible adversarial code samples
and demonstrates the vulnerabilities of the state-of-the-art PL
models to code-specific adversarial attacks. We evaluate the
transferability of CodeAttack on several code-code (translation and repair) and code-NL (summarization) tasks across
different programming languages. CodeAttack outperforms
state-of-the-art adversarial NLP attack models to achieve the
best overall drop in performance while being more efficient,
imperceptible, consistent, and fluent. The code can be found
at https://github.com/reddy-lab-code-research/CodeAttack.

Figure 1: CodeAttack makes a small modification to the input code snippet (in red) which causes significant changes
to the code summary obtained from the SOTA pre-trained
programming language models. Keywords are highlighted
in blue and comments in green.

the natural channel of code and demonstrate the vulnerability of the state-of-the-art programming language models to
adversarial attacks.
Adversarial attacks are characterized by imperceptible
changes in the input that result in incorrect predictions from
a machine learning model. For pre-trained PL models operating in the natural channel, such attacks are important for
two primary reasons: (i) Exposing system vulnerabilities and
evaluating model robustness: A small change in the input
programming language (akin to a typo in the NL scenario)
can trigger the code summarization model to generate gibberish natural language code summary (Figure 1), and (ii)
Model interpretability: Adversarial samples can be used to
inspect the tokens pre-trained PL models attend to.
A successful adversarial attack in the natural channel for
code should have the following properties: (i) Minimal perturbations: Akin to spelling mistakes or synonym replacement in NL that mislead neural models with imperceptible
changes, (ii) Code Consistency: Perturbed code is consistent
with the original input and follows the same coding style as
the original code, and (iii) Code fluency: Does not alter the
user-level code understanding of the original code. The current natural language adversarial attack models fall short on
all three fronts. Hence, we propose CodeAttack – a simple yet effective black-box attack model for generating adversarial samples in the natural channel for any input code
snippet, irrespective of the programming language.
CodeAttack operates in a realistic scenario, where the adversary does not have access to model parameters but only to

Introduction
There has been a recent surge in the development of general purpose programming language (PL) models (Ahmad
et al. 2021; Feng et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2020; Tipirneni,
Zhu, and Reddy 2022; Wang et al. 2021). They can capture the relationship between natural language and source
code, and potentially automate software engineering development tasks involving code understanding (clone detection,
defect detection) and code generation (code-code translation, code-code refinement, code-NL summarization). However, the data-driven pre-training of the above models on
massive amounts of code data constraints them to primarily operate in the ‘natural channel’ of code (Chakraborty
et al. 2022; Hindle et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2022). This
‘natural channel’ focuses on conveying information to humans through code comments, meaningful variable names,
and function names (Casalnuovo et al. 2020). In such a scenario, the robustness and vulnerabilities of the pre-trained
models need careful investigation. In this work, we leverage the code structure to generate adversarial samples in
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14892

