The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Global Mixup: Eliminating Ambiguity with Clustering
Xiangjin Xie1 , Li Yangning1,3 , Wang Chen2 , Kai Ouyang1 , Zuotong Xie1 , Hai-Tao Zheng1,3 *
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Google Inc.
3
Pengcheng Laboratory
1
{xxj20, liyn20, oyk20, xzt20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
2
allencw@google.com, 1 zheng.haitao@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Data augmentation with Mixup has been proven an effective method to regularize the current deep neural networks.
Mixup generates virtual samples and corresponding labels simultaneously by linear interpolation. However, the one-stage
generation paradigm and the use of linear interpolation have
two defects: (1) The label of the generated sample is simply combined from the labels of the original sample pairs
without reasonable judgment, resulting in ambiguous labels.
(2) Linear combination significantly restricts the sampling
space for generating samples. To address these issues, we
propose a novel and effective augmentation method, Global
Mixup, based on global clustering relationships. Specifically,
we transform the previous one-stage augmentation process
into two-stage by decoupling the process of generating virtual samples from the labeling. And for the labels of the generated samples, relabeling is performed based on clustering
by calculating the global relationships of the generated samples. Furthermore, we are no longer restricted to linear relationships, which allows us to generate more reliable virtual samples in a larger sampling space. Extensive experiments for CNN, LSTM, and BERT on five tasks show that
Global Mixup outperforms previous baselines. Further experiments also demonstrate the advantage of Global Mixup in
low-resource scenarios.

Figure 1: Illustration of the two-stage paradigm of Global
Mixup, a new paradigm for data augmentation.

posed Mixup (Zhang et al. 2018) and its variants (Zhang, Yu,
and Zhang 2020; Verma et al. 2019; Guo, Mao, and Zhang
2019) have further improved the efficiency and robustness
of models by using features such as linear interpolation to
generate more virtual samples in the feature space.
While achieving promising results, Mixup still has limitations. First, the labels of the generated samples with data
augmentation were directly inherited from the labels of the
original samples, and the gaps between the generated sample features and the original samples were not adequately
represented, which have lead to errors in the labels of the
generated samples. Second, The restriction of the data generated by Mixup is within the linearity and only two samples’ similarity is considered, which results in the ambiguity
of Mixup.
To address these problems, we propose Global Mixup,
a data augmentation method that eliminates ambiguity by
decoupling the sample generation phase from the label determination phase and relabeling by clustering relationships
of samples. Specifically, Global Mixup separates the sample generation and label determination for data augmentation into two stages, and relabels potentially ambiguous labels by clustering. The generated samples will not directly
inherit the labels of the original samples or sample pairs.
For the ambiguous labeling problem of the generated sam-

Introduction
Although deep neural networks have achieved remarkable
results in computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), speech recognition (Hinton et al. 2012), and natural language processing (NLP), they are prone to errors
and poor generalization when training data is insufficient.
Data augmentation can effectively mitigate this problem by
generating new samples transformed from the existing training set. In NLP, data augmentation methods mainly consist
of rule-based and generation-based approaches. Rule-based
methods typically rely on manually designed paradigms,
such as synonym replacement (Zhang, Zhao, and LeCun
2015), random noise injection, deletion, and insertion (Wei
and Zou 2019). Generation-based methods leverage trained
deep models, such as back-translation and pre-trained models, to automatically generate new samples. Recently pro* The author is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13798

