The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Few-Shot Object Detection via Variational Feature Aggregation
Jiaming Han1,2 * , Yuqiang Ren3 , Jian Ding1,2 , Ke Yan3† , Gui-Song Xia1,2†
1

NERCMS, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
State Key Lab. LIESMARS, Wuhan University
3
YouTu Lab, Tencent
{hanjiaming, jian.ding, guisong.xia}@whu.edu.cn, {condiren, kerwinyan}@tencent.com

Abstract
plain FCs
(previous)

As few-shot object detectors are often trained with abundant
base samples and fine-tuned on few-shot novel examples, the
learned models are usually biased to base classes and sensitive to the variance of novel examples. To address this issue,
we propose a meta-learning framework with two novel feature aggregation schemes. More precisely, we first present a
Class-Agnostic Aggregation (CAA) method, where the query
and support features can be aggregated regardless of their categories. The interactions between different classes encourage
class-agnostic representations and reduce confusion between
base and novel classes. Based on the CAA, we then propose
a Variational Feature Aggregation (VFA) method, which encodes support examples into class-level support features for
robust feature aggregation. We use a variational autoencoder
to estimate class distributions and sample variational features
from distributions that are more robust to the variance of support examples. Besides, we decouple classification and regression tasks so that VFA is performed on the classification branch without affecting object localization. Extensive
experiments on PASCAL VOC and COCO demonstrate that
our method significantly outperforms a strong baseline (up to
16%) and previous state-of-the-art methods (4% in average).

𝐱𝐱2
𝐱𝐱1

𝐱𝐱𝑝𝑝

𝐱𝐱3
𝐱𝐱4

rm. 𝐱𝐱 3

𝐱𝐱2
𝐱𝐱1

𝐱𝐱𝑝𝑝

𝐱𝐱4

𝐱𝐱𝑝𝑝 = Avg(𝐱𝐱1 , 𝐱𝐱2 , … ) is sensitive to example’s variations

VAEs
(Ours)

Appearance variations of support images

𝒩𝒩(𝜇𝜇, 𝜎𝜎)
𝐱𝐱2

𝐱𝐱1

𝐱𝐱𝑝𝑝

𝐱𝐱3
𝐱𝐱4

rm. 𝐱𝐱 3

𝒩𝒩(𝜇𝜇, 𝜎𝜎)
𝐱𝐱2

𝐱𝐱1

𝐱𝐱𝑝𝑝

𝐱𝐱4

𝐱𝐱𝑝𝑝 ~𝒩𝒩(𝜇𝜇, 𝜎𝜎) is robust to few-shot examples

Figure 1: Comparisons of different support feature encoding
methods. Previous methods use plain fully-connected (FC)
layers to encode support features and obtain class prototypes
by averaging these features: xp = Avg(x1 , x2 , . . . ). In contrast, our method uses variational autoencoders (VAEs) pretrained on abundant base examples to estimate the distributions of novel classes. Since intra-class variance is shared
across classes and can be modeled with common distributions (Lin et al. 2018), we use a shared VAE to transfer the
distributions of base classes to novel classes. Finally, we can
sample class prototypes xp from the distributions N (µ, σ)
that are robust to the variance of few-shot examples. rm.: remove.

Introduction
This paper studies the problem of few-shot object detection
(FSOD), a recently-emerged challenging task in computer
vision (Yan et al. 2019; Kang et al. 2019). Different from
generic object detection (Girshick et al. 2014; Redmon et al.
2016; Ren et al. 2017), FSOD assumes that we have abundant samples of some base classes but only a few examples of novel classes. Thus, a dynamic topic is how to improve the recognition capability of FSOD on novel classes
by transferring the knowledge of base classes to novel ones.
In general, FSOD follows a two-stage training paradigm.
In stage-I, the detector is trained with abundant base samples to learn generic representations required for the object detection task, such as object localization and classification. In stage-II, the detector is fine-tuned with only K shots
(K=1, 2, 3, . . . ) novel examples. Despite the great success
of this paradigm, the learned models are usually biased to

base classes due to the imbalance between base and novel
classes. As a result, the model will confuse novel objects
with similar base classes. See Fig. 5 (top) for an instance,
the novel class, cow, has high similarities with several base
classes such as dog, horse and sheep. Besides, the model is
sensitive to the variance of novel examples. Since we only
have K shots examples per class, the performance highly depends on the quality of the support sets. As shown in Fig. 1,
appearance variations are common in FSOD. Previous methods (Yan et al. 2019) consider each support example as a
single point in the feature space and average all features as
class prototypes. However, it is difficult to estimate the real
class centers with a few examples.
In this paper, we propose a meta-learning framework to
address this issue. Firstly, we build a strong meta-learning
baseline based on Meta R-CNN (Yan et al. 2019), which
even outperforms a representative two-stage fine-tuning ap-

* Work done during internship at Tencent YouTu Lab.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

755

