The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robust Training of Neural Networks against Bias Field Perturbations
Patrick Henriksen1,2 , Alessio Lomuscio2
1

Imperial College London
2
Safe Intelligence
patrick.henriksen18@imperial.ac.uk, alessio@safeintelligence.ai

Abstract

during training can provide formal guarantees on the robustness of the networks; for these reasons, these methods are
often referred to as certifiably robust training methods.
While abstraction-based robust training methods have
achieved state-of-the-art results, their supported input perturbation types are limited with most methods supporting
white noise perturbations only. But additional input perturbations such as contrast, brightness, and other smooth intensity perturbations remain of high interest in practice. This
paper focuses on robust training against bias field perturbations (Tincher et al. 1993; Vovk, Pernus, and Likar 2007).
Bias field perturbations model a wide range of smooth,
spatially varying intensity changes via multiplicative and
additive polynomials. For instance, brightness and contrast
perturbations are instantiations of 0-order bias field perturbations. While bias field perturbations have extensively been
used to model noise in MRI images from imperfections in
the magnetic imaging equipment and electrodynamic interactions (Styner et al. 2000), more recent work has employed
them to model smooth intensity changes in natural images
due to changes in lighting conditions (Henriksen et al. 2021)
(see Figure 1). This makes them a useful perturbation to explore in the context of robust training of neural networks. In
this paper we make the following contributions towards bias
field robust training of neural networks.
• We define bias field robust training and propose a novel
encoding such that white noise robust training methods
become applicable to bias fields perturbations.
• We provide an analytical evaluation of the leading robust training method, RSIP-IBP, when instantiated on
bias field robust training and identify some limitations.
• Based on our analytical findings, we propose a new
method, called RSIP-SSIP, which addresses some of the
limitations of RSIP-IBP when applied to bias field robust
training.
• We implement RSIP-IBP and RSIP-SSIP in a
toolkit ROB N ET. In experiments networks trained
with RSIP-SSIP achieved up to 31% higher certified bias
field robustness than networks trained with RSIP-IBP.

We introduce the problem of training neural networks such
that they are robust against a class of smooth intensity perturbations modelled by bias fields. We first develop an approach
towards this goal based on a state-of-the-art robust training
method utilising Interval Bound Propagation (IBP). We analyse the resulting algorithm and observe that IBP often produces very loose bounds for bias field perturbations, which
may be detrimental to training. We then propose an alternative approach based on Symbolic Interval Propagation (SIP),
which usually results in significantly tighter bounds than IBP.
We present ROB N ET, a tool implementing these approaches
for bias field robust training. In experiments networks trained
with the SIP-based approach achieved up to 31% higher certified robustness while also maintaining a better accuracy than
networks trained with the IBP approach.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have achieved remarkable performance in
a wide range of applications recently; however, they remain fragile to even small perturbations of the networks’
inputs (Szegedy et al. 2014). Thus, research into robust training, i.e., training approaches that improve the robustness of
neural networks, is of high importance.
Adversarial augmentation-based methods (Zhang and Li
2019) are one class of robust training approaches which augment the training set with adversarial examples (Szegedy
et al. 2014) to promote robustness. Adversarial augmentation often produces networks that are empirically more robust (Madry et al. 2017); however, the method does not
capture all adversarial inputs for the perturbation under
consideration. Therefore, networks trained with adversarial augmentation often exhibit a higher empirical robustness against the adversarial attacks used during training than
against different ones.
A further approach to robust training utilises abstractionbased methods to over-approximate the reachable output
sets for each perturbation region (Zhang et al. 2020a). The
output sets are used in loss functions that promote correctness for all perturbations under consideration. In contrast
to adversarial training, this approach encapsulates all inputs
defined by the perturbation. Moreover, the abstractions used

Related Work. A significant body of work has considered methods for robust training of neural networks based on
augmenting the training set with adversarial examples (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017; Madry et al. 2017;

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14865

