The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Combinatorial Civic Crowdfunding with Budgeted Agents: Welfare Optimality at
Equilibrium and Optimal Deviation
Sankarshan Damle* , Manisha Padala* , Sujit Gujar
Machine Learning Lab, International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad
{sankarshan.damle,manisha.padala}@research.iiit.ac.in; sujit.gujar@iiit.ac.in

Abstract
Civic Crowdfunding (CC) uses the “power of the crowd”
to garner contributions towards public projects. As these
projects are non-excludable, agents may prefer to “free-ride,”
resulting in the project not being funded. Researchers introduce refunds for single project CC to incentivize agents to
contribute, guaranteeing the project’s funding. These funding
guarantees are applicable only when agents have an unlimited budget. This paper focuses on a combinatorial setting,
where multiple projects are available for CC and agents have
a limited budget. We study specific conditions where funding can be guaranteed. Naturally, funding the optimal social
welfare subset of projects is desirable when every available
project cannot be funded due to budget restrictions. We prove
the impossibility of achieving optimal welfare at equilibrium
for any monotone refund scheme. Further, given the contributions of other agents, we prove that it is NP-Hard for an
agent to determine its optimal strategy. That is, while profitable deviations may exist for agents instead of funding the
optimal welfare subset, it is computationally hard for an agent
to find its optimal deviation. Consequently, we study different heuristics agents can use to contribute to the projects in
practice. We demonstrate the heuristics’ performance as the
average-case trade-off between the welfare obtained and an
agent’s utility through simulations.

Figure 1: Example instance of Combinatorial Civic Crowdfunding (CC) (Spacehive 2023).

Narahari 2017; Wang et al. 2021; Yan and Chen 2021; Cason, Tabarrok, and Zubrickas 2021). Moreover, introduction
of web-based CC platforms (Kickstarter 2023; Spacehive
2023) has added to its popularity.
As depicted in Figure 1, typically, multiple projects are
simultaneously available for CC. We refer to CC for multiple projects as combinatorial CC. Formally, CC comprises
strategic agents who observe their valuations for the available public projects. Each project has a known target cost
and deadline. Each agent contributes to the available projects
as per its valuations and within its budget. The agent valuations are such that the overall sum is greater than the
project’s target cost, i.e., there is enough valuation (interest) for the project’s funding. A project is funded when the
agents’ total contribution meets the target cost within the
deadline. When funded, each agent obtains a quasi-linear
utility equivalent to its valuation for the project minus its
contribution. In turn, the community generates social welfare – the difference in the project’s total valuation and cost.
Free-riding. The primary challenge in CC is due to the
non-excludability of the public projects. That is, the citizens can avail a project’s benefit without contributing to its
funding. Consequently, strategic agents may free-ride and
merely wait for others to fund the project. When the majority decides to free-ride, the project remains unfunded despite
sufficient interest in its funding (Stroup 2000). To persuade
strategic agents to contribute, researchers propose to provide
additional incentives to them in the form of refunds.
Refunds. Zubrickas (2014) presents PPR, Provision Point
Mechanism with Refunds, which employs the first such refund scheme. PPR assumes that a central planner keeps

Introduction
Local communities often find it beneficial to elicit contributions from their members for public good projects. E.g., the
construction of markets, playgrounds, and libraries, among
others (London 2021). These goods provide the local community with social amenities, generating social welfare. This
process of generating funds from members towards community services is referred to as Civic Crowdfunding (CC).
CC is instrumental in changing the interaction between local governments and communities. It empowers citizens by
allowing participation in the design and planning of public good projects (Van Montfort, Siebers, and De Graaf
2021). Such democratization of public projects has led CC
to become an active area of research (Diederich, Goeschl,
and Waichman 2016; Goodspeed 2017; Chandra, Gujar, and
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5582

