The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Feature Normalization and Cartography-Based Demonstrations
for Prompt-Based Fine-Tuning on Emotion-Related Tasks
Mahshid Hosseini, Cornelia Caragea
Computer Science
University of Illinois Chicago
mhosse4@uic.edu, cornelia@uic.edu

Abstract
To train a model in a traditional supervised learning classification system for natural language processing (NLP) tasks, it
is essential to have labeled data, which is not present in large
amounts for many tasks. Prompt-based learning methods attempt to combat the supervised learning need for labeled data
by directly adapting pre-trained language models and modeling the probability of text itself. In this paper, we propose a
novel data-agnostic strategy for prompt-based fine-tuning that
leverages feature moments (a.k.a., mean and standard deviation) as a data augmentation technique and employs training
dynamics (i.e., confidence and variability) to allow more informative samples to be concatenated for generating demonstrations as input context. Our approach is a strong method for
few-shot learning that forces the language model to pay special
attention to the feature moments and allows more informative samples to be concatenated for generating demonstrations
as input context by selecting high confidence and low variance samples. To demonstrate its effectiveness given limited
training data, we conduct extensive experiments in different
few-shot settings on three empathy and emotion classification datasets (from various domains). We further evaluate our
method’s robustness by introducing noise to our few-shot input
data and labels and show that exchanging moments between
samples and incorporating cartography-based demonstrations
are beneficial when the available data is limited and noisy.

Introduction
Despite the fact that pre-training on a large corpus of text has
manifested substantial gains on many NLP tasks (Liu et al.
2019a; Devlin et al. 2019; Radford et al. 2018), effectively
employing such paradigms depends on the presence of tens of
thousands of labeled samples. However, the time-consuming
and labor-intensive annotation process has made it challenging to obtain large labeled datasets in real-world scenarios
like computer-assisted therapy sessions where the relevant
empathy or emotion data might not be present at a large scale
(Hosseini and Caragea 2021a). In recent years, a resurgence
of work in few-shot learning has led to major advances in natural language understanding (NLU) tasks. Strikingly, GPT-3
model (Brown et al. 2020) has shown remarkable few-shot
capabilities only by employing a natural-language prompt
and some task demonstrations as input context. However,
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12881

GPT-3 is a humongous autoregressive language model with
175 billion parameters, which makes it inexpedient to use in
most real-world applications.
Following the route of prompt-based prediction, Gao,
Fisch, and Chen (2021) studied few-shot learning in a more
realistic scenario, where they employed a moderately-sized
language model like RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019b) or BERT
(Devlin et al. 2019) for which fine-tuning is computationally
efficient. In addition, Gao, Fisch, and Chen (2021) explored
fine-tuning with demonstrations where they randomly select
a single sample from each class that is semantically close to
the input sample to form the demonstrations.
Inspired by these observations, we propose a novel strategy for prompt-based fine-tuning that (1) leverages feature
moments (a.k.a., mean and standard deviation) as a data augmentation technique and (2) generates demonstrations based
on the characteristics of the data samples and their contextual similarity to the input sample. Our approach is a strong
data-agnostic method for few-shot learning that forces the language model to pay special attention to the feature moments
and allows more informative samples to be concatenated for
generating demonstrations as input context by selecting high
confidence and low variance samples. To leverage feature
moments (Li et al. 2021), our approach pulls the mean and
variance (across feature dimensions) of the hidden state representations and swaps them between samples. In other words,
we extract and detach the feature moments of an input sample
xi and subsume the moments of another sample xj (in the
same mini-batch) under xi . Consequently, resulting features
emanating from the moment exchange process contain information about both samples, which in turn makes the few-shot
model more robust by paying attention to two salient signals,
i.e., the normalized feature of xi and the moments of xj .
Furthermore, our approach leverages training dynamics
(i.e., the model’s behavior as training progresses) to generate
informative demonstrations targeted at improving promptbased fine-tuning with a small number of annotated examples. To this end, our approach first employs data maps
(Swayamdipta et al. 2020) to characterize training samples
to different groups, namely easy-to-learn, ambiguous, and
hard-to-learn. Then, it selects samples based on how they
contribute to the model learning and their semantic similarity
to the input sample. Our goal, by employing such particularities, is to impart the model with the samples with high

