The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fisher Markets with Social Influence
Jiayi Zhao1 , Denizalp Goktas2 , Amy Greenwald2
1

Department of Computer Science, Pomona College
Department of Computer Science, Brown University
jzae2019@mymail.pomona.edu, denizalp goktas@brown.edu, amy greenwald@brown.edu
2

Abstract

market supply and Walras’ law holds, meaning the value of
demand equals the value of supply.
In much of mainstream consumer theory (Mas-Colell,
Whinston, and Green 1995), and in Arrow-Debreu markets,
each trader’s preference depends only on its own consumption. Such models fail to capture the influence of social interactions on traders’ interests. For example, the more friends
one has who own an iPhone, the more one might prefer an
iPhone. Likewise, if a celebrity, e.g., Beyonce, wears a particular brand of bag, e.g., Telfar, then one’s preference for
that brand of bag might increase. In an age of densifying social networks, it is becoming more and more essential that
our economic models capture the effects of social interactions on individuals’ preferences.
To try to better understand the implications of social networks on market equilibria, Chen and Teng (2011) recently
proposed an extension of the Arrow-Debreu market model
in which each trader’s preference is influenced by the goods
her neighbors obtains: the Arrow-Debreu market with social influence. Formally, Chen and Teng’s model augments
an Arrow-Debreu market with a social network connecting
the traders, and then embeds this network’s structure in each
trader’s utility function, thus inducing a preference relation
over allocations of goods that depends both on the trader’s
and its neighbors’ allocations. The authors then study a
modest generalization of competitive equilibrium in which
traders maximize their utility, assuming the allocations of
the other traders in the market, including their neighbors,
are fixed.
Chen and Teng analyze their model under two specific
types of utilities: linear and threshold influence functions.
They prove existence of competitive equilibrium in their setting, when the graph underlying the economy is strongly
connected and the utility functions’ parameters guarantee
non-satiation of the preferences they represent. Under additional assumptions on the topology of the network, they
also provide polynomial-time methods for computing competitive equilibria.
As the computation of competitive equilibrium in ArrowDebreu markets is believed to be intractable, i.e., it is PPADcomplete (Chen and Deng 2006; Chen and Teng 2009), it
seems unlikely that we can obtain positive computational
results in such a broad setting. In the last two decades, however, Fisher markets have emerged as an interesting special

A Fisher market is an economic model of buyer and seller interactions in which each buyer’s utility depends only on the
bundle of goods she obtains. Many people’s interests, however, are affected by their social interactions with others. In
this paper, we introduce a generalization of Fisher markets,
namely influence Fisher markets, which captures the impact
of social influence on buyers’ utilities. We show that competitive equilibria in influence Fisher markets correspond to generalized Nash equilibria in an associated pseudo-game, which
implies the existence of competitive equilibria in all influence
Fisher markets with continuous and concave utility functions.
We then construct a monotone pseudo-game, whose variational equilibria and their duals together characterize competitive equilibria in influence Fisher markets with continuous,
jointly concave, and homogeneous utility functions. This observation implies that competitive equilibria in these markets
can be computed in polynomial time under standard smoothness assumptions on the utility functions. The dual of this
second pseudo-game enables us to interpret the competitive
equilibria of influence CCH Fisher markets as the solutions
to a system of simultaneous Stackelberg games. Finally, we
derive a novel first-order method that solves this Stackelberg
system in polynomial time, prove that it is equivalent to computing competitive equilibrium prices via tâtonnement, and
run experiments that confirm our theoretical results.

Introduction
The branch of mathematical economics that attempts to explain the behavioral relationship among supply, demand,
and prices via equilibria dates back to the work of French
economist (Walras 1896), and today is known as general equilibrium theory (Mas-Colell, Whinston, and Green
1995). One of the seminal achievements in this area is
the proof of existence of competitive equilibrium prices in
Arrow-Debreu markets (1954). In such a market, traders
seek to “purchase” goods from others, by exchanging a part
of their endowment of goods for various other goods. A
competitive equilibrium comprises an allocation of goods
to traders together with good prices such that traders maximize their preferences over goods while ensuring that their
spending does not exceed the value of their endowment, and
the market clears: i.e., no more goods are allocated than the
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5900

