The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Panoramic Video Salient Object Detection with Ambisonic Audio Guidance
Xiang Li1 * , Haoyuan Cao2 , Shijie Zhao3 , Junlin Li2 , Li Zhang2 , Bhiksha Raj1,4
1

Carnegie Mellon University, PA, USA.
Bytedance Inc., San Diego, CA, USA.
3
Bytedance Inc., Shenzhen, China.
4
Mohammed bin Zayed University of AI, Abu Dhabi, UAE.
{xl6, bhiksha}@andrew.cmu.edu, {haoyuan.cao, zhaoshijie.0526, lijunlin.li, lizhang.idm}@bytedance.com
2

Abstract

Visual Scene
Understanding

Video salient object detection (VSOD), as a fundamental computer vision problem, has been extensively discussed in the
last decade. However, all existing works focus on addressing
the VSOD problem in 2D scenarios. With the rapid development of VR devices, panoramic videos have been a promising
alternative to 2D videos to provide immersive feelings of the
real world. In this paper, we aim to tackle the video salient
object detection problem for panoramic videos, with their corresponding ambisonic audios. A multimodal fusion module
equipped with two pseudo-siamese audio-visual context fusion
(ACF) blocks is proposed to effectively conduct audio-visual
interaction. The ACF block equipped with spherical positional
encoding enables the fusion in the 3D context to capture the
spatial correspondence between pixels and sound sources from
the equirectangular frames and ambisonic audios. Experimental results verify the effectiveness of our proposed components
and demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on the ASOD60K dataset.

ER Frame

Multi-channel Audios

3D Sound
Source
Localization

Fusion

Audio-Visual Scene
Understanding

Figure 1: We study the problem of how to utilize the ambisonic audio to facilitate the panoramic video salient object
detection. Since ambisonic audio contains rich spatial information, we can directly localize the sound sources and then
fuse them with visual cues. On the other hand, since the ER
frame has distortions and cannot reflect the 3D position of
pixels, projecting the pixels back to 3D space is essential for
effective multimodal fusion.
The panoramic video contains omnidirectional contexts
and represents each pixel on a 3D sphere. Unlike 2D videos
that display with a stable viewpoint and fixed environmental audios, panoramic videos are typically supported by VR
headsets which provide a head direction-adaptive field of
view (FOV) and ambisonic audios. With multi-channel audio recordings, ambisonic audios encode the 3D location of
the sound source and the VR headset can further adjust the
original audio to provide a real sense of sound source to the
user given the movement of the head. Previous works (Tsiami, Koutras, and Maragos 2020; Cheng et al. 2021) have
demonstrated the audio shows non-trivial influence on human
attention in 2D videos. For VSOD in panoramic videos, as
shown in Figure 1, since the ambisonic audio can directly
reflect the 3D sound source location, we consider it should
perform a more important role compared to 2D scenarios.
On the other hand, previous panoramic video processing approaches cannot preserve the spatial relationship of
panoramic videos. Due to the unique format of panoramic
videos, it is difficult to store or transmit the raw video using
current video coding techniques. Therefore, equirectangular (ER) projection is commonly leveraged to transform the
panoramic video into a regular 2D format. However, the ER
projection will involve not only a separation along the longitude of the sphere but also distortions in the polar area,

Introduction
Video salient object detection (VSOD) aims to find the most
visually distinctive objects in a video. VSOD for 2D videos
has been attracting considerable attention (Su et al. 2022;
Liu et al. 2021; Ren et al. 2021b) due to its wide applications in real-world scenarios, such as video editing and
video compression. While, for panoramic videos which have
a very different format and viewing environment, how to
effectively detect salient objects is still an open problem.
Since human attention is usually influenced by acoustic signatures that are naturally synchronized with visual objects
in audio-bearing video recordings, some VSOD methods for
2D videos (Tsiami, Koutras, and Maragos 2020; Cheng et al.
2021) introduce acoustic modality to facilitate the saliency
discrimination. Different from mono or binaural audio used
in 2D videos, ambisonic audio is utilized to create immersive
feelings of the real world in panoramic videos. In this work,
we focus on how to detect the salient objects in panoramic
videos with their corresponding ambisonic audios. To the
best of our knowledge, we are the first to tackle the VSOD
problem for panoramic scenarios.
* This work was done when Xiang Li was an intern at Bytedance.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1424

