The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

From Coarse to Fine: Hierarchical Pixel Integration for Lightweight Image
Super-resolution
Jie Liu* , Chao Chen* , Jie Tang † , Gangshan Wu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
liujie@nju.edu.cn, chenchao@smail.nju.edu.cn, {tangjie,gswu}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

32.8

Image super-resolution (SR) serves as a fundamental tool for
the processing and transmission of multimedia data. Recently,
Transformer-based models have achieved competitive performances in image SR. They divide images into fixed-size
patches and apply self-attention on these patches to model
long-range dependencies among pixels. However, this architecture design is originated for high-level vision tasks, which
lacks design guideline from SR knowledge. In this paper,
we aim to design a new attention block whose insights are
from the interpretation of Local Attribution Map (LAM) for
SR networks. Specifically, LAM presents a hierarchical importance map where the most important pixels are located
in a fine area of a patch and some less important pixels are
spread in a coarse area of the whole image. To access pixels in the coarse area, instead of using a very large patch
size, we propose a lightweight Global Pixel Access (GPA)
module that applies cross-attention with the most similar
patch in an image. In the fine area, we use an Intra-Patch
Self-Attention (IPSA) module to model long-range pixel dependencies in a local patch, and then a spatial convolution
is applied to process the finest details. In addition, a Cascaded Patch Division (CPD) strategy is proposed to enhance
perceptual quality of recovered images. Extensive experiments suggest that our method outperforms state-of-the-art
lightweight SR methods by a large margin. Code is available
at https://github.com/passerer/HPINet.

32.7

L
M

PSNR…(dB)

32.6
32.5

S
SwinIR-light

32.4
LatticeNet

32.3
RFDN
32.2
0.3

MAFFSRN

0.6

A2F-L A-CubeNet

IMDN

LARPAR-A
0.9
1.2
Model…Size…(M)

1.5

1.8

Figure 1: PSNR v.s. model size for ×4 SR on Set5. We
compare our HPINet-S/M/L with other lightweight SR models of various sizes, including MAFFSRN (Muqeet et al.
2020), RFDN (Liu, Tang, and Wu 2020), LAPAR-A (Li et al.
2020), IMDN (Hui et al. 2019), LatticeNet (Luo et al. 2020),
SwinIR-light (Liang et al. 2021), A2 F-L (Wang et al. 2020)
and A-cubeNet (Hang et al. 2020).
Though CNN-based models have achieved significant improvement compared with traditional methods, they suffer
from some inherent problems brought by the local processing principle of convolution kernels. Recent study (Gu and
Dong 2021) shows that SR networks with a wide range of involved input pixels could achieve better performance. However, most of the CNN-based models adopt a small convolution kernel (e.g. 3 × 3) where only a limited range of pixels
are aggregated. Alternatively, the self-attention mechanism
in Transformer (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) models can model
long-range dependencies of input pixels and several attempts
have already made in the task of SISR. In this paper, we also
focus on the self-attention mechanism for aggregating pixels
in a wide range of input pixels.
The pioneering vision Transformer (Dosovitskiy et al.
2020) adopts a redundant attention manner, whose computation complexity is quadratic to the image size. The large
computation complexity makes it difficult to be applied
for high-resolution predictions in SISR task. Some recent
proposals apply self-attention within a small spatial region

Introduction
Single-Image Super-Resolution (SISR) aims to recover a visually pleasing high-Resolution (HR) image from its LowResolution (LR) counterpart. SISR is widely used in many
multimedia applications such as facial recognition on lowresolution images and server costs reduction for media
transmission. With the success of Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs), CNN-based models (Zhang, Zeng, and
Zhang 2021; Dong, Loy, and Tang 2016; Tai et al. 2017;
Zhang, Zuo, and Zhang 2018; Li et al. 2019; Lim et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2018c) have become the mainstream of SISR
due to the natural local processing ability of convolution kernels.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1666

