The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Low-Light Video Enhancement with Synthetic Event Guidance
Lin Liu1 , Junfeng An2 * , Jianzhuang Liu4 , Shanxin Yuan3† , Xiangyu Chen6, 8 ,
Wengang Zhou1 , Houqiang Li1 , Yan Feng Wang7 , Qi Tian5
1

CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Independent Researcher
3
Queen Mary University of London
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
5
Huawei Cloud BU
6
University of Macau
7
Cooperative medianet innovation center of Shanghai Jiao Tong University
8
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology (SIAT)
Abstract

Frame
Alignment

Low-light video enhancement (LLVE) is an important yet
challenging task with many applications such as photographing and autonomous driving. Unlike single image low-light
enhancement, most LLVE methods utilize temporal information from adjacent frames to restore the color and remove
the noise of the target frame. However, these algorithms,
based on the framework of multi-frame alignment and enhancement, may produce multi-frame fusion artifacts when
encountering extreme low light or fast motion. In this paper,
inspired by the low latency and high dynamic range of events,
we use synthetic events from multiple frames to guide the enhancement and restoration of low-light videos. Our method
contains three stages: 1) event synthesis and enhancement, 2)
event and image fusion, and 3) low-light enhancement. In this
framework, we design two novel modules (event-image fusion transform and event-guided dual branch) for the second
and third stages, respectively. Extensive experiments show
that our method outperforms existing low-light video or single image enhancement approaches on both synthetic and real
LLVE datasets. Our code will be available at https://gitee.
com/mindspore/models/tree/master/research/cv/LLVE-SEG.

Enhancement

(a) Traditional frames-based LLVE method

Event Image
Fusion

Event
Synthesis

Enhancement

Event
Restoration

(b) Our event-image-fusion LLVE method

Ground Truth

Low-light image

SDSDNet

Ours

Ground Truth

（c）Visual comparison with a recent LLVE method (best viewed on screen)

1

Introduction

Figure 1: Comparison between (a) Traditional framesbased LLVE method and (b) Our event-image fusion LLVE
method. (c) Visual comparison between a recent LLVE
method SDSDNet (Wang et al. 2021) and ours. Our method
can better remove noise, maintain details and avoid misaligned artifacts of multi-frame fusion.

The image quality in low-light or under-exposure conditions is often unsatisfactory, so image/video enhancement
in low light has been an active research topic in computer
vision (Wang et al. 2021; Jiang et al. 2022b). However, it
is challenging due to strong noise, detail loss, non-uniform
exposure, etc. These problems become even more serious in
videos taken from dynamic scenes. In this paper, in contrast
to low-light, we loosely call bright-light and day-light images/videos/events normal-light images/videos/events.
Most of fully-supervised deep-learning based low-light
video enhancement (LLVE) methods (Lv et al. 2018; Jiang

and Zheng 2019; Wang et al. 2021) or video reconstruction methods (Xue et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019b;
Isobe et al. 2020; Dai et al. 2022) are based on the
multi-frame alignment-and-enhancement framework. This
pipeline firstly utilizes some techniques, e.g., 3D convolution (Lv et al. 2018; Jiang and Zheng 2019), deformable
convolution (Isobe et al. 2020; Dai et al. 2022), or flowbased alignment (Xue et al. 2019), to align the temporal information from adjacent frames to the reference frame, and

* Part of the work was done during an internship in Huawei

Noah’s Ark Lab.
†
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1692

