The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Visually Grounded Commonsense Knowledge Acquisition
Yuan Yao1 , Tianyu Yu2 , Ao Zhang4 , Mengdi Li5 , Ruobing Xie6 , Cornelius Weber4 ,
Zhiyuan Liu1 * , Hai-Tao Zheng2,3∗ , Stefan Wermter5 , Tat-Seng Chua4 , Maosong Sun1
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
5
Department of Informatics, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany
6
WeChat AI, Tencent
yaoyuanthu@163.com

Abstract

Commonsense relation: ( person , ? , bottle )

Large-scale commonsense knowledge bases empower a
broad range of AI applications, where the automatic extraction of commonsense knowledge (CKE) is a fundamental and
challenging problem. CKE from text is known for suffering
from the inherent sparsity and reporting bias of commonsense in text. Visual perception, on the other hand, contains
rich commonsense knowledge about real-world entities, e.g.,
(person, can hold, bottle), which can serve as promising
sources for acquiring grounded commonsense knowledge.
In this work, we present CLEVER, which formulates CKE
as a distantLy supErVised multi-instancE leaRning problem,
where models learn to summarize commonsense relations
from a bag of images about an entity pair without any human annotation on image instances. To address the problem,
CLEVER leverages vision-language pre-training models for
deep understanding of each image in the bag, and selects informative instances from the bag to summarize commonsense
entity relations via a novel contrastive attention mechanism.
Comprehensive experimental results in held-out and human
evaluation show that CLEVER can extract commonsense
knowledge in promising quality, outperforming pre-trained
language model-based methods by 3.9 AUC and 6.4 mAUC
points. The predicted commonsense scores show strong correlation with human judgment with a 0.78 Spearman coefficient. Moreover, the extracted commonsense can also be
grounded into images with reasonable interpretability. The
data and codes can be obtained at https://github.com/thunlp/
CLEVER.

person
bottle

person

person

…

bottle

hold

Distant
Supervision

bottle

KB

Figure 1: Visually grounded commonsense knowledge acquisition as a distantly supervised multi-instance learning
problem. Given an entity pair and associated images, our
model first understands entity interactions in each image,
and then selects informative ones (solid line) to summarize
the commonsense relations.

computer vision (Wu et al. 2017; Narasimhan, Lazebnik, and
Schwing 2018; Gu et al. 2019; Gardères et al. 2020) and natural language processing (Zhou et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2020;
Lv et al. 2020). However, most commonsense KBs are manually curated, which greatly limits their coverage and scale.
This paper studies the fundamental and challenging problem of commonsense knowledge extraction (CKE), which
aims to extract plausible commonsense interactions between
entities, e.g., (person, can hold, bottle). Previous works
have attempted to extract commonsense knowledge from
plain text (Li et al. 2016) or pre-trained language models
(PLMs) (Petroni et al. 2019; Bosselut et al. 2019). However,
there is a growing consensus that obvious commonsense
is rarely reported in text (Gordon and Van Durme 2013;
Paik et al. 2021), and commonsense in PLMs suffers from
low consistency and significant reporting bias (Shwartz and
Choi 2020; Zhou et al. 2020; Elazar et al. 2021). There is
also widespread doubt whether learning purely from the surface text forms can lead to real understanding of common-

Introduction
Providing machines with commonsense knowledge is a
longstanding goal of artificial intelligence (Davis, Shrobe,
and Szolovits 1993). Tremendous efforts have been devoted
to building commonsense knowledge bases (KBs) (Liu and
Singh 2004; Speer, Chin, and Havasi 2017; Sap et al. 2019),
which have facilitated various important applications in both
* Corresponding authors: Z.Liu (liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn), H.Zheng (zheng.haitao@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6583

