The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Recurrent Structure Attention Guidance for Depth Super-resolution
Jiayi Yuan* , Haobo Jiang* , Xiang Li, Jianjun Qian† , Jun Li† , Jian Yang
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{jiayiyuan, jiang.hao.bo, xiang.li.implus, csjqian, junli, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹

Image guidance is an effective strategy for depth superresolution. Generally, most existing methods employ handcrafted operators to decompose the high-frequency (HF) and
low-frequency (LF) ingredients from low-resolution depth
maps and guide the HF ingredients by directly concatenating them with image features. However, the hand-designed
operators usually cause inferior HF maps (e.g., distorted or
structurally missing) due to the diverse appearance of complex depth maps. Moreover, the direct concatenation often results in weak guidance because not all image features have
a positive effect on the HF maps. In this paper, we develop a recurrent structure attention guided (RSAG) framework, consisting of two important parts. First, we introduce a
deep contrastive network with multi-scale filters for adaptive
frequency-domain separation, which adopts contrastive networks from large filters to small ones to calculate the pixel
contrasts for adaptive high-quality HF predictions. Second,
instead of the coarse concatenation guidance, we propose a
recurrent structure attention block, which iteratively utilizes
the latest depth estimation and the image features to jointly
select clear patterns and boundaries, aiming at providing refined guidance for accurate depth recovery. In addition, we
fuse the features of HF maps to enhance the edge structures in
the decomposed LF maps. Extensive experiments show that
our approach obtains superior performance compared with
state-of-the-art depth super-resolution methods. Our code is
available at: https://github.com/Yuanjiayii/DSR RSAG.

𝑫𝑫𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒍

𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹
𝑫𝑫𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒍

(a) Image Guided Residual Framework

Hand-Crafted HF
& LF Separation

𝑫𝑫𝒉𝒉𝒉𝒉

RGB & HF
Feature Fusion

𝑫𝑫𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒍

Bicubic
Interpolation

𝑫𝑫𝒉𝒉𝒉𝒉

(b) Recurrent Structure Attention Guided Framework

Recurrent

Adaptive HF & LF
Separation

𝑫𝑫𝒉𝒉𝒉𝒉

Structure
Attention

𝑫𝑫𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒍

HF & LF
Feature Fusion

𝑫𝑫𝒉𝒉𝒉𝒉

Figure 1: Image guided DSR framework. (a) Popular image
guided residual DSR framework; (b) Our recurrent structure
attention guided DSR framework.

in Fig. 1 (a), most efforts (Hui, Loy, and Tang 2016; Zuo
et al. 2019b; Li et al. 2019) usually 1) use hand-crafted operators (e.g., hand-designed filters) to perform an early spectral decomposition of the low-resolution depth map (i.e.,
high-frequency (HF) and low-frequency (LF)), 2) coarsely
implement the image guidance by directly concatenating the
image features into the HF map, and 3) run a simple upsampling like bicubic interpolation on the low-resolution LF
map to a high-resolution one. However, this framework still
suffers from three challenging problems as follows.
Firstly, the hand-designed operators often cause a weak
spectral decomposition as they are difficult to handle the diverse structures in the complex depth map, resulting in lost
object structures in the HF map of Fig. 2 (b). Secondly, the
direct feature concatenation results in weak image guidance
since the complex textures of the image usually produce inferior features based on our observation. For example, Fig. 2
(f-h) show clear features of the ceramic bottle (white box)
and poor features of the poster (yellow box), corresponding
to the complex and simple textures of the image in Fig. 2 (j),
respectively. Thirdly, the bicubic interpolation also results
in blurred edges in the LF map of Fig. 2 (d), because it is
unsuitable for up-sampling of all kinds of structures.

Introduction
Depth super-resolution (DSR) is a fundamental low-level vision topic in computer vision as it plays an important role in
a variety of applications, such as 3D reconstruction (Hou,
Dai, and Nießner 2019), autonomous driving (Caesar et al.
2020), and virtual reality (Meuleman et al. 2020). Generally, DSR is to recover a high-resolution depth map precisely
from a given low-resolution depth map. Recently, an image
guidance DSR framework becomes more and more popular
since it has demonstrated remarkable progress by borrowing the structures and boundaries in high-resolution image to
improve the depth map (Hui, Loy, and Tang 2016). As shown
* These authors contributed equally.
†

corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3331

