The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MoEC: Mixture of Expert Clusters
Yuan Xie * , Shaohan Huang, Tianyu Chen, Furu Wei
Microsoft Research Asia, China
{v-yuanxie, shaohanh, v-tianyuchen, fuwei}@microsoft.com

Abstract

the routing score between input tokens and each expert and
activate experts with top-k routing scores. Most experts will
not be activated, thus forming a sparse structure. Since the
computation cost is only proportional to the activated top-k
sub-network, sparsely activated MoE models could scale up
model parameters without significantly increasing computational cost. With affordable computational overhead, MoE
models could achieve better performance than dense models
on various tasks such as neural machine translation (Lewis
et al. 2019; Conneau and Lample 2019; Lepikhin et al.
2020),image recognition (Riquelme et al. 2021) and speech
recognition (Kumatani et al. 2021).
Recent studies have reached a consensus that more experts mean more parameters and large model capacity,
which always bring improvements. However, some studies
show that more trainable parameters and sparse conditional
computation may introduce overfitting (Xue et al. 2021; Lou
et al. 2021; Xue et al. 2022), especially for downstream tasks
with limited data. As depicted in Figure 1, as the number of
experts grows, overfitting gradually becomes apparent in the
machine translation task. Moreover, we find that enlarging
the size of the MoE will not always lead to improvement.
There seems to exist a performance upper bound of scaling
up experts with limited data.
Besides, we find an unreasonable phenomenon in Figure 1: 64-expert MoE with more parameters and larger
model capacity has higher training loss than 32-expert MoE.
It implies that large-scale MoE not only suffers from overfitting, but also has other hidden problems that affect training. According to our analysis, the probability of each expert
getting a token reduces proportionately as the number of experts grows. With the same data, each expert will get less diverse samples. Insufficient data not only affects the training
of expert layers, but also aggravate overfitting. Therefore,
we want to explore ways in which experts could get diverse
samples and learn abundant knowledge, thereby alleviating
overfitting and sparse data allocation.
In this work, we propose Mixture of Expert Clusters
(MoEC), a general optimizing strategy for MoE models. All
the experts in MoE models are clustered to form several
static expert clusters by minimizing the clustering loss associated with the routing probability among neighbor experts.
The inductive bias expects that the similarity of intra-cluster
experts is high while the similarity of inter-cluster experts is

Sparsely Mixture of Experts (MoE) has received great interest
due to its promising scaling capability with affordable computational overhead. MoE models convert dense layers into
sparse experts, and utilize a gated routing network to make
experts conditionally activated. However, as the number of
experts grows, MoE with outrageous parameters suffers from
overfitting and sparse data allocation. Such problems are especially severe on tasks with limited data, thus hindering the
progress towards improving performance by scaling up. We
verify that there exists a performance upper bound of scaling up sparse MoE. In this work, we propose Mixture of Expert Clusters — a general approach to enable expert layers to
learn more diverse and appropriate knowledge by imposing
variance-based constraints on the routing stage. Given this,
we could further propose a cluster-level expert dropout strategy specifically designed for the expert cluster structure. Our
experiments reveal that MoEC could improve performance
on machine translation and natural language understanding
tasks. MoEC plays a positive role in mitigating overfitting
and sparse data allocation problems, thus fully releasing the
potential of large-scale sparse models.

Introduction
Scaling up the model capacity has shown to be promising
to achieve better performance on a variety of tasks, including natural language understanding (Brown et al. 2020; Raffel et al. 2019) and visual representation learning (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Bao, Dong, and Wei 2021). The continued
growth in model size and parameters brings higher computational cost, while large dense models have almost hit the
boundary of hardware capacity. In pursuit of better computational efficiency, sparse Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) is proposed as an efficient alternative to dense models (Lepikhin
et al. 2020; Fedus, Zoph, and Shazeer 2021; Riquelme et al.
2021; Lewis et al. 2021). For the sparsely-gated MoE transformers, the feed-forward network (FFN) sub-layer will be
replaced by a set of experts with independent parameters.
The sparsity of MoE is brought by experts and the gated
routing network. The gated routing network will calculate
* Work done during internships at Microsoft Research Asia.
The source code of this paper could be obtained from
https://github.com/xy980523/MoEc model.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13807

