The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Occupancy Planes for Single-View RGB-D Human Reconstruction
Xiaoming Zhao, Yuan-Ting Hu, Zhongzheng Ren, Alexander G. Schwing
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{xz23, ythu2, zr5, aschwing}@illinois.edu

Image

Abstract
Single-view RGB-D human reconstruction with implicit functions is often formulated as per-point classification. Specifically, a set of 3D locations within the view-frustum of the
camera are first projected independently onto the image and
a corresponding feature is subsequently extracted for each
3D location. The feature of each 3D location is then used to
classify independently whether the corresponding 3D point is
inside or outside the observed object. This procedure leads to
sub-optimal results because correlations between predictions
for neighboring locations are only taken into account implicitly via the extracted features. For more accurate results we
propose the occupancy planes (OPlanes) representation, which
enables to formulate single-view RGB-D human reconstruction as occupancy prediction on planes which slice through
the camera’s view frustum. Such a representation provides
more flexibility than voxel grids and enables to better leverage
correlations than per-point classification. On the challenging
S3D data we observe a simple classifier based on the OPlanes
representation to yield compelling results, especially in difficult situations with partial occlusions due to other objects and
partial visibility, which haven’t been addressed by prior work.

1

(a)

PIFuHD

(b)

Ours

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1: Reconstruction results compared to PIFuHD (Saito
et al. 2020) on S3D (Hu et al. 2021) data (1st row) and realworld data (2nd row). (a): input image; (b) and (c): results
from PIFuHD. It struggles with partial visibility and nonstanding poses; (d): our reconstruction overlaying the input
image with perspective camera projection. (e): another view
of our reconstruction.

have shown compelling results on single view human reconstruction. In common to all these prior works is the use of
per-point classification. Specifically, prior works formulate
single-view human reconstruction by first projecting a point
onto the image. A pixel aligned feature is subsequently extracted and used to classify whether the 3D point is inside or
outside the observed human.
While such a formulation is compelling, it is challenged
by the fact that occupancy for every point is essentially predicted independently (Saito et al. 2019, 2020; Mescheder
et al. 2019). While image features permit to take context into
account implicitly, the point-wise prediction often remains
noisy. This is particularly true if the data is more challenging than the one used in prior works. For instance, we observe prior works to struggle if humans are only partially
visible, i.e., if we are interested in only reconstructing the
observed part of a partially occluded person.
To address this concern, we propose to formulate singleview RGB-D human reconstruction as an occupancy-planeprediction task. For this, we introduce the novel occupancy
planes (OPlanes) representation. The OPlanes representation consists of multiple image-like planes which slice in a
fronto-parallel manner through the camera’s view frustum
and indicate at every pixel location the occupancy for the corresponding 3D point. Importantly, the OPlanes representation
permits to adaptively adjust the number and location of the

Introduction

Reconstructing the 3D shape of humans (Guan et al. 2009;
Tong et al. 2012; Bogo et al. 2016; Lassner et al. 2017; Guler
and Kokkinos 2019; Xiang, Joo, and Sheikh 2019; Yu et al.
2017; Varol et al. 2018; Zheng et al. 2019; Saito et al. 2019;
Ren, Zhao, and Schwing 2021) has attracted extensive attention. It enables numerous applications such as AR/VR
content creation, virtual try-on in the fashion industry, and
image/video editing. In this paper, we focus on the task of
human reconstruction from a single RGB-D image and its
camera information. A single-view setup is simple and alleviates the tedious capturing of sequences from multiple
locations. However, while capturing of data is simplified, the
task is more challenging because of the ambiguity in inferring the invisible part of the 3D human shape given only the
camera facing part.
A promising direction for 3D reconstruction of a human
from a single image is the use of implicit functions. Prior
works which use implicit functions (Saito et al. 2019, 2020)
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3633

