The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Splitting Answer Set Programs with Respect to Intensionality Statements
Jorge Fandinno* and Yuliya Lierler*
University of Nebraska at Omaha
{jfandinno,ylierler}@unomaha.edu

Abstract

of the blocks world encoding (Lifschitz 2002):
on(B, L, T + 1) ← on(B, L, T ), not non(B, L, T + 1) (1)
on(B, L, T + 1) ← move(B, L, T )
(2)

Splitting a logic program allows us to reduce the task of computing its stable models to similar tasks for its subprograms.
This can be used to increase solving performance and to prove
the correctness of programs. We generalize the conditions under which this technique is applicable, by considering not
only dependencies between predicates but also their arguments and context. This allows splitting programs commonly
used in practice to which previous results were not applicable.

non(B, L0 , T ) ← on(B, L, T ), location(L0 ), L 6= L0 (3)

We are interested in splitting this fragment so that one subprogram contains instances of these rules for all time points
before a (positive) threshold t and another contains rules
corresponding to the time points at or after t. This form
of splitting will help, for example, understanding iterative
solving of planning problems (Gebser et al. 2019) and arguing correctness of action descriptions (that frequently result
in rules of the form presented in our blocks world example). However, the proposed splitting is impossible under the
currently available Splitting Theorem for first-order formulas (Ferraris et al. 2009). The splitting relies on identifying
“non-circularly” dependent rules of a program. Ferraris et al.
(2009) define dependencies in terms of predicate symbols.
In our example, on/3 depends on itself in rule (1).
Here, we formulate a more general condition for the applicability of the splitting method that considers a refined
version of the dependency graph that takes into account not
only the predicate dependencies but also their arguments and
context. Among others, this makes it applicable to the discussed example. The notion of intensionality statement introduced in this work is of key importance. This is a refinement of the idea of intensional and extensional predicates (Ferraris, Lee, and Lifschitz 2011) originally stemming
from databases. It provides us with means for specifying arguments of the predicates for which these are seen as intensional or extensional. Thus, the same predicate symbol may
be both intensional and extensional depending on its context.
This refinement is the basis for a new Splitting result.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. After reviewing some preliminaries, we introduce the notion of intensionality statement. Then, we present the key ideas for
the new Splitting Theorem in the context of logic programs.
Finally, we generalize this result to first-order theories.

Introduction
Answer set programming (ASP; Lifschitz 2008) is a declarative logic programming paradigm well-suited for solving
knowledge-intensive search problems. Its success relies on
the combination of a rich knowledge representation language with efficient solvers for finding solutions to problems expressed in this language (Lifschitz 2019). Solutions
for logic programs in ASP are called “stable models”. Lifschitz and Turner (1994) introduced a fundamental splitting
method (or, simply, splitting) in the theory of ASP. Often,
splitting is used to reduce the task of computing the stable
models of a logic program to the task of computing these
of its subprograms. Also, the splitting is used to understand
the meaning of a program in terms of its smaller components and it has become a key instrument in constructing
proofs of correctness for logic programs (Cabalar, Fandinno,
and Lierler 2020). The original condition required to split a
logic program was generalized by Oikarinen and Janhunen
(2008) in the context of propositional programs. Also, when
stable models were defined for arbitrary first-order formulas (Pearce and Valverde 2005; Ferraris, Lee, and Lifschitz
2007) and infinitary propositional formulas (Truszczyński
2012), the splitting method was extended to these new settings (Ferraris et al. 2009; Harrison and Lifschitz 2016).
However, when dealing with first-order formulas (logic programs with variables are often identified with first-order formulas of a restricted syntactic form), the splitting condition
is not sufficiently general for some applications.
For instance, consider the following simplified fragment

Preliminaries
We start by reviewing a many-sorted first-order language.
The use of a many-sorted language is motivated by its ability to formalize commonly used features of logic programs

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6338

