The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Covariate-Shift Generalization via Random Sample Weighting
Yue He1 , Xinwei Shen2 , Renzhe Xu1 , Tong Zhang3 , Yong Jiang1 , Wenchao Zou4 , Peng Cui1 *
1

Tsinghua University
2
ETH Zürich
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Siemens
heyue18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xinwei.shen@stat.math.ethz.ch, xrz199721@gmail.com, tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org,
jiangyong@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, wenchao.zou@siemens.com, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

training to the test phase, while the conditional distribution of the response variable P (y|x) remains unchanged. If
a model is correctly specified and P (y|x) can be learned
precisely, its performance will not be affected by covariateshifts. However, the model misspecification problem is usually inevitable in real applications. Therefore, here we focus
on the covariate-shift generalization problem, i.e., how to
improve the generalization ability of a model under model
misspecification and unknown covariate-shifts.
There are several strands of literature related to the target problem. Given multiple heterogeneous environments,
invariant learning methods and domain generalization methods are proposed to learn a domain-agnostic model (Ghifary
et al. 2015; Li et al. 2017; Ganin et al. 2017) or invariant representation (Muandet, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf 2013; Lee,
Kim, and Lee 2021; Krueger et al. 2021). However, their
performance depends heavily on the availability and quality
of heterogeneous environments (Ahuja et al. 2021), which
are difficult to guarantee in real applications. In contrast, stable learning algorithms (Shen et al. 2020; Kuang et al. 2020;
Xu et al. 2022b; Zhang et al. 2021) require only one environment. Enlightened by the ideas of causal inference, they tend
to identify the causal variables by learning sample weights to
make all covariates mutually independent and exploit the invariance property of causal variables for covariate-shift generalization. But the underlying assumptions of causal inference mean that their performance is largely affected by the
sample size and the inner heterogeneity of the training data
(Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983). Some recent studies stand in
the middle. HRM (Liu et al. 2021b) and EIIL (Creager, Jacobsen, and Zemel 2021) put forward to generate heterogeneous environments adaptively from a mixture of data supposed to come from multiple environments without environment labels, their environment partition may bring negative
effects unconsciously if the multi-environment hypothesis is
violated.
In this paper, we combine the merits of stable learning and
invariant learning. We suppose the observed variables X are
composed of an invariant component S and a variant component V , i.e., P (y|s) keeps unchanged while P (y|v) changes
under covariate-shifts. We found that by assigning a set of
random weights on samples as long as the weights do not
change P (y|x), the P (y|v) will be changed while P (y|s)
keeps unchanged. This means that such random weighting

Shifts in the marginal distribution of covariates from training
to the test phase, named covariate-shifts, often lead to unstable prediction performance across agnostic testing data,
especially under model misspecification. Recent literature
on invariant learning attempts to learn an invariant predictor from heterogeneous environments. However, the performance of the learned predictor depends heavily on the availability and quality of provided environments. In this paper,
we propose a simple and effective non-parametric method for
generating heterogeneous environments via Random Sample
Weighting (RSW). Given the training dataset from a single
source environment, we randomly generate a set of covariatedetermining sample weights and use each weighted training distribution to simulate an environment. We theoretically
show that under appropriate conditions, such random sample weighting can produce sufficient heterogeneity to be exploited by common invariance constraints to find the invariant
variables for stable prediction under covariate shifts. Extensive experiments on both simulated and real-world datasets
clearly validate the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Despite the great success of machine learning, it often
assumes the independent and identically distributed (IID)
training and test data, encouraging the models to minimize
the empirical training error. However, the IID assumption is
fragile in practice since distribution shifts often occur due
to various reasons such as sample selection bias. Such distribution shifts lead to poor performance of traditional algorithms, especially when the test distribution is unknown. The
risk is more critical in high-stake scenarios such as financial analysis (Wong, Hryniowski, and Wang 2020; Xu et al.
2022a), medical diagnosis (Kukar 2003), and criminal justice (Rudin and Ustun 2018). To guarantee the good generalization ability of a model on data drawn out-of-distribution
(OOD) (Koh et al. 2021), the OOD generalization problem
has been intensively studied in recent years.
Among types of distribution shifts, covariate-shift (BenDavid et al. 2010) is the most common one, where the
marginal distribution of covariates P (x) changes from the
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11828

