The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Estimating Geographic Spillover Effects of COVID-19 Policies
From Large-Scale Mobility Networks
Serina Chang1 , Damir Vrabac1 , Jure Leskovec1 , Johan Ugander2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
Department of Management Science & Engineering, Stanford University
{serinac, dvrabac, jure, jugander}@stanford.edu

Abstract

across state borders or if, during the pandemic, individuals
in counties under lockdown continue to visit places in neighboring counties. Furthermore, spillovers can affect important downstream consequences. For example, the movement
of individuals from more restricted (and possibly more infected) regions to less restricted (and possibly less infected)
regions during the pandemic could result in greater overall
spread of the virus.
However, there are few opportunities to reliably estimate
causal spillover effects. Researchers cannot run experiments
to randomly assign policies to states and counties, and causal
identification is difficult in most observational studies, due
to the presence of confounders. For example, attempting
to study the effects of COVID-19 restrictions (e.g., closing restaurants) on mobility patterns introduces potential
confounding covariates that predict both the treatment and
the outcome, such as current COVID-19 severity in the region and the population’s demographics. Prior work has
attempted to address these confounders by controlling for
them, but there could always be unobserved or unknown
confounders that bias causal estimates. Furthermore, the decentralized nature of policymaking that gives rise to potential spillovers also often results in varying policy definitions and implementations across regions. This heterogeneity makes it difficult to define a consistent treatment whose
effects we can measure.
In this work, we introduce a setting in which we can make
unconfounded estimates of the spillover effects of consistent policies. We focus on California’s Blueprint for a Safer
Economy, a statewide policy framework that determined
weekly county-level mobility restrictions for all 58 counties
in California from August 2020 to June 2021. The Blueprint
consisted of four tiers that corresponded to policies of decreasing restrictiveness. At the start of each week, each
county’s tier was determined based on that county’s COVID19 metrics (case rate and test positivity) in the preceding
weeks. The California Blueprint presents a unique opportunity for studying spillover for three reasons: (1) neighboring counties were frequently in differing tiers, enabling the
analysis of spillovers from more restricted to less restricted
counties; (2) tiers were defined in the same way across counties, yielding a consistent treatment; (3) tiers were deterministically assigned at the thresholds of COVID-19 metrics.
These three ingredients allow us to develop a causal infer-

Many policies in the US are determined locally, e.g., at the
county-level. Local policy regimes provide flexibility between regions, but may become less effective in the presence
of geographic spillovers, where populations circumvent local
restrictions by traveling to less restricted regions nearby. Due
to the endogenous nature of policymaking, there have been
few opportunities to reliably estimate causal spillover effects
or evaluate their impact on local policies. In this work, we
identify a novel setting and develop a suitable methodology
that allow us to make unconfounded estimates of spillover
effects of local policies. Focusing on California’s Blueprint
for a Safer Economy, we leverage how county-level mobility
restrictions were deterministically set by public COVID-19
severity statistics, enabling a regression discontinuity design
framework to estimate spillovers between counties. We estimate these effects using a mobility network with billions of
timestamped edges and find significant spillover movement,
with larger effects in retail, eating places, and gyms. Contrasting local and global policy regimes, our spillover estimates
suggest that county-level restrictions are only 54% as effective as statewide restrictions at reducing mobility. However,
an intermediate strategy of macro-county restrictions—where
we optimize county partitions by solving a minimum k-cut
problem on a graph weighted by our spillover estimates—
can recover over 90% of statewide mobility reductions, while
maintaining substantial flexibility between counties.

Introduction
Many policies in the United States—COVID-19 restrictions, environmental regulations, and laws controlling the
sales of e-cigarettes, firearms, and controlled substances—
are determined at the state- or county-level. Local policy
regimes provide flexibility between regions, allowing policymakers to set regulations depending on local circumstances (e.g., COVID-19 severity) and the preferences of
their constituents (e.g., on gun control). On the other hand,
allowing policies to be set locally often results in differing
levels of restrictiveness between neighboring regions. These
differences can lead to geographic spillovers, where populations circumvent restrictions by traveling to less restricted
regions nearby. Spillovers risk undermining the efficacy of
local policies; for example, if banned goods are imported
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14161

