The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

COSMOS: Catching Out-of-Context
Image Misuse with Self-Supervised Learning
Shivangi Aneja1 , Chris Bregler2 , Matthias Nießner1
1

Technical University of Munich
2
Google AI

Abstract

The danger of out-of-context images is that little technical
expertise is required, as one can simply take an image from a
different event and create highly convincing but potentially
misleading message. At the same time, it is extremely challenging to detect misinformation based on out-of-context
images given that the visual content by itself is not manipulated; only the image-text combination creates misleading
or false information. In order to detect these out-of-context
images, several online fact-checking initiatives have been
launched by news rooms and independent organizations,
most of them being part of the International Factchecking
Network. However, they all heavily rely on manual human
efforts to verify each post factually, and to determine if a
fact-checking claim should be labelled as “out-of-context”
or not. Thus, automated techniques can aid the verification
of potentially false claims for fact checkers.
Seminal works along these lines focus on predicting the
veracity of a claim based on certain evidence like subject,
context, social network spread, prior history, etc. (Wang
2017; Thorne et al. 2018). However, these methods are limited only to the linguistics domain, focusing on textual metadata to predict the factuality of the claim. In particular,
language-only analysis cannot accurately identify many outof-context scenarios, as shown in Figure 1 – the grounding of which objects in an image the language refers to is
essential towards understanding whether there is an out-ofcontext situation.
An image serves as evidence of the event described by a
news caption. If two captions associated with an image are
valid, then they should describe the same event. If they align
with the same object(s) in the image, then they are broadly
conveying same information (see Fig. 2). Based on these patterns, we define out-of-context use of images as presenting
an image as an evidence of untrue and/or unrelated event(s).
If the two captions refer to same object in the image, but
are semantically different, i.e. associate the same subject to
different events, then it indicates out-of-context use of image (Case 1 from Fig. 1). However, if the captions correspond to the same event irrespective of the object(s) the captions describe, then it is defined as not-out-of-context (Case
2 from Fig. 1) use of images. Note that a not-out-of-context
scenario makes no conclusions regarding the veracity of the
statements.
Our work differs from standard fake news detection meth-

Despite the recent attention to DeepFakes, one of the most
prevalent ways to mislead audiences on social media is the
use of unaltered images in a new but false context. We
propose a new method that automatically highlights out-ofcontext image and text pairs, for assisting fact-checkers. Our
key insight is to leverage the grounding of image with text
to distinguish out-of-context scenarios that cannot be disambiguated with language alone. We propose a self-supervised
training strategy where we only need a set of captioned images. At train time, our method learns to selectively align
individual objects in an image with textual claims, without
explicit supervision. At test time, we check if both captions
correspond to the same object(s) in the image but are semantically different, which allows us to make fairly accurate
out-of-context predictions. Our method achieves 85% out-ofcontext detection accuracy. To facilitate benchmarking of this
task, we create a large-scale dataset of 200K images with
450K textual captions from a variety of news websites, blogs,
and social media posts.

Introduction
In recent years, the computer vision community as well as
the general public have focused on new misuses of media manipulations such as DeepFakes (Lu 2018; Paris and
Donovan 2019; Petrov et al. 2020) and how they aid the
spread of misinformation in news and social media platforms. At the same time, researchers have developed impressive media forensic methods to automatically detect these
manipulations (Rössler et al. 2019; Nguyen, Yamagishi, and
Echizen 2019; Li and Lyu 2019; Yang, Li, and Lyu 2019;
Zhou et al. 2017; Cozzolino et al. 2018; Afchar et al. 2018;
Agarwal et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020; Verdoliva 2020; Aneja
and Nießner 2020; Davide Cozzolino and Andreas Rössler
and Justus Thies and Matthias Nießner and Luisa Verdoliva
2021). However, despite the importance of DeepFakes and
other visual manipulation methods, one of the most prevalent ways to mislead audiences is the use of unaltered images
in a new but false or misleading context (Fazio 2020). Fact
checkers refer to this as out-of-context use of images, where
an image is recontextualized with one or two (or even more)
online sources with different and contradictory captions.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14084

