The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Frido: Feature Pyramid Diffusion for Complex Scene Image Synthesis
Wan-Cyuan Fan1 * , Yen-Chun Chen2† ,
DongDong Chen2 , Yu Cheng2 , Lu Yuan2 , Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1, 3
National Taiwan University
2
Microsoft Corporation
3
NVIDIA
r09942092@ntu.edu.tw

Diffusion models (DMs) have shown great potential for highquality image synthesis. However, when it comes to producing images with complex scenes, how to properly describe
both image global structures and object details remains a
challenging task. In this paper, we present Frido, a Feature
Pyramid Diffusion model performing a multi-scale coarseto-fine denoising process for image synthesis. Our model decomposes an input image into scale-dependent vector quantized features, followed by a coarse-to-fine modulation for
producing image output. During the above multi-scale representation learning stage, additional input conditions like
text, scene graph, or image layout can be further exploited.
Thus, Frido can be also applied for conditional or crossmodality image synthesis. We conduct extensive experiments
over various unconditioned and conditional image generation
tasks, ranging from text-to-image synthesis, layout-to-image,
scene-graph-to-image, to label-to-image. More specifically,
we achieved state-of-the-art FID scores on five benchmarks,
namely layout-to-image on COCO and OpenImages, scenegraph-to-image on COCO and Visual Genome, and label-toimage on COCO.

A person
riding a
motorcycle
with mountain
in the
background

Coarse-to-fine denoising results

2

LDM

Conditions

1

Frido

LDM

Abstract

Frido

1

Figure 1: Illustration of Frido. Given a cross-modal con1 a coarse-to-fine mandition, Frido generates images in ⃝
ner from structure to object details, producing outputs with
2 high semantic correctness and quality. Note that existing
⃝
models such as the LDMs are not designed to distinguish
between high/low-level visual information.

Recently, diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020;
Nichol and Dhariwal 2021; Ho et al. 2022; Rombach et al.
2022; Ramesh et al. 2022) have demonstrated a remarkable
capability of high-quality image synthesis and outperform
other classes of generative approaches on multiple tasks, including but not limited to unconditional image generation,
text-to-image generation, and image super-resolution. Despite the encouraging progress, diffusion models may fall
short when targeted images are more complex and conditioning inputs are highly abstractive. The composition of
objects and parts, along with high-level semantic relations
are prevailing in those tasks, which are less seen in earlier
object-centric benchmarks and may be essential to higher
quality generation.
In particular, we point out two major challenges in existing DM works. First, most of existing DMs deal with feature maps or image pixels at a single scale/resolution, which
might not be able to capture image semantics or compositions in real-world complex scenes. Take the first row of Figure 1 as examples, it can be seen that while LDM (Rombach
et al. 2022) generates images containing a “person” given
the text condition, semantic structures of “riding a motorcycle” and “mountain in the background” are not sufficiently

Introduction
Generating photo-realistic images is a critical task in computer vision research. In this task, a generative model is
designed to learn the underlying data distribution of a
given set of images and to be capable of synthesizing
new samples from the learned distribution. To this end, series of methods were proposed, including VAEs (Kingma
and Welling 2014; Van Den Oord, Vinyals et al. 2017),
GANs (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015), flow-based methods (Dinh, Krueger, and Bengio
2014; Kingma and Dhariwal 2018), and the trending diffusion models (DMs) (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015; Ho, Jain,
and Abbeel 2020). The quality of the generated images has
been improved rapidly with the contribution of these lines
of works. Moreover, the task itself also evolves from objectcentric image synthesis without conditions to complex scene
image generation, and sometimes based on multi-modal
conditions (e.g., texts, layouts, labels, and scene-graphs).
* work done during research internship at Microsoft
†

project lead
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

579

