The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Interpolating Graph Pair to Regularize Graph Classification
Hongyu Guo1,2 , Yongyi Mao2
1

National Research Council Canada
2
University of Ottawa
{hongyu.guo, ymao}@uottawa.ca

Abstract

2018a; Verma et al. 2018; Guo, Mao, and Zhang 2019b; Kim,
Choo, and Song 2020), called Mixup. Mixup was originally
introduced by (Zhang et al. 2018a) as an interpolation-based
regularizer for image classification. It regularizes the learning of deep classification models by training with synthetic
samples, which are created by linearly interpolating a pair of
randomly selected training samples, naturally well-aligned,
as well as their training targets.
Motivated by the effectiveness and simplicity of Mixup in
regularizing image classification models, we are motivated
to design a similar, straight-forward, “Mixup” scheme for
graph data. Nevertheless, unlike images, which are supported
on grid coordinates, graph data have arbitrary structure and
topology, such as having different numbers of nodes and these
nodes from different graphs are typically not readily aligned.
Furthermore, such irregular graph topologies typically play a
critical role in the graph semantics, and consequently even
simply modifying one node or edge can dramatically change
the semantic meaning of a graph. Hence, the following two
questions naturally arise:

We present a simple and yet effective interpolation-based regularization technique, aiming to improve the generalization of
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) on supervised graph classification. We leverage Mixup (Zhang et al. 2018a), an effective
regularizer for vision, where random sample pairs and their
labels are interpolated to create synthetic images for training.
Unlike images with grid-like coordinates, graphs have arbitrary structure and topology, which can be very sensitive to any
modification that alters the graph’s semantic meanings. This
posts two unanswered questions for Mixup-like regularization
schemes: Can we directly mix up a pair of graph inputs? If so,
how well does such mixing strategy regularize the learning of
GNNs? To answer these two questions, we propose ifMixup,
which first adds dummy nodes to make two graphs have the
same input size and then simultaneously performs linear interpolation between the aligned node feature vectors and the
aligned edge representations of the two graphs. We empirically
show that such simple mixing schema can effectively regularize the classification learning, resulting in superior predictive
accuracy to popular graph augmentation and GNN methods.

Can we directly mix up a pair of graph inputs? If so, how well
does such mixing strategy regularize the learning of GNNs?

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017)
have recently shown promising performance in many challenging applications, including predicting molecule property (Wu et al. 2018), forecasting protein activation (Jiang
et al. 2017), and estimating circuit functionality (Zhang,
He, and Katabi 2019). Nevertheless, like other successfully deployed deep networks, GNNs also suffer from the
data-hungry issue due to their over-parameterized learning
paradigm. Consequently, regularization techniques have been
actively proposed, aiming to empower the learning of GNNs
while avoiding over-smoothing (Li, Han, and Wu 2018), oversquashing (Alon and Yahav 2021) and over-fitting (Zhang
et al. 2017). Amongst these generalization strategies, data
augmentation schemes have been proven to be very effective (Rong et al. 2020; Zhou, Shen, and Xuan 2020). Existing
graph data augmentation methods, nevertheless, mostly involve graph manipulations on a single graph (Rong et al.
2020; Zhou, Shen, and Xuan 2020; You et al. 2020).
In this paper, we look into a very successful pairwise data
augmentation technique for image recognition (Zhang et al.

To answer these two questions, we propose a simple input mixing strategy for Mixup on graph, coined ifMixup
for graph-level classification. ifMixup first samples random
graph pairs from the training data, and then creates a synthetic graph through mixing each selected sample pair, using a mixing ratio sampled from a Beta distribution. For
mixing, ifMixup first adds disconnected dummy nodes to
make the two selected graphs have the same input size, so
that it can align the two graphs with an arbitrary node order.
Next, it simultaneously performs linear interpolation between
the aligned node feature vectors and the aligned edge representations of the two graph inputs, through leveraging the
straight-forward mixing strategy as that of the original Mixupon image pairs. The newly generated mixed graphs, which
have a much larger number of graphs with changing local
neighborhood properties than the original training dataset,
are then used for training to regularize the GNNs learning.
We conduct extensive experiments, using eight benchmarking tasks from various domains, showing that our strategy
can effectively regularize the graph classification to improve
its predictive accuracy, outperforming popular graph augmen-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7766

