The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Restructuring Graphs for Higher Homophily via Adaptive Spectral Clustering
Shouheng Li1,3 , Dongwoo Kim2 , Qing Wang1
1

School of Computing, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
2
CSE & GSAI, POSTECH, Pohang, South Korea
3
Data61, CSIRO, Canberra, Australia
shouheng.li@anu.edu.au, dongwoo.kim@postech.ac.kr, qing.wang@anu.edu.au

Abstract
While a growing body of literature has been studying new
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) that work on both homophilic
and heterophilic graphs, little has been done on adapting classical GNNs to less-homophilic graphs. Although the ability to
handle less-homophilic graphs is restricted, classical GNNs
still stand out in several nice properties such as efficiency,
simplicity, and explainability. In this work, we propose a novel
graph restructuring method that can be integrated into any type
of GNNs, including classical GNNs, to leverage the benefits
of existing GNNs while alleviating their limitations. Our contribution is threefold: a) learning the weight of pseudo-eigenvectors for an adaptive spectral clustering that aligns well
with known node labels, b) proposing a new density-aware
homophilic metric that is robust to label imbalance, and c) reconstructing the adjacency matrix based on the result of adaptive spectral clustering to maximize homophilic scores. The
experimental results show that our graph restructuring method
can significantly boost the performance of six classical GNNs
by an average of 25% on less-homophilic graphs. The boosted
performance is comparable to state-of-the-art methods.

1

(a) W ISCONSIN: visualized using T-SNE with the leading 5
eigenvectors

(b) W ISCONSIN: visualized using 22th, 44th and 206th eigenvectors

(c) E UROPE A IRPORT: visualized using T-SNE with the
leading 5 eigenvectors

(d) E UROPE A IRPORT: visualized using the 366th, 382th
and 3rd eigenvectors

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) were originally inspired under the homophilic assumption - nodes of the same label are
more likely to be connected than nodes of different labels. Recent studies have revealed the limitations of this homophilic
assumption when applying GNNs on less-homophilic or heterophilic graphs (Pei et al. 2020). Since then, a number of
approaches have been proposed with a focus on developing deep learning architectures for heterophilic graphs (Zhu
et al. 2021b; Kim and Oh 2021; Chien et al. 2021; Li, Kim,
and Wang 2021; Bo et al. 2021; Lim et al. 2021). However,
little work has been done on adapting existing GNNs to
less-homophilic graphs. Although existing GNNs such as
GCN (Kipf and Welling 2017), ChevNet (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016), and GAT (Velickovic et al.
2018) are lacking the ability to work with less-homophilic
graphs, they still stand out in several nice properties such as
efficiency (Zeng et al. 2020), simplicity (Wu et al. 2019), and
explainability (Ying et al. 2019). Our work aims to develop
a graph restructuring method that can restructure a graph to

Figure 1: Node clusters using different eigenvector choices on
W ISCONSIN and E UROPE A IRPORT. Colours represent node
labels. Coordinates in 1a and 1c are computed using threedimensional T-SNE. In 1b and 1d many nodes are overlapped
so they appear to have fewer nodes than they actually have.
leverage the benefit of prevalent homophilic GNNs. Inspired
by Klicpera, Weißenberger, and Günnemann (2019), we extend the restructuring approach to heterophilic graphs and
boost the performance of GNNs that do not work well on
less-homophilic graphs.
Discrepancy between SC and labels Spectral clustering
(SC) aims to cluster nodes such that the edges between different clusters have low weights and the edges within a cluster
have high weights. Such clusters are likely to align with
node labels where a graph is homophilic, i.e., nodes with the

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8622

