The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

The Influence of Dimensions on the Complexity of Computing Decision Trees
Stephen G. Kobourov1 , Maarten Löffler2 , Fabrizio Montecchiani3 , Marcin Pilipczuk4 ,
Ignaz Rutter5 , Raimund Seidel6 , Manuel Sorge7 , Jules Wulms7
1
University of Arizona, Department of Computer Science
Utrecht University, Department of Information and Computing Sciences
3
University of Perugia, Department of Engineering
4
University of Warsaw, Faculty of Mathematics, Informatics, and Mechanics
5
University of Passau, Faculty of Computer Science and Mathematics
6
Saarland University, Department of Computer Science
7
TU Wien, Institute of Logic and Computation
kobourov@cs.arizona.edu, m.loffler@uu.nl, fabrizio.montecchiani@unipg.it, malcin@mimuw.edu.pl,
rutter@fim.uni-passau.de, rseidel@cs.uni-saarland.de {manuel.sorge, jwulms}@ac.tuwien.ac.at
2

Abstract

other criteria, the number of nodes is often minimized for
the above-mentioned reasons. There is a plethora of implementations for learning decision trees (e.g., (Breiman et al.
1984; Bessiere, Hebrard, and O’Sullivan 2009; Narodytska
et al. 2018; Schidler and Szeider 2021; Hu, Rudin, and
Seltzer 2019)). The classical CART heuristic herein is
among the Top 10 Algorithms of Data Mining chosen by
the ICDM (Wu et al. 2008; Steinberg 2009) and several implementations are based on exact algorithms minimizing the
size of the produced trees. Despite this, our knowledge of
the computational complexity of learning (minimum-node)
decision trees is limited: Several classical results show NPhardness (Hyafil and Rivest 1976; Goodrich et al. 1995) (see
also the survey by Murthy (1998)) and we know that even
if we require parameters such as the number of nodes of the
tree, or the number of different feature values, to be small,
we still cannot achieve efficient algorithms in terms of upper
bounds on the running time (Ordyniak and Szeider 2021).
In this paper, we study the influence of the number d of
dimensions of the feature space on the complexity of learning small decision trees. This problem can be phrased as the
decision problem M INIMUM D ECISION T REE S IZE (DTS):
The input is a tuple (E, λ, s) consisting of a set E ⊆ Rd
of examples, a class labeling λ : E → {blue, red}, and
an integer s, and we want to decide whether there is a
decision tree for (E, λ) of size at most s. Herein, a binary
tree T is decision tree for (E, λ) if the labeled partition of
Rd associated with T agrees with the labels λ of E; see
Section 2 for a precise definition.
We provide three main results. First, we show that DTS
can be solved in O(n2d+1 d) time (Theorem 3.1), where n
is the number of input examples. In other words, for fixed
number of dimensions, DTS is polynomial-time solvable.
Contrast this with the variant where, instead of axis-parallel
cuts, we allow linear cuts of arbitrary slopes. This problem
is NP-hard already for d = 3 (Goodrich et al. 1995).
Second, complementing the first result, we show that the
dependency on d in the exponent cannot be substantially
reduced. More precisely, a running time of f (d) · no(d/ log d)
would contradict widely accepted complexity-theoretic assumptions (Theorem 4.1). This implies that the running time

A decision tree recursively splits a feature space Rd and then
assigns class labels based on the resulting partition. Decision
trees have been part of the basic machine-learning toolkit for
decades. A large body of work considers heuristic algorithms
that compute a decision tree from training data, usually aiming to minimize in particular the size of the resulting tree.
In contrast, little is known about the complexity of the underlying computational problem of computing a minimumsize tree for the given training data. We study this problem
with respect to the number d of dimensions of the feature
space Rd , which contains n training examples. We show that
it can be solved in O(n2d+1 ) time, but under reasonable
complexity-theoretic assumptions it is not possible to achieve
f (d) · no(d/ log d) running time. The problem is solvable in
(dR)O(dR) · n1+o(1) time, if there are exactly two classes
and R is an upper bound on the number of tree leaves labeled
with the first class.

1

Introduction

A decision tree is a useful tool to classify and describe
data (Murthy 1998). It takes the feature space Rd , recursively performs axis-parallel cuts to split the space into two
subspaces, and then assigns class labels based on the resulting partition (see Figure 1). Because of their simplicity, decision trees are particularly attractive as interpretable models of the underlying data (Molnar 2020). In this context,
small trees are preferable, i.e., trees that have a small number of nodes, or in other words, perform a small number of
cuts (Moshkovitz et al. 2020). Such trees are also desired in
the context of classification, because it is thought that minimizing the number of nodes reduces the chances of overfitting (Fayyad and Irani 1990).
In the learning phase, we are given a finite set of examples
E ⊆ Rd labeled with classes and we want to find a decision
tree that optimizes certain performance criteria and that is
consistent with E, that is, the classes assigned by the tree
perfectly agree with the class labels of the examples. Among
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8343

