The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Distributed Projection-Free Online Learning for Smooth and Convex Losses
Yibo Wang1,2,† , Yuanyu Wan3,† , Shimao Zhang1 , Lijun Zhang1,2, *
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China
3
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo 315048, China
{wangyb, zhanglj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wanyy@zju.edu.cn, smzhang@smail.nju.edu.cn

which is the sum of all local loss functions at round t. Minimizing the global loss is equivalent to minimizing the global
regret, which is defined as the difference between cumulative global loss of local learner i and that of the best fixed
decision in hindsight:

Abstract
We investigate the problem of distributed online convex optimization with complicated constraints, in which the projection operation could be the computational bottleneck. To
avoid projections, distributed online projection-free methods
have been proposed and attain an O(T 3/4 ) regret bound
for general convex losses. However, they cannot utilize the
smoothness condition, which has been exploited in the centralized setting to improve the regret. In this paper, we propose a new distributed online projection-free method with
a tighter regret bound of O(T 2/3 ) for smooth and convex
losses. Specifically, we first provide a distributed extension
of Follow-the-Perturbed-Leader so that the smoothness can
be utilized in the distributed setting. Then, we reduce the
computational cost via sampling and blocking techniques. In
this way, our method only needs to solve one linear optimization per round on average. Finally, we conduct experiments
on benchmark datasets to verify the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Regreti =

t=1

ft (xt,i ) − min
x∈K

T
X

ft (x).

(2)

t=1

When there is only one learner in the network, this challenge can be handled by a classical online learning framework: centralized online convex optimization (OCO). The
global loss ft in centralized OCO reduces to the local loss
for the single learner. Correspondingly, the global regret degenerates to that defined by the local loss:
Regret =

T
X
t=1

ft (xt ) − min
x∈K

T
X

ft (x),

(3)

t=1

where xt is the action of the single learner at round t. In
centralized OCO, various methods have been proposed to
achieve the optimal regret bound, such as Online Gradient
Descent (OGD) (Zinkevich 2003; Hazan, Agarwal, and Kale
2007) and Online Dual Averaging (ODA) (Nesterov 2009;
Bubeck 2015). In the past decade, these methods in centralized OCO have been extended to the distributed setting,
e.g., Distributed Online Gradient Descent (D-OGD) (Ram,
Nedich, and Veeravalli 2010; Yan et al. 2013; Yuan, Ling,
and Yin 2016) and Distributed Online Dual Averaging (DODA) (Hosseini, Chapman, and Mesbahi 2013; Lee, Nedić,
and Raginsky 2016).
A main operation in these D-OCO methods is projection,
which pulls an infeasible point back into the convex domain
K. In general, the infeasible point is projected to the nearest
one in domain K under ℓ2 distance (Hazan and Kale 2012).
However, when constraints are complicated, such an operation can be quite time-consuming and even impossible for
the local learners with light computation capability. To handle this issue, recent studies (Zhang et al. 2017; Wan, Tu, and
Zhang 2020; Wan et al. 2022) proposed several distributed
online projection-free methods, which replace the projection operation with a linear optimization step. Different from
the projection operation, the linear optimization step could
be more efficient for certain complicated domains. Moreover, existing distributed online projection-free methods can

Introduction
Distributed online convex optimization (D-OCO) has been a
popular research topic due to its powerful capability in distributed online decision making, such as distributed tracking in sensor networks (Li et al. 2002; Shahrampour and
Jadbabaie 2018) and distributed energy management (Bao
et al. 2018; Lesage-Landry and Callaway 2020). In general,
D-OCO can be viewed as an iterative game between an adversary and a group of local learners connected via a distributed network, which is defined by an undirected graph
G = (V, E) with the vertex set V = {1, · · · , n} and the
edge set E ⊂ V ×V . At round t, learner i ∈ V chooses a decision xt,i from a convex set K ⊆ Rd . After that, the adversary reveals a convex local loss function ft,i (·) : K → R and
the local learner i suffers a loss ft,i (xt,i ). The main challenge in D-OCO is that each learner i can only access local
information (e.g., losses and gradients of itself) but needs to
minimize the global loss:
n
X
ft (x) =
ft,j (x),
(1)
j=1
†

T
X

*

Contributed equally, Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10226

