The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improving Scene Text Image Super-resolution via
Dual Prior Modulation Network
Shipeng Zhu1,2 , Zuoyan Zhao1,2 , Pengfei Fang1,2 , Hui Xue1,2 *
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
MOE Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), China
{shipengzhu, zuoyanzhao, fangpengfei, hxue}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Scene text image super-resolution (STISR) aims to simultaneously increase the resolution and legibility of the text images, and the resulting images will significantly affect the performance of downstream tasks. Although numerous progress
has been made, existing approaches raise two crucial issues:
(1) They neglect the global structure of the text, which bounds
the semantic determinism of the scene text. (2) The priors,
e.g., text prior or stroke prior, employed in existing works, are
extracted from pre-trained text recognizers. That said, such
priors suffer from the domain gap including low resolution
and blurriness caused by poor imaging conditions, leading to
incorrect guidance. Our work addresses these gaps and proposes a plug-and-play module dubbed Dual Prior Modulation
Network (DPMN), which leverages dual image-level priors
to bring performance gain over existing approaches. Specifically, two types of prior-guided refinement modules, each using the text mask or graphic recognition result of the lowquality SR image from the preceding layer, are designed to
improve the structural clarity and semantic accuracy of the
text, respectively. The following attention mechanism hence
modulates two quality-enhanced images to attain a superior
SR result. Extensive experiments validate that our method
improves the image quality and boosts the performance of
downstream tasks over five typical approaches on the benchmark. Substantial visualizations and ablation studies demonstrate the advantages of the proposed DPMN. Code is available at: https://github.com/jdfxzzy/DPMN.

cat

dog

4, 6,
L, …

CCLCAS,
colors, …

(a) The uncertainty of LR natural objects and scene texts.
LR

LR

TATT
TATT
(with DPMN)
HR

R: meisner / P: 22.61 / S: 0.7926 R: bottom / P: 20.99 / S: 0.5907
meisner

TPGSR
(with DPMN) HR

R: heisner / P: 20.23 / S: 0.7355 R: botton / P: 14.76 / S: 0.5161

TPGSR

R: mcisnea / P: 19.66 / S: 0.5629 R: botton / P: 20.13 / S: 0.4725

bottom

(b) The performance of SR models.

Figure 1: The illustration of effect about global structure and
graphic semantic priors on the scene text image. “R”, “P”
and “S” represent recognition results, PSNR, and SSIM.
to develop a super-resolution (SR) method, to recover LR
scene text images to high-quality SR ones.
To achieve this goal, some early attempts (Xu et al. 2017;
Pandey et al. 2018) simply utilize techniques of conventional SR methods, e.g., L1 loss, to improve the quality of
scene text in images. However, they cannot effectively boost
the performance of downstream tasks. Subsequently, some
methods, tailored for the scene text image super-resolution
(STISR) task, benefit from the superficial properties of the
scene text. For example, the pioneering work, Text SuperResolution Network (TSRN), tends to perceive the sequential information of the text via CNN-BiLSTM layers (Wang
et al. 2020). The most recent works attempt to leverage various text properties from LR images, as prior, to steer the SR
process. Text Gestalt (TG) model (Chen et al. 2022) uses
the local stroke structure to capture the stroke-aware prior
from a Transformer-based recognizer to prompt the training phase. Text Prior Guided Super-Resolution (TPGSR)
model (Ma, Guo, and Zhang 2021) and the following Text
ATTention network (TATT) (Ma, Liang, and Zhang 2022)
leverage the pre-trained text recognizer to obtain a text prior,
i.e., the probability sequence of a scene text image whose
length denotes the number of characters learned by the text
recognizer. This hence improves the quality of SR images as

Introduction
Scene text images, containing rich linguistic and graphic information, are widely present in our daily life. The understanding of scene text images is an integral part of various high-level applications, like scene text recognition (Fang
et al. 2021), scene text retrieval (Wang et al. 2021a), and
text-based image captioning (Zhang et al. 2022). However,
limited zone in the image and inadequate imaging conditions (Long, He, and Yao 2021) cause an issue of low resolution (LR) for texts. This, in turn, leads to unreliable text
understanding in such images, thereby degrading the performance of downstream tasks. In this context, it is necessary
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3843

