The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Out-of-Distribution Generalization by Neural-Symbolic Joint Training
Anji Liu2 , Hongming Xu3 , Guy Van den Broeck2 , Yitao Liang1,3
1
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
Computer Science Department, University of California, Los Angeles
3
Beijing Institute of General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI)
{liuanji, guyvdb}@cs.ucla.edu, xuhongming@bigai.ai, yitaol@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract

types of distribution shift of the input (e.g., longer numbers)
since the NN only needs to accurately predict the digit of
MNIST images and the addition rules are invariant to input
length.
Some prior work has success in addressing such an integration (Dai and Muggleton 2021). However, they often require abundant prior knowledge. Specifically, most of them
require the ground-truth symbolic knowledge to be provided (Yang, Ishay, and Lee 2020; Manhaeve et al. 2018).
In other word, such success has not been transferred to the
setting where priors on task semantics are limited or not
provided. We identify two challenges that hinder the development of neural-symbolic models in this more generalized
setting. First, the lack of bidirectional supervision between
the neural and symbolic models poses great difficulties for
reliably learning meaningful symbolic features z. Specifically, an under-trained neural network cannot produce accurate grounded facts for the symbolic model to learn logic
rules, and conversely, the symbolic model cannot provide effective supervision to refine the neural model. Existing approaches alleviate this problem by either providing strong
priors on the symbolic rules (Dai and Muggleton 2021;
Yang, Ishay, and Lee 2020) or learning symbolic models implicitly (Wang et al. 2019; Amos and Kolter 2017), which
cannot deliver reliable reasoning results when facing out-ofdistribution samples. Next, even if supervision signals can
be properly propagated between the neural and symbolic
models, it is still possible that the NN predicts spurious features, leading to bad generalization performance (an example is provided in Sec. 6).
This paper makes an initial attempt to solve these crucial
yet under-explored problems. Both aforementioned challenges are mainly attributed to the gigantic set of candidate
rules considered by the symbolic model. In one direction, a
large number of plausible rules result in noisy update signals
to the NN. In the other direction, it is hard to search for good
symbolic rules from a vast candidate set. Instead of adding
prior knowledge to shrink the rule space, we propose to control the symbolic model’s complexity by gradually adding
plausible candidate rules with a symbolic search step. That
is, the model is first initialized with a few “general” rules.
After eliminating candidates that are very unlikely to hold,
we invoke the symbolic search algorithm to extend and specialize the remaining rules. This process continues until the

This paper develops a novel methodology to simultaneously
learn a neural network and extract generalized logic rules.
Different from prior neural-symbolic methods that require
background knowledge and candidate logical rules to be provided, we aim to induce task semantics with minimal priors.
This is achieved by a two-step learning framework that iterates between optimizing neural predictions of task labels
and searching for a more accurate representation of the hidden task semantics. Notably, supervision works in both directions: (partially) induced task semantics guide the learning of
the neural network and induced neural predictions admit an
improved semantic representation. We demonstrate that our
proposed framework is capable of achieving superior outof-distribution generalization performance on two tasks: (i)
learning multi-digit addition, where it is trained on short sequences of digits and tested on long sequences of digits; (ii)
predicting the optimal action in the Tower of Hanoi, where
the model is challenged to discover a policy independent of
the number of disks in the puzzle.

1

Introduction

The recent rejuvenation of neural-symbolic synthesis
demonstrates that we can significantly benefit from a tight
integration of low-level perception and high-level reasoning
in tasks featuring out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization
(Manhaeve et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2018; Li and Srikumar
2019). It is especially the case on tasks whose semantics are
(implicitly) encoded as symbolic rules. Take the multi-digit
addition example shown in Fig. 1(left) as an example. Given
two numbers represented by a sequence of MNIST images,
the goal is to predict the sum of both numbers. Following
the orange arrows, it is possible to train neural nets (NNs) to
predict the sum directly. When the test sums are i.i.d. w.r.t.
the training samples, this task poses no challenge for NNs either. However, the prediction accuracy could degrade if NNs
are provided with OOD samples (e.g., unseen combination
of digits or numbers with greater length). In contrast, from
a neural-symbolic perspective, we can adopt NNs to extract
invariant features z (in this case, the digit of every MNIST
image) first, and then employ logic rules for multi-digit addition to predict the sum. This model is more robust to various
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12252

