The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robust Average-Reward Markov Decision Processes
Yue Wang1 , Alvaro Velasquez2 , George Atia3 , Ashley Prater-Bennette4 , Shaofeng Zou1
1

University at Buffalo, The State University of New York
2
University of Colorado Boulder
3
University of Central Florida
4
Air Force Research Laboratory
ywang294@buffalo.com, alvaro.velasquez@colorado.edu, george.atia@ucf.edu, ashley.prater-bennette@us.af.mil,
szou3@buffalo.edu
Abstract

The solution to the robust MDP problem provides performance guarantee for all uncertain MDP models, and is thus
robust to the model mismatch.
Robust MDP problems falling under different reward optimality criteria are fundamentally different. In robust discounted MDPs, the goal is to find a policy that maximizes
the discounted cumulative reward in the worst case. In this
setting, as the agent interacts with the environment, the reward received diminishes exponentially over time. Much of
the prior work in the robust setting has focused on the discounted reward formulation. The model-based method, e.g.,
(Iyengar 2005; Nilim and El Ghaoui 2004; Bagnell, Ng,
and Schneider 2001; Satia and Lave Jr 1973; Wiesemann,
Kuhn, and Rustem 2013; Tamar, Mannor, and Xu 2014; Lim
and Autef 2019; Xu and Mannor 2010; Yu and Xu 2015;
Lim, Xu, and Mannor 2013), where information about the
uncertainty set is assumed to be known to the learner, unveiled several fundamental characterizations of robust discounted MDPs. This was further extended to the more practical model-free setting in which only samples from a simulator (the centroid of the uncertainty set) are available to
the learner. For example, the value-based method (Roy, Xu,
and Pokutta 2017; Badrinath and Kalathil 2021; Wang and
Zou 2021; Tessler, Efroni, and Mannor 2019; Zhou et al.
2021; Yang, Zhang, and Zhang 2021; Panaganti and Kalathil
2021; Goyal and Grand-Clement 2018; Kaufman and Schaefer 2013; Ho, Petrik, and Wiesemann 2018, 2021; Si et al.
2020) optimizes the worst-case performance using the robust value function as an intermediate step; on the other
hand, the model-free policy-based method (Russel, Benosman, and Van Baar 2020; Derman, Geist, and Mannor 2021;
Eysenbach and Levine 2021; Wang and Zou 2022) directly
optimizes the policy and is thus scalable to large/continuous
state and action spaces.
Although discounted MDPs induce an elegant Bellman
operator that is a contraction, and have been studied extensively, the policy obtained usually has poor long-term performance when a system operates for an extended period
of time. When the discount factor is very close to 1, the
agent may prefer to compare policies on the basis of their
average expected reward instead of their expected total discounted reward, e.g., queueing control, inventory management in supply chains, scheduling automatic guided vehicles and applications in communication networks (Kober,

In robust Markov decision processes (MDPs), the uncertainty
in the transition kernel is addressed by finding a policy that
optimizes the worst-case performance over an uncertainty set
of MDPs. While much of the literature has focused on discounted MDPs, robust average-reward MDPs remain largely
unexplored. In this paper, we focus on robust average-reward
MDPs, where the goal is to find a policy that optimizes the
worst-case average reward over an uncertainty set. We first
take an approach that approximates average-reward MDPs
using discounted MDPs. We prove that the robust discounted
value function converges to the robust average-reward as the
discount factor goes to 1, and moreover when it is large, any
optimal policy of the robust discounted MDP is also an optimal policy of the robust average-reward. We further design
a robust dynamic programming approach, and theoretically
characterize its convergence to the optimum. Then, we investigate robust average-reward MDPs directly without using discounted MDPs as an intermediate step. We derive the
robust Bellman equation for robust average-reward MDPs,
prove that the optimal policy can be derived from its solution,
and further design a robust relative value iteration algorithm
that provably finds its solution, or equivalently, the optimal
robust policy.

Introduction
A Markov decision process (MDP) is an effective mathematical tool for sequential decision-making in stochastic environments (Derman 1970; Puterman 1994). Solving an MDP
problem entails finding an optimal policy that maximizes
a cumulative reward according to a given criterion. However, in practice there could exist a mismatch between the
assumed MDP model and the underlying environment due to
various factors, such as non-stationarity of the environment,
modeling error, exogenous perturbation, partial observability, and adversarial attacks. The ensuing model mismatch
could result in solution policies with poor performance.
This challenge spurred noteworthy efforts on developing
and analyzing a framework of robust MDPs e.g., (Bagnell,
Ng, and Schneider 2001; Nilim and El Ghaoui 2004; Iyengar
2005). Rather than adopting a fixed MDP model, in the robust MDP setting, one seeks to optimize the worst-case performance over an uncertainty set of possible MDP models.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15215

