The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Denoising after Entropy-Based Debiasing
a Robust Training Method for Dataset Bias with Noisy Labels
Sumyeong Ahn, Se-Young Yun
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Seoul, Republic of Korea
{sumyeongahn, yunseyoung}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

Easy-to-learn

Improperly constructed datasets can result in inaccurate inferences. For instance, models trained on biased datasets perform
poorly in terms of generalization (i.e., dataset bias). Recent
debiasing techniques have successfully achieved generalization performance by underestimating easy-to-learn samples
(i.e., bias-aligned samples) and highlighting difficult-to-learn
samples (i.e., bias-conflicting samples). However, these techniques may fail owing to noisy labels, because the trained
model recognizes noisy labels as difficult-to-learn and thus
highlights them. In this study, we find that earlier approaches
that used the provided labels to quantify difficulty could be
affected by the small proportion of noisy labels. Furthermore,
we find that running denoising algorithms before debiasing is
ineffective because denoising algorithms reduce the impact of
difficult-to-learn samples, including valuable bias-conflicting
samples. Therefore, we propose an approach called denoising
after entropy-based debiasing, i.e., DENEB, which has three
main stages. (1) The prejudice model is trained by emphasizing (bias-aligned, clean) samples, which are selected using a
Gaussian Mixture Model. (2) Using the per-sample entropy
from the output of the prejudice model, the sampling probability of each sample that is proportional to the entropy is
computed. (3) The final model is trained using existing denoising algorithms with the mini-batches constructed by following
the computed sampling probability. Compared to existing debiasing and denoising algorithms, our method achieves better
debiasing performance on multiple benchmarks.

1

Difficult-to-learn

Bias

Label Flip

Label: Camel, Bg: Desert

Label: Camel, Bg: Forest

Label: Horse, Bg: Desert

Label: Horse, Bg: Forest

Figure 1: Examples of biased dataset with noisy labels. (1)
Blue: bias-aligned, clean label samples. (2) Orange: biasconflicting, clean labels samples. (3) Green: bias-aligned,
noisy labels. (4) Red: bias-conflicting, noisy labels. The
dashed background represents difficult-to-learn samples.
Therefore, except for (bias-aligned, clean) case, other cases
are difficult-to-learn. To mitigate dataset bias with noisy labels, training directions for each type differ. For example,
(bias-aligned, noisy) case must be discarded or cleansed,
while (bias-conflicting, clean) cases have to be emphasized.

This unintended bias causes the trained model to infer erroneously based on shortcuts (i.e., background). To mitigate
such dataset bias, previous researches have used the fact that
bias-conflicting samples are more difficult-to-learn than biasaligned samples (Nam et al. 2020). Various approaches have
been proposed, such as adjusting the loss function (Bahng
et al. 2020; Nam et al. 2020; Creager, Jacobsen, and Zemel
2021), feature disentanglement (Lee et al. 2021), creating
mixed-attribute samples (Kim, Lee, and Choo 2021), or reconstructing balanced datasets (Liu et al. 2021; Ahn, Kim,
and Yun 2023) to emphasize difficult-to-learn samples.
In addition to dataset bias, noisy labels are caused by many
reasons (Yu et al. 2018; Nicholson, Sheng, and Zhang 2016)
and are known to degrade training mechanisms. For example,
in Figure 1, the camel in the bottom row can be labeled
horse by human error. Numerous studies have focused on
alleviating the impact of noisy labels or directly correcting
them. Some (Bahri, Jiang, and Gupta 2020; Zhang et al.
2020; Veit et al. 2017; Ren et al. 2018; Hendrycks et al.
2018) deal with the problem of noisy labels by assuming
clean data to set training guidelines (i.e., purifying a given

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved human-like performance in various tasks, such as image classification (He
et al. 2016), image generation (Goodfellow et al. 2014), and
object detection (He et al. 2017), but require well-organized
training datasets for success. For example, the trained model
might have prejudices when its training dataset is biased. In
real life, we often encounter dataset bias problems (Bahng
et al. 2020; Nam et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2021; Kim, Lee, and
Choo 2021). For example, as shown in Figure 1, the dataset
for classifying camels in images could be very biased, as
most camel images are captured against a desert background
(i.e., bias-aligned); only a few images are captured against
other backgrounds, such as forests (i.e., bias-conflicting).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

169

