The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robust Self-Supervised Multi-Instance Learning with Structure Awareness
Yejiang Wang1 , Yuhai Zhao1, * , Zhengkui Wang2 , Meixia Wang1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, China
InfoComm Technology Cluster, Singapore Institute of Technology, Singapore
wangyejiang@stumail.neu.edu.cn, zhaoyuhai@mail.neu.edu.cn,
zhengkui.wang@singaporetech.edu.sg, wangmeixia@stumail.neu.edu.cn

2

Abstract

2021; Wang et al. 2018). For large-scale MIL scenarios like
drug activity prediction, where each molecule can be represented as a bag and the instances correspond to different conformations (molecular structures) of that compound,
these methods often implement the bag-level MIL models
by a two-stage strategy: first training an instance-level feature extractor, and then aggregating features as bag-level
representations with label information (Ilse, Tomczak, and
Welling 2018). However, it may be difficult to collect a
multi-instance learning datasets composed of fully labeled
bags in real-world applications, due to the significant labeling costs. For example, high-quality molecule data with
human labeling could be costly and it is difficult, if not
impossible to create fully labeled datasets with millions of
molecules (Rong et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021). To tackle
this challenge, in this paper, we make an attempt to learn the
representation of bag in a self-supervised manner without
the requirement of any label information.
A robust self-supervised MIL learning for bag representation should fulfil below important properties. First, it should
generate the bag representation that is invariant to the permutation of the set of instances. The example (i.e. a bag)
in MIL is described by a set of feature instances. The order
independence of set can be used to design models with improved efficiency and generalization (Wagstaff et al. 2022;
Maron et al. 2019). Second, it should have the capability
of capturing the topological structure information on tasks
where the objects have inherent interactions. Previous studies on multi-instance learning typically treated instances in
the bags as independently and identically distributed (Huang
et al. 2022; Feng et al. 2021; Ilse, Tomczak, and Welling
2018). However, the local structures and the proximity information from nearby instances are important in MIL model
(Zhang 2021). Third, it should be able to handle the bag
noise. It is inevitable that the provided multi-instance bags
are incomplete and noisy in real-world scenarios (Chevaleyre and Zucker 2000; Luengo et al. 2021). Hence, developing robust multi-instance learning models to resist unnoticeable perturbation (e.g., missing or error instances in bags) is
of significant importance.
In this paper, we provide a full characterization of multiinstance learning and present a robust Self-supervised MultiInstance LEarning architecture with Structure awareness
(S MILES) to capture all the above properties. Specifically,

Multi-instance learning (MIL) is a supervised learning where
each example is a labeled bag with many instances. The typical MIL strategies are to train an instance-level feature extractor followed by aggregating instances features as bag-level
representation with labeled information. However, learning
such a bag-level representation highly depends on a large
number of labeled datasets, which are difficult to get in realworld scenarios. In this paper, we make the first attempt to
propose a robust Self-supervised Multi-Instance LEarning architecture with Structure awareness (S MILES) that learns unsupervised bag representation. Our proposed approach is: 1)
permutation invariant to the order of instances in bag; 2)
structure-aware to encode the topological structures among
the instances; and 3) robust against instances noise or permutation. Specifically, to yield robust MIL model without
label information, we augment the multi-instance bag and
train the representation encoder to maximize the agreement
between the representations of the same bag in its different
augmented forms. Moreover, to capture topological structures
from nearby instances in bags, our framework learns optimal
graph structures for the bags and these graphs are optimized
together with message passing layers and ordered weighted
averaging operator towards contrastive loss. Our main theorem characterizes the permutation invariance of the bag representation. Compared with state-of-the-art supervised MIL
baselines, S MILES achieves average improvement of 4.9%,
4.4% in classification accuracy on 5 benchmark datasets and
20 newsgroups datasets, respectively. In addition, we show
that the model is robust to the input corruption.

Introduction
Multi-instance learning (MIL) is a form of supervised learning where training instances are arranged in sets, namely
bags, and each bag is assigned a binary label (Yuan et al.
2021; Pal et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2022). The standard MIL
assumption is that a bag is positive if it contains at least one
positive instance, and negative otherwise.
In the past decades, much research effort has been devoted to improve the performance of MIL by learning the
bag-level representation, which implicitly utilizes bag-tobag similarity or explicitly trains a bag classifier (Feng et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10218

