The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

The Effect of Diversity in Meta-Learning
Ramnath Kumar1 * , Tristan Deleu2 , Yoshua Bengio2, 3
Google Research, India 1
Mila, Québec Artificial Intelligence Institute, Université de Montréal 2
CIFAR, IVADO 3

Abstract

previous work attempts to work with task diversity and its
effect in the meta-learning setting.
Conventional wisdom is that the model’s performance
will improve as we train on more diverse tasks. This does
seem intuitively sound: training on a diverse and large
amount of classes should bring about a more extensive understanding of the world, thus learning multiple concepts
of, let’s say, the ”world model”. To test this hypothesis,
we define task samplers that either limit task diversity by
selecting a subset of overall tasks or improve task diversity using approaches such as Determinantal Point Processes
(DPPs) proposed by (Macchi 1975). This problem is interesting since understanding the effect of diversity in metalearning is closely linked to the model’s ability to learn. In
hindsight, this study is also an excellent metric to test the
efficacy of our models, as will become more substantial in
further sections.

Recent studies show that task distribution plays a vital role
in the meta-learner’s performance. Conventional wisdom is
that task diversity should improve the performance of metalearning. In this work, we find evidence to the contrary;
(i) our experiments draw into question the efficacy of our
learned models: similar manifolds can be learned with a subset of the data (lower task diversity). This finding questions
the advantage of providing more data to the model, and (ii)
adding diversity to the task distribution (higher task diversity)
sometimes hinders the model and does not lead to a significant improvement in performance as previously believed. To
strengthen our findings, we provide both empirical and theoretical evidence.

1

Introduction

It is widely recognized that humans can learn new concepts
based on very little supervision, i.e., with few examples (or
”shots”), and generalize these concepts to unseen data as
mentioned by (Lake et al. 2011). On the other hand, recent
advances in deep learning have primarily relied on datasets
with large amounts of labeled examples, primarily due to
overfitting concerns in low data regimes. Although better
data augmentation and regularization techniques can alleviate these concerns, many researchers now assume that future
breakthroughs in low data regimes will emerge from metalearning, or ”learning to learn.”
Here, we study the effect of task diversity in the low
data regime and its impact on various models. In this metalearning setting, a model is trained on a handful of labeled
examples at a time under the assumption that it will learn
how to correctly project examples of different classes and
generalize this knowledge to unseen labels at test time. Although this setting is often used to illustrate the remaining gap between human capabilities and machine learning,
we could argue that the domain of meta-learning is still
nascent. The field of task selection has mainly remained
under-explored in this setting. Hence, our exploration of this
setting is much warranted. To the best of our knowledge, no

1.1

Contributions

In this section, we present the main contributions of the paper:
• We show that limiting task diversity and repeating the
same tasks over the training phase allows the model to
obtain performances similar to models trained on Uniform Sampler without any adverse effects. (Section 4,5)
• We also show that increasing task diversity using sophisticated samplers such as DPP or Online Hard Task Mining (OHTM) Samplers does not significantly boost performance. Instead, this also harms the performance of the
learner in certain instances. (Section 4,5)
• We also propose a suitable theoretical explanation for our
findings from the connection to Simpson’s paradox phenomenon from the discipline of causality as discussed
briefly in Appendix D.1 in (Kumar, Deleu, and Bengio
2022).
• We also propose a metric to compute task diversity in the
meta-learning setting. (Section 3)
• Our findings bring into question the efficiency of the
model and the advantage it gains with access to more
data using samplers such as the standard sampling regime
– Uniform Sampler. If we can achieve similar performances with fewer data, the existing models have not
taken advantage of the excess data it is provided with.

* Work done during an internship at Mila; Correspondence author: ramnathk@google.com.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8396

