The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning to Imagine: Distillation-Based Interactive Context Exploitation
for Dialogue State Tracking
Jinyu Guo1,2 , Kai Shuang1,2 * , Kaihang Zhang1,2 , Yixuan Liu1,2 , Jijie Li3 , Zihan Wang4
1

State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China
4
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo
{guojinyu, shuangk, zkh1999, liuyixuan}@bupt.edu.cn, jjli@baai.ac.cn, zwang@tkl.iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract

S1: Good morning! How can I help you?
U1: I want to move around downtown today, please
help me find a Turkish restaurant.
restaurant-food: ['Turkish']
S2: The Alimentum is in the center of the town, how
many people would you like to reserve?
U2: Please book me for 7 people.
restaurant-food: ['Turikish'] restaurant-name: ['Alimentum']
restaurant-area: ['center'] restaurant-bookpeople: ['7']
S3: Your reservation at Alimentum for 7 people has been
successful!

In dialogue state tracking (DST), the exploitation of dialogue history is a crucial research direction, and the existing DST models can be divided into two categories: fullhistory models and partial-history models. Since the “select
first, use later” mechanism explicitly filters the distracting information being passed to the downstream state prediction,
the partial-history models have recently achieved a performance advantage over the full-history models. However, besides the redundant information, some critical dialogue context information was inevitably filtered out by the partialhistory models simultaneously. To reconcile the contextual
consideration with avoiding the introduction of redundant information, we propose DICE-DST, a model-agnostic module
widely applicable to the partial-history DST models, which
aims to strengthen the ability of context exploitation for the
encoder of each DST model. Specifically, we first construct
a teacher encoder and devise two contextual reasoning tasks
to train it to acquire extensive dialogue contextual knowledge. Then we transfer the contextual knowledge from the
teacher encoder to the student encoder via a novel turn-level
attention-alignment distillation. Experimental results show
that our approach extensively improves the performance of
partial-history DST models and thereby achieves new stateof-the-art performance on multiple mainstream datasets while
keeping high efficiency.

······

S8: Is there anything else I can help you with?
U8: I also need to book a hotel for 7 people for 3 nights.
... hotel-bookstay: ['3'] hotel-bookpeople: ['7']
S9: May I suggest the Worth House? It is a cheap,
4 star hotel in northen Cambridge.
U9: This location is a bit out of the way.
... hotel-bookstay: ['3']
hotel-bookpeople: ['7'] hotel-area: ['center']

Figure 1: An example of DST. Utterances on the left and the
right sides are from system and user, respectively. Each red
slot value in the figure indicates that it is updated in its turn.
food”:“Turkish”). The continuously updated dialogue state
indicates the progress of the dialogue and is leveraged to determine the next system action.
In dialogue state tracking, the utilization of dialogue history is a crucial research direction. The existing DST methods can generally be divided into two categories based on
the use of dialogue history: full-history methods and partialhistory methods. Full-history methods employ the current
turn dialogue concatenated to the entire historical utterances
as input to ensure the integrity of the input information (Xu
and Hu 2018; Lei et al. 2018; Goel, Paul, and HakkaniTür 2019; Ren 2020; Shan et al. 2020; Rastogi et al. 2020;
Hosseini-Asl et al. 2020). Nevertheless, this type of method
usually encounters two issues: 1) The huge spatial costs
and the serious efficiency issues brought by the input of
all dialogues, and more seriously; 2) since the truly useful dialogues for the state update of each turn are only a
small portion of all dialogue utterances, the input of all dialogues leads to the introduction of a large amount of re-

Introduction
Imagination is the eye of the soul.
———————————————————————–
Joseph Joubert (1754 AD - 1824 AD)
Task-Oriented Dialogue (TOD) systems have achieved
substantial progress and have penetrated our daily lives
much more than before. As an essential component of dialogue management, Dialogue State Tracking (DST) is in
charge of utilizing multi-turn dialogues to extract the compact dialogue information which contains user goals and intentions as the dialogue state. In each turn, the dialogue state
is typically in the form of a set of (slot, value) pairs. For example, in Fig. 1, the dialogue state at turn 1 is (“restaurant* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12845

