The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Scaling Law for Recommendation Models:
Towards General-Purpose User Representations
Kyuyong Shin12 * , Hanock Kwak1 * , Su Young Kim1 , Max Nihlén Ramström1 ,
Jisu Jeong12 , Jung-Woo Ha12 , Kyung-Min Kim12
1
NAVER
NAVER AI Lab
{ky.shin, hanock.kwak2}@navercorp.com
2

Abstract

general-purpose user representations learned from multiple
source data provide a promising transfer learning capability?
2) Are pretraining and downstream task performances positively correlated? 3) How various tasks can the pretrained
user representations address? 4) Does scaling up pretraining
models improve the generalization performance? 5) If so,
which factors, such as, training data and model size, behavior sequence length, and batch size, should be scaled up?
To answer these questions, we introduce Contrastive
Learning User Encoder, i.e, CLUE. CLUE demonstrates the
effectiveness of the pretrained general user representations,
learned from 50 billion behavior tokens of 11 million users
from a search engine and e-commerce platform that share
a common user pool, by adapting them to unseen downstream tasks. CLUE uses contrastive learning by constructing user representations for each service task, then treating
pairs of the same user representations as positive samples
while treating representations of different users as negative
samples. We comprehensively evaluate the pretrained user
representation of CLUE with multiple downstream tasks
from industrial and benchmark datasets, including an online
CTR evaluation. More specifically, we compare the performance of a simple multi-layer perceptron (MLP) employing our task-agnostic pretrained CLUE features with a taskspecific model trained for each downstream task. Furthermore, we investigate the empirical scaling laws of training
data size, model size, sequence length and batch size with
extensive experiments, and analyze power-law scaling for
training performance as a function of computing resources.
Our key findings through CLUE are summarized:
Empirical scaling law. The pretraining test error scales as a
power-law with the total training cost (PF-days) unless bottlenecked by other factors, which is also observed in other
domains (Brown et al. 2020). However, we observe that the
performance of the models does not depend on their size
alone in user representation tasks (Figure 2(a)), other factors
such as batch size and sequence length also have considerable influences on the performance.
Transferability improves as the pretraining error decrease. CLUE performs transfer learning well on heterogeneous datasets even when the domains are different. The resulting test losses on the downstream tasks also show strong
correlation to the pretraining test loss. These results indicate
that generalization on various data distributions are strongly

Recent advancement of large-scale pretrained models such
as BERT, GPT-3, CLIP, and Gopher, has shown astonishing achievements across various task domains. Unlike vision
recognition and language models, studies on general-purpose
user representation at scale still remain underexplored. Here
we explore the possibility of general-purpose user representation learning by training a universal user encoder at large
scales. We demonstrate that the scaling law is present in
user representation learning areas, where the training error
scales as a power-law with the amount of computation. Our
Contrastive Learning User Encoder (CLUE), optimizes taskagnostic objectives, and the resulting user embeddings stretch
our expectation of what is possible to do in various downstream tasks. CLUE also shows great transferability to other
domains and companies, as performances on an online experiment shows significant improvements in Click-ThroughRate (CTR). Furthermore, we also investigate how the model
performance is influenced by the scale factors, such as training data size, model capacity, sequence length, and batch size.
Finally, we discuss the broader impacts of CLUE in general.

Introduction
Recent work has demonstrated that models pretrained on
enormous data at scale can perform remarkable downstream
transfers in a flexible and task-agnostic manner for vision
recognition (Zhai et al. 2021; Dai et al. 2021; Goyal et al.
2021), language models (Devlin et al. 2019; Brown et al.
2020; Kim et al. 2021; Rae et al. 2021), speech recognition (Baevski et al. 2020), and multimodal learning (Radford et al. 2021; Akbari et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022). These
large-scale models are called foundation models, which have
brought seismic changes to both academia and industry
by providing general-purpose utilities and promising results (Bommasani, Hudson et al. 2021). However, in contrast
to the other domains mentioned above, studies on the scaling and generalization ability of general-purpose pretrained
user representation learning still remain underexplored for
various downstream recommendation tasks.
Here we highlight five key questions for exploring the
possibilities of general-purpose user representations. 1) Can
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4596

