The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Joint Multimodal Entity-Relation Extraction Based on Edge-Enhanced Graph
Alignment Network and Word-Pair Relation Tagging
Li Yuan1, 2 , Yi Cai 1, 2, 3 * , Jin Wang4 , Qing Li5
1

School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot (SCUT), MOE of China
3
The Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
School of Information Science and Engineering, Yunnan University, Yunnan, P.R. China
5
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
seyuanli@mail.scut.edu.cn, ycai@scut.edu.cn, wangjin@ynu.edu.cn, qing-prof.li@polyu.edu.hk
Abstract

hat

0_man

Multimodal named entity recognition (MNER) and multimodal relation extraction (MRE) are two fundamental subtasks in the multimodal knowledge graph construction task.
However, the existing methods usually handle two tasks independently, which ignores the bidirectional interaction between
them. This paper is the first to propose jointly performing
MNER and MRE as a joint multimodal entity-relation extraction (JMERE) task . Besides, the current MNER and MRE
models only consider aligning the visual objects with textual
entities in visual and textual graphs but ignore the entity-entity
relationships and object-object relationships. To address the
above challenges, we propose an edge-enhanced graph alignment network and a word-pair relation tagging (EEGA) for
the JMERE task. Specifically, we first design a word-pair
relation tagging to exploit the bidirectional interaction between MNER and MRE and avoid error propagation. Then,
we propose an edge-enhanced graph alignment network to
enhance the JMERE task by aligning nodes and edges in the
cross-graph. Compared with previous methods, the proposed
method can leverage the edge information to auxiliary alignment between objects and entities and find the correlations
between entity-entity relationships and object-object relationships. Experiments are conducted to show the effectiveness of
our model1 .

2_man

1_man
trophy

Image:

entity type entity type relation

t1

e2

t2

Thompson Per

NBA

Org member_of

Per

NBA

Org member_of

Thompson Per

Curry

Per

e1

Curry

hand

So happy, NBA stars Thompson,
Text: Curry, and Green surround the
O'Brien Trophy.

Input

……
……

Green

Per

Curry

Per

O'Brien
Trophy Misc
O'Brien
Trophy Misc

r

peer

awarded
awarded

Output

Joint Multimodal Entity-Relation Extraction (JMERE)

Figure 1: An illustrative example of the joint multimodal
entity-relation extraction (JMERE) task, where the Per, Org,
and Misc are denoted as the entity types of person, organization, and miscellaneous.

Introduction
Multimodal named entity recognition (MNER) and multimodal relation extraction (MRE) are two fundamental subtasks for the multimodal knowledge graph construction (Liu
et al. 2019; Chen, Jia, and Xiang 2020), which aims to extend
the text-based models by taking images as additional inputs.
Previous works usually consider MNER and MRE as two independent tasks (Lu et al. 2018; Moon, Neves, and Carvalho
2018; Wu et al. 2020b; Yu et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2021c;
Zhang et al. 2021a), which ignore the interaction between
these two tasks. Recently, jointing NER and RE as joint
entity-relation extraction tasks have attracted much attention
in text scenarios, which can exploit the bidirectional interaction between tasks and improve their performance (Wei
* Corresponding author: Yi Cai (ycai@scut.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The
code
and
appendix
are
available
at
https://github.com/YuanLi95/EEGA-for-JMERE

11051

et al. 2020; Yuan et al. 2020a,b). As shown in Figure 1, if we
extract the entity type of (Curry, NBA) is Per and Org, then
their relation should not be peer. Otherwise, if we know the
relation of entity pair (Curry, Thompson) is the peer, then
their entity types should be Per and Per. Thus, the NER can
facilitate RE. Meanwhile, RE is also beneficial for NER.
However, to the best of our knowledge, joining the MNER
and MRE as a joint multimodal entity-relation extraction
(JMERE) task has not been studied in the multimodal scenario. Compared with separate tasks, the JMERE task requires extracting different characteristic information from
vision. As shown in Figure 1, for the MNER task, if the
model can capture the people objects from the image, e.g.,
outlines of multiple people (blue boxes), it helps to identify the person entity in the text. Meanwhile, the MRE task
needs to extract the object-object relationships, e.g., if we
know the holding is the relationship between man 0 and
trophy, we can understand the relation awarded between
entities Thompson and O’Brien Trophy. Thus, we consider
that the JMERE task should align entities with objects and
entity-entity relationships (in text) with object-object relationships (in image). Most recent MNER and MRE studies
(Zhang et al. 2021a; Zheng et al. 2021a) align the entities
with objects in the visual and textual graphs constructed by
the latent relationships of objects and words, as shown by the

