The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

S HEET PT: Spreadsheet Pre-training Based on Hierarchical Attention Network
Ran Jia1 * † , Qiyu Li2 * ‡ , Zihan Xu2‡ , Xiaoyuan Jin2‡ , Lun Du1 ,
Haoyu Dong1 , Xiao Lv1 , Shi Han1 , Dongmei Zhang 1
1

Microsoft Research Asia
2
Peking University
{raji, lun.du, hadong, xilv, shihan, dongmeiz}@microsoft.com, {liqiyu0728, xzhpku, jinxy}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Zhang et al. 2021), formula prediction (Chen et al. 2021;
Cheng et al. 2021) and chart recommendation (Zhou et al.
2021). Some (Huang and He 2018; Zhou et al. 2021; Chen
et al. 2021) of them only discuss relational tables with simple and definitive schema, and others (Zhang et al. 2021;
Cheng et al. 2021) require explicit table boundary and structural information like the position of headers. Such designs
heavily rely on techniques that detect table boundary and
structure, and errors from preceding models will accumulate and impact performance on downstream tasks. Essentially, these work regard spreadsheets as a type of tabular
data, which neglects the fact that they are a kind of document where data is organized on the grid with more abundant analytical components like formulas and charts.
As a unique type of document, spreadsheets are distinct
from tables in other documents in the following aspects. 1)
Table boundary in spreadsheets is usually not explicit and
is even difficult to be identified on some sheets based on
the general table definition; 2) Even if the table boundary
can be determined, other cells outside the table also contain
valuable information, such as the data description and comments; 3) Users will process and analyze across different
tables, such as creating cross-table formulas and charts. For
convenience, there can be multiple tables with semantic and
calculation dependence in one sheet. Hence, only considering tables in spreadsheets will lead to significant information loss, and a more comprehensive spreadsheet modeling
method is in urgent need.
To bridge the gap between tables and spreadsheets, we
desire an approach that can directly handle the entire sheet,
which means the sheet is not divided into multiple tables
and separately modeled, instead all the cells are input together and the contextual relations among cells can be holistically captured. Due to the high complexity of spreadsheets
data, data labeling for various tasks is extremely hard, so
we turn to leveraging the pre-training technique. But it still
faces some challenges:
Challenge 1: Large input size. Spreadsheets usually consist
of numerous cells and the entire token sequence can be extremely long. According to our statistics on more than 400K
sheets, the 85th percentile of the number of cells is about
4K, and the length of the corresponding token sequence is
more than 13K, which greatly exceeds the usual token limit
for transformer-based models and raises challenges to both

Spreadsheets are an important and unique type of business
document for data storage, analysis and presentation. The distinction between spreadsheets and most other types of digital
documents lies in that spreadsheets provide users with high
flexibility of data organization on the grid. Existing related
techniques mainly focus on the tabular data and are incompetent in understanding the entire sheet. On the one hand,
spreadsheets have no explicit separation across tabular data
and other information, leaving a gap for the deployment of
such techniques. On the other hand, pervasive data dependence and semantic relations across the sheet require comprehensive modeling of all the information rather than only
the tables. In this paper, we propose S HEET PT, the first pretraining technique on spreadsheets to enable effective representation learning under this scenario. For computational effectiveness and efficiency, we propose the coherent chunk,
an intermediate semantic unit of sheet structure; and we accordingly devise a hierarchical attention-based architecture
to capture contextual information across different structural
granularities. Three pre-training objectives are also designed
to ensure sufficient training against millions of spreadsheets.
Two representative downstream tasks, formula prediction and
sheet structure recognition are utilized to evaluate its capability and the prominent results reveal its superiority over existing state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
With the superior ability of efficient data management and
presentation, spreadsheets are widely used by billions of
users in public and internal data storage and analysis. They
are becoming a critical scenario of document intelligence,
where advanced intelligence techniques can improve user
effectiveness and experience such as formula and chart recommendation during analysis. To accomplish these goals,
understanding spreadsheets from both structure and semantics is an important foundation and has attracted attention
from researchers in recent years.
Most existing studies on spreadsheets take a single table
as the input, such as error detection (Huang and He 2018;
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Work done during internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

12951

