The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CLIP-ReID: Exploiting Vision-Language Model for Image Re-identification
without Concrete Text Labels
Siyuan Li1 , Li Sun1,2 , Qingli Li1
1

2

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing, East China Normal University
Key Laboratory of Advanced Theory and Application in Statistics and Data Science, East China Normal University
sunli@ee.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Pre-trained vision-language models like CLIP have recently
shown superior performances on various downstream tasks,
including image classification and segmentation. However,
in fine-grained image re-identification (ReID), the labels are
indexes, lacking concrete text descriptions. Therefore, it remains to be determined how such models could be applied to
these tasks. This paper first finds out that simply fine-tuning
the visual model initialized by the image encoder in CLIP, has
already obtained competitive performances in various ReID
tasks. Then we propose a two-stage strategy to facilitate a better visual representation. The key idea is to fully exploit the
cross-modal description ability in CLIP through a set of learnable text tokens for each ID and give them to the text encoder
to form ambiguous descriptions. In the first training stage,
image and text encoders from CLIP keep fixed, and only the
text tokens are optimized from scratch by the contrastive loss
computed within a batch. In the second stage, the ID-specific
text tokens and their encoder become static, providing constraints for fine-tuning the image encoder. With the help of
the designed loss in the downstream task, the image encoder
is able to represent data as vectors in the feature embedding
accurately. The effectiveness of the proposed strategy is validated on several datasets for the person or vehicle ReID tasks.
Code is available at https://github.com/Syliz517/CLIP-ReID.

(a) Stage1
Initialized text features
Text features after stage1

(b) Stage2
Original image features
Image features after stage2

Figure 1: t-SNE visualization on image and text features
(Van der Maaten and Hinton 2008). Randomly selected 10
persons in the MSMT17 are represented by different colors.
The dots and pentagons indicate the image and text features,
respectively. (a) and (b) show the data distributions after the
first and second training stage.

from being used in a real application. CNN is often blamed
for only focusing on a small irrelevant region in the image,
which indicates that its feature is not robust and discriminative enough. Recently, vision transformers like ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) have become popular in many tasks, and
they have also shown better performances in ReID. Compared to CNN, transformers can model the long-range dependency in the whole image. However, due to a large number of model parameters, they require a big training set and
often perform erratically during optimization. Since ReID
datasets are relatively small, the potential of these models is
not fully exploited yet.
Both CNN-based and ViT-based methods heavily rely on
pre-training. Almost all ReID methods need an initial model
trained on ImageNet, which contains images manually given
one-hot labels from a pre-defined set. Visual contents describing rich semantics outside the set are completely ignored. Recently, cross-modal learning like CLIP (Radford
et al. 2021) connects the visual representation with its corresponding high-level language description. They not only
train on a larger dataset but also change the pre-training
task, matching visual features to their language descriptions.
Therefore, the image encoder can sense a variety of highlevel semantics from the text and learn transferable features,
which can be adapted to many different tasks. E.g., given

Introduction
Image re-identification (ReID) aims to match the same object across different and non-overlapping camera views. Particularly, it focuses on detecting the same person or vehicle
in the surveillance camera networks. ReID is a challenging
task mainly due to the cluttered background, illumination
variations, huge pose changes, or even occlusions. Most recent ReID models depend on building and training a convolution neural network (CNN) so that each image is mapped
to a feature vector in the embedding space before the classifier. Images of the same object tend to be close, while different objects become far away in this space. The parameters of
CNN can be effectively learned under the guidance of cross
entropy loss together with the typical metric learning loss
like center or triplet loss (Hermans, Beyer, and Leibe 2017).
Although CNN-based models for ReID have achieved
good performance on some well-known datasets, it is still far
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1405

