The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Vector Causal Inference between Two Groups of Variables
Jonas Wahl* ,1,2 , Urmi Ninad* ,1,2 , Jakob Runge1,2
1

Technische Universität Berlin
DLR Institut für Datenwissenschaften Jena
wahl@tu-berlin.de, urmi.ninad@tu-berlin.de, runge@tu-berlin.de
2

Abstract

vector-valued X

Methods to identify cause-effect relationships currently
mostly assume the variables to be scalar random variables.
However, in many fields the objects of interest are vectors
or groups of scalar variables. We present a new constraintbased non-parametric approach for inferring the causal relationship between two vector-valued random variables from
observational data. Our method employs sparsity estimates of
directed and undirected graphs and is based on two new principles for groupwise causal reasoning that we justify theoretically in Pearl’s graphical model-based causality framework.
Our theoretical considerations are complemented by two new
causal discovery algorithms for causal interactions between
two random vectors which find the correct causal direction
reliably in simulations even if interactions are nonlinear. We
evaluate our methods empirically and compare them to other
state-of-the-art techniques.

X1
X3

X2
X4

vector-valued Y
neg. effect

Y1
Y3

pos. effect

Y2
Y4

Figure 1: Two components in the vector-valued variable X
have effects on Y that are of opposing signs, such that aggregation of X and Y leads to a dilution or cancellation of
dependence.
|=

instance, conditional independencies X Y|Z between vectors might not be visible in their mean values (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000). Opposing causal effects from different parts of a region might average to zero, and causally
relevant information might be diluted or lost when considering aggregate variables, see Figure 1. Furthermore, methods
that rely on the non-Gaussianity of noise to make inferences
about the causal direction, such as LinGaM (Shimizu et al.
2006), are rendered weak by the averaging due to the central
limit theorem driving the average noise closer to a Gaussian.
In this work, we aim to develop new techniques to infer
the causal relationship between two groups of variables, represented as random vectors, without a dimension reduction
step. Assuming that the causal arrows go from one group to
the other only, the most straightforward way to do so is to
run a standard causal discovery algorithm, e.g. the PC algorithm, on all microvariables (i.e. all entries of both vectors), and then choose the cause group as the one that has
the most edges pointing to the other group. When groups
become large, this approach, henceforth called Vanilla-PC,
has disadvantages: since it needs to determine the full causal
‘microstructure’, it has to run many conditional independence tests and due to the sequential error propagation of the
PC algorithm becomes unreliable quickly at small sample
size (see Subsection 12 in the Supplement for an empirical
illustration of this). In essence, Vanilla-PC computes more
structure than is needed to answer the causal query at hand
and therefore uses the data inefficiently. We therefore take
a different road and combine the constraint-based approach
for causal discovery with sparsity measures of the internal
(causal) structure of the groups. Our methods are based on

Introduction
In recent years, many methods have been developed in order
to infer cause-effect relationships between random variables
from observational data, see e.g. Pearl (2009); Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines (2000); Shimizu et al. (2006); Peters,
Janzing, and Schölkopf (2017); Runge et al. (2015). Most
often these random variables are assumed to be scalar; an
assumption which covers many but by no means all questions of interest in science. For instance, neuroscience researchers are often interested in the causal interactions between different brain regions each of which are represented
by a multitude of measurement locations in fMRI data. Similarly, in the Earth sciences, researchers would like to understand causal relationship between variables (such as sea
surface temperature, air pressure or wind speed) that have
each been measured at a number of grid locations in predefined areas on the planet. To make inferences in such a
setup, standard approaches often proceed to drastically reduce the number of measurement variables, for instance by
computing average values across each region of interest or
by applying statistical dimension reduction techniques such
as principal component analysis. However, aggregating data
in such a way might lead to faulty causal conclusions: For
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12305

