The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Decomposed Spatial Relations for Multi-Variate Time-Series Modeling
Yuchen Fang1 , Kan Ren2 , Caihua Shan2 , Yifei Shen2 ,
You Li3 , Weinan Zhang1 , Yong Yu1 , Dongsheng Li2
1

Abstract
PearsonR

1.00

Modeling multi-variate time-series (MVTS) data is a longstanding research subject and has found wide applications.
Recently, there is a surge of interest in modeling spatial relations between variables as graphs, i.e., first learning one static
graph for each dataset and then exploiting the graph structure
via graph neural networks. However, as spatial relations may
differ substantially across samples, building one static graph
for all the samples inherently limits flexibility and severely
degrades the performance in practice. To address this issue,
we propose a framework for fine-grained modeling and utilization of spatial correlation between variables. By analyzing the statistical properties of real-world datasets, a universal decomposition of spatial correlation graphs is first identified. Specifically, the hidden spatial relations can be decomposed into a prior part, which applies across all the samples,
and a dynamic part, which varies between samples, and building different graphs is necessary to model these relations. To
better coordinate the learning of the two relational graphs,
we propose a min-max learning paradigm that not only regulates the common part of different dynamic graphs but also
guarantees spatial distinguishability among samples. The experimental results show that our proposed model outperforms
the state-of-the-art baseline methods on both time-series forecasting and time-series point prediction tasks.

Corr. between variable pairs

0.75

(111,242)
(1,219)
(288,247)
(60,241)

0.50
0.25
0.00
0

10

20

30

Time (day)

40

50

(a) Correlation between variable
pairs varies across time.

# sample pairs (x 104)

Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
2
Microsoft Research Asia,
3
Central South University
{arthur fyc, wnzhang}@sjtu.edu.cn, kan.ren@microsoft.com

1.0

Similarities btw. correlation matrices

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Cosine similarity

(b) Variable correlation matrices vary among samples.

Figure 1: We calculate the correlation (Benesty et al.
2009) between variables in each sample of Pems-bay traffic dataset (Li et al. 2017).
2018) regard multi-variate information as an individual vector and rely on fully connected layers to conduct interactions
between variables. However, these methods failed to exploit
the spatial relationship efficiently without explicitly modeling correlations between variables, yielding high sample
complexity and poor generalization ability.
Inspired by the great success of graph neural networks
(GNNs), many works utilize spatio-temporal GNNs to deal
with the spatial dependencies between variables. The early
attempts (Li et al. 2017; Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2017) rely on
a predefined graph structure to model inter-variate dependencies, which is generally unavailable in real-world scenarios and can be inaccurate or incomplete. Recent works (Wu
et al. 2019, 2020) proposed to use graph structure learning
methods to discover spatial relations between variables, relaxing the requirement of predefined graphs and leading to
promising results.
Nevertheless, the existing methods build a static graph
for the whole dataset and ignore the fact that the relations
usually vary across different samples, resulting in poor performance on some datasets. For example, suppose the sample is obtained from time-series segmentation in traffic data.
Some factors (e.g., dynamic traffic flow, road maintenance
or emergent accidents) affect the correlation among sensors
at the crossing, which leads to dynamic variable relations in
different samples. Except for these factors, some common
relations, such as arterial traffic conditions, remain invariant across the samples. To verify this claim, we analyze the
variable correlations on real-world data. As shown in Figure 1, we calculate the cosine similarity of the variable cor-

Introduction
Multi-variate time-series (MVTS) data modeling has always
been an important subject in a wide range of research domains, including healthcare (Stevenson et al. 2019), economics and finance (Lin et al. 2021), meteorology and traffic (Lai et al. 2018). One of the key observations for MVTS
data is that there exist spatial relations among different variables. For example, the traffic speed on one road would be
heavily affected by the traffic flow of a nearby street. Traditional methods like auto-regressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) (Box et al. 2015) and Gaussian process (GP)
models (Roberts et al. 2013) either ignore spatial relations,
or assume linear dependencies among variables. Deep learning methods based on recurrent neural networks (RNN) and
convolutional neural networks (CNN) (Ismail Fawaz et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Shih, Sun, and Lee 2019; Lai et al.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7530

