The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MEID: Mixture-of-Experts with Internal Distillation
for Long-Tailed Video Recognition
Xinjie Li, Huijuan Xu
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, USA
{xql5497, hkx5063}@psu.edu

Head

Abstract
The long-tailed video recognition problem is especially challenging, as videos tend to be long and untrimmed, and each
video may contain multiple classes, causing frame-level class
imbalance. The previous method tackles the long-tailed video
recognition only through frame-level sampling for class rebalance without distinguishing the frame-level feature representation between head and tail classes. To improve the
frame-level feature representation of tail classes, we modulate the frame-level features with an auxiliary distillation
loss to reduce the distribution distance between head and tail
classes. Moreover, we design a mixture-of-experts framework
with two different expert designs, i.e., the first expert with
an attention-based classification network handling the original long-tailed distribution, and the second expert dealing
with the re-balanced distribution from class-balanced sampling. Notably, in the second expert, we specifically focus
on the frames unsolved by the first expert by designing a
complementary frame selection module, which inherits the
attention weights from the first expert and selects frames
with low attention weights, and we also enhance the motion feature representation for these selected frames. To highlight the multi-label challenge in long-tailed video recognition, we create two additional benchmarks based on Charades and CharadesEgo videos with the multi-label property,
called CharadesLT and CharadesEgoLT. Extensive experiments are conducted on the existing long-tailed video benchmark VideoLT and the two new benchmarks to verify the effectiveness of our proposed method with state-of-the-art performance. The code and proposed benchmarks are released at
https://github.com/VisionLanguageLab/MEID.

Medium

Tail

Figure 1: One example video contains multiple labels, causing frame-level class imbalance. Labels from left to right:
opening a door (head class), watching something/someone/themselves in a mirror (medium class) and lying on the
floor (tail class). The illustration video is from our proposed
CharadesLT benchmark.
class imbalance, which makes long-tailed video recognition
more challenging.
Recently, Zhang et al. (Zhang et al. 2021b) release the
VideoLT dataset to facilitate the research on long-tailed
video recognition, and propose the FrameStack model,
which performs sampling at the frame level using the
running average precision as guidance. While FrameStack (Zhang et al. 2021b) emphasizes the importance of
frame-level class re-balance, it does not distinguish the
frame-level feature representation between head and tail
classes. Another work tackling the long-tailed video recognition task is MEDC (Hu, Gao, and Xu 2022) which models both the intra-class distribution and the inter-class distribution for long-tailed classes. However, MEDC (Hu, Gao,
and Xu 2022) focuses on calibrating the intra-class distribution to adapt to different inter-class distributions in the test
phase instead of considering the multi-label frame-level imbalance.
Besides these preliminary explorations in the long-tailed
video recognition task, there already exists a lot of work in
the long-tailed image recognition task and the common characteristic is increasing the impact of tail classes. For example, re-weighting based methods (Cui et al. 2019; Cao et al.
2019; Tan et al. 2020) try to find a better loss weight for
the tail classes to boost the performance of tail classes, and

Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved significant success in
the video classification task (Lin, Gan, and Han 2019; Feichtenhofer et al. 2019) due to the networks’ data-driven
nature and the availability of large-scale video data. However, imbalanced data is ubiquitous in the real world, and
model training on the long-tailed distribution may cause the
under-representation of samples from tail classes. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 1, long and untrimmed videos may
contain multiple labels simultaneously, causing frame-level
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1451

