The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Mining and Applying Composition Knowledge of Dance Moves for
Style-Concentrated Dance Generation
Xinjian Zhang1,2 , Su Yang1,2 * , Yi Xu1,2 , Weishan Zhang3 , Longwen Gao 4
1
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
3
Department of Software Engineering, China University of Petroleum (East China)
4
Bilibili
{zhangxj17, suyang, yxu17}@fudan.edu.cn, zhangws@upc.edu.cn, gaolongwen@bilibili.com
2

Abstract

Popping
Dance

Choreography refers to creation of dance motions according
to both music and dance knowledge, where the created dances
should be style-specific and consistent. However, most of the
existing methods generate dances using the given music as
the only reference, lacking the stylized dancing knowledge,
namely, the flag motion patterns contained in different styles.
Without the stylized prior knowledge, these approaches are
not promising to generate controllable style or diverse moves
for each dance style, nor new dances complying with stylized knowledge. To address this issue, we propose a novel
music-to-dance generation framework guided by style embedding, considering both input music and stylized dancing
knowledge. These style embeddings are learnt representations of style-consistent kinematic abstraction of reference
dance videos, which can act as controllable factors to impose style constraints on dance generation in a latent manner.
Hence, we can make the style embedding fit into any given
style while allowing the flexibility to generate new compatible dance moves by modifying the style embedding according
to the learnt representations of a certain style. We are the first
to achieve knowledge-driven style control in dance generation tasks. To support this study, we build a large multi-style
music-to-dance dataset referred to as I-Dance. The qualitative
and quantitative evaluations demonstrate the advantage of the
proposed framework, as well as the ability to synthesize diverse moves under a dance style directed by style embedding.

1

Anime
Dance

Locking
Dance

Figure 1: The example of dances in different styles accompanying with the same music. All dancers’ moving rhythm
match the music well.

ture space or latent space without any stylized knowledge.
Early studies (Shiratori, Nakazawa, and Ikeuchi 2006; Ofli
et al. 2008; Fan, Xu, and Geng 2011; Asahina et al. 2016) are
mainly retrieval based, which are focused on selecting the
best matching pair from the database based on music and
dance features. Due to the retrieval nature, these methods
cannot generate new dance motions. In recent years, deep
generative models (Alemi, Françoise, and Pasquier 2017;
Tang, Jia, and Mao 2018; Lee et al. 2019; Ye et al. 2020; Ren
et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2021; Siyao et al. 2022) are introduced to alleviate this problem. The temporal indexes (Tang,
Jia, and Mao 2018) and contrastive cost function (Ren et al.
2020) have been utilized to promote the model’s ability of
generation. However, such methods usually regress to deviating from normal dance moves, for example, remaining rigid or shaking meaninglessly. To deal with this problem, (Lee et al. 2019; Ye et al. 2020) attempt to label dances
into a series of basic dance units manually and learn to compose a dance by organizing multiple dancing units, which
cost tremendous manual efforts and are unable to be compatible with different rhythms. Yet, machine-generated choreography is far behind human works in terms of coherence to
a desired style because the professional knowledge behind
choreography, such as dance styles as well as the the motion
patterns favored by each given dance style, is not exploited
in the previous works. In view of that, this study aims to
discover from a large corpus of dance videos the basic motion patterns and how a certain dance style is subject to such
patterns so that style-controllable dance generation can be

Introduction

Dancers move elegantly following the rhythm of music. Behind dancing is the hard labor in terms of choreography.
Consequently, automatic music-to-dance choreography has
emerged as a new topic in multimedia (Lee et al. 2019; Ye
et al. 2020; Ren et al. 2020; Siyao et al. 2022). It can enable
various real applications, such as virtual character generation, game creation, and teaching assistant. Specifically, investigations on music-to-dance synthesis give rise to a new
problem, say, machine perception of the latent knowledge
regarding dance moves as well as matching rhythm between
music and dance in terms of beat and intensity, that is, style.
Historically, most dance generation methods pay efforts
to model the relationship between music and dance in fea* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5411

