The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Video Event Extraction via Tracking Visual States of Arguments
Guang Yang1 , Manling Li2 , Jiajie Zhang1 , Xudong Lin3 , Heng Ji2 , Shih-Fu Chang3
1
Tsinghua University
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
3
Columbia University
yangg19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, hengji@illinois.edu
2

Abstract
Video event extraction aims to detect salient events from
a video and identify the arguments for each event as well
as their semantic roles. Existing methods focus on capturing the overall visual scene of each frame, ignoring finegrained argument-level information. Inspired by the definition of events as changes of states, we propose a novel
framework to detect video events by tracking the changes
in the visual states of all involved arguments, which are expected to provide the most informative evidence for the extraction of video events. In order to capture the visual state
changes of arguments, we decompose them into changes in
pixels within objects, displacements of objects, and interactions among multiple arguments. We further propose Object State Embedding, Object Motion-aware Embedding and
Argument Interaction Embedding to encode and track these
changes respectively. Experiments on various video event
extraction tasks demonstrate significant improvements compared to state-of-the-art models. In particular, on verb classification, we achieve 3.49% absolute gains (19.53% relative
gains) in F1 @5 on Video Situation Recognition. Our Code
is publicly available at https://github.com/Shinetism/VStates
for research purposes.

Figure 1: An example of a video event, with KNOCK as the
verb and man as TARGET ( ARG 1 ), bull as AGENT ( ARG 0 ).

2021) grasps the overall semantics of visual scenes, as a result of the difficulty in locating a specific visual area (i.e., a
bounding box) to indicate the happening of an event. This is
the case for images; however, additional temporal dynamics
of videos provides another perspective to indicate the occurrences of events visually.
Events, in linguistic form and interpretation, are telic, resultative, and indicate changes in states (Dölling, HeydeZybatow, and Schäfer 2008). Similarly, we argue that video
events can, by nature, be represented by the visual state
changes of all involved arguments. We further encode the
argument visual state changes from three perspectives: (1)
Single-frame state is characterized by in-bounding-box pixel
changes (such as the man’s state changes from a running position to a lying position in Figure 1) and displacements of
bounding boxes (such as the man moves from left to right in
Figure 1). Therefore, we propose Object State Embedding
(OSE) by encoding both pixel changes and displacements.
(2) The motion of objects across multiple frames, which we
introduce Object Motion-aware Embedding (OME) to aggregate the changes of object states from different frames.
(3) The interaction between objects, which we propose to
learn an Multi-Object Interaction Embedding by encoding the interaction area, which is able to capture the relative
position of multiple objects and the pixel changes within intersection background. For example, the bounding boxes of
man and bull are moving towards each other and then being
apart, and the background pixels of grass also indicate the
KNOCK DOWN event.
On top of that, the information of multiple objects and
their interactions is aggregated by an Argument Interaction Encoder, by contextualizing objects with other objects
within the same scene, and learning to focus on the objects
and interactions that are more indictable. For example, the
man and the bull in Figure 1 are the major objects compared
to the orange ring in the background. With this module de-

Introduction
The ability to comprehend a video requires a structured
understanding of events, including what is happening, the
objects involved, as well as their semantic roles. Situation
Recognition (Yatskar, Zettlemoyer, and Farhadi 2016; Pratt
et al. 2020) is a representative task for image event semantic structure understanding, aiming to classify an image to salient events (verbs) and to predict entities (nouns)
associated with semantic roles of each event. Video Situation Recognition (Sadhu et al. 2021) extends the capacity
of understanding event semantic structures from images to
videos, as shown in Figure 1. However, due to the high variation of temporal dynamics and visual features presented in
videos, it remains to be a challenging and understudied task.
Traditional image event extraction (Yatskar, Zettlemoyer,
and Farhadi 2016; Pratt et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Cho,
Yoon, and Kwak 2022; Wei et al. 2022) and video event extraction (Medioni et al. 2001; Chen et al. 2021; Sadhu et al.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3136

