The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Ising-Traffic: Using Ising Machine Learning to Predict Traffic
Congestion under Uncertainty
Zhenyu Pan1 , Anshujit Sharma1 , Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu2 , Zhuo Liu1 ,
Ang Li3 , Han Liu2 , Michael Huang1 , Tong Geng1
1

University of Rochester,
Northwestern University,
3
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
{zhenyupan, anshujit.sharma, zhuo.liu, michael.huang, tong.geng}@rochester.edu,
{jhu, hanliu}@northwestern.edu, ang.li@pnnl.gov
2

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenges in accurate and real-time
traffic congestion prediction under uncertainty by proposing
Ising-Traffic, a dual-model Ising-model-based traffic prediction framework that delivers higher accuracy and lower latency than SOTA solutions. While traditional solutions face
the dilemma from the trade-off between algorithm complexity and computational efficiency, our Ising-model-based
method breaks away from the trade-off leveraging the Ising
model’s strong expressivity and the Ising machine’s strong
computation power. In particular, Ising-Traffic formulates
traffic prediction under uncertainty into two Ising models: Reconstruct-Ising and Predict-Ising. Reconstruct-Ising is
mapped onto modern Ising machines and handles uncertainty
in traffic accurately with negligible latency and energy consumption, while Predict-Ising is mapped onto traditional processors and predicts future congestion precisely with only
at most 1.8% computational demands of existing solutions.
Our evaluation shows Ising-Traffic delivers on average 98×
speedups and 5% accuracy improvement over SOTA.

1

Figure 1: Accuracy vs computational demands of
Ising-Traffic and SOTA methods.

among traffic speed, travel time, and queue length of a
road segmentation to define a complex threshold and predict whether congestion will take place (Akhtar and Moridpour 2021). In the past decade, deep learning methods like
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs), and Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are
also used in traffic congestion prediction in the real world
(Ranjan et al. 2020). Some of these methods provide high
accuracy (Guo et al. 2021a) while others deliver faster-thanreal-time prediction (Liu and Wu 2017; Peng et al. 2022;
Zeng et al. 2023). However, the common challenge existing
studies face is the trade-off between algorithm complexity
and computational efficiency. Namely, the increase in accuracy generally comes from the increase in algorithmic complexity, which normally leads to higher prediction latency.
Furthermore, as the end of Moore’s law is approaching, the
increase of hardware computational capability is inevitably
slowing down, making it increasingly challenging to improve accuracy from this trade-off. Figure 1 compares current state-of-the-art methods’ accuracy and computational
efficiency. It shows that the traditional methods following
the trade-off fail to deliver both accurate and fast solutions
that should stand on the right side of the Pareto-frontier. New
methods that breaks away from the trade-off are needed.
We observe that recent studies on the Ising model have
demonstrated that, leveraging the Ising machine’s unique capability of finding the low-energy states of a system, an mWlevel CMOS-based Ising model implementation (Afoakwa

Introduction

With rapid economic development, urbanization, and an increase in personal vehicle ownership in the past decade,
traffic congestion has become a significant problem in
metropolitan centers around the world, resulting in more accidents, higher fuel consumption, greater emission of greenhouse gas and pollutants, health hazards, and lower productivity at the workplace. One of the best approaches to
avoiding congestion is to predict it accurately and promptly.
However, the uncertainty from unobserved traffic information due to the lack of sensors or cameras at certain road
segments and external shocks like weather, accidents, and
unexpected road conditions makes accurate prediction very
challenging. As wrong or delayed prediction can result in
worse traffic performance and more accidents (Cheng et al.
2022), effective and efficient traffic congestion prediction is
in urgent demand.
There have been many studies on predicting traffic congestion in academia and industry (Kumar and Raubal 2021).
Traditionally, researchers use one or multiple measurements
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9354

