The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SafeLight: A Reinforcement Learning Method toward Collision-Free Traffic
Signal Control
Wenlu Du, Junyi Ye, Jingyi Gu, Jing Li, Hua Wei, Guiling Wang*
New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, USA
{wd48, jy394, jg95, jingli, hua.wei, gwang}@njit.edu

Abstract

observing the feedback (rewards) from the environment after previous actions and continuously explores the possible
cases. By setting mobility-related rewards like vehicle delay,
RL-based TSC methods can learn to adjust the traffic signals
to accommodate the real traffic demand and hence achieve
better than human performance to make traffic move faster.
However, TSC must consider both traffic mobility and
traffic safety. A small mistake in traffic signals can cause
significant loss of life and property. According to the Federal Highway Administration, more than 50 percent of the
combined fatal and injury crashes occur at or near intersections (Coben 2006). Moreover, crashes at signalized intersections occupy about one–third of all intersection fatalities, including a large proportion that involves red-light running (Himes et al. 2017) and improper left turns (Le et al.
2018), which could be reduced through well-designed signal timing plans. This motivates the study of safety rules in
the traditional transportation field.
Conventional transportation research has extensively
studied the safety effects associated to signal timing. In
particular, previous works (Anjana and Anjaneyulu 2015;
Wong, Sze, and Li 2007) analyzed the contributory factors
for traffic crashes and found red-light violations, yellowlight time changes, and left-turn phases are critical for traffic
safety. Other works (Essa and Sayed 2019; Persaud, Lord,
and Palmisano 2002) predicted the safety risk through regression models and Bayesian methods and provided authoritative equations and rules (Urbanik et al. 2015) as domain
knowledge to help traffic engineers determine the signal timing in practice.
Some RL-based TSC methods attempted to address the
safety concerns. They usually incorporate safety into the reward and combine it with mobility-related rewards (Khamis
and Gomaa 2014; Gong et al. 2020; Wei et al. 2018). Unfortunately, this often results in highly sensitive performance
w.r.t. the setting and inevitably leads to a long learning process. In other words, finding the appropriate rewards of traffic mobility and safety for RL models requires not only the
ad-hoc tuning of various reward factors but also a long time
of exploration to learn the safe actions. The tuning process can be avoided by Inverse Reinforcement Learning (Ng,
Russell et al. 2000) where the reward signal is learned by the
RL agent, but still it would require a large volume of data to
learn the reward for safety, large enough to cover various

Traffic signal control is safety-critical for our daily life.
Roughly one-quarter of road accidents in the U.S. happen at
intersections due to problematic signal timing, urging the development of safety-oriented intersection control. However,
existing studies on adaptive traffic signal control using reinforcement learning technologies have focused mainly on
minimizing traffic delay but neglecting the potential exposure to unsafe conditions. We, for the first time, incorporate
road safety standards as enforcement to ensure the safety of
existing reinforcement learning methods, aiming toward operating intersections with zero collisions. We have proposed
a safety-enhanced residual reinforcement learning method
(SafeLight) and employed multiple optimization techniques,
such as multi-objective loss function and reward shaping
for better knowledge integration. Extensive experiments are
conducted using both synthetic and real-world benchmark
datasets. Results show that our method can significantly reduce collisions while increasing traffic mobility.

Introduction
Traffic congestion has become increasingly costly. For example, on average, American drivers lost 26 hours in traffic jams even in 2020 under the pandemic situation, which
already includes a drop from 73 hours in 2019 (INTRIX
2021). The American Transportation Research Institute estimates that congestion costs the U.S. freight sector $74.1
billion annually, of which $66.1 billion is from urban areas (Glover 2020). Intersections, especially in the urban
area, are where the aforementioned congestion problems
happen every single day. Signalized intersections are one of
the most common bottleneck road types in urban environments. Thus, Traffic Signal Control (TSC) plays a vital role
in urban traffic management (McElroy and Taylor 2007).
To improve the mobility of vehicles in a city, Reinforcement Learning (RL), a widely adopted method for control
problems, has been applied to TSC research and has proven
to be effective (Genders and Razavi 2016; Zheng et al. 2019;
Chen et al. 2020; Wei et al. 2021). The biggest advantage of
RL is that it directly learns how to take the next action by
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14801

