The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SSMI: Semantic Similarity and Mutual Information Maximization Based
Enhancement for Chinese NER
Pengnian Qi, Biao Qin*
School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
{pengnianqi,qinbiao}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
The Chinese NER task consists of two steps, first determining entity boundaries and then labeling them. Some previous
work incorporating related words from pre-trained vocabulary into character-based models has demonstrated to be effective. However, the number of words that characters can
match in the vocabulary is large, and their meanings vary
widely. It is unreasonable to concatenate all the matched
words into the character’s representation without making semantic distinctions. This is because words with different semantics also have distinct vectors by the distributed representation. Moreover, mutual information maximization (MIM)
provides a unified way to characterize the correlation between
different granularity of embeddings. We find MIM can be
used to enhance the features in our task. Consequently, this
paper introduces a novel Chinese NER model named SSMI
based on semantic similarity and MIM. We first match all the
potential word boundaries of the input characters from the
pre-trained vocabulary and employ BERT to segment the input sentence to get the segmentation containing these characters. After computing their semantic similarity, we obtain the
word boundary with the highest similarity and the word group
with similarity score larger than a specific threshold. Then,
we concatenate the most relevant word boundaries with character vectors. We further calculate the mutual information
maximization of group, character and sentence, respectively.
Finally, we feed the result from the above steps to our novel
network. The results on four Chinese public NER datasets
show that our SSMI achieves state-of-the-art performance.

Figure 1: A visual example of some latent word boundaries matched by “言”. Specifically, we first perform Chinese word segmentation of the input sentence to obtain “语
言学”, then calculate the spatial distance of all word embeddings with respect to it, and show the five shortest distances.

methods suffer from error propagation because named entities may encounter out-of-vocabulary problems in segmentation. Consequently, some works that applied the characterbased methods have been empirically proven to be effective
(He and Wang 2008; Liu, Zhu, and Zhao 2010; Li et al.
2014; Sui et al. 2019; Ding et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019).
A drawback of the character-based model is that explicit
word information is not fully exploited. Therefore, Zhang
and Yang (2018) proposed Lattice-LSTM that incorporates
the related words into the character representation, which
not only injects the word’s feature but also avoids the error
propagation of word segmentation. However, Lattice-LSTM
is limited by the structure of no-parallelizable sequential
LSTM, and the architecture is quite complicated that it is a
challenging to transfer to other neural networks. With this
consideration, LR-CNN (Gui et al. 2019a) uses CNN instead of LSTM to improve the model parallel ability. FLAT

Introduction
Named Entity Recognition (NER) aims to automatically recognize named entities in plain text. In English NER, LSTMCRF models (Lample et al. 2016; Ma and Hovy 2016; Liu
et al. 2018; Chiu and Nichols 2016; Huang, Xu, and Yu
2015) have achieved state-of-the-art results by integrating
character information into word representations. Compared
with English NER, Chinese NER is more complicated because it has no obvious word boundaries. One intuitive way
is to first perform word segmentation using Chinese word
segmentation tools and then employ the word-based methods (Jie et al. 2016; He and Sun 2017b). However, such
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13474

