The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Better Context Makes Better Code Language Models:
A Case Study on Function Call Argument Completion
Hengzhi Pei1 * , Jinman Zhao2 , Leonard Lausen2 , Sheng Zha2 , George Karypis2
1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
2
Amazon Web Services
hpei4@illinois.edu, {jinmaz,lausen,zhasheng,gkarypis}@amazon.com

Abstract

Despite their success, these code language models are
usually restricted to file-level local code context, and thus
miss richer context from project files and libraries. This is in
contrast to the more common software development setting
where the current piece of code only makes sense under the
context and constraints posed by the codebase that it resides
in. As a result, models can generate outputs that appear locally plausible but contradict the constraints imposed by the
codebase that they operate in.
Machine-learning-for-code datasets and benchmarks also
lack such project-level environments for training and evaluating code language models. For example, a common choice
for evaluating code completion models is Py150 (Raychev,
Bielik, and Vechev 2016) which contains Python source files
from Github. However, its train-test split is at file level, making it infeasible to obtain dependency information or incorporate project-level analysis. Similar problems applies to
other existing datasets in the code domain (more in Section
5). This motivates us to create a new dataset that better captures what happens in the real-world where software is developed by incorporating external dependencies and spans
multiple files. Another missed opportunity is the availability
program analyzer smarts that are common in today’s integrated development environments (IDEs). Our dataset provides an extensible foundation for the integration of program
analyzer information into machine learning for code models.
We collect thousands of permissively licensed Python
packages and create a development environment for each of
them along with their dependencies. We utilize a language
server which can provide language-specific smarts based on
project-level analysis. We query the language server to extract environment information relevant to a certain code location. Our setup supports extracting all analyzer information that is available to a developer through an IDE, potentially beneficial to a wide range of code-related tasks.
As a case study, we focus on the task of function call argument completion, a special case of code completion where
we predict what arguments should be passed through a given
function call. This task is well suited to analyze the impact
of missing cross-file and cross-project information as understanding function calls requires information that spans file
boundaries. A developer who needs to decide what to pass
to a function first needs to understand the meaning and the
expected usage. They may also benefit from looking at other

Pretrained code language models have enabled great progress
towards program synthesis. However, common approaches
only consider in-file local context and thus miss information
and constraints imposed by other parts of the codebase and
its external dependencies. Existing code completion benchmarks also lack such context. To resolve these restrictions we
curate a new dataset of permissively licensed Python packages that includes full projects and their dependencies and
provide tools to extract non-local information with the help
of program analyzers. We then focus on the task of function
call argument completion which requires predicting the arguments to function calls. We show that existing code completion models do not yield good results on our completion
task. To better solve this task, we query a program analyzer
for information relevant to a given function call, and consider ways to provide the analyzer results to different code
completion models during inference and training. Our experiments show that providing access to the function implementation and function usages greatly improves the argument completion performance. Our ablation study provides further insights on how different types of information available from
the program analyzer and different ways of incorporating the
information affect the model performance.

1

Introduction

Following their counterparts in the natural language domain,
we see rapid adoption of language models in the code domain, e.g. Code-GPT (Lu et al. 2021), GPT-J (Wang and Komatsuzaki 2021), Codex (Chen et al. 2021), PLBART (Ahmad et al. 2021), CodeT5 (Wang et al. 2021b), CodeGen (Nijkamp et al. 2022), to name a few. Such code
language models have demonstrated amazing abilities in
achieving new state of the art in various code-related tasks
such as clone detection (Feng et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2020;
Ahmad et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021b), code completion
(Svyatkovskiy et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2021;
Guo et al. 2022) and code translation (Ahmad et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2021b; Guo et al. 2022). Notably, pretrained
large code language models have been reported to solve programming problems at a high rate (Chen et al. 2021) or at a
rate similar to average human contestants (Li et al. 2022).
* Work done while interning at Amazon Web Services.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5230

