The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

T2-GNN: Graph Neural Networks for Graphs with Incomplete Features and
Structure via Teacher-Student Distillation
Cuiying Huo1 , Di Jin1,2 , Yawen Li3 , Dongxiao He1, * , Yu-Bin Yang2 , Lingfei Wu4
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, P.R. China
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, P.R. China
3
School of Economics and Management, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, P.R. China
4
Pinterest, New York, USA
{huocuiying, jindi, hedongxiao}@tju.edu.cn, warmly0716@bupt.edu.cn, yangyubin@nju.edu.cn, lwu@email.wm.edu
2

Abstract

data become ubiquitous (Wu et al. 2022). GNNs achieve remarkable results across a wide range of graph analysis tasks
such as node classification (Wang et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2021),
link prediction (You, Ying, and Leskovec 2019; Chen et al.
2020), and recommendation (Xu et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020),
and are continuously being applied in many fields such as
computer vision and natural language processing (Wu et al.
2021; Zhou et al. 2020; Jin et al. 2023). The essence of
most existing GNNs is the process of message propagation
and aggregation guided by graph structure (neighbors), such
as GCN (Kipf and Welling 2017), GraphSAGE (Hamilton,
Ying, and Leskovec 2017), GAT (Velickovic et al. 2018)
and APPNP (Klicpera, Bojchevski, and Günnemann 2019).
Therefore, a key prerequisite for the success of GNNs is
complete and trustworthy initial graph descriptions (i.e.,
node features and graph structure).
However, in real-world scenarios, there are many graph
data with incomplete descriptions for various reasons. For
example, some features or edges are missing due to technical
or human errors during data collection. The large scale and
potential resource constraints of complex real-world systems make collecting complete data prohibitively expensive
or impossible. And we cannot obtain some sensitive feature
information due to confidential data or privacy security (e.g.,
nationality, age). Furthermore, the addition of a new node
leads to the absence of links between the node and other
nodes in the graph, and even becomes an isolated node. All
these cases lead to incomplete features or structure in the
initial graph, which brings great challenges to GNNs.
Based on the types of missing descriptions in the graphs,
descriptions missing graphs can be classified into three
categories: 1) feature-incomplete graph where features of
some nodes are partially (or entirely) missing, as shown
in Fig. 1(a); 2) structure-incomplete graph where edges of
some nodes are partially (or entirely) missing (Fig. 1(b));
3) incomplete graph where features and (or) edges of some
nodes are partially (or entirely) missing (Fig. 1(c)). For
GNN-based methods for feature-incomplete graphs, some
specific methods have been proposed. SAT (Chen et al.
2022) proposes a structure-feature matching GNN model to
complete the missing features by assuming that the graph
structure and node features come from the same latent space.
GCNMF (Taguchi, Liu, and Murata 2021) integrates the

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been a prevailing technique for tackling various analysis tasks on graph data. A
key premise for the remarkable performance of GNNs relies
on complete and trustworthy initial graph descriptions (i.e.,
node features and graph structure), which is often not satisfied
since real-world graphs are often incomplete due to various
unavoidable factors. In particular, GNNs face greater challenges when both node features and graph structure are incomplete at the same time. The existing methods either focus
on feature completion or structure completion. They usually
rely on the matching relationship between features and structure, or employ joint learning of node representation and feature (or structure) completion in the hope of achieving mutual
benefit. However, recent studies confirm that the mutual interference between features and structure leads to the degradation of GNN performance. When both features and structure
are incomplete, the mismatch between features and structure
caused by the missing randomness exacerbates the interference between the two, which may trigger incorrect completions that negatively affect node representation. To this end,
in this paper we propose a general GNN framework based
on teacher-student distillation to improve the performance of
GNNs on incomplete graphs, namely T2-GNN. To avoid the
interference between features and structure, we separately design feature-level and structure-level teacher models to provide targeted guidance for student model (base GNNs, such
as GCN) through distillation. Then we design two personalized methods to obtain well-trained feature and structure
teachers. To ensure that the knowledge of the teacher model
is comprehensively and effectively distilled to the student
model, we further propose a dual distillation mode to enable
the student to acquire as much expert knowledge as possible.
Extensive experiments on eight benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of the new framework
on graphs with incomplete features and structure.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), as a powerful technique for modeling and analysis of graphs, have gained
widespread attention in recent years as the graph-structured
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4339

