The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Interpretable Chirality-Aware Graph Neural Network for
Quantitative Structure Activity Relationship Modeling in Drug Discovery
Yunchao (Lance) Liu1 , Yu Wang1 , Oanh Vu1 , Rocco Moretti1 , Bobby Bodenheimer1 ,
Jens Meiler1, 2 , Tyler Derr1
1

Vanderbilt University
2
Leipzig University
{yunchao.liu, yu.wang.1, oanh.t.vu.2, rocco.moretti, bobby.bodenheimer, jens.meiler, tyler.derr}@vanderbilt.edu
Abstract
In computer-aided drug discovery, quantitative structure activity relation models are trained to predict biological activity from chemical structure. Despite the recent success of applying graph neural network to this task, important chemical information such as molecular chirality is ignored. To fill
this crucial gap, we propose Molecular-Kernel Graph Neural
Network (MolKGNN) for molecular representation learning,
which features SE(3)-/conformation invariance, chiralityawareness, and interpretability. For our MolKGNN, we first
design a molecular graph convolution to capture the chemical pattern by comparing the atom’s similarity with the learnable molecular kernels. Furthermore, we propagate the similarity score to capture the higher-order chemical pattern. To
assess the method, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation
with nine well-curated datasets spanning numerous important
drug targets that feature realistic high class imbalance and it
demonstrates the superiority of MolKGNN over other graph
neural networks in computer-aided drug discovery. Meanwhile, the learned kernels identify patterns that agree with domain knowledge, confirming the pragmatic interpretability of
this approach. Our code and supplementary material are publicly available at https://github.com/meilerlab/MolKGNN.

1

Figure 1: Analogy between (A) 2D image convolution and
(B) 3D molecular convolution. In (A), the more similar the
image patch is to the image kernel, the higher the output
value. We design molecular convolution (B) to output a
higher value if the molecular neighborhood is similar to the
molecular kernel. The kernel provides the basis for our chirality calculation and has added benefit of interpretability.
architecture for graph classification begins with an encoder
extracting node representations by passing neighborhood
information followed by pooling operations that integrate
node representations into graph representations, which are
fed into a classifier to predict graph classes (Zhou et al.
2020).
Despite the promise of GNN models applied to molecular
representation learning, existing GNN models either blindly
follow the message passing framework without considering
molecular constraints on graphs (Feng et al. 2022), fail to
integrate chirality (Schütt et al. 2017), or lack interpretability (Adams, Pattanaik, and Coley 2021). To fill this crucial
gap, we develop a new GNN model named MolKGNN that
features SE(3)/conformation invariance, chirality-awareness
and provides a form of interpretability. Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• Novel Interpretable Molecular Convolution: We design
a new convolution operation to capture chemical pattern
of each atom by quantifying the similarity between the
atom’s neighboring subgraph and the learnable molecular
kernel, which is inherently interpretable.
• Better Chirality Characterization: Rather than listing
all permutations of neighbors for a chiral center, or using
dihedral angles, the chirality calculation module in our design only needs a lightweight linear algebra calculation.

Introduction

Developing new drugs is time-consuming and expensive,
e.g., it took cabozantinib, an oncologic drug, 8.8 years and
$1.9 billion to get on the market (Prasad and Mailankody
2017). To assist this process, computer-aided drug discovery (CADD) has been widely used. In CADD, several mathematical and machine learning methods have been developed to model the Quantitative Structure Activity Relationship (QSAR) to predict the biological activity of molecules
based on their geometric structures (Sliwoski et al. 2014).
Recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have successfully been applied in many fields, e.g., social networks and
recommender systems (Zhou et al. 2020). As molecules can
be essentially viewed as graphs with atoms as nodes and
chemical bonds as edges, GNNs are naturally adopted to
perform such graph classification, i.e., predicting the biological activity of molecules based on their geometric structures (Atz, Grisoni, and Schneider 2021). A typical GNN
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14356

