The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Key Feature Replacement of In-Distribution Samples for Out-of-Distribution
Detection
Jaeyoung Kim* 1 , Seo Taek Kong* †2 , Dongbin Na1 , Kyu-Hwan Jung†3
1

VUNO, Inc.
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
3
Samsung Advanced Institute for Health Sciences and Technology, Sungkyunkwan University
jaeyoung.kim@vuno.co, skong10@illinois.edu, dongbin.na@vuno.co, khwanjung@skku.edu
2

In-Distribution

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection can be used in deep
learning-based applications to reject outlier samples from being unreliably classified by deep neural networks. Learning
to classify between OOD and in-distribution samples is difficult because data comprising the former is extremely diverse. It has been observed that an auxiliary OOD dataset
is most effective in training a “rejection” network when its
samples are semantically similar to in-distribution images.
We first deduce that OOD images are perceived by a deep
neural network to be semantically similar to in-distribution
samples when they share a common background, as deep networks are observed to incorrectly classify such images with
high confidence. We then propose a simple yet effective Key
In-distribution feature Replacement BY inpainting (KIRBY)
procedure that constructs a surrogate OOD dataset by replacing class-discriminative features of in-distribution samples
with marginal background features. The procedure can be implemented using off-the-shelf vision algorithms, where each
step within the algorithm is shown to make the surrogate data
increasingly similar to in-distribution data. Design choices in
each step are studied extensively, and an exhaustive comparison with state-of-the-art algorithms demonstrates KIRBY’s
competitiveness on various benchmarks.

Out-of-Distribution

Figure 1: Examples of our auxiliary OOD dataset constructed from STL10 (Coates, Ng, and Lee 2011). Each column represents raw images, activation maps, and OOD constructions, respectively.
Denote X to be the set of all possible, including undesirable, input images to a classifier. An in-distribution (ID)
is the distribution from which a training set is sampled. Its
support is described as an ID set XID ⊂ X , and OOD data
XOOD is any data that is unlikely to be drawn from this ID.
The task of detecting OOD samples is a binary hypothesis
test

0 if x ∈ XID
Ψ (x) =
(1)
1 if x ∈ XOOD

Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is important in safetycritical applications where predictions should not only be
accurate on average, but also reliable. Deep neural networks
(DNNs) excel at classifying samples drawn from a distribution matching the training set’s, but they also tend to inaccurately classify out-of-distribution (OOD) data with high
confidence even when the samples deviate significantly from
the training distribution (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017; Liu
et al. 2020a). In order to prevent classifiers from producing
such predictions, safety-critical applications use OOD detection to alert the user when it is likely that the DNN cannot reliably classify a given input (Cao et al. 2020; Feng,
Rosenbaum, and Dietmayer 2018; Filos et al. 2020).

where the main difficulty lies in XOOD being too large to be
represented by any reasonable dataset size.
In this paper, we primarily focus on methods to detect
OOD samples without having to modify a classifier trained
on ID data XID . Having to (re-)train a model specifically for
OOD detection on a large training set is computationally demanding, and classification performance may be adversely
affected (Van Amersfoort et al. 2020). Instead, we describe
a method to construct an auxiliary dataset of surrogate OOD
data from any training (ID) set.
Our work builds upon the observation that OOD samples
used to learn a decision rule Ψ are most effective when they
are semantically similar to ID samples (Lee et al. 2018a).
First, we establish that OOD samples are perceived by a
DNN to be semantically similar to ID samples when they
share a common background. Then we propose a procedure
to construct an auxiliary OOD ‘rejection” set by replacing
class-discriminative features of a training set with marginal

* These authors contributed equally.
†
This work was submitted while the authors worked at VUNO
Inc.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8246

