The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Semi-Supervised Deep Regression with Uncertainty Consistency and
Variational Model Ensembling via Bayesian Neural Networks
Weihang Dai1 , Xiaomeng Li1, 2 * , Kwang-Ting Cheng1, 2
1
2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
wdaiaj@connect.ust.hk, eexmli@ust.hk, timcheng@ust.hk;

Abstract
Deep regression is an important problem with numerous applications. These range from computer vision tasks such as
age estimation from photographs, to medical tasks such as
ejection fraction estimation from echocardiograms for disease tracking. Semi-supervised approaches for deep regression are notably under-explored compared to classification
and segmentation tasks, however. Unlike classification tasks,
which rely on thresholding functions for generating class
pseudo-labels, regression tasks use real number target predictions directly as pseudo-labels, making them more sensitive to prediction quality. In this work, we propose a novel
approach to semi-supervised regression, namely UncertaintyConsistent Variational Model Ensembling (UCVME), which
improves training by generating high-quality pseudo-labels
and uncertainty estimates for heteroscedastic regression.
Given that aleatoric uncertainty is only dependent on input
data by definition and should be equal for the same inputs,
we present a novel uncertainty consistency loss for co-trained
models. Our consistency loss significantly improves uncertainty estimates and allows higher quality pseudo-labels to
be assigned greater importance under heteroscedastic regression. Furthermore, we introduce a novel variational model ensembling approach to reduce prediction noise and generate
more robust pseudo-labels. We analytically show our method
generates higher quality targets for unlabeled data and further
improves training. Experiments show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art alternatives on different tasks and can
be competitive with supervised methods that use full labels.
Code is available at https://github.com/xmed-lab/UCVME.

Figure 1: Differences between standard pseudo-labeling approaches and our method (UCVME). Classification tasks
typically apply thresholding functions to probability predictions, p̂i , to obtain one-hot pseudo-labels, ŷ i . Regression tasks use real number target predictions, ŷ, directly as
pseudo-labels and are therefore more sensitive to prediction quality. Our UCVME improves pseudo-labels for regression by considering pseudo-label uncertainty, σ 2 , and
robustness. We use a novel uncertainty consistency loss to
improve uncertainty-based loss weighting and a variational
model ensembling method to improve pseudo-label quality.

Introduction
Deep learning has achieved state-of-the-art results on a variety of tasks such as classification (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020),
segmentation (Chen et al. 2021), image generation (Bodla,
Hua, and Chellappa 2018), and others. These methods tend
to require large amounts of labeled data for training, however, which can be costly to annotate. State-of-the-art image
classifiers such as ViT are trained on the JFT-300M dataset,
for example, which consists of 300 million images (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020). Labeling can also be prohibitively expensive for medical image analysis, where life-saving tasks

such as medical disease diagnoses (Li et al. 2021) and tumor
segmentation (Li et al. 2018a) require domain expertise. The
ability to train neural networks with reduced labels is therefore highly valuable and an active research area.
Semi-supervised learning uses unlabeled data together
with a smaller labeled dataset for model training. These
methods reduce reliance on labeled data and sometimes outperform state-of-the-art techniques on fully labeled datasets.
Chen et al. (Chen et al. 2021) propose CPS, a semisupervised algorithm for image segmentation, which is timeconsuming to label. Li et al. (Li et al. 2021) enforce con-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7304

