The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

GOHSP: A Unified Framework of Graph and Optimization-Based Heterogeneous
Structured Pruning for Vision Transformer
Miao Yin1 * Burak Uzkent2 , Yilin Shen2 , Hongxia Jin2 , Bo Yuan1
1

2

Rutgers University
Samsung Research America

Abstract

et al. 2018) and GPT-3 (Brown et al. 2020)), the existing
ViTs are also constructed with large model sizes to adapt for
massive data training (Zhai et al. 2021). Consequently, they
are suffering from huge memory footprints and extensive
computational costs. These limitations, if not being properly
addressed, could severely hinder the widespread adoption of
ViTs in many practical scenarios, especially on the resourceconstrained mobile platforms and Internet-of-things (IoT)
devices.
To mitigate this challenging problem, one attractive solution is to perform model compression (Yu et al. 2017; Kim
et al. 2016; Pan et al. 2019) to reduce the network costs without affecting task performance. However, unlike the current
popularity of compressing convolutional and recurrent neural networks (CNNs and RNNs), ViT-oriented model compression has not been systematically studied yet. In particular, structured pruning, as an important hardware-friendly
compression strategy that can bring practical efficiency on
the off-the-shelf hardware, is little explored for ViT models.
To date, a rich set of structured pruning approaches have
been proposed and investigated in the existing literatures,
and most of them focus on sparsifying the CNNs at the channel level (He, Zhang, and Sun 2017; Ye et al. 2018). On the
other hand, as will be analyzed and elaborated in Section ,
because of the difference of the underlying architecture, the
structured sparse ViT models can exhibit multi-granularity
sparsity (i.e., head-level and column-level) in the different
component modules (i.e., attention head and multi-layer perception (MLP)). The co-existence of such heterogeneous
sparse patterns raises a series of new research challenges and
questions when we consider the efficient structured pruning
strategy for ViT models. For instance, for each component
module what is the corresponding suitable pruning criterion
to obtain its specific sparse pattern? Also, how should we
perform the entire pruning process across different modules
with different levels of granularity sparsity to optimize the
overall compression and task performance?
Technical Preview & Contributions. To answer these
questions, in this paper we propose GOHSP, a unified framework of Graph and Optimization-based Structure Pruning for vision transformer. To be specific, we first develop a graph-based ranking approach to measure the importance of attention heads. As a soft-pruning guideline,
such importance information is then integrated to the overall

The recently proposed Vision transformers (ViTs) have
shown very impressive empirical performance in various
computer vision tasks, and they are viewed as an important type of foundation model. However, ViTs are typically
constructed with large-scale sizes, which then severely hinder their potential deployment in many practical resourcesconstrained applications. To mitigate this challenging problem, structured pruning is a promising solution to compress
model size and enable practical efficiency. However, unlike
its current popularity for CNNs and RNNs, structured pruning for ViT models is little explored.
In this paper, we propose GOHSP, a unified framework of
Graph and Optimization-based Structured Pruning for ViT
models. We first develop a graph-based ranking for measuring the importance of attention heads, and the extracted importance information is further integrated to an optimizationbased procedure to impose the heterogeneous structured sparsity patterns on the ViT models. Experimental results show
that our proposed GOHSP demonstrates excellent compression performance. On CIFAR-10 dataset, our approach can
bring 40% parameters reduction with no accuracy loss for
ViT-Small model. On ImageNet dataset, with 30% and 35%
sparsity ratio for DeiT-Tiny and DeiT-Small models, our approach achieves 1.65% and 0.76% accuracy increase over the
existing structured pruning methods, respectively.

Introduction
Recently applying transformer architecture to computer vision has emerged as an important forefront of foundation
model design (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020). Thanks to the delicate vision-specific self-attention, inherent minimal inductive biases and high scalability and parallelism, vision transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Touvron et al.
2021; Zhou et al. 2021) have shown very outstanding and
even state-of-the-art performance in many fundamental and
downstream image and video processing tasks, such as image classification, object detection, super-resolution, video
classification etc.
Motivated by the scaling success of the giant natural language processing (NLP) transformers (e.g., BERT (Devlin
* This work was done during Miao Yin’s internship at Samsung
Research America.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10954

