The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Hierarchical Consistent Contrastive Learning for Skeleton-Based Action
Recognition with Growing Augmentations
Jiahang Zhang, Lilang Lin, Jiaying Liu*
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
{zjh2020, linlilang, liujiaying}@pku.edu.cn

More Strongly Augmented

Input Data

Abstract
Contrastive learning has been proven beneficial for selfsupervised skeleton-based action recognition. Most contrastive learning methods utilize carefully designed augmentations to generate different movement patterns of skeletons
for the same semantics. However, it is still a pending issue to
apply strong augmentations, which distort the images/skeletons’ structures and cause semantic loss, due to their resulting
unstable training. In this paper, we investigate the potential of
adopting strong augmentations and propose a general hierarchical consistent contrastive learning framework (HiCLR) for
skeleton-based action recognition. Specifically, we first design a gradual growing augmentation policy to generate multiple ordered positive pairs, which guide to achieve the consistency of the learned representation from different views.
Then, an asymmetric loss is proposed to enforce the hierarchical consistency via a directional clustering operation in the
feature space, pulling the representations from strongly augmented views closer to those from weakly augmented views
for better generalizability. Meanwhile, we propose and evaluate three kinds of strong augmentations for 3D skeletons to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. Extensive experiments show that HiCLR outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods notably on three large-scale datasets, i.e., NTU60,
NTU120, and PKUMMD. Our project is publicly available
at: https://jhang2020.github.io/Projects/HiCLR/HiCLR.html.

+ shear

…

+ rotate

…

+ flip…

…

…

Feature Space

Growing Augmentation

: Positive samples
: Negative samples
: Pulling
Baseline

Ours

: Pushing

Figure 1: The proposed hierarchical consistent contrastive
learning compared with the traditional contrastive learning
pipelines. Instead of applying all augmentations directly, we
utilize a growing augmentation to generate multiple ordered
positive pairs that are augmented progressively. Then the
model performs a directional feature clustering operation to
constrain the consistency of adjacent positive samples.
of large-scale datasets is expensive and time-consuming, recently more and more researchers pay attention to the study
of representation learning from unlabeled data (Lin et al.
2020; Li et al. 2021; Kim et al. 2022).
Among the various self-supervised learning methods,
contrastive learning is an effective one and has been shown
successful for skeleton-based action recognition (Rao et al.
2021; Thoker, Doughty, and Snoek 2021; Li et al. 2021). For
contrastive learning, augmentations have been proven to be
very crucial, introducing various movement patterns for the
same semantics and directly affecting the quality of feature
representations learned by the model (Tian et al. 2020; Guo
et al. 2022). However, it is still not fully investigated on what
augmentation to use and how to use it for skeleton data.
Compared to the RGB representation of human action, 3D
skeleton data is a more high-level modality representation,
which intensifies the sensitivity of contrastive learning to
the augmentations. This sensitivity leads to a cautious selection of augmentations, which becomes the bottleneck in designing more advanced contrastive learning methods. On the
one hand, as shown on the right of Table 3, some augmentations like Random Mask cause the performance drop of the
baseline algorithm. Following (Bai et al. 2022), these aug-

Introduction
Human action recognition is important for bridging artificial systems and humans in the real world. It has been
widely used in video understanding, human-robot interaction, entertainment, etc. (Tang et al. 2020; Rodomagoulakis
et al. 2016; Shotton et al. 2011). Owing to the advantages
such as lightweight, robustness, and privacy protection, action recognition based on 3D skeleton data has attracted a
lot of attention recently. There are many works targeted at
skeleton-based action recognition (Shi et al. 2019; Cheng
et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020b; Chen et al. 2021), but most of
them are designed in a fully-supervised manner and require
a large amount of labeled data. Considering that annotation
* Corresponding author. This work is supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under contract No.62172020.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3427

