The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Acceleration of Large Transformer Model Training
by Sensitivity-Based Layer Dropping
Yujie Zeng1, Wenlong He1, Ihor Vasyltsov2, Jiali Pang1, Lin Chen1
Samsung R&D Institute China Xian
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
{yujie.zeng, wenlong.he, ihor.vasiltsov, jiali.pang, lin81.chen}@samsung.com
1

2

Abstract
Transformer models are widely used in AI applications such as
Natural Language Processing (NLP), Computer Vision (CV),
etc. However, enormous computation workload becomes an
obstacle to train large transformer models efficiently. Recently,
some methods focus on reducing the computation workload
during the training by skipping some layers. However, these
methods use simple probability distribution and coarse-grained
probability calculation, which significantly affect the model
accuracy. To address the issue, in this paper we propose a novel
method to accelerate training—Sensitivity-Based Layer
Dropping (SBLD). SBLD uses layer-wise sensitivity data to
switch on/off transformer layers in proper order to keep high
accuracy. Besides, we adjust the probability of skipping
transformer layers with a scheduler to accelerate training speed
and get faster convergence. Our results show that SBLD solves
the accuracy drop issue compared with prior layer dropping
methods. Our SBLD method can decrease end-to-end training
time by 19.67% during training of GPT-3 Medium model, the
same time increasing the accuracy by 1.65% w.r.t. baseline.
Furthermore, for SwinV2-L model the obtained Top-1 and Top5 accuracies are also higher vs. the baseline. Thus, the proposed
method is efficient and practical to improve the large
transformer model training.

Introduction
Natural Language Processing models such as transformer
are widely used in AI application nowadays. Texts, images
and audios all can be used to train DL models for tasks such
as question answering, sentiment analysis, information
extraction, image captioning and so on. According to
existing research results (Arici et al. 2021, Brown et al. 2020,
Liu et al. 2021, Dehghani et al. 2019, Shoeybi et al. 2019),
the NLP models with transformer can solve the text
processing related tasks adequately. However, due to the
huge parameter numbers in transformer models, enormous
computation is involved in training. Transformer-based
models cost too much time and resources in unsupervised
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.


11156

pre-training phase. Therefore, it is urgently required to find
the methods allowing accelerate training, while maintain the
original transformer accuracy.
One of the effective speed-up idea is to reduce computation
in training. Progressive Layer Dropping (PLD) (Zhang and
He 2020) is one of the layer dropping methods that can
reduce computation efficiently. PLD method determines to
drop some layers with a probability decided by the depth
position of the layers. However, such an approach cannot
describe these probabilities for different transformer
structures accurately enough. Also, PLD proposes a
progressive schedule to change the probability of layer
dropping. PLD method increases the layers’ dropping rate
for deeper layers and longer training iterations. However,
when the model scale is too large (e.g., GPT-3 (Brown et al.
2020) model), PLD’s schedule is coarse-grained and causes
serious accuracy loss because many important layers are
dropped. Therefore, it is necessary to design an acceleration
method that can better keep the transformer structures to
maintain the accuracy even when the model scale is large.
In this paper, we propose a new layer dropping method to
better tradeoff between high accuracy and low training cost.
Our proposal is based on several strategies combined:
• We apply a layer-wise sensitivity method, which allows
allocating the drop probability to each layer, in order to
control switchable transformer layers during the training.
• To further increase the model accuracy, we add
Block/Allow Lists on top of layer-wise sensitivity, which
avoid dropping the most sensitive layers.
• We develop a variance-based scheduler to adjust the
probability of dropping transformer layers to accelerate
the convergence speed while maintaining the original
transformer structure.
Experiment results showed that SBLD can increase
throughput by about 20.0% in the pre-training stage,
compared with baselines on GPT-3 model with the nearly
the same accuracy. Besides, SBLD improves accuracy of
GPT-3 Medium model on LAMBADA (Paperno et al. 2016)

