The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DICNet: Deep Instance-Level Contrastive Network for Double Incomplete
Multi-View Multi-Label Classification
Chengliang Liu1 , Jie Wen1∗ , Xiaoling Luo1 , Chao Huang2 , Zhihao Wu1 , Yong Xu1,3 *
1

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Visual Object Detection and Recognition, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China.
3
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China.
liucl1996@163.com, jiewen pr@126.com, xiaolingluoo@outlook.com, huangchao 08@126.com, horatio ng@163.com,
yongxu@ymail.com
Abstract

perspective can no longer meet the needs of more complex
and comprehensive analysis (Hu, Shi, and Ye 2020; Yuan
et al. 2021; Fang et al. 2021). Doubtlessly, multi-view data
collected from multiple sources is able to describe the observed objects more integrally and accurately (Li, Wan, and
He 2021; Li and He 2020; Wang et al. 2022). For example, in clinical practice, multiple indicators such as height,
weight, and average hemoglobin are often used to synthetically diagnose whether a person is malnourished (Hu and
Chen 2019; Luo et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2022). Obviously,
multi-view data is rich in more semantic information, which
greatly facilitates the learning of multi-label semantic content (Huang et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2020; Hu, Lou, and Ye
2021). Therefore, different from the simple single-label classification task (Zhao et al. 2022), this paper focuses on the
multi-view multi-label classification task, namely MVMLC.

In recent years, multi-view multi-label learning has aroused
extensive research enthusiasm. However, multi-view multilabel data in the real world is commonly incomplete due to
the uncertain factors of data collection and manual annotation, which means that not only multi-view features are often
missing, and label completeness is also difficult to be satisfied. To deal with the double incomplete multi-view multilabel classification problem, we propose a deep instance-level
contrastive network, namely DICNet. Different from conventional methods, our DICNet focuses on leveraging deep neural network to exploit the high-level semantic representations
of samples rather than shallow-level features. First, we utilize the stacked autoencoders to build an end-to-end multiview feature extraction framework to learn the view-specific
representations of samples. Furthermore, in order to improve
the consensus representation ability, we introduce an incomplete instance-level contrastive learning scheme to guide the
encoders to better extract the consensus information of multiple views and use a multi-view weighted fusion module to
enhance the discrimination of semantic features. Overall, our
DICNet is adept in capturing consistent discriminative representations of multi-view multi-label data and avoiding the
negative effects of missing views and missing labels. Extensive experiments performed on five datasets validate that our
method outperforms other state-of-the-art methods.

For MVMLC, a few meaningful methods have been proposed in recent years. Zhu et al. proposed a multi-view label embedding model, which learns the intermediate latent
space through the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion
(Gretton et al. 2005) to indirectly bridge the feature space
and the label space (Zhu et al. 2018). Another representative matrix factorization (MF) based MVMLC method,
named latent semantic aware multi-view multi-label learning (LSA-MML), aligns the semantic spaces by maximizing
the dependencies of basis matrices corresponding to different views in the kernel space (Zhang et al. 2018). In addition, deep neural networks (DNN) have also been developed to handle this issue (Liu et al. 2023). For example,
Fang et al. proposed the simultaneously combining multiview multi-label learning (SIMM) neural network framework, which exploits adversarial loss and label loss to learn
shared semantics and imposes the regularization constraint
to obtain view-specific information (Fang and Zhang 2012).
It is worth noting that these methods are invariably based
on the unreasonable assumption that all views and labels are
available. However, in practice, the data used for MVMLC is
often incomplete. We consider this incompleteness from two
aspects: On the one hand, the heterogenous data collected
from multiple sources may be with missing views due to various reasons. For example, the media forms of records stored
in archive may include text, audio, video, etc (Chen, Wang,
and Lai 2022; Chen et al. 2022b). These diverse media of

Introduction
As one of the important tasks of multi-label learning, the
purpose of multi-label classification task is to label the observed samples with various category tags (Zhu et al. 2018;
Herrera et al. 2016). For example, in the field of image
recognition, a natural picture can be labeled with multiple
labels such as ‘wild’, ‘bird’, and ‘sky’. Or in a text classification task, a piece of text can be classified into different semantic sets such as ‘soccer’, ‘news’, ‘advertising’, etc.
The broad application prospect of multi-label classification
has aroused great research enthusiasm in both industry and
academia (Liu et al. 2015). In addition, with the explosive
growth of data sources and feature extraction methods, only
describing, analyzing, and processing samples from a single
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8807

