The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SoftCorrect: Error Correction with Soft Detection for Automatic Speech
Recognition
Yichong Leng1 * , Xu Tan2 , Wenjie Liu3 , Kaitao Song2 , Rui Wang2
Xiang-Yang Li1 , Tao Qin2 , Ed Lin3 , Tie-Yan Liu2
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Microsoft Azure Speech
1
lyc123go@mail.ustc.edu.cn,xiangyangli@ustc.edu.cn
2
{xuta,kaitaosong,ruiwa,taoqin,tyliu}@microsoft.com 3 {liwenjie,edlin}@microsoft.com
Abstract

proportion of tokens are incorrect and need correction), how
to accurately detect errors is important for correction (Leng
et al. 2021b). Otherwise, correct tokens may be changed
by mistake, or error tokens cannot be corrected. Previous
works conduct error detection in different ways: 1) Implicit
error detection, where the errors are not explicitly detected
but embedded in the correction process. For example, Liao
et al. (2020); Mani et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2020); Zhu
et al. (2021) adopt an encoder-decoder based autoregressive
correction model with a target-source (decoder-encoder) attention (Vaswani et al. 2017); Gu and Kong (2021) duplicate the source tokens several times and leverage a CTC
(connectionist temporal classification) loss (Graves et al.
2006), where the target-source alignments learnt in decoderencoder attention or CTC paths play a role of implicit error detection. 2) Explicit error detection, where the specific
deletion/substitution/insertion errors are detected out explicitly. For example, Leng et al. (2021b,a); Du et al. (2022);
Shen et al. (2022) rely on the predicted duration to determine how many target tokens each source token should be
corrected to (e.g., 0 stands for deletion error, 1 stands for no
change or substitution error, ≥ 2 stands for insertion error).
Implicit error detection enjoys the advantage of the flexibility of model learning but suffers from the limitation that it
does not provide clear signal for model training about which
tokens are incorrect. In the contrast, explicit error detection
enjoys the advantage of clear signal but suffers from the limitation that it requires precise error patterns and thus new error will be introduced once error detection is not accurate.
For example, if a substitution error is predicted as an insertion error by explicit error detection, then the model cannot correct this error but introduce new error by inserting a
wrong token. A natural question arises: can we design a better error detection mechanism that inherits the advantages
of both implicit and explicit error detection and avoids their
limitations?
To answer this question, in this paper, we propose a soft
error detection mechanism with an error detector (encoder)
and an error corrector (decoder). Specifically, we dedicatedly design a language model as the encoder to determine
whether a token is correct or not and design a constrained
CTC loss on the decoder to only focus on correcting the de-

Error correction in automatic speech recognition (ASR) aims
to correct those incorrect words in sentences generated by
ASR models. Since recent ASR models usually have low
word error rate (WER), to avoid affecting originally correct
tokens, error correction models should only modify incorrect
words, and therefore detecting incorrect words is important
for error correction. Previous works on error correction either implicitly detect error words through target-source attention or CTC (connectionist temporal classification) loss,
or explicitly locate specific deletion/substitution/insertion errors. However, implicit error detection does not provide clear
signal about which tokens are incorrect and explicit error detection suffers from low detection accuracy. In this paper, we
propose SoftCorrect with a soft error detection mechanism to
avoid the limitations of both explicit and implicit error detection. Specifically, we first detect whether a token is correct
or not through a probability produced by a dedicatedly designed language model, and then design a constrained CTC
loss that only duplicates the detected incorrect tokens to let
the decoder focus on the correction of error tokens. Compared with implicit error detection with CTC loss, SoftCorrect provides explicit signal about which words are incorrect
and thus does not need to duplicate every token but only incorrect tokens; compared with explicit error detection, SoftCorrect does not detect specific deletion/substitution/insertion errors but just leaves it to CTC loss. Experiments on
AISHELL-1 and Aidatatang datasets show that SoftCorrect
achieves 26.1% and 9.4% CER reduction respectively, outperforming previous works by a large margin, while still enjoying fast speed of parallel generation.

Introduction
Correction (Cucu et al. 2013; D’Haro and Banchs 2016;
Anantaram et al. 2018; Du et al. 2022) has been widely used
in automatic speech recognition (ASR) to refine the output
sentences of ASR systems to reduce word error rate (WER).
Considering the error rate of the sentences generated by
ASR is usually low (e.g., <10%, which means only a small
* This work was conducted at Microsoft. Corresponding author:
Xu Tan, xuta@microsoft.com
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13034

