The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Decorate the Newcomers:
Visual Domain Prompt for Continual Test Time Adaptation
Yulu Gan1 , Yan Bai1 , Yihang Lou2 , Xianzheng Ma3 , Renrui Zhang1 , Nian Shi4 , Lin Luo1 *
1

Peking University
Huawei Technology
3
Wuhan University
4
Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences
ganyulu@stu.pku.edu.cn, {yanbai,luol}@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Continual Test-Time Adaptation (CTTA) aims to adapt the
source model to continually changing unlabeled target domains without access to the source data. Existing methods mainly focus on model-based adaptation in a selftraining manner, such as predicting pseudo labels for new
domain datasets. Since pseudo labels are noisy and unreliable, these methods suffer from catastrophic forgetting and
error accumulation when dealing with dynamic data distributions. Motivated by the prompt learning in NLP, in
this paper, we propose to learn an image-level visual domain prompt for target domains while having the source
model parameters frozen. During testing, the changing target
datasets can be adapted to the source model by reformulating the input data with the learned visual prompts. Specifically, we devise two types of prompts, i.e., domains-specific
prompts and domains-agnostic prompts, to extract current
domain knowledge and maintain the domain-shared knowledge in the continual adaptation. Furthermore, we design
a homeostasis-based prompt adaptation strategy to suppress
domain-sensitive parameters in domain-invariant prompts to
learn domain-shared knowledge more effectively. This transition from the model-dependent paradigm to the model-free
one enables us to bypass the catastrophic forgetting and error
accumulation problems. Experiments show that our proposed
method achieves significant performance gains over state-ofthe-art methods on four widely-used benchmarks, including
CIFAR-10C, CIFAR-100C, ImageNet-C, and VLCS datasets.

Figure 1: The problem and our main idea. Our goal is to
adapt the source model to continually changing target domains. Existing methods focus on model-based adaptation.
Differently, we design our method to adapt the changing
target datasets to the source model by 1) tuning the visual
prompts for each domain while keeping the source model
frozen; 2) reformulating the input data with learned prompts
when testing on the current target domain. This transition
from the model-dependent paradigm to a model-free one enables us to eliminate catastrophic forgetting and achieve significant performance gains over state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
The deep neural networks can perform well when the models are trained with supervision and the data follow a consistent distribution. However, the performance can drop significantly when a domain gap exists between the training
and test data, especially when the distribution of the test
data changes over time unexpectedly. Besides, this domain
gap commonly exists in the real world (Radosavovic et al.
2022): for a model deployed on the street for signal light
recognition, the target domain is constantly changing, such
as foggy, snowy, rainy days, or the light difference between
day and night. A source model needs to adapt to the het-

erogeneous and dynamic target domains to ensure acceptable performance in real applications. To this end, Continual Test-Time Adaptation (CTTA) is introduced and draws
growing attention in the community.
Recently, researchers propose Test-Time Adaptation(TTA) to fine-tune the model or change the model’s
output distributions online during the test time. As shown
in Table 1, TTA cannot utilize source data during test time.
Some works (Wang et al. 2021a; Liang, Hu, and Feng 2020;
Chen et al. 2022) handle TTA by adjusting the network

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7595

