The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multi-Resolution Monocular Depth Map Fusion by Self-Supervised
Gradient-Based Composition
Yaqiao Dai* , Renjiao Yi* , Chenyang Zhu† , Hongjun He, Kai Xu†
National University of Defense Technology
chenyang.chandler.zhu, kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com

Abstract
Monocular depth estimation is a challenging problem on
which deep neural networks have demonstrated great potential. However, depth maps predicted by existing deep models usually lack fine-grained details due to convolution operations and down-samplings in networks. We find that increasing input resolution is helpful to preserve more local
details while the estimation at low resolution is more accurate globally. Therefore, we propose a novel depth map fusion module to combine the advantages of estimations with
multi-resolution inputs. Instead of merging the low- and highresolution estimations equally, we adopt the core idea of Poisson fusion, trying to implant the gradient domain of highresolution depth into the low-resolution depth. While classic Poisson fusion requires a fusion mask as supervision, we
propose a self-supervised framework based on guided image
filtering. We demonstrate that this gradient-based composition performs much better at noisy immunity, compared with
the state-of-the-art depth map fusion method. Our lightweight
depth fusion is one-shot and runs in real-time, making it
80X faster than a state-of-the-art depth fusion method. Quantitative evaluations demonstrate that the proposed method
can be integrated into many fully convolutional monocular
depth estimation backbones with a significant performance
boost, leading to state-of-the-art results of detail enhancement on depth maps. Codes are released at https://github.com/
yuinsky/gradient-based-depth-map-fusion.

LeRes

Ours

LeRes

Ours

LeRes

Ours

Figure 1: We propose a multi-resolution depth map fusion
method to recover high-resolution depth maps. Compared
with the single-resolution depth estimation network, the proposed method recovers wide levels of details.

shown in the second column “448” (denotes resolution of
448 × 448) in Fig. 2. Details are losing due to the downsampling, max-pooling or convolution operations in the network. Furthermore, although fully convolutional networks
take images at arbitrary resolutions as inputs, the networks
are overfitted to the fixed resolution of training images. With
a testing image at the training resolution, the estimated depth
map is more accurate in values. Considering the memory and
training time, networks for monocular depth estimation are
usually trained in a relatively low resolution. In two most recent monocular depth estimation methods SGR (Xian et al.
2020) and LeRes (Yin et al. 2021), training images are at
the resolution of 448 × 448. Testing images at training lowresolution lead to more accurate depth predictions than those
at different resolutions, as demonstrated in Fig. 2. Testing
images at original high-resolutions lead to inaccurate predictions of depth values, but keep much more local details.
It motivates our explorations in multi-resolution depth map
fusion, to combine the depth values and details predicted at
different resolutions. It is studied that visual perceptions in
natural images include various visual “levels” (Hubel and
Wiesel 1962), while different visual “levels” should be considered at the same time to get an overall plausible result.

Introduction
Depth is an essential information in a wide range of 3D vision applications, bridging 2D images to 3D world. Prior
methods of image-based depth estimation rely on multi-view
geometry or other scene priors and constraints. In real-life
scenarios, multi-view images or additional inputs are not
always accessible and monocular depth estimation (depth
from a single image) is the most common case. Estimating depth from a single image is a challenging and ill-posed
problem, where deep learning demonstrated great potential,
by which priors are automatically learnt from training data.
As many other vision tasks based on deep-learning, the
predictions of networks are more blurry than the inputs, as
* Co-first authors.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

488

