The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robust-by-Design Classification via Unitary-Gradient Neural Networks
Fabio Brau, Giulio Rossolini, Alessandro Biondi, and Giorgio Buttazzo
Department of Excellence in Robotics and AI, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa,Italy
{fabio.brau, giulio.rossolini, alessandro.biondi, giorgio.buttazzo}@santannapisa.it

Abstract
The use of neural networks in safety-critical systems requires
safe and robust models, due to the existence of adversarial attacks. Knowing the minimal adversarial perturbation of any
input x, or, equivalently, knowing the distance of x from the
classification boundary, allows evaluating the classification
robustness, providing certifiable predictions. Unfortunately,
state-of-the-art techniques for computing such a distance are
computationally expensive and hence not suited for online
applications. This work proposes a novel family of classifiers, namely Signed Distance Classifiers (SDCs), that, from
a theoretical perspective, directly output the exact distance of
x from the classification boundary, rather than a probability
score (e.g., SoftMax). SDCs represent a family of robust-bydesign classifiers. To practically address the theoretical requirements of a SDC, a novel network architecture named
Unitary-Gradient Neural Network is presented. Experimental results show that the proposed architecture approximates
a signed distance classifier, hence allowing an online certifiable classification of x at the cost of a single inference.

Figure 1: An example of a binary SDC. Observe that
the countour lines are parallel-curves of the classification
boundary (the black curve) and the output of the model in a
x (the orange cross) directly provides the distance from the
closest point in the classification boundary (the blue cross).

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) reached popularity due to
the high capability of achieving super-human performance
in various tasks, such as Image Classification, Object Detection and Image Generation. However, their usage in safetycritical systems, such as autonomous cars, is pushing the
scientific community toward the definition and the achievement of certifiable guarantees.
In this regard, as independently shown by (Szegedy et al.
2013; Biggio et al. 2013), neural networks are highly sensitive to small perturbations of the input, also known as adversarial examples, which are not easy to detect (Biggio and
Roli 2018; Carlini et al. 2018; Rossolini, Biondi, and Buttazzo 2022), and cause the model to produce a wrong classification. Informally speaking, a classifier is said to be εrobust in a certain input x if the classification result does not
change by perturbing x with all possible perturbations of a
bounded magnitude ε.
In the last few years, a large number of methods for crafting adversarial examples have been presented (Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and

Frossard 2016; Rony et al. 2020; Madry et al. 2019). In particular, (Carlini and Wagner 2017; Rony et al. 2019) proposed methods to find the minimal adversarial perturbation
(MAP) or, equivalently, the closest adversarial example for a
given input x. Such a perturbation directly provides the distance of x from the classification boundary, which, given a
maximum magnitude of perturbation, can be used to verify
the trustworthiness of the prediction (Weng et al. 2018) and
design robust classifiers (Wong et al. 2018; Cohen, Rosenfeld, and Kolter 2019). Note that, when the MAP is known,
one can check on-line whether a certain input x can be perturbed with a bounded-magnitude perturbation to change
the classification result. If this is the case, the network itself can signal the unsafeness of the result. Unfortunately,
due the hard complexity of the algorithms for solving the
MAP problem on classic models, the aforementioned strategies are not suited for efficiently certifying the robustness of
classifiers (Brau et al. 2023).
To achieve provable guarantees, other works focused on
designing network models with bounded Lipschitz constant
that, by construction, offers a lower bound of the MAP as the

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14729

