The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Correct-by-Construction Reinforcement Learning of Cardiac Pacemakers
from Duration Calculus Requirements*
Kalyani Dole†1 , Ashutosh Gupta†1 , John Komp†2 ,
Shankaranarayanan Krishna†1 , Ashutosh Trivedi†2
1

Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
2
University of Colorado Boulder
{kalyanid,akg,krishnas}@cse.iitb.ac.in, {john.komp,ashutosh.trivedi}@colorado.edu

Abstract

A common cardiac arrhythmia, known as heart block or
AV block, is a condition where the electrical signal controlling the ventricular contractions are partially or completely blocked (Vijayaraman and Ellenbogen 2017). Depending upon the severity of this block, pacemaker therapy
may be indicated. A pacemaker is an implantable electronic
device that sends electrical impulses to the heart to regulate the heartbeat. The correctness of the pacemaker-heart
closed-loop system is time-critical: it should not only provide supportive pacing when needed, it must ensure that the
heart is not sent into unnaturally fast heart beats. Furthermore, there are secondary requirements to improve the quality of life such as detecting and supplying increased rates
when the patient exercises (rate-adaptive pacing) and maximizing battery longevity (2.2% risk of infection; 0.4% mortality rate per pacemaker replacement (Polyzos, Konstantelias, and Falagas 2015)).
Over sixty years of research and development in designing artificial cardiac pacemakers has resulted in remarkable robustness, convenience, and acceptance of these devices. As the number of patients using pacemakers continues to rise (Greenspon et al. 2012), so are the expectations
on the invisibility of its design resulting in ever-increasing
demands on improved functionality, size shrinkage, power
consumption, battery performance and adaptability to individual cardiac arrhythmias (Gomes 2020; Finkelmeier
1991). The medical device industry continues to meet these
challenges by extending its design with more sensors (e.g.,
for rate augmentation, sleep apnea, and haemodynamic status) (Lau, Siu, and Tse 2017) resulting in ever-increasing
complexity of the device software.
While manual design, supported by exhaustive modelbased development, has served well for previous generations
of devices, the need for adaptability without sacrificing the
basic functional correctness is ever-present (Maisel et al.
2001). This paper proposes a correct-by-construction reinforcement learning (RL) paradigm to design cardiac pacemakers by integrating formal requirements in RL.
Example 1 (The need for Adaptive Pacemaker). Mobitz II
second-degree AV block (Langendorf and Pick 1968) is a

As the complexity of artificial pacemakers continues to grow,
the importance of capturing its functional correctness requirement formally cannot be overestimated. The pacemaker
system specification document by Boston Scientific provides
a widely accepted set of specifications for pacemakers. As
these specifications are written in a natural language, they
are not amenable to automated verification, synthesis, or
reinforcement learning of pacemaker systems. This paper
presents a formalization of these requirements for a dualchamber pacemaker in duration calculus (DC), a highly expressive real-time specification language. The proposed formalization allows us to automatically translate pacemaker requirements into executable specifications as stopwatch automata, which can be used to enable simulation, monitoring,
validation, verification and automatic synthesis of pacemaker
systems. The cyclic nature of the pacemaker-heart closedloop system results in DC requirements that compile to a decidable subclass of stopwatch automata. We present shield reinforcement learning (shield RL), a shield synthesis based reinforcement learning algorithm, by automatically constructing safety envelopes from DC specifications.

Introduction
The human heart is arguably the most important real-time
safety-critical system. In an average life-span of 70 years,
the human heart beats more than 2.5 billion times. Each
heartbeat is a complex chemical reaction that starts at the
sinoatrial node in the right atrium and sweeps down through
the ventricles. The cells of the myocardium have unique
properties that regulate the speed of this chemical reaction
to synchronize each chamber’s beat with the hemodynamics
of the cardiac cycle (Kay and Shepard 2017). Any disruption
in the cellular chain can cause the heart to beat improperly.
* This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation (NSF) under grant No. CCF-2009022 and NSF
CAREER award CCF-2146563.
†
These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14792

