The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Novel Motion Patterns Matter for Practical Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
Mengyuan Liu1 * , Fanyang Meng2 , Chen Chen3 , Songtao Wu4
1

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Peking University, Shenzhen Graduate School
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
University of Central Florida
4
Sony R&D Center China
nkliuyifang@gmail.com, mengfy@pcl.ac.cn, chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu, Songtao.Wu@sony.com
Abstract
Most skeleton-based action recognition methods assume that
the same type of action samples in the training set and the
test set share similar motion patterns. However, action samples in real scenarios usually contain novel motion patterns
which are not involved in the training set. As it is laborious to collect sufficient training samples to enumerate various
types of novel motion patterns, this paper presents a practical
skeleton-based action recognition task where the training set
contains common motion patterns of action samples and the
test set contains action samples that suffer from novel motion patterns. For this task, we present a Mask Graph Convolutional Network (Mask-GCN) to focus on learning actionspecific skeleton joints that mainly convey action information meanwhile masking action-agnostic skeleton joints that
convey rare action information and suffer more from novel
motion patterns. Specifically, we design a policy network to
learn layer-wise body masks to construct masked adjacency
matrices, which guide a GCN-based backbone to learn stable
yet informative action features from dynamic graph structure.
Extensive experiments on our newly collected dataset verify that Mask-GCN outperforms most GCN-based methods
when testing with various novel motion patterns.

Train

Train

Test

Test

(a) Samples used in previous methods

novel motion patterns

(b) Samples used in our method

Figure 1: Comparison between samples used in previous
methods and ours. We take an action “wave” as an example. (a) Previous methods assume that samples in both training and test sets share similar motion patterns. (b) In our
method, samples in the test set contain novel motion patterns, e.g. leg movements (named as “walking”), which are
unobserved in the training set.
Method CS 1 (%) CS 2 (%) CV 1 (%) CV 2 (%)
CTR-GCN 46.90
62.48
44.46
66.23
Ours
51.05
66.90
57.79
73.00

Table 1: Comparison of performances between state-of-theart CTR-GCN (Chen et al. 2021) method and ours on our
dataset, where test samples contain novel motion patterns.
(CS: cross subject; CV: cross view)

Skeleton-based action recognition methods assume that
the same type of action samples in the training set and the
test set share similar motion patterns. This ideal assumption
is widely adopted by existing skeleton-based action recognition datasets (Wang et al. 2014; Chen, Jafari, and Kehtarnavaz 2015; Shahroudy et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2020), including the most popular dataset, i.e., NTU RGB+D dataset.
We take an action “wave” as an example. The training and
test samples used in previous methods are shown in Fig. 1
(a). They contain similar motion patterns, i.e., raising one
hand and moving the hand from one side to another. Meanwhile, remaining body parts, e.g., legs, keep nearly still.
Practical Problem: Compared with samples in Fig. 1 (a),
action samples in real scenarios are more complex. We observe that action samples usually contain novel motion patterns which are not involved in the training set. We take an
action “wave” from our newly collected dataset as an example. The training and test samples used in our method are
shown in Fig. 1 (b), where the test sample contains novel
motion patterns, e.g. leg movements, which are unobserved
in our training set. One natural question arises: How do the
novel motion patterns in the test stage affect the existing

Introduction
Action recognition is of great importance to human-robot
interaction, which enables a robot to understand the meaning of human movements. Existing work can be roughly
categorized into RGB-based methods (Tu et al. 2019; Liu
and Yuan 2018), depth-based methods (Chen et al. 2016),
and skeleton-based methods (Liu, Liu, and Chen 2017; Liu,
Meng, and Liang 2022). Compared with RGB data, skeleton representation of actions suffers less from clutter backgrounds and additionally encodes depth information (Zhang
et al. 2022; Tu et al. 2022). Compared with depth data,
skeleton data directly capture human body structure meanwhile having less redundant information. Moreover, skeleton data can be accessed in real-time with the spread of
depth sensors. Therefore, skeleton-based action recognition
has attracted increasing attention (Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018;
Chen et al. 2021).
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1701

