The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Differentially Private Heatmaps
Badih Ghazi, Junfeng He, Kai Kohlhoff, Ravi Kumar
Pasin Manurangsi, Vidhya Navalpakkam, Nachiappan Valliappan
Google Research, Mountain View, CA
{badihghazi, ravi.k53}@gmail.com
{junfenghe,kohlhoff,pasin,vidhyan,nac}@google.com

Abstract

Distance (EMD)? While closely related to heatmaps, the
EMD measure is of independent interest: it was originally proposed for computer vision tasks (Rubner, Tomasi,
and Guibas 2000) since it matches perceptual similarity better than other measures such as ℓ1 , ℓ2 , or KLdivergence (Stricker and Orengo 1995; Levina and Bickel
2001; Wang and Guibas 2012). It is also well-suited for spatial data analysis since it takes the underlying metric space
into account and considers “neighboring” bins. EMD is used
in spatial analysis (Kranstauber, Smolla, and Safi 2017), human mobility (Isaacman et al. 2012), image retrieval (Rubner, Tomasi, and Guibas 1998; Puzicha et al. 1999), face
recognition (Xu, Yan, and Luo 2008), visual tracking (Zhao,
Yang, and Tao 2008), shape matching (Grauman and Darrell
2004), etc. For the task of sparse aggregation under EMD,
we give an efficient algorithm with asymptotically tight error. We next describe our results in more detail.

We consider the task of producing heatmaps from users’ aggregated data while protecting their privacy. We give a differentially private (DP) algorithm for this task and demonstrate its advantages over previous algorithms on real-world
datasets.
Our core algorithmic primitive is a DP procedure that takes
in a set of distributions and produces an output that is close
in Earth Mover’s Distance to the average of the inputs. We
prove theoretical bounds on the error of our algorithm under
a certain sparsity assumption and that these are near-optimal.

1

Introduction

Recently, differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al. 2006b,a)
has emerged as a strong notion of user privacy for data aggregation and machine learning, with practical deployments
including the 2022 US Census (Abowd 2018), in industry
(Erlingsson, Pihur, and Korolova 2014; Shankland 2014;
Greenberg 2016; Apple Differential Privacy Team 2017;
Ding, Kulkarni, and Yekhanin 2017) and in popular machine
learning libraries (Radebaugh and Erlingsson 2019; Testuggine and Mironov 2020). Over the last few years, DP algorithms have been developed for several analytic tasks involving aggregation of user data.
One of the basic data aggregation tools is a heatmap.
Heatmaps are popular for visualizing aggregated data in
two or higher dimensions. They are widely used in many
fields including computer vision and image processing, spatial data analysis, bioinformatics, etc. Many of these applications involve protecting the privacy of user data. For example, heatmaps for gaze or gene microdata (Liu et al. 2019;
Steil et al. 2019) would be based on data from individuals
that would be considered private. Similarly, a heatmap of
popular locations in a geographic area will be based on user
location check-ins, which are sensitive. Motivated by such
applications, in this paper, we present an efficient DP algorithm for computing heatmaps with provable guarantees, and
evaluate it empirically.
At the core of our algorithm is a primitive solving the following basic task: how to privately aggregate sparse input
vectors with a small error as measured by the Earth Mover’s

1.1

Our Results

We consider the setting where each user i holds a probability
distribution pi over points in [0, 1)2 , and the goal is to compute
Pnthe heatmap of the average of these probabilities, i.e.,
1
i=1 pi . We give an ε-DP algorithm for this task, estabn
lish its theoretical guarantees, and provide empirical evaluations of its performance. (For definitions, see Section 2.)
Sparse Aggregation under EMD. At the heart of our ap1
proach is the study of aggregation under
PnEMD , where we
would like to output the estimate of n1 i=1 pi with the error measured in EMD. There are two main reasons why we
consider EMD for the error measure. First, a bound on the
EMD to the average distribution implies bounds on several
metrics commonly used in evaluating heatmaps, including
the KL-divergence, ℓ1 distance, and EMD itself. Second,
while it is possible to obtain DP aggregation algorithms with
bounded EMD error, as we will discuss below, any DP aggregation algorithm must suffer errors under other metrics,
including KL-divergence or ℓ1 distance, that grow with the
resolution2 , rendering them impractical when the number of
users is small compared to the resolution.
1

For a formal definition of EMD, please see Section 2.1.
Specifically, it follows from previous work (Dwork et al. 2015)
that, if we consider the ℓ1 distance or KL-divergence for ∆ × ∆
grid and n ≤ Oε (∆), then the error must be Ω(1).
2

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7696

