The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Low-Light Image Enhancement Network Based on Multi-Scale Feature
Complementation
Yong Yang1*, Wenzhi Xu2*, Shuying Huang3†, Weiguo Wan4

School of Computer Science and Technology, Tiangong University, Tianjin, China
School of Information Technology, Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics, Nanchang, China
3
School of Software, Tiangong University, Tianjin, China
4
School of Software and Internet of Things Engineering, Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics, Nanchang, China4
greatyangy@126.com, xuwenzhi1998@163.com, huangshuying@tiangong.edu.cn, wanweiguo@jxufe.edu.cn
1

2

Abstract
Images captured in low-light environments have problems
of insufficient brightness and low contrast, which will affect
subsequent image processing tasks. Although most current
enhancement methods can obtain high-contrast images, they
still suffer from noise amplification and color distortion. To
address these issues, this paper proposes a low-light image
enhancement network based on multi-scale feature complementation (LIEN-MFC), which is a U-shaped encoderdecoder network supervised by multiple images of different
scales. In the encoder, four feature extraction branches are
constructed to extract features of low-light images at different scales. In the decoder, to ensure the integrity of the
learned features at each scale, a feature supplementary fusion module (FSFM) is proposed to complement and integrate features from different branches of the encoder and
decoder. In addition, a feature restoration module (FRM)
and an image reconstruction module (IRM) are built in each
branch to reconstruct the restored features and output enhanced images. To better train the network, a joint loss
function is defined, in which a discriminative loss term is
designed to ensure that the enhanced results better meet the
visual properties of the human eye. Extensive experiments
on benchmark datasets show that the proposed method outperforms some state-of-the-art methods subjectively and objectively.

(a) Input

(b) GLADNet

(d) Ours
(c) EnlightenGAN
Figure 1: Results of different low-light image enhancement
methods. GLADNet (Wang et al. 2018) and EnlightenGAN (Jiang et al. 2021) tend to produce images with
strong noise.

convolution networks. These methods are roughly divided
into three categories according to the learning strategy of
the network: supervised learning, semi-supervised learning
and unsupervised learning. The earliest methods are mainly
based on supervised learning networks. For example,
LLNet (Lore, Akintayo and Sarkar 2017) is a supervised
learning network and the first neural network built for lowlight image enhancement, in which a stacked sparse autoencoder is proposed for noise removal and contrast enhancement. To reduce the network's dependence on training samples, semi-supervised and unsupervised learning
networks are proposed. DRBN (Yang et al. 2021) is a deep
recursive band network that combines fully supervised and
unsupervised learning. It first used supervised learning to
recover linear bands of the enhanced image and then recombined these bands through unsupervised adversarial
learning to obtain an improved band representation. Unsupervised learning does not require paired datasets to participate in network training. For example, EnlightenGAN
(EG) (Jiang et al. 2021) is the first unsupervised low-light

Introduction
Images captured in extremely dark environments often
have problems such as low brightness, low contrast, severe
noise pollution, and color loss, which will affect subsequent image processing tasks, such as security monitoring,
target detection and recognition. Therefore, effective lowlight image enhancement methods are needed to restore the
quality of low-light images.
In recent years, low-light image enhancement methods
based on deep learning have gradually become mainstream
due to the powerful feature extraction capabilities of deep
*These authors contributed equally. †Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3214

