The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Retrosynthesis Prediction with Local Template Retrieval
Shufang Xie1 , Rui Yan1 * , Junliang Guo2 , Yingce Xia3 , Lijun Wu3 , Tao Qin3
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods,
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence (GSAI), Renmin University of China
2
Microsoft Reserarch Aisa
3
Microsoft Reserarch AI4Science
{shufangxie,ruiyan}@ruc.edu.cn, {junliangguo,yingce.xia,lijuwu,taoqin}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Retrosynthesis, which predicts the reactants of a given target molecule, is an essential task for drug discovery. In recent years, the machine learing based retrosynthesis methods have achieved promising results. In this work, we introduce RetroKNN, a local reaction template retrieval method
to further boost the performance of template-based systems
with non-parametric retrieval. We first build an atom-template
store and a bond-template store that contain the local templates in the training data, then retrieve from these templates
with a k-nearest-neighbor (KNN) search during inference.
The retrieved templates are combined with neural network
predictions as the final output. Furthermore, we propose a
lightweight adapter to adjust the weights when combing neural network and KNN predictions conditioned on the hidden
representation and the retrieved templates. We conduct comprehensive experiments on two widely used benchmarks, the
USPTO-50K and USPTO-MIT. Especially for the top-1 accuracy, we improved 7.1% on the USPTO-50K dataset and
12.0% on the USPTO-MIT dataset. These results demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method.

1

Figure 1: Illustration of retrosynthesis that takes the target
molecule on the left side and predicts two reactants on the
right side. Inside the callout is its reaction template that
breaks the carbon-nitrogen bond into two parts.

spite their promising results, we notice that it is still challenging to learn all reaction patterns only with neural networks, especially for the rare templates.
Therefore, we introduce a non-parametric retrieval-based
method to provide concrete guidance in prediction. Specifically, we use a local template retrieval method, the knearest-neighbor (KNN) method, to provide additional predictions to improve the prediction accuracy. Following LocalRetro (Chen and Jung 2021), We first take a trained
graph-neural network (GNN) for the retrosynthesis task and
offline build an atom-template and a bond-template store
that contain reaction templates (Section 2.1). During this
store construction phase, we iterate all target molecules in
the training data and add the templates of each atom and
each bond to the corresponding store. The templates are indexed by the hidden representations extracted by the GNN.
During inference, for a given new target molecule, we first
use the original GNN to extract the hidden representations as
well as the original GNN predicted templates. Then, we use
the hidden representations to search the two stores to retrieve
local templates similar to the query. The GNN predicted
templates and the KNN retrieved templates are merged with
different weights to build the final output.
Combining the GNN and KNN predictions is one key design factor in the above processes. The conventional way
is to use fixed parameters to aggregate these predictions
for all reactions, which may be sub-optimal and hurt the
model’s generalization (Zheng et al. 2021). Because each
prediction may have a different confidence level, it would
be beneficial to assign the weights adaptively for each reac-

Introduction

Retrosynthesis, which predicts the reactants for a given
product molecule, is a fundamental task for drug discovery. The conventional methods heavily rely on the expertise and heuristics of chemists (Corey 1991). Recently, machine learning based approaches have been proposed to assist chemists and have shown promising results (Dong et al.
2021). The typical approaches includes the template-free
methods that predict the reactants directly and the templatebased methods that first predict reaction templates and then
obtain reactants based on templates. For these different approaches, a shared research challenge is effectively modeling this task’s particular property.
As shown in Figure 1, a key property of a chemical reaction is that it is strongly related to modifying the local
structure of the target molecule, such as replacing a functional group or breaking a bond. Therefore, much recent
research focuses on better modeling the local structure of
molecules (Chen and Jung 2021; Somnath et al. 2021). De* Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5330

