The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DENet: Disentangled Embedding Network for Visible Watermark Removal
Ruizhou Sun1,2 * , Yukun Su1,3 * , Qingyao Wu1,4†
1
2

School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education
3
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
ruizhousun@foxmail.com

Abstract

high-dimensional space
“watermark”

Adding visible watermark into image is a common copyright
protection method of medias. Meanwhile, public research on
watermark removal can be utilized as an adversarial technology to help the further development of watermarking. Existing watermark removal methods mainly adopt multi-task
learning networks, which locate the watermark and restore
the background simultaneously. However, these approaches
view the task as an image-to-image reconstruction problem,
where they only impose supervision after the final output,
making the high-level semantic features shared between different tasks. To this end, inspired by the two-stage coarserefinement network, we propose a novel contrastive learning
mechanism to disentangle the high-level embedding semantic information of the images and watermarks, driving the respective network branch more oriented. Specifically, the proposed mechanism is leveraged for watermark image decomposition, which aims to decouple the clean image and watermark hints in the high-level embedding space. This can
guarantee the learning representation of the restored image
enjoy more task-specific cues. In addition, we introduce a
self-attention-based enhancement module, which promotes
the network’s ability to capture semantic information among
different regions, leading to further improvement on the contrastive learning mechanism. To validate the effectiveness of
our proposed method, extensive experiments are conducted
on different challenging benchmarks. Experimental evaluations show that our approach can achieve state-of-the-art performance and yield high-quality images. The code is available at: https://github.com/lianchengmingjue/DENet.

“watermark-free image”
“watermark”

“watermark-free image”

Figure 1: The main idea of our proposed DENet. Our goal
is to disentangle the watermark-free image and watermark
embeddings in the high-level space, which can provide more
explicit cues for the decoder to reconstruct the images. The
decoupled embedding of the watermark images has a more
separate distribution of the potential content.
Some early watermark image removal methods (van Renesse 1996; Pei and Zeng 2006) adopt traditional techniques
like nonlinear pixel domain technology and Independent
Component Analysis (ICA) algorithm to decompose the
watermark-free images and watermarks. With the flourish
of deep learning, recent methods view the watermark image
removal task as the image-to-image translation issue. Benefiting from the end-to-end reconstruction network (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015) and generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al. 2014), the existing methods
can achieve satisfactory watermark removal performance.
More recently, Cun et al. (Cun and Pun 2021) and Liang
et al. (Liang et al. 2021) propose to utilize multi-branch networks to locate and separate the watermark and image and
finally refine the reconstructed images.

Introduction
As an important carrier, social media provides a platform for
us to deliver and share different images and video content,
whose security and robustness have become an important
trend in recent research. Among them, watermarking (Cox
et al. 2002; Katzenbeisser and Petitcolas 2000) is a common
copyright protection approach of digital media. Meanwhile,
many researchers pay attention to the watermark removal
methods as an adversarial technology to boost the further
development of digital watermarks.

However, the above mentioned methods ignore the highlevel semantic embedding of the watermark and watermarkfree image feature. To be specific, the previous methods
capture the watermark image’s semantic information within
a single encoder, which will make their learning representation less discriminative and separate, as shown in Fig 1

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2411

