The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DeFL: Defending against Model Poisoning Attacks in Federated Learning via
Critical Learning Periods Awareness
Gang Yan1 , Hao Wang2 , Xu Yuan3 , Jian Li1
1

SUNY-Binghamton University
2
Louisiana State University
3
University of Louisiana at Lafayette
gyan2@binghamton.edu, haowang@lsu.edu, xu.yuan@louisiana.edu, lij@binghamton.edu
Abstract

raoui, and Rouault 2018; Mahloujifar, Mahmoody, and Mohammed 2019; Baruch, Baruch, and Goldberg 2019; Fang
et al. 2020; Xie, Koyejo, and Gupta 2020; Shejwalkar and
Houmansadr 2021), where the goal is to minimize the global
model accuracy on any test input, or targeted (Bhagoji et al.
2019; Sun et al. 2019; Bagdasaryan et al. 2020), where the
goal is to minimize the accuracy on specific test inputs. To
this end, untargeted model poisoning attacks can completely
cripple the global model and hence pose more severe threats
to FL, which is the focus of this paper.
Existing defenses against model poisoning attacks mainly
rely on robust methods, where the central server leverages
Byzantine-robust aggregation rules to reduce the impact of
malicious model updates via either detecting and removing
statistical outliers or limiting their impacts. However, these
approaches suffer from several key limitations: i) only robust
when there is a smaller number of malicious clients (Blanchard et al. 2017; Yin et al. 2018); ii) prediction based malicious client detection using historical update information is
accurate when there is a larger number of malicious clients
in each training round (Zhang et al. 2022); and iii) require
the central server to have access to a clean validation dataset
whose distribution does not diverge too much from the overall training data distribution (Li et al. 2020; Cao et al. 2021).
As a result, existing defenses are shown (Bhagoji et al. 2019;
Fang et al. 2020) to be still vulnerable to model poisoning
attacks, especially to those with high attack impacts.
Exacerbating these limitations is the fact that existing defenses mainly focus on designing Byzantine-robust aggregation rules, and largely ignore the impact of the underlying DNN that is used to training FL models since existing
defenses implicitly assume that all FL training phases are
equally important. Unfortunately, this assumption is invalid
due to the existence of critical learning periods (CLP), i.e.,
the final quality of a DNN model is determined by the first
few training rounds, in which deficits such as low quality or
quantity of training data will cause irreversible model degradation (Achille, Rovere, and Soatto 2019; Jastrzebski et al.
2019; Golatkar, Achille, and Soatto 2019; Jastrzebski et al.
2021; Yan, Wang, and Li 2022).
To address the above limitations, we propose DeFL, a
novel CLP-aware defense against model poisoning attacks
to FL that seamlessly analyzes the DNN that is used for
FL training and leverages its structural information to de-

Federated learning (FL) is known to be susceptible to model
poisoning attacks in which malicious clients hamper the accuracy of the global model by sending manipulated model updates to the central server during the FL training process. Existing defenses mainly focus on Byzantine-robust FL aggregations, and largely ignore the impact of the underlying deep
neural network (DNN) that is used to FL training. Inspired by
recent findings on critical learning periods (CLP) in DNNs,
where small gradient errors have irrecoverable impact on the
final model accuracy, we propose a new defense, called a
CLP-aware defense against poisoning of FL (DeFL). The key
idea of DeFL is to measure fine-grained differences between
DNN model updates via an easy-to-compute federated gradient norm vector (FGNV) metric. Using FGNV, DeFL simultaneously detects malicious clients and identifies CLP, which
in turn is leveraged to guide the adaptive removal of detected
malicious clients from aggregation. As a result, DeFL not
only mitigates model poisoning attacks on the global model
but also is robust to detection errors. Our extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate that DeFL
produces significant performance gain over conventional defenses against state-of-the-art model poisoning attacks.

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017) is an emerging distributed learning paradigm that enables many clients
to collaboratively learn a deep neural network (DNN) model
(called the global model) without sharing their private local
training data. This is done through an iterative process where
a central server repeatedly coordinates dispersed clients via
collecting clients’ local model updates computed on their local data, aggregating clients’ updates using an aggregation
rule, and finally using the aggregated updates to tune the
global model, which is broadcast to a subset of clients at the
beginning of each FL training round.
However, due to its distributed nature, FL is vulnerable to
model poisoning attacks (Imteaj et al. 2023), which attempt
to degrade the global model accuracy by contributing malicious model updates during the training process. Depending
on the adversarial goal, model poisoning attacks can be either untargeted (Blanchard et al. 2017; El El Mhamdi, GuerCopyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10711

