The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Symbolic Metamodels for Interpreting Black-Boxes Using Primitive Functions
Mahed Abroshan1 , Saumitra Mishra2, * , Mohammad Mahdi Khalili3,4
1

The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
JP Morgan AI Research, London, UK
3
Yahoo! Research, NYC, NY, USA
4
CSE Department, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA
mabroshan@tuirng.ac.uk, saumitra.mishra@jpmorgan.com, mahdi.khalili@yahooinc.com.
2

Abstract

There exist two key approaches to bring interpretability to machine learning models: (1) by designing inherently interpretable models (Rudin 2019; Chen et al. 2019;
Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola 2018); or (2) by designing posthoc methods to understand a pre-trained model (Ribeiro,
Singh, and Guestrin 2016a; Lipton 2016). In this work,
we focus on the second approach that includes methods to
analyze a trained model locally and globally (Montavon,
Samek, and Müller 2018). The local interpretability methods focus on instance-wise explanations, which although
useful, provide little understanding of a model’s global behaviour (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016b; Lundberg
and Lee 2017). Hence, researchers have proposed multiple techniques to interpret how a ML model behaves for a
group of instances. Some examples of global analysis methods include permutation feature importance (Molnar 2019),
activation-maximization (Erhan et al. 2009), and learning
globally surrogate models (Thrun 1995; Craven and Shavlik 1996).
Our work relates to the last approach which aims to
learn interpretable proxies by approximating the behaviour
of black-box ML models for multiple instances. Some efforts in this category include methods to approximate neural networks with if-then rules (Thrun 1995) or decision
trees (Craven and Shavlik 1996) and the method to approximate matrix factorisation models using Bayesian networks
and simple logic rules (Carmona et al. 2015). Our work is
mostly relevant to a different category of approaches for
learning interpretable proxies that focuses on approximating
black-box functions with symbolic metamodels. A proper
interpretable metamodel can enjoy the benefits of different
categories of interpretability methods. For example, a metamodel may provide insight into the interactions of different
features and how they contribute in producing results. The
metamodel can be locally approximated (e.g. using Taylor
series) to generate instance-wise explanations. Moreover, it
may be used for scientific discovery by revealing underlying laws governing the observed data (Schmidt and Lipson 2009; Wang, Wagner, and Rondinelli 2019; Udrescu and
Tegmark 2020b).
Symbolic regression (SR) (Koza 1994), has been the primary approach for finding approximate metamodels. In SR,
there exist some fixed mathematical building blocks (e.g.
summation operation), and the Genetic Programming (GP)

One approach for interpreting black-box machine learning
models is to find a global approximation of the model using simple interpretable functions, which is called a metamodel (a model of the model). Approximating the black-box
with a metamodel can be used to 1) estimate instance-wise
feature importance; 2) understand the functional form of the
model; 3) analyze feature interactions. In this work, we propose a new method for finding interpretable metamodels. Our
approach utilizes Kolmogorov superposition theorem, which
expresses multivariate functions as a composition of univariate functions (our primitive parameterized functions). This
composition can be represented in the form of a tree. Inspired by symbolic regression, we use a modified form of
genetic programming to search over different tree configurations. Gradient descent (GD) is used to optimize the parameters of a given configuration. Our method is a novel
memetic algorithm that uses GD not only for training numerical constants but also for the training of building blocks.
Using several experiments, we show that our method outperforms recent metamodeling approaches suggested for interpreting black-boxes.

Introduction
In recent years machine learning (ML) algorithms made several breakthroughs in issuing accurate predictions. There is
however a growing need to improve the trustworthiness of
these models. Providing accurate predictions is not enough
in high-stake applications like healthcare where an agent
(e.g. clinician) needs to interact with the model. In these
applications, the agent usually needs to understand how a
particular prediction is issued. Especially, if the model prediction (say treatment plan) is different from what the clinician has in mind, explaining the model is vital. Complicated ML models like neural networks are essentially blackboxes to humans, and that is why interpretability methods are important and have gained significant attention in
recent years (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016b; Lundberg and Lee 2017; Guidotti et al. 2018; Arnaldo, Krawiec,
and O’Reilly 2014; Zhang, Solar-Lezama, and Singh 2018;
Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola 2018; Arrieta et al. 2020; Lou
et al. 2013; Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017).
* Work done as a research associate at the Alan Turing Institute
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6649

