The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Moving-Landmark Assisted Distributed Learning Based Decentralized
Cooperative Localization (DL-DCL) with Fault Tolerance
Shubhankar Gupta, Suresh Sundaram
Artificial Intelligence and Robotics Lab (AIRL)
Department of Aerospace Engineering
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
shubhankarg@iisc.ac.in, vssuresh@iisc.ac.in
Abstract

like search and rescue (Scherer et al. 2015), disaster relief (Gregory et al. 2016), convoy protection (Spry, Girard,
and Hedrick 2005), traffic monitoring (Khan et al. 2020),
etc. Therefore, in such uncertain scenarios, having multiple
robots carry out the mission increases the chances of success by increasing the reliability of the overall multi-robot
system (MRS) (Mohiuddin et al. 2020).

This paper considers the problem of cooperative localization
of multiple robots under uncertainty, communicating over a
partially connected, dynamic communication network and assisted by an agile landmark. Each robot owns an IMU and a
relative pose sensing suite, which can get faulty due to system or environmental uncertainty and therefore exhibit large
bias in their estimation output. For the robots to localize accurately under sensor failure and system or environmental uncertainty, a novel Distributed Learning based Decentralized
Cooperative Localization (DL-DCL) algorithm is proposed
that involves real-time learning of an information fusion strategy by each robot for combining pose estimates from its own
sensors as well as from those of its neighboring robots and
utilizing the moving landmark’s pose information as a feedback to the learning process. Convergence analysis shows that
the learning process converges exponentially under certain
reasonable assumptions. Simulations involving sensor failures inducing around 40-60 times increase in the nominal
bias show DL-DCL’s estimation performance to be approximately 40% better than the well-known covariance-based
estimate fusion methods. For the evaluation of DL-DCL’s
implementability and fault-tolerance capability in practice, a
high-fidelity simulation is carried out in Gazebo with ROS2.

A key challenge in the localization of a MRS is to determine an appropriate estimate fusion strategy each robot
should employ so that they collaboratively share their sensor information and improve their pose estimates under system and environmental uncertainty. The literature on Decentralized Cooperative Localization (DCL) of a MRS mainly
utilizes covariance-based methods like Kalman Fusion (KF)
(Maybeck 1982), (Uhlmann 2003), Covariance Intersection
(CI) (Matzka and Altendorfer 2009), (Julier and Uhlmann
2017), and Covariance Union (CU) (Matzka and Altendorfer 2009), (Reece and Roberts 2010), as information fusion
strategy that robots use to improve their estimation accuracy. (Carrillo-Arce et al. 2013) proposes an approximate
decentralized multi-robot cooperative localization algorithm
with reduced processing and communication costs, using CI
to maintain consistency while handling asynchronous communication constraints. (Assa and Janabi-Sharifi 2015) proposes a nonlinear KF-based sensor fusion framework that
adaptively compensates for system noise variations and iteratively deals with the fast system dynamics. CI is explicitly used in the communication update of the multi-robot localization algorithm proposed in (Chang, Chen, and Mehta
2021) for ensuring estimation consistency and resilience.
Similarly, (Pires et al. 2021) use CI in their cooperative
localization and mapping algorithm for robotic swarms. In
(Wang et al. 2021), a fully decentralized multi-robot cooperative localization algorithm based on CU is proposed, where
CU handles spurious sensor data in the fusion process ensuring consistency of the fused estimates. The above-mentioned
covariance-based fusion methods usually involve assumptions regarding consistency and correlation among the estimates being fused – KF requires the estimates to be uncorrelated, CI requires the estimates to be consistent, and CU
requires at least one of the estimates to be consistent. Further, covariance-based methods require covariance information of the estimates being fused as input. In applications involving adverse conditions, temporary or permanent sensor

Introduction
In autonomous robotic applications involving mobile robots,
localization is considered one of the most fundamental challenges (Huang and Dissanayake 1999); localization is the
process of determining where a robot is located with respect
to its environment, or in other words, determining an accurate estimate of its location and orientation with respect to
a global frame of reference. Localization of a single robot
is usually carried out using a filtering method, like Kalman
Filter, for estimating the robot pose by fusing information
from its proprioceptive sensors (e.g., IMU, INS) and exteroceptive sensors (e.g., RADAR, LiDAR, GPS, camera).
In ideal situations, one can achieve success in autonomous
robotic mission objectives by simply deploying a single
robot. But in practice, system and environmental uncertainty
play a critical role by increasing the chances of sensor failure, especially in applications involving adverse conditions
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6175

