The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Tournament Fixing Parameterized by Feedback Vertex Set Number Is FPT
Meirav Zehavi*
Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel
meiravze@bgu.ac.il

Abstract

a seeding. In the first round, every two players mapped to
leaves with the same parent compete against each other, and
the winner is mapped to the common parent. The leaves are
then deleted from the tree, and the next round is conducted
similarly. The execution stops when the tree contains a single node, mapped to a player who is declared the winner.
Having a favorite player w in mind, a natural question in
this context is—does there exist a way to conduct the competition so that w wins? This question is sensible when we have
predictive information about outcomes of matches. Specifically, we assume we have a digraph D that is a tournament
(not to be confused with the competition itself, which is also
termed a tournament). That is, D is a digraph where either
(u, v) ∈ A(D) or (v, u) ∈ A(D) for all u, v ∈ V (D). This
encodes predictive information as follows: V (D) = N , and
for every u, v ∈ N , we predict that in a match between u
and v, u would beat v if and only if (u, v) ∈ A(D). Now,
the corresponding problem, termed the T OURNAMENT F IX ING problem, is formalized as follows. The input consists of
a tournament D, and a node w ∈ V (D). The objective is to
decide whether there exists a seeding of the set of n players,
V (D), such that w wins the resulting knockout tournament.

A knockout (or single-elimination) tournament is a format
of a competition that is very popular in practice (particularly in sports, elections and decision making), and which
has been extensively and intensively studied from a theoretical point of view for more than a decade. Particular attention has been devoted to the T OURNAMENT F IXING problem, where, roughly speaking, the objective is to determine
whether we can conduct the knockout tournament in a way
that makes our favorite player win. Here, part of the input is
a tournament graph D that encodes the winner of each possible match. A sequence of papers has studied the parameterized complexity of T OURNAMENT F IXING with respect to
the feedback arc set number (fas) of D. Given that this parameter yielded tractability, it has been asked explicitly and
repeatedly whether T OURNAMENT F IXING is FPT also with
respect to the feedback vertex set number (fvs) of D. We answer this question positively. In fact, although fvs can be arbitrarily smaller than fas, we attain the same dependency on
the parameter in the time complexity. So, additionally, our
work subsumes the best known algorithm for T OURNAMENT
F IXING with respect to fas.

Introduction

Previous Work. The T OURNAMENT F IXING problem
was introduced by Vu et al. (Vu, Altman, and Shoham
2009) in 2009. This work has led to a flurry of research of
structural properties of D that guarantee that w wins (see,
e.g., (Williams 2010; Stanton and Williams 2011b,a; Aziz
et al. 2014; Kim and Williams 2015; Kim, Suksompong,
and Williams 2016)). Nowadays, there already exist dozens
of papers that consider the T OURNAMENT F IXING problem and its different variants. Here, we only briefly survey
some of the results most relevant to our work. For more information, we refer to surveys on T OURNAMENT F IXING
such as (Williams 2016; Suksompong 2021). Computationally, T OURNAMENT F IXING is NP-hard (Aziz et al. 2014).
On the positive side, it was shown to be solvable in time
2n · nO(1) and polynomial space (Gupta et al. 2018b), improving upon earlier exponential-time algorithms by (Aziz
et al. 2014; Kim and Williams 2015). Since n can be quite
large, this running time is prohibitive.
The state-of-the-art described above gave rise to the study
of the parameterized complexity of the problem. Specifically, Aziz et al. (Aziz et al. 2014) considered the feedback

A knockout (or single-elimination) tournament is a format
of competition that is very popular in practice, particularly
in sports and popular culture, elections and decision making. Notably, it is the most widely-used format of competition in sports (Horen and Riezman 1985; Connolly and
Rendleman 2011; Groh et al. 2012). Further, it has been
extensively and intensively studied from both practical and
theoretical point of views for over three decades, particularly from the perspectives of artificial intelligence, computational social choice, economics and operation research. We
refer to (Williams 2016; Suksompong 2021; Tullock 1980;
Rosen 1986; Laslier 1997) for a few illustrative examples.
Formally, an execution of a knockout tournament with a
set N of n players (where n is a power of 2) is conducted
as follows. Consider a complete (unordered) binary tree T
with n leaves and a mapping φ : N → leaves(T ), called
* Supported by the European Research Council (ERC) grant titled PARAPATH.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5876

