The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Markov Random Fields for Combinatorial Structures via
Sampling through Lovász Local Lemma
Nan Jiang* 1 , Yi Gu* 2 , Yexiang Xue1
1

Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, USA
Department of Mathematics, Northwestern University, USA
{jiang631, yexiang}@purdue.edu, Yi.Gu@u.northwestern.edu
2

Abstract

has a higher complexity. In fact, when applied in a constrained domain, existing approaches spend most of their
training time manipulating the likelihood of invalid structures, but not learning the difference between valid structures inside and outside of the training set. In the meantime, tremendous progress has been made in automated reasoning (Braunstein, Mézard, and Zecchina 2005; Andersen
et al. 2007; Chavira, Darwiche, and Jaeger 2006; Van Hentenryck 1989; Gogate and Dechter 2012; Sang, Bearne,
and Kautz 2005). Nevertheless, reasoning and learning have
been growing independently for a long time. Only recently
do ideas emerge exploring the role of reasoning in learning (Kusner, Paige, and Hernández-Lobato 2017; Jin, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2018; Dai et al. 2018; Hu et al. 2017; Lowd
and Domingos 2008; Ding et al. 2021).
The Lovász Local Lemma (LLL) (Erdős and Lovász
1973) is a classic gem in combinatorics, which at a high
level, states that there exists a positive probability that none
of a series of bad events occur, as long as these events
are mostly independent from one another and are not too
likely individually. Recently, Moser and Tardos (2010) came
up with an algorithm, which samples from the probability distribution proven to exist by LLL. Guo, Jerrum, and
Liu (2019) proved that the algorithmic-LLL is an unbiased
sampler if those bad events satisfy the so-called “extreme”
condition. The expected running time of the sampler is also
shown to be polynomial. As one contribution of this paper,
we offer proofs of the two aforementioned results using precise mathematical notations, clarifying a few descriptions
not precisely defined in the original proof. While this line of
research clearly demonstrates the potential of LLL in generative learning (generating samples that satisfy all hard constraints), it is not clear how to embed LLL-based samplers
into learning and no empirical studies have been performed
to evaluate LLL-based samplers in machine learning.
In this paper, we develop NEural Lovász Sampler
(N ELSON), which implements the LLL-based sampler as a
fully differentiable neural network. Our N ELSON-CD embeds N ELSON into the contrastive divergence learning process of Markov Random Fields (MRFs). Embedding LLLbased sampler allows the contrastive learning algorithm to
focus on learning the difference between the training data
and the valid structures drawn from the current model distribution. Baseline approaches, on the other hand, spend most

Learning to generate complex combinatorial structures satisfying constraints will have transformative impacts in many
application domains. However, it is beyond the capabilities of
existing approaches due to the highly intractable nature of the
embedded probabilistic inference. Prior works spend most of
the training time learning to separate valid from invalid structures but do not learn the inductive biases of valid structures.
We develop NEural Lovász Sampler (N ELSON), which embeds the sampler through Lovász Local Lemma (LLL) as a
fully differentiable neural network layer. Our N ELSON-CD
embeds this sampler into the contrastive divergence learning
process of Markov random fields. N ELSON allows us to obtain valid samples from the current model distribution. Contrastive divergence is then applied to separate these samples
from those in the training set. N ELSON is implemented as a
fully differentiable neural net, taking advantage of the parallelism of GPUs. Experimental results on several real-world
domains reveal that N ELSON learns to generate 100% valid
structures, while baselines either time out or cannot ensure
validity. N ELSON also outperforms other approaches in running time, log-likelihood, and MAP scores.

Introduction
In recent years, tremendous progress has been made in generative modeling (Hinton 2002; Tsochantaridis et al. 2005;
Goodfellow et al. 2014; Kingma and Welling 2014; Germain
et al. 2015; Larochelle and Murray 2011; van den Oord,
Kalchbrenner, and Kavukcuoglu 2016; Arjovsky, Chintala,
and Bottou 2017; Song and Ermon 2019; Song et al. 2021;
Murphy, Weiss, and Jordan 1999; Yedidia, Freeman, and
Weiss 2000; Wainwright and Jordan 2006).
Learning a generative model involves increasing the divergence in likelihood scores between the structures in the
training set and those structures sampled from the current generative model distribution. While current approaches
have achieved successes in un-structured domains such as
vision or speech, their performance is degraded in the structured domain, because it is already computationally intractable to search for a valid structure in a combinatorial
space subject to constraints, not to mention sampling, which
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4016

