The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DAMix: Exploiting Deep Autoregressive Model Zoo for
Improving Lossless Compression Generalization
Qishi Dong2,1 * , Fengwei Zhou1 * , Ning Kang1 * , Chuanlong Xie3,1 * , Shifeng Zhang1 ,
Jiawei Li1 , Heng Peng2† , Zhenguo Li1†
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab,
Hong Kong Baptist Uiversity,
3
Beijing Normal University
19481284@life.hkbu.edu.hk, fzhou@connect.ust.hk, {kang.ning2, zhangshifeng4, li.jiawei}@huawei.com,
clxie@bnu.edu.cn, hpeng@hkbu.edu.hk, li.zhenguo@huawei.com
2

Abstract

2013; Rezende, Mohamed, and Wierstra 2014; Ho, Lohn, and
Abbeel 2019), normalizing flows (Rezende and Mohamed
2015; Tran et al. 2019), and autoregressive models (Uria, Murray, and Larochelle 2013; Van den Oord et al. 2016; Salimans
et al. 2017), have shown great potential in improving lossless
compression ratio due to their powerful ability in modeling
the distribution of various types of data, and various lossless
compression algorithms (Zhang et al. 2021c,b,a; Kang et al.
2022) have been proposed based on deep generative models.
One primary assumption, ensuring these models are
effective, is training and test data being Independent and
Identically Distributed (IID). However, data to be compressed
in real-world scenarios follow very different distributions and
are usually OoD samples that cannot be known in advance.
To cope with it, previous works in context mixing attempt to
adaptively mix different compression algorithms. This idea
has been widely used in non-AI compression algorithms to
combine multiple statistical models to yield a prediction that
is often more accurate than any of the individual predictions.
PNG (Boutell 1997) makes use of 5 models to predict each
pixel and mix them simply by selecting one of them for
each line. WebP increases the number of models to 13,
one of which is chosen for each block. For more advanced
techniques, linear mixing and logistic mixing are applied
in PAQ to mix 1000+ models. CMIX (Knoll 2007) further
improves by introducing an LSTM Mixer with a gated linear
network (Veness et al. 2017). However, none of them can be
naturally applied to AI lossless compression.
On the other hand, recent works (Hendrycks et al. 2020;
Albuquerque et al. 2020; Yi et al. 2021; Radford et al. 2021)
have shown the advantages of pre-training for improving OoD
generalization, i.e., learning from multiple training domains
and being well applied to an unseen domain. Yi et al. (2021)
prove that adversarially pre-trained models perform better
for OoD generalization. Yu et al. (2021) show that the right
choice of pre-trained models can achieve SOTA OoD results.
Radford et al. (2021) demonstrate that large-scale pre-training
on a dataset of image-text pairs results in much more robust
models for downstream tasks with various distribution shifts.
For data compression, Zhang et al. (2021c) and Zhang et al.
(2021b) also show that large-scale pre-training can alleviate
the performance degradation on OoD data. Naturally, we

Deep generative models have demonstrated superior performance in lossless compression on identically distributed data.
However, in real-world scenarios, data to be compressed are of
various distributions and usually cannot be known in advance.
Thus, commercially expected neural compression must have
strong Out-of-Distribution (OoD) generalization capabilities.
Compared with traditional compression methods, deep learning
methods have intrinsic flaws for OoD generalization. In this
work, we make the attempt to tackle this challenge by exploiting a zoo of Deep Autoregressive models (DAMix). We build a
model zoo consisting of autoregressive models trained on data
from diverse distributions. In the test phase, we select useful expert models by a simple model evaluation score and adaptively
aggregate the predictions of selected models. By assuming the
outputs from each expert models are biased in favor of their
training distributions, a von Mises-Fisher based filter is proposed to recover the value of unbiased predictions that provides
more accurate density estimations than a single model. We
derive the posterior of unbiased predictions as well as concentration parameters in the filter, and a novel temporal Stein variational gradient descent for sequential data is proposed to adaptively update the posterior distributions. We evaluate DAMix on
22 image datasets, including in-distribution and OoD data, and
demonstrate that making use of unbiased predictions has up to
45.6% improvement over the single model trained on ImageNet.

Introduction
The big data era, with the huge amount of data being generated
each year, inspires new business lines including cloud service
and streaming platforms. This motivates the industry to develop more efficient and effective lossless compression methods (Alakuijala et al. 2019; Sneyers and Wuille 2016; Collet
and Turner 2016; Ahmed, Islam, and Uddin 2018). According
to Shannon’s source coding theorem, the more accurately
the distribution of the data can be estimated, the better the
limits of compression can be reached (MacKay 2003). Hence,
deep generative models, such as VAEs (Kingma and Welling
* Equal Contribution. This work was carried out at Huawei

Noah’s Ark Lab.
†
Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4250

