The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Auto-Weighted Multi-View Clustering for Large-Scale Data
Xinhang Wan1 , Xinwang Liu1 * , Jiyuan Liu1 , Siwei Wang1 , Yi Wen1 ,
Weixuan Liang1 , En Zhu1 , Zhe Liu2 , Lu Zhou2
1

College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, China
{wanxinhang, xinwangliu, liujiyuan13, wangsiwei13, wenyi21, weixuanliang, enzhu}@nudt.edu.cn, {zhe.liu,
lu.zhou}@nuaa.edu.cn
2

Abstract

2021a, 2022a), multiple kernel clustering (Zhang et al. 2021;
Li et al. 2022a; Zhang et al. 2022a; Wan et al. 2022), graphbased methods (Liang et al. 2020; Tang et al. 2020; Liu
et al. 2022b,c; Xia et al. 2022a), and matrix factorizationbased methods (Khan et al. 2019; Gao et al. 2019). Under
the assumption that a linear combination of data samples can
reconstruct themselves, multi-view subspace clustering obtains a reconstruction matrix upon a self-expressive framework. For instance, (Zhang et al. 2017) simultaneously explores the latent representation of data samples and the underlying complementary information to attain a more comprehensive reconstruction matrix. Multiple kernel clustering
(Liu 2021) always seeks a common cluster assignment matrix by jointly maximizing the partition matrix and kernel
coefficients. As pointed out by (Li et al. 2022b), graph-based
methods rely on spectral clustering, which performs eigendecomposition upon the Laplacian matrix to partition the
data cloud with a linear/nonlinear relationship.
Despite the above three categories of algorithms displaying acceptable clustering performance, they encounter the
square or cubic time complexity, which limits the applicability in large-scale data. To handle the issue, a series of researches (Liu et al. 2013; Gao et al. 2019) based on nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) appear due to its low
time complexity. NMF-based multi-view clustering factorizes the original features into two components, i.e., a consensus coefficient matrix and view-specific base matrices.
For example, (Wang et al. 2018) proposes a method to reduce the redundancy using a diversity term and solves the resultant optimization problem in linear execution time. However, the algorithm puts up with two hyperparameters, restraining the practicability in many applications. Based on
the observation that the non-negative constraint leads to a
less discriminatory embedding, (Liu et al. 2021b) removes
the restriction and proposes an MF-based algorithm. However, it assumes that the latent embedding of multiple views
is under a fixed latent dimension, which harms the expressiveness of the model and the ability to extract complementary information between views.
We propose auto-weighted multi-view clustering for
large-scale data (AWMVC) to address the abovementioned
drawbacks. To enhance the data embedding and gain complementary information among views, we obtain various coefficient matrices learned by base matrices under diverse di-

Multi-view clustering has gained broad attention owing to its
capacity to exploit complementary information across multiple data views. Although existing methods demonstrate delightful clustering performance, most of them are of high
time complexity and cannot handle large-scale data. Matrix factorization-based models are a representative of solving this problem. However, they assume that the views share
a dimension-fixed consensus coefficient matrix and viewspecific base matrices, limiting their representability. Moreover, a series of large-scale algorithms that bear one or more
hyperparameters are impractical in real-world applications.
To address the two issues, we propose an auto-weighted
multi-view clustering (AWMVC) algorithm. Specifically,
AWMVC first learns coefficient matrices from corresponding base matrices of different dimensions, then fuses them
to obtain an optimal consensus matrix. By mapping original features into distinctive low-dimensional spaces, we
can attain more comprehensive knowledge, thus obtaining better clustering results. Moreover, we design a sixstep alternative optimization algorithm proven to be convergent theoretically. Also, AWMVC shows excellent performance on various benchmark datasets compared with existing ones. The code of AWMVC is publicly available at
https://github.com/wanxinhang/AAAI-2023-AWMVC.

Introduction
With the rapid development of multimedia techniques, data
can be described from various modalities (Xia et al. 2022c).
For instance, an object could be recognized by an intelligent robot from its eyes (image), ears (transform sound into
texts), and past knowledge (knowledge graph). How to uncover items’ intrinsic structure and label them is crucial in
many applications (Zhang et al. 2022b; Yang et al. 2022; Xia
et al. 2022b), such as the recommender system and decision
support system. Multi-view clustering, which explores complementary information among views and discovers the underlying structure for clustering, is an effective method to
conduct a clustering process for data from multiple sources.
To the best of our knowledge, existing multi-view clustering algorithms can be divided into four categories including
multi-view subspace clustering (Gao et al. 2015; Liu et al.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10078

