The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Neighborhood-Regularized Self-Training for Learning with Few Labels
Ran Xu1 , Yue Yu2 , Hejie Cui1 , Xuan Kan1 , Yanqiao Zhu3 , Joyce Ho1 , Chao Zhang2 , Carl Yang1 *
1
Emory University,
Georgia Institute of Technology,
3
University of California, Los Angeles
{ran.xu,hejie.cui,xuan.kan,joyce.c.ho,j.carlyang}@emory.edu, {yueyu,chaozhang}@gatech.edu, yzhu@cs.ucla.edu
2

Abstract

labeled data to improve the model’s generalization power on
the target task (Yang et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022). Although
generative models (Gururangan et al. 2019) and consistencybased regularization (Tarvainen and Valpola 2017; Miyato et al. 2018; Xie et al. 2020a) methods have been proposed for semi-supervised learning, they either suffer from
the issue of limited representation power (Tsai, Lin, and
Fu 2022) or require additional resources to generate highquality augmented samples (e.g., for text classification, Xie
et al. (2020a) generate augmented text via back-translation,
which rely on a Machine Translation model trained with
massive labeled sentence pairs). Consequently, they cannot
be readily applied to low-resource scenarios.
Self-training is a proper tool to deal with the deficiency
of labeled data via gradually enlarging the training set with
pseudo-labeled data (Rosenberg, Hebert, and Schneiderman
2005). Specifically, it can be interpreted as a teacher-student
framework: the teacher model generates pseudo labels for
the unlabeled data, and the student model updates its parameters by minimizing the discrepancy between its predictions and the pseudo labels (Xie et al. 2020b; Mukherjee and
Awadallah 2020). Though conceptually simple, self-training
has achieved superior performance for various tasks with
limited labels, such as image classification (Sohn et al. 2020;
Rizve et al. 2021), natural language understanding (Du et al.
2020), sequence labeling (Liang et al. 2020), and graph
learning (Hao et al. 2020). Self-training has also been successfully extended to other settings including weak supervision (Zhang et al. 2021b) and zero-shot learning (Li,
Savarese, and Hoi 2022).
However, one major challenge of self-training is that it
suffers from confirmation bias (Arazo et al. 2020) — when
the teacher model memorizes some biases and generates
incorrect pseudo labels, the student model will be reinforced to train with these wrong biases. As a result, the biases may amplify over iterations and deteriorates the final
performance. To suppress the noisy pseudo labels in selftraining, Xu et al. (2021); Zhang et al. (2021a); Sohn et al.
(2020); Kim et al. (2022b) leverage model predictive confidence with a thresholding function, Mukherjee and Awadallah (2020); Tsai, Lin, and Fu (2022) propose to leverage
model uncertainty to select samples with low uncertainty,
and Wang et al. (2021) use meta-learning to conduct instance reweighting for sequence labeling. Although these

Training deep neural networks (DNNs) with limited supervision has been a popular research topic as it can significantly
alleviate the annotation burden. Self-training has been successfully applied in semi-supervised learning tasks, but one
drawback of self-training is that it is vulnerable to the label noise from incorrect pseudo labels. Inspired by the fact
that samples with similar labels tend to share similar representations, we develop a neighborhood-based sample selection approach to tackle the issue of noisy pseudo labels.
We further stabilize self-training via aggregating the predictions from different rounds during sample selection. Experiments on eight tasks show that our proposed method outperforms the strongest self-training baseline with 1.83% and
2.51% performance gain for text and graph datasets on average. Our further analysis demonstrates that our proposed
data selection strategy reduces the noise of pseudo labels by
36.8% and saves 57.3% of the time when compared with the
best baseline. Our code and appendices will be uploaded to
https://github.com/ritaranx/NeST.

1

Introduction

In the era of deep learning, neural network models have
achieved promising performance in most supervised learning settings, especially when combined with self-supervised
learning techniques (Chen et al. 2020; Devlin et al. 2019;
Hu et al. 2020). However, they still require a sufficient
amount of labels to achieve satisfactory performances on
many downstream tasks. For example, in the text domain,
curating NLP datasets often require domain experts to read
thousands of documents and carefully label them with domain knowledge. Similarly, in the graph domain, molecules
are examples naturally represented as graphs, and characterizing their properties relies on density functional theory
(DFT) (Cohen, Mori-Sánchez, and Yang 2012) which often
takes several hours. Such a dependency on labeled data is
one of the barriers to deploy deep neural networks (DNNs)
in real-world applications.
To better adapt the DNNs to target tasks with limited labels, one of the most popular approaches is semi-supervised
learning (SSL), which jointly leverages unlabeled data and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10611

