The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

An Equivalence Analysis of Binary Quantification Methods
Alberto Castaño, Jaime Alonso, Pablo González, Juan José del Coz
Artificial Intelligence Center - University of Oviedo. Campus de Viesques, 33204, Gijón, Spain
uo226218@uniovi.es, jalonso@uniovi.es, gonzalezgpablo@uniovi.es, juanjo@uniovi.es

Abstract

on this topic. The aim is to accurately classify the examples
from the target domain T when it differs from the source
domain S. This approach usually has two steps: 1) to detect
and estimate the shift between S and T and 2) to correct or
modify the classifier learned with the training data using the
estimates from the previous step, for instance reweighting
the training data to reproduce the target distribution (Zhang
et al. 2013). The final goal is to improve the performance of
the classifier over the target domain T .
It is noteworthy that both tasks belong to those real world
problems in which the source and target distributions differ,
i.e., PS (x, y) 6= PT (x, y). The shift between S and T can
not be arbitrary, otherwise the learning task would be unfeasible. We need to make some assumptions on the expected
shift to learn a useful model using the training data. These
assumptions may be based on some prior knowledge of the
data generating process, since it usually determines how the
data distribution changes. In this sense, two causal systems
can be distinguished: X → Y and Y → X (Schölkopf et al.
2012; Kull and Flach 2014), representing the relationship between the cause and the effect in the data generating process.
In the former, the class labels are causally determined by the
covariates. In the latter, which is the focus of this study, the
class labels causally determines the covariates. Despite how
unnatural this may seem, this causal system occurs in many
applications. In Y → X problems we can factorize P (x, y)
as P (x|y)P (y) to better express our main learning assumption. All quantification algorithms studied below assume that:
PS (y) 6= PT (y) and PS (x|y) = PT (x|y).
(1)
The first part of this learning assumption is evidently met
since these methods are designed for quantification tasks in
which the class distribution is expected to change. The second
part, the invariance of P (x|y) with respect to the change
in P (y), is one of the characteristics of the causal system
Y → X, see (Woodward 2005). Notice that the assumption in
Eq 1 implies that the difference between S and T is caused
solely by a change in the classes distribution. This learning
setting has been labeled under different names, including
prior probability shift (Storkey 2009) target shift (Zhang et al.
2013) and label shift (Lipton, Wang, and Smola 2018).
Several approaches have been proposed to design quantification algorithms. Among them, one of the most interesting
is based on matching a modified version of the source distribution, S, with the target distribution, T . Focusing just

Quantification (or prevalence estimation) algorithms aim at
predicting the class distribution of unseen sets (or bags) of examples. These methods are useful for two main tasks: 1) quantification applications, for instance when we need to track the
proportions of several groups of interest over time, and 2) domain adaptation problems, in which we usually need to adapt
a previously trained classifier to a different –albeit related– target distribution according to the estimated prevalences. This
paper analyzes several binary quantification algorithms showing that not only do they share a common framework but are,
in fact, equivalent. Inspired by this study, we propose a new
method that extends one of the approaches analyzed. After an
empirical evaluation of all these methods using synthetic and
benchmark datasets, the paper concludes recommending three
of them due to their precision, efficiency, and diversity.

Introduction
Let x ∈ X = Rd and y ∈ Y = {−1, +1} be the features and
the class variable of a binary supervised learning problem,
respectively. We use S and T to denote the source/training
and target/testing distributions defined on X × Y. Given a
tr n
training set, Dtr = {(xtr
i , yi )}i=1 , drawn from S, the goal
of binary quantification algorithms is to induce a model able
to predict the proportion of positive and negative examples
m
in any unlabeled testing bag Dte = {xte
j }j=1 . Due to the
fact that both proportions are complementary, the models just
return the estimated prevalence of the positives, p̂ ∈ [0, 1].
To the best of our knowledge, prevalence estimation or
quantification methods (González et al. 2017) have been
applied to two kinds of tasks. The first group is composed
of actual quantification problems, such as quantifying the
number of damaged cells in tissue samples (Alaiz-Rodrı́guez
et al. 2008), monitoring the proportion of species over time
(González et al. 2019), estimating the credit risk of portfolios
(Tasche 2014) and tracking consumers’ sentiment on products
and services (Gao and Sebastiani 2015) To these tasks, each
individual example’s class is usually not relevant, but an
aggregate estimate of each class is (González et al. 2016).
The other application of prevalence estimation algorithms
is the task known as domain adaptation in machine learning
literature, see (Jiang 2008; Pan and Yang 2009) for a survey
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6944

