The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Implementing Bounded Revision via Lexicographic Revision and C-revision
Meliha Sezgin, Gabriele Kern-Isberner
TU Dortmund University, Germany
meliha.sezgin@tu-dortmund.de, gabriele.kern-isberner@tu-dortmund.de

Abstract

that George Washington was an American president and she
trusts the tour guide’s statement about Washington’s term
of office as president. The example illustrates how supplementary information affects the revision. In the course of
the revision, Anna should not give up her prior belief that
Washington was an US president. Also the input’s context,
e.g., the tour guide’s trustworthiness, is crucial for the revision and should determine the depth with which Anna trusts
his statement about Washington’s term of office.
There have been several approaches to belief revision
with input information that is accompanied by some kind
of supplementary information, see e.g. (Hunter 2021; Ammar and Ismail 2021; Sezgin and Kern-Isberner 2022), indicating trust or reliance towards the input information. In
this paper, we present a revision method in a qualitative and
a semi-quantitative framework based on Bounded Revision
(BR) which was firstly introduced by (Rott 2012). BR takes
as input two pieces of information, an input sentence β and
a reference sentence α, thus displaying a two-dimensional
revision function, where the input sentence is accompanied
by some kind of meta-information. The reference sentence
α guides the revision process and the main goal of BR by β
w.r.t. α can be expressed as follows: Accept β in the posterior entrenchment relation as far as α and just a little further. Despite its intuitive strength the formal implementation
of BR remains unclear in (Rott 2012). Our investigations
provide new insights in which way α influences the posterior belief state and how it acts as a bound for the acceptance
of β.
Our main contributions are as follows:

New information in the context of real life settings usually
is accompanied by some kind of supplementary information
that indicates context, reliability, or expertise of the information’s source. Bounded Revision (BR) displays an iterated belief revision mechanism that takes as input a new information
accompanied by a reference sentence acting as supplementary information, which specifies the depth with which the
new input shall be integrated in the posterior belief state. The
reference sentence specifies which worlds in the prior belief
state are affected by the change mechanism. We show that
Bounded Revision can be characterized by three simple, yet
elegant postulates and corresponds to a special case of a lexicographic revision, which inherits all relevant features of BR.
Furthermore, we present methodological implementations of
BR including conditional revision with c-revisions, making it
directly usable for conditional revision tools.

Introduction
The vivid research area of iterated belief revision (Darwiche
and Pearl 1997) investigates in which manner an agent incorporates new information that may be inconsistent with their
current epistemic state represented via total preorders. During the revision inconsistencies are cleared out, yet metainformation accompanying the new input, e.g. reliability, are
not taken into account. Extensive studies in psychology (see
e.g. (Wolf, Rieger, and Knauff 2012; Sparks and Rapp 2011;
Pornpitakpan 2004)) have shown that the rather naive acceptance of any kind of input information does not correspond to the way individuals revise their beliefs in real life
settings. In fact, expertise, reliability, and other factors impact the way we incorporate new information. We strongly
believe that realistic models of revision should provide the
necessary means to represent this kind of meta-information.
We present a real life example illustrating what we have
in mind. Anna knows that George Washington was the first
president of the United States and she is also aware of the
fact that all presidents of the US lived in the White House. In
Washington, she learns from a tour guide that George Washington never lived in the White House and that he served
as a president from 1789 to 1797. So, Anna needs to revise her beliefs but will do so only as far as she still accepts

• We clarify the strategy underlying BR by β w.r.t. α and
summarize the worlds affected by the belief change by a
single formula
• We present a representation theorem implementing semantic postulates that characterize the iterated belief
change of BR by β w.r.t. to the reference sentence α
• We show that BR corresponds to a special lexicographic
revision and thus implements a more fine-grained revision mechanism via supplementary information
• We define BR for the semi-quantitative framework
of ranking functions (Spohn 1988) and implement it
methodologically as a conditional revision making the
ensuing application of BR more explicit and therefore di-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6525

