The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Physics Guided Neural Networks for Time-Aware Fairness: An Application in
Crop Yield Prediction
Erhu He1 * , Yiqun Xie2 * , Licheng Liu3 , Weiye Chen2 , Zhenong Jin3 , Xiaowei Jia1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Pittsburgh
Department of Geographical Sciences, University of Maryland
3
Department of Bioproducts and Biosystems Engineering, University of Minnesota
erh108@pitt.edu, xie@umd.edu, lichengl@umn.edu, weiyec@umd.edu, jinzn@umn.edu, xiaowei@pitt.edu
2

Abstract
This paper proposes a physics-guided neural network model
to predict crop yield and maintain the fairness over space.
Failures to preserve the spatial fairness in predicted maps
of crop yields can result in biased policies and intervention
strategies in the distribution of assistance or subsidies in supporting individuals at risk. Existing methods for fairness enforcement are not designed for capturing the complex physical processes that underlie the crop growing process, and thus
are unable to produce good predictions over large regions under different weather conditions and soil properties. More importantly, the fairness is often degraded when existing methods are applied to different years due to the change of weather
conditions and farming practices. To address these issues, we
propose a physics-guided neural network model, which leverages the physical knowledge from existing physics-based
models to guide the extraction of representative physical information and discover the temporal data shift across years.
In particular, we use a reweighting strategy to discover the relationship between training years and testing years using the
physics-aware representation. Then the physics-guided neural network will be refined via a bi-level optimization process based on the reweighted fairness objective. The proposed
method has been evaluated using real county-level crop yield
data and simulated data produced by a physics-based model.
The results demonstrate that this method can significantly improve the predictive performance and preserve the spatial fairness when generalized to different years.

Figure 1: Example of spatial bias on crop yield prediction.

et al. 2012) and NASA Harvest (Whitcraft, Becker-Reshef,
and Justice 2020). Importantly, resulting products are also
used to inform critical actions (e.g., distribution of subsidies
(Bock, Kirkendall et al. 2018; Bailey and Boryan 2010; Boryan et al. 2011)) to mitigate natural disturbance-incurred
food shortage, which is necessary for continued sustainability and stability.
Physics-based crop models have been developed and
widely used to simulate different components in the crop
growing process (Grant et al. 2010; Zhou et al. 2021; Jones
et al. 2003; Srinivasan, Zhang, and Arnold 2010). Even
though these models are based on known physical laws
that govern relationships between input and output variables
(e.g., mass and energy conservation laws), most physicsbased models are necessarily approximations of reality due
to incomplete knowledge of certain processes or omission of
processes to maintain computational efficiency. Moreover,
running these models is often extremely time intensive due
to the needs to solve hundreds of ordinary and partial differential equations that are used to describe the complex interactions among physical processes (Beven 2006). For example, the Ecosys model (Zhou et al. 2021) used in this paper
takes about 4.15 days for training for 199 counties over the
years 2000-2020. Although machine learning (ML) models (Fan et al. 2022) can significantly speed up crop yield
predictions, existing products are largely subject to unfairness across locations due to the data variability across space
and the ignorance of fairness during the training process. For
example, Fig. 1 shows the spatial distribution of the RMSE

Introduction
The global food system has been threatened by many rising
challenges, such as the population explosion, sub-optimal or
even destructive farming practices, climate change, and loss
of productive land due to urbanization (Ortiz et al. 2008;
d’Amour et al. 2017; Bebber, Holmes, and Gurr 2014; Jia
et al. 2019). Given the limited land and water resources
available for crop production, ensuring food security requires effective use of existing farmland by increasing crop
productivity through sustainable farming practices. The importance and urgency of the problem have also led to major national and international efforts to monitor crops at
large scales, including G20’s GEOGLAM (Singh Parihar
* These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14223

