The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multi-View Domain Adaptive Object Detection on Camera Networks
Yan Lu1 , Zhun Zhong2 , Yuanchao Shu3
1
2

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, New York University
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento
3
College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University
jasonengineer@hotmail.com, zhunzhong007@gmail.com, ycshu@zju.edu.cn

Backbone

Abstract
In this paper, we study a new domain adaptation setting on
camera networks, namely Multi-View Domain Adaptive Object Detection (MVDA-OD), in which labeled source data is
unavailable in the target adaptation process and target data
is captured from multiple overlapping cameras. In such a
challenging context, existing methods including adversarial
training and self-training fall short due to multi-domain data
shift and the lack of source data. To tackle this problem,
we propose a novel training framework consisting of two
stages. First, we pre-train the backbone using self-supervised
learning, in which a multi-view association is developed to
construct an effective pretext task. Second, we fine-tune the
detection head using robust self-training, where a trackingbased single-view augmentation is introduced to achieve
weak-hard consistency learning. By doing so, an object detection model can take advantage of informative samples generated by multi-view association and single-view augmentation to learn discriminative backbones as well as robust
detection classifiers. Experiments on two real-world multicamera datasets demonstrate significant advantages of our approach over the state-of-the-art domain adaptive object detection methods.

Source Domain

Detection
Head

Ground-Truth

cam1
overlapping Target Domain

Shared

Pseudo-Labels

cam2
Target Domain

Pseudo-Labels

Figure 1: An overview of MVDA-OD. All cameras train a
shared backbone with multi-view fusion, and each camera
fine-tunes its detection head with its local data and pseudolabels.

to adapt models from labeled data (a.k.a., the source domain) to unlabeled data (a.k.a., the target domain).
Despite the advancements in DA-OD, most existing
methods require access to the source domain during the
adaptation phase. However, due to privacy and compliance
issues, companies and organizations that have large-scale labeled data are commonly reluctant to share their data with
users who want to adapt the model to their own environments. Instead, they provide users with models pre-trained
on the labeled data. Moreover, existing methods commonly
focus on the setting of a single target domain and lack design on simultaneous adaptation to multiple target domains.
On camera networks, however, videos are usually captured
by multiple cameras (views) with overlapping fields of view,
which can be regarded as different but non-independent domains. Existing methods will produce inferior performance
in this context due to neglecting spatial-temporal correlations and cross-camera domain shifts.
To this end, this paper focuses on a more practical setting
on camera networks where Multi-View Domain Adaptive
Object Detection (MVDA-OD) is desired. In MVDA-OD,
a fleet of cameras with overlapping views share their unlabeled data and train their backbones of object detection models collaboratively. Conceptually, backbones need to generalize on unseen domains while detection heads are better

Introduction
Object detection aims at finding all regions of interests
(RoIs) in an image and assigning each RoI to a semantic class. Recent works on object detection (Ren et al.
2015; Lin et al. 2017; Redmon and Farhadi 2018; Zhao
et al. 2019) has achieved remarkable results on many public datasets. Nonetheless, the success is mainly attributed to
supervised learning over large amounts of annotated data.
Since the labor cost of RoI-level annotations is prohibitively
expensive, domain adaptive object detection (DA-OD) algorithms (Zhuang et al. 2020; He and Zhang 2019) have
been developed in various scenarios (e.g., adverse weather
conditions (Sakaridis, Dai, and Gool 2018; Nada et al.
2018; Li et al. 2018), synthetic data adaptation (Matthew
et al. 2017; Inoue et al. 2018), and cross-camera adaptation (Cordts et al. 2016; Yu et al. 2020; Geiger et al. 2013))
*A complete version with a technical appendix is available on the
website: https://jason-cs18.github.io.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8966

