The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Privacy Attacks on Schedule-Driven Data
Stephan A. Fahrenkrog-Petersen1 , Arik Senderovich2 , Alexandra Tichauer1 ,
Ali Kaan Tutak1 , J. Christopher Beck3 , Matthias Weidlich1
1

Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Unter den Linden 6, 10117 Berlin, Germany
2
York University, 4700 Keele St, Toronto, ON M3J 1P3, Canada
3
University of Toronto, 5 King’s College Rd, Toronto ON M5S 3G8, Canada
{fahrenks,tichauea,tutakali,matthias.weidlich}@hu-berlin.de
sariks@yorku.ca
jcb@mie.utoronto.ca
Abstract

Despite the pervasiveness of the analysis of scheduledriven data, the induced privacy risks have not yet been
studied in the literature. Techniques for privacy-aware recommender systems (Yang, Qu, and Cudré-Mauroux 2018),
which may seem related, are not directly applicable, due to
fundamental differences in the problem structure: in schedules, certain features are unknown for all jobs, whereas common attacks on recommender systems are based on the full
set of features being available for some items.

Schedules define how resources process jobs in diverse domains, reaching from healthcare to transportation, and, therefore, denote a valuable starting point for analysis of the underlying system. However, publishing a schedule may disclose private information on the considered jobs. In this paper, we provide a first threat model for published schedules, thereby defining a completely new class of data privacy
problems. We then propose distance-based measures to assess the privacy loss incurred by a published schedule, and
show their theoretical properties for an uninformed adversary, which can be used as a benchmark for informed attacks.
We show how an informed attack on a published schedule
can be phrased as an inverse scheduling problem. We instantiate this idea by formulating the inverse of a well-studied
single-machine scheduling problem, namely minimizing the
total weighted completion times. An empirical evaluation for
synthetic scheduling problems shows the effectiveness of informed privacy attacks and compares the results to theoretical
bounds on uninformed attacks.

In this paper, we provide a first study of privacy attacks
on schedule-driven data. To this end, we contribute a threat
model that clarifies the knowledge to be used by an adversary. Next, we focus on the privacy gain that an adversary
may achieve and develop measures for the privacy loss incurred by a published schedule.
Turning to the actual privacy attack, we first consider an
uninformed adversary, who ignores the schedule and guesses
randomly. For this baseline, we study formal properties of
our loss functions and derive bounds on the expected value
of the total privacy loss. For effective attacks, we present a
framework for an informed adversary, who uses the published schedule for an attack based on inverse scheduling (Brucker and Shakhlevich 2009). For an important, basic
scheduling problem, namely minimizing the total weighted
completion time in a single-machine setting (Pinedo 2016,
Chap. 3.1), we formulate the attack as a constraint satisfaction problem and explore its computational complexity.

Introduction
Schedule-driven systems are pervasive in our lives in areas such as outpatient clinics , production lines, and public
transportation systems. To investigate improvements in system performance, it is common for an analyst to have access
to the schedules. For example, Zhang et al. (2019) use data
mining techniques to infer root-causes for failures based on
historical schedules, Li and Olafsson (2005) use schedules
to derive dispatching rules to solve future problem instances,
and Kim and Nembhard (2013) use past schedules to facilitate real-time decision making.
Publishing the schedule, as in any data publishing scenario (Fung et al. 2010), may result in loss of private information. Specifically, the schedule of jobs depends on their
features that are partially private and may constitute sensitive information, such as a medical priorities of patients in a
hospital. As we shall demonstrate, given an optimal schedule, an adversary can potentially infer such private information, especially in the presence of even minimal background
knowledge about the jobs in the published data (Narayanan
and Shmatikov 2008).

We summarize our contributions as follows:
1) We present a threat model for schedules based on the
public and private features used to derive an optimal
schedule.
2) We devise measures for the privacy loss incurred by a
published schedule.
3) We analyze the properties of our privacy loss measures
for a randomly guessing adversary.
4) We present a framework for informed privacy attacks on
schedules following the idea of inverse scheduling and
provide complexity results.
Experiments with synthetic schedules indicate that informed
privacy attacks indeed pose a threat and allow adversaries to
make inference on private attributes of jobs.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11972

