The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Hierarchical Text Classification as Sub-hierarchy Sequence Generation
SangHun Im, GiBaeg Kim, Heung-Seon Oh, Seongung Jo, Dong Hwan Kim
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University of Technology and Education (KOREATECH)
{tkrhkshdqn, fk0214, ohhs, oowhat, hwan6615}@koreatech.ac.kr

Abstract
Hierarchical text classification (HTC) is essential for various
real applications. However, HTC models are challenging to
develop because they often require processing a large volume
of documents and labels with hierarchical taxonomy. Recent
HTC models based on deep learning have attempted to incorporate hierarchy information into a model structure. Consequently, these models are challenging to implement when
the model parameters increase for a large-scale hierarchy because the model structure depends on the hierarchy size. To
solve this problem, we formulate HTC as a sub-hierarchy sequence generation to incorporate hierarchy information into
a target label sequence instead of the model structure. Subsequently, we propose the Hierarchy DECoder (HiDEC), which
decodes a text sequence into a sub-hierarchy sequence using recursive hierarchy decoding, classifying all parents at
the same level into children at once. In addition, HiDEC is
trained to use hierarchical path information from a root to
each leaf in a sub-hierarchy composed of the labels of a target
document via an attention mechanism and hierarchy-aware
masking. HiDEC achieved state-of-the-art performance with
significantly fewer model parameters than existing models
on benchmark datasets, such as RCV1-v2, NYT, and EURLEX57K.

Figure 1: Example of converting the target labels of two documents to the sub-hierarchy sequences. The existing global
model uses the entire hierarchy twice. In contrast, the proposed HiDEC uses the sufficiently small sub-hierarchies relevant to the documents twice.

approach (Zhao et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2021; Peng et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2020; Mao et al. 2019;
Chen et al. 2021; Sinha et al. 2018; Deng et al. 2021; Wu,
Xiong, and Wang 2019; Yang et al. 2018), a classifier for
all labels in the entire hierarchy is built, excluding the hierarchy structure through flattening. A document hierarchy
information can be obtained using a structure encoder and
merged with text features from a text encoder. The global approach achieves superior performance to the local approach
owing to the effective design of the structure encoders, such
as the graph convolution network (Kipf and Welling 2017)
and Graphormer (Ying et al. 2021).
However, the global approach has scalability limitations
because the structure encoders require a disproportionate
number of parameters as the size of the hierarchies increases. For example, HiAGM (Zhou et al. 2020) and HiMatch (Chen et al. 2021), recent GCN-based structure encoders, require a weight matrix to convert text features to
label features. In HGCLR (Wang et al. 2022), edge and spatial encodings were employed to represent the relationship
between two nodes.
In existing global models, a large model size is inevitable
because they attempt to incorporate the entire hierarchy in-

Introduction
Hierarchical text classification (HTC) uses a hierarchy such
as a web taxonomy to classify a given text into multiple
labels. Moreover, classification tasks are essential in realworld applications because of the tremendous amount of
data on the web that should be properly organized for applications such as product navigation (Kozareva 2015; Cevahir
and Murakami 2016) and news categorization (Lewis et al.
2004; Sandhaus. 2008).
Recent HTC research using deep learning can be categorized into local and global approaches. In the local approach (Peng et al. 2018; Kowsari et al. 2017; Shimura,
Li, and Fukumoto 2018; Banerjee et al. 2019; Dumais and
Chen 2000; Wehrmann, Cerri, and Barros 2018), a classifier is built for each unit after the entire hierarchy is split
into a set of small units. Subsequently, the classifiers are
applied in sequence according to a path from a root to target labels in a top-down manner. In contrast, in the global
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12933

