The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning to Super-resolve Dynamic Scenes for Neuromorphic Spike Camera
Jing Zhao1,2 , Ruiqin Xiong1,2 , Jian Zhang2,3 , Rui Zhao1,2 , Hangfan Liu4 , Tiejun Huang1, 2, 5
1

Institute of Digital Media, School of Computer Science, Peking University
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology (NERCVT), Peking University
3
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School
4
Center for Biomedical Image Computing and Analytics, University of Pennsylvania
5
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
{jzhaopku, rqxiong, zhangjian.sz, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn, ruizhao@stu.pku.edu.cn, hfliu@upenn.edu
2

Abstract

neuromorphic event cameras (Lichtsteiner, Posch, and Delbruck 2008b; Brandli et al. 2014b) that use differential sampling model to record the brightness changes, spike cameras fire spikes to record the arrival of a certain amount of
photons. Such an integral sampling model enables the spike
cameras to report per-pixel luminance intensity, providing
more explicit information for recovering texture details.
For spike camera, image reconstruction is an important
topic to bridge the domain gap between binary spikes and
light intensity. This has attracted great attention in the past
few years (Zhu et al. 2019, 2020; Zheng et al. 2021; Zhao
et al. 2021b; Zhu et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2021a). However,
the previous works usually suffer from noise, blur or unsatisfactory details, due to the following issues:

Spike camera is a kind of neuromorphic sensor that uses a
novel “integrate-and-fire” mechanism to generate a continuous spike stream to record the dynamic light intensity at extremely high temporal resolution. However, as a trade-off for
high temporal resolution, its spatial resolution is limited, resulting in inferior reconstruction details. To address this issue,
this paper develops a network (SpikeSR-Net) to super-resolve
a high-resolution image sequence from the low-resolution binary spike streams. SpikeSR-Net is designed based on the
observation model of spike camera and exploits both the merits of model-based and learning-based methods. To deal with
the limited representation capacity of binary data, a pixeladaptive spike encoder is proposed to convert spikes to latent
representation to infer clues on intensity and motion. Then,
a motion-aligned super resolver is employed to exploit longterm correlation, so that the dense sampling in temporal domain can be exploited to enhance the spatial resolution without introducing motion blur. Experimental results show that
SpikeSR-Net is promising in super-resolving higher-quality
images for spike camera.

(1) Ultra high-speed motion. Due to the existence of highspeed motion, the spikes fired by a single sensor pixel
no longer describe the same point on the moving objects.
Thus, special attention needs be paid to avoiding the mixing of lights from different object points.
(2) Undesired noise. Due to the Poisson effect of photon arrivals and the existence of thermal noises, the firing interval of neighboring spikes exhibits a strong fluctuation.
For this reason, the reconstruction tends to be noisy, unstable, and spatio-temporally incoherent.
(3) Limited spatial resolution. As a trade-off for high temporal resolution, the spatial resolution of spike camera is
limited, which results in inferior reconstruction details.

Introduction
The newly emerged real-time computer vision applications,
such as autonomous driving and unmanned aerial vehicle,
require the machines to record high-speed motion clearly
and response quickly. This makes the inherent limitations
of conventional digital cameras evident. Conventional cameras are mostly based on one-time exposure imaging, which
can produce clear images for still and slow-motion scenes.
However, for dynamic scenes with high-speed motion, a single point on a moving object may be projected to different
pixels on the image sensor, resulting in blurry images.
To capture high-motion dynamic scenes clearly, a novel
neuromorphic camera called spike camera was recently invented (Dong, Huang, and Tian 2017; Dong et al. 2019;
Huang et al. 2022). Unlike conventional cameras that compact all the visual information within an exposure interval into a single snapshot, spike camera abandons the concept of exposure window. Instead, it monitors the incoming
light persistently and continuously, and outputs binary spike
streams to record the dynamic scenes at extremely high temporal resolution (40000Hz). Additionally, different from the

To address the above issues, this paper develops an endto-end spike camera super-resolution network (SpikeSRNet), aiming to super-resolve spike streams to high-quality
high-resolution intensity images. In particular, SpikeSR-Net
is designed based on the observation model of spike camera super-resolution imaging, which takes both the merits
of model-based and learning-based methods. To be specific,
we first propose a pixel-adaptive spike encoder (PASE) to
convert the raw binary spikes to latent intensity representation. Considering the diversity of scene content, PASE
adaptively exploits local spatio-temporal correlation to cope
with different motion and light conditions. Then, we propose
a motion-aligned super resolver (MASR), which conducts
motion-aligned gradient descent and proximal mapping iteratively. MASR exploits long-term temporal correlation to
convert the dense sampling in temporal domain to spatial

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3579

