The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Reconstructing an Epidemic Outbreak Using Steiner Connectivity
Ritwick Mishra1,2 , Jack Heavey1,2 , Gursharn Kaur1 , Abhijin Adiga1 , Anil Vullikanti1,2
1

Biocomplexity Institute & Initiative, University of Virginia
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia
{mbc7bu, jch7jm, fug3aj, abhijin, vsakumar}@virginia.edu
2

Abstract

In the simplest SIR type network model of epidemic
spread (also referred to as the independent cascade (IC)
model), where a disease spreads on each edge of a contact network G = (V, E) with probability p, this reconstruction problem (referred to as C ASCADE MLE) involves
finding a connected subgraph T = (V (T ), E(T )) such that
S ⊆ V (T ), where S is the subset of observed infections. Using the natural maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) approach, the goal of the C ASCADE MLE problem is to find
a connected Steiner subgraph T such that S ⊆ V (T ), and
Pr[T ] is maximized—this can be expressed as an equivalent problem of minimizing cost of T , denoted by Cost(T ).
As discussed later in the Preliminaries section, Cost(T ) includes cost of edges e ∈ E(T ), as well as cost of edges
= (u, v) 6∈ E(T ) not in T , but with {u, v} ∩ V (T ) 6= ∅ (i.e.,
at least one end point of e is in E(T )). This makes Cost(T )
quite different from the standard Steiner tree objective (Karp
1972), which has been very well studied. Most prior work
on reconstructing epidemic cascades in the SIR model has
mainly been restricted to the regular Steiner tree objective,
e.g., (Jang et al. 2021; Rozenshtein et al. 2016); this immediately connects with the vast literature on algorithms for the
Steiner tree problem. We note that Zhu and Ying (2014) consider the actual cost, but mainly focus on trees for rigorous
analysis (which is then extended to general graphs through
various heuristics).
Our Contributions. We study the C ASCADE MLE problem
of finding an MLE solution for reconstructing an epidemic
cascade for the independent cascade (IC) model.

Only a subset of infections is actually observed in an outbreak, due to multiple reasons such as asymptomatic cases
and under-reporting. Therefore, reconstructing an epidemic
cascade given some observed cases is an important step in
responding to such an outbreak. A maximum likelihood solution to this problem (referred to as C ASCADE MLE) can
be shown to be a variation of the classical Steiner subgraph
problem, which connects a subset of observed infections. In
contrast to prior works on epidemic reconstruction, which
consider the standard Steiner tree objective, we show that a
solution to C ASCADE MLE, based on the actual MLE objective, has a very different structure. We design a logarithmic
approximation algorithm for C ASCADE MLE, and evaluate it
on multiple synthetic and social contact networks, including a
contact network constructed for a hospital. Our algorithm has
significantly better performance compared to a prior baseline.

Introduction
In most outbreaks (of diseases, pests, or pathogens), such
as COVID-19 (Shaman et al. 2020), Hospital Associated
Infections (HAIs), such as Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), and biological invasions (Robinson et al. 2017) only a subset of infections is known in a
timely manner, due to multiple reasons, including asymptomatic cases (Jang et al. 2021), and lack of resources for
tracing or inspection. Such events require a prompt response,
such as isolation of infected patients (important in the case
of HAIs, since hospitalized patients are very vulnerable) and
corresponding measures in the case of crops and livestock.
Therefore, reconstructing an epidemic cascade which identifies missing infections (or infestations), and explains the
pattern of spread an important problem.
The problems of reconstructing an epidemic cascade and
identifying the source have been studied extensively for both
SI and SIR models on networks (Rozenshtein et al. 2016;
Jang et al. 2021; Zhu and Ying 2014; Shah and Zaman
2011). These works assume partial information is available
about the cascade, e.g., a subset of nodes which are known
to be infected (Jang et al. 2021), or both infection state and
time of infection (Rozenshtein et al. 2016; Zhu and Ying
2014; Shah and Zaman 2011).

• We show that the solution to C ASCADE MLE can have
a very different structure from the solution to the regular Steiner tree objective. In particular, there exist instances where the solution to C ASCADE MLE has diameter Θ(n), where as the Steiner tree solution can have
constant diameter. We observe a significant difference in
real instances as well.
• We study the conditions under which the MLE solution
to the cascade reconstruction problem will fail. We find
that the MLE based approach is not good in many classes
of instances.
• The C ASCADE MLE hasn’t been studied before. We
show that it is NP-hard. For the independent cascade
model, we present an algorithm with a logarithmic ap-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11613

