The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Mind the Gap: Polishing Pseudo Labels for Accurate Semi-supervised Object
Detection
Lei Zhang1∗ , Yuxuan Sun1∗ , Wei Wei1,2†
1

2

School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
Research & Development Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University in Shenzhen, China
{nwpuzhanglei,weiweinwpu}@nwpu.edu.cn, sunyuxuan@mail.nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Exploiting pseudo labels (e.g., categories and bounding
boxes) of unannotated objects produced by a teacher detector
have underpinned much of recent progress in semi-supervised
object detection (SSOD). However, due to the limited generalization capacity of the teacher detector caused by the scarce
annotations, the produced pseudo labels often deviate from
ground truth, especially those with relatively low classification confidences, thus limiting the generalization performance of SSOD. To mitigate this problem, we propose a dual
pseudo-label polishing framework for SSOD. Instead of directly exploiting the pseudo labels produced by the teacher
detector, we take the first attempt at reducing their deviation from ground truth using dual polishing learning, where
two differently structured polishing networks are elaborately
developed and trained using synthesized paired pseudo labels and the corresponding ground truth for categories and
bounding boxes on the given annotated objects, respectively.
By doing this, both polishing networks can infer more accurate pseudo labels for unannotated objects through sufficiently exploiting their context knowledge based on the initially produced pseudo labels, and thus improve the generalization performance of SSOD. Moreover, such a scheme
can be seamlessly plugged into the existing SSOD framework for joint end-to-end learning. In addition, we propose
to disentangle the polished pseudo categories and bounding
boxes of unannotated objects for separate category classification and bounding box regression in SSOD, which enables introducing more unannotated objects during model
training and thus further improves the performance. Experiments on both PASCAL VOC and MS-COCO benchmarks
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method over existing state-of-the-art baselines. The code can be found at
https://github.com/snowdusky/DualPolishLearning.

1

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Quality of pseudo labels for unannotated objects
produced by a teacher detector and polished by the proposed
method on the MS-COCO dataset with 10% labeled images.
(a) The amount of unannotated objects with correct pseudo
category labels, when IoU between the pseudo bounding
boxes and the ground truth is larger than different thresholds. A larger amount indicates more accurate pseudo category labels. (b) The amount of unannotated objects with
different quality of pseudo bounding boxes. The quality is
measured by the IoU between the pseudo bounding box
and ground truth. A larger amount indicates more accurate
pseudo bounding boxes. As can be seen, through polishing
the pseudo labels using the proposed method, the amount of
objects with high-quality pseudo labels including both categories and bounding boxes is obviously increased.

expensive and time-consuming. As a result, increasing efforts (Zhou et al. 2021; Tang et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021;
Xu et al. 2021) commence investigating semi-supervised object detection (SSOD), which aims to achieve good generalization performance using only a few annotated objects together with extensive unannotated objects. Since DNNs with
a few annotated objects are prone to be over-fitting, the key
for SSOD is how to exploit the beneficial knowledge from
extensive unannotated objects to regularize the supervised
training of DNNs. To achieve this goal, a promising solution
is the pseudo labeling technique (Zoph et al. 2020) which
aims at introducing unannotated objects with pseudo labels
produced by a teacher detector to augment the scarce annotated objects for model training. Till now, many pseudo labeling based SSOD methods (Sohn et al. 2020b; Zhou et al.
2021; Tang et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2021) have
been proposed, which mainly focus on constructing various
semi-supervised learning framework to exploit the pseudo

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive
progress in object detection, when being supervisedly
trained with a large amount of annotated objects. However,
it is often infeasible to collect such sufficient annotated objects in real applications, since the manual annotation is
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3463

