The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multi-Classifier Adversarial Optimization for Active Learning
Lin Geng, Ningzhong Liu∗ , and Jie Qin*
School of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
{lingeng, ningzhongliu, jie.qin}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract

a limited annotation budget, by choosing the most suitable
samples to annotate from a large unlabeled dataset.
Conventional AL approaches can be categorized into
query synthesis or pool-based methods. In query synthesis methods, the most informative samples are selected using generative models (Mayer and Timofte 2020; Zhu and
Bento 2017). Pool-based methods can be further divided into
uncertainty-based methods (Ducoffe and Precioso 2018;
Houlsby et al. 2011), representation-based methods (Sener
and Savarese 2018; Caramalau, Bhattarai, and Kim 2021),
and the combination of both (Kuo et al. 2018; Liu and Ferrari
2017). More recently, several pool-based methods (Sinha,
Ebrahimi, and Darrell 2019; Kim et al. 2021) have also resorted to generative models (e.g., variational auto-encoders
(VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2014) and generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014)) to select uncertain samples for annotation. For instance, (Sinha,
Ebrahimi, and Darrell 2019) trained the VAE and discriminator using an adversarial approach, where the VAE generates latent space representations of labeled and unlabeled
data, and the discriminator is utilized as a binary classifier
to determine the uncertainty of the input samples. These adversarial methods are effective in aligning the feature distributions of labeled and unlabeled data. Nevertheless, on the
one hand, class discriminability cannot be guaranteed in the
adversarial learning process; on the other hand, adversarial
training is very sensitive to the selection of hyper-parameters
between discriminator and generator (Berthelot, Schumm,
and Metz 2017), leading to a complex and unstable training
process. Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop an active
learning method that could inherit the merits of the adversarial spirit but circumvent the tedious training procedure.
Inspired by the recent success of the methods exploiting
classifier discrepancies (Fu et al. 2021; Cho et al. 2022; Saito
et al. 2018), in this paper, we propose a novel, easy-to-train
yet effective adversarial active learning approach, namely
multi-classifier adversarial optimization for active learning
(MAOAL). In particular, MAOAL plays the min-max game
between the feature generator G, the main classifier C, and
two auxiliary classifiers C1 and C2 , with the aim of minimizing/maximizing the class-level discrepancy. As illustrated in
Fig. 2, by fixing C1 and C2 , we update G and C to learn
more discriminative features, ensuring the consistency of
the distribution between labeled and unlabeled samples. Ad-

Active learning (AL) aims to find a better trade-off between
labeling costs and model performance by consciously selecting more informative samples to label. Recently, adversarial
approaches have emerged as effective solutions. Most of them
leverage generative adversarial networks to align feature distributions of labeled and unlabeled data, upon which discriminators are trained to better distinguish between them. However, these methods fail to consider the relationship between
unlabeled samples and decision boundaries, and their training processes are often complex and unstable. To this end,
this paper proposes a novel adversarial AL method, namely
multi-classifier adversarial optimization for active learning
(MAOAL). MAOAL employs task-specific decision boundaries for data alignment while selecting the most informative samples to label. To fulfill this, we introduce a novel
classifier class confusion (C3 ) metric, which represents the
classifier discrepancy as the inter-class correlation of classifier outputs. Without any additional hyper-parameters, the
C3 metric further reduces the negative impacts of ambiguous
samples in the process of distribution alignment and sample
selection. More concretely, the network is trained adversarially by adding two auxiliary classifiers, reducing the distribution bias of labeled and unlabeled samples by minimizing the
C3 loss between classifiers, while learning tighter decision
boundaries and highlighting hard samples by maximizing the
C3 loss. Finally, the unlabeled samples with the highest C3
loss are selected to label. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the superiority of our approach over state-of-the-art AL methods in terms of image classification and object detection.

Introduction
Over the past decade, the emergence of large-scale annotated datasets (Deng et al. 2009) and the development of
deep learning techniques have brought prosperity to the field
of computer vision (Badrinarayanan, Kendall, and Cipolla
2017; Li et al. 2021; He et al. 2016). However, high-quality
annotations are both time- and resource-consuming, hindering the application of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
in realistic scenarios. This dilemma between performance
and costs has given rise to active learning (AL) (Settles
2009), which aims to maximize the model performance with
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7687

