The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

HG-SL: Jointly Learning of Global and Local User Spreading Behavior for Fake
News Early Detection
Ling Sun1 , Yuan Rao1∗ , Yuqian Lan1 , Bingcan Xia1 , Yangyang Li2
1

Xi’an Key Laboratory of Social Intelligence and Complexity Data Processing,
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
National Engineering Laboratory for Risk Perception and Prevention, China
{sunling, Yuqian Lan xjtu, bingcan92}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, raoyuan@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, liyangyang@cetc.com.cn
Abstract

et al. 2020b; Ma, Gao, and Wong 2018). While such strategies enhanced the effectiveness of detection, they will inevitably be fooled by the glorified identities of social robots
or the instructive fake comments given by malicious manipulators (Figure 1). (Allcott and Gentzkow 2017).

Recently, fake news forgery technology has become more and
more sophisticated, and even the profiles of participants may
be faked, which challenges the robustness and effectiveness
of traditional detection methods involving text or user identity. Most propagation-only approaches mainly rely on neural
networks to learn the diffusion pattern of individual news,
but this is insufficient to describe the differences in news
spread ability, and also ignores the valuable global connections of news and users, limiting the performance of detection. Therefore, we propose a joint learning model named
HG-SL, which is blind to news content and user identity,
but capable of catching the differences between true and fake
news in the early stages of propagation through global and
local user spreading behavior. Specifically, we innovatively
design a Hypergraph-based Global interaction learning module to capture the global preferences of users from their cospreading behaviors, and introduce node centrality encoding
to complement user influence in hypergraph learning. Moreover, the designed Self-attention-based Local context learning module first introduce spread status in behavior learning
process to highlight the propagation ability of news and users,
thus providing additional signals for verifying news authenticity. Experiments on real-world datasets indicate that our
HG-SL, which solely relies on user behavior, outperforms
SOTA baselines utilizing multidimensional features in both
fake news detection and early detection task.

Real

Real

Local

...

d2

d1

Fake

dj

u3

u1

u2
u4

...

u1
u2

Global

u5

...

u6

u4

u1

u2

u5

u5

...

Cascades

...

u4

Sequence

Figure 1: Illustration of global and local user spreading behavior, fake objects and abnormal users are highlighted in
red. The abnormal user u2 tricks a normal user u4 to spread
the fake news dj , and u5 cooperates with u2 to make fake
comments, further causing confusion.
Compared with methods involving text or user attributes,
deceiving a spreading behavior-only model requires disturbing the holistic propagation patterns involving many ordinary users, which makes such methods theoretically robust
(Rosenfeld, Szanto, and Parkes 2020). Recently, a series of
models that only rely on propagation have been proposed,
such as PPC (Liu and Wu 2018), Pattern-driven approach
(Zhou and Zafarani 2019) and WL graph kernel (Rosenfeld,
Szanto, and Parkes 2020). However, most of them are proved
to be not competitive in detection. We summarize the following possible reasons:
First, few models learn the connections of news and users
from a global perspective, which limits the learning of user
identities and preferences. Generally, there are differences
in the behavior patterns of ordinary users and special accounts (e.g., bots) (Orabi et al. 2020), and given that users’
attributes can be faked, it is reasonable and more stable to
learn their identities through behavior. In addition, learning the global behavior of users also helps to reveal their
preferences on content (individuals tend to believe information that confirm their existing cognitions) (Allcott and
Gentzkow 2017) and environment (credibility of the infor-

Introduction
Serious cases of spreading fake news (Grinberg et al. 2019;
Vosoughi, Roy, and Aral 2018) have posed a significant
threat to social stability and even national security, aggravated the urgency of developing efficient detection methods.
Classical fake news detection approaches are mainly
based on the semantics or styles of news content (Vlachos
and Riedel 2014; Wu et al. 2020a). However, given that fake
news is deliberately fabricated to mislead consumers, such
methods are difficult to identify well-disguised fake news.
Therefore, recent researches tried to complement the content
features with relevant comments (Shu et al. 2019; Wu et al.
2020c), participants’ attributes (Monti et al. 2019), social
networks (Min et al. 2022) and propagation structures (Shu
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5248

