The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SEFormer: Structure Embedding Transformer for 3D Object Detection
Xiaoyu Feng1 , Heming Du2 , Hehe Fan3 , Yueqi Duan1 , Yongpan Liu1
1
Tsinghua University,
Australian National University,
3
National University of Singapore
feng-xy18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Unrelated Points

Related Points

Transformation for value

Abstract
Effectively preserving and encoding structure features from
objects in irregular and sparse LiDAR points is a crucial challenge to 3D object detection on the point cloud. Recently,
Transformer has demonstrated promising performance on
many 2D and even 3D vision tasks. Compared with the fixed
and rigid convolution kernels, the self-attention mechanism
in Transformer can adaptively exclude the unrelated or noisy
points and is thus suitable for preserving the local spatial
structure in the irregular LiDAR point cloud. However, Transformer only performs a simple sum on the point features,
based on the self-attention mechanism, and all the points
share the same transformation for value. A such isotropic
operation cannot capture the direction-distance-oriented local structure, which is essential for 3D object detection. In
this work, we propose a Structure-Embedding transFormer
(SEFormer), which can not only preserve the local structure
as a traditional Transformer but also have the ability to encode the local structure. Compared to the self-attention mechanism in traditional Transformer, SEFormer learns different
feature transformations for value points based on the relative
directions and distances to the query point. Then we propose a SEFormer-based network for high-performance 3D
object detection. Extensive experiments show that the proposed architecture can achieve SOTA results on the Waymo
Open Dataset, one of the most significant 3D detection
benchmarks for autonomous driving. Specifically, SEFormer
achieves 79.02% mAP, which is 1.2% higher than existing
works. https://github.com/tdzdog/SEFormer.

(a) Vanilla Transformer

(b) SEFormer

Figure 1: Motivation illustration: (a) The self-attention
mechanism in Transformer can adaptively exclude unrelated
or noisy points. However, the vanilla Transformer shares
the same feature transformation for all value points. Such
isotropic operation ignores the local structure information
between the key points and the query point. (b) While in
SEFormer, we propose to learn different feature transformations for value points based on their relative directions and
distances to the query point. Hence the local structure can be
encoded in the Transformer output. For example, SEFormer
can differentiate a car’s front and tail points.

2022), convolution rapidly becomes the mainstream operator in 3D object detection. Traditional convolution-based
3D object detection can be divided into two main trends:
point (Qi et al. 2017a,b; Shi, Wang, and Li 2019; Qi et al.
2018; Yang et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2022; He et al. 2022b)
and voxel-based solutions (Yan, Mao, and Li 2018; Shi et al.
2020; Deng et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2021; Lang et al. 2019;
Shi et al. 2022; Li et al. 2021b,a; Xu, Zhong, and Neumann
2022).
However, convolution is designed with fixed and rigid
kernel sizes and treats all neighboring points equally.
Therefore, it inevitably contains unrelated or noisy points
from other objects or backgrounds. Recently, Transformer
(Vaswani et al. 2017) has shown its effectiveness in 3D vision tasks such as classification, segmentation and object
detection (Zheng et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2021; Wang et al.

Introduction
Point cloud-based 3D object detection has attracted more
and more attention with the development of autonomous
driving and robotics. Due to the lack of texture and color information in the point cloud, 3D object detection highly depends on the structure information of local areas. However,
unlike the grid-arranged 2D images, the sparse and irregular
nature of LiDAR point clouds makes the local structure often incomplete and noisy. Hence, how to effectively extract
the essential structure feature still needs to be solved.
Inspired by the success of 2D object detection (Ren et al.
2015; Wu et al. 2021b,a; Shrivastava, Gupta, and Girshick
2016; Sun et al. 2021b; Chi, Wei, and Hu 2020; Dong et al.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

632

