The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Calibrated Teacher for Sparsely Annotated Object Detection
Haohan Wang1 * , Liang Liu2 * † , Boshen Zhang2 , Jiangning Zhang2 , Wuhao Zhang2 ,
Zhenye Gan2 , Yabiao Wang2† , Chengjie Wang23† , Haoqian Wang1†
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Tencent Youtu Lab
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
wang-hh20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {leoneliu, boshenzhang, vtzhang, wuhaozhang, wingzygan, caseywang,
jasoncjwang}@tencent.com, wanghaoqian@tsinghua.edu.cn
(a) Before Calibration:
0.63 0.68
0.43 0.48
0.76
0.54
0.62
0.90
0.69

Abstract
Fully supervised object detection requires training images in
which all instances are annotated. This is actually impractical due to the high labor and time costs and the unavoidable missing annotations. As a result, the incomplete annotation in each image could provide misleading supervision
and harm the training. Recent works on sparsely annotated
object detection alleviate this problem by generating pseudo
labels for the missing annotations. Such a mechanism is sensitive to the threshold of the pseudo label score. However,
the effective threshold is different in different training stages
and among different object detectors. Therefore, the current
methods with fixed thresholds have sub-optimal performance,
and are difficult to be applied to other detectors. In order to
resolve this obstacle, we propose a Calibrated Teacher, of
which the confidence estimation of the prediction is well calibrated to match its real precision. In this way, different detectors in different training stages would share a similar distribution of the output confidence, so that multiple detectors
could share the same fixed threshold and achieve better performance. Furthermore, we present a simple but effective Focal IoU Weight (FIoU) for the classification loss. FIoU aims
at reducing the loss weight of false negative samples caused
by the missing annotation, and thus works as the complement of the teacher-student paradigm. Extensive experiments
show that our methods set new state-of-the-art under all different sparse settings in COCO. Code will be available at
https://github.com/Whileherham/CalibratedTeacher.

0.71

0.90

0.65

0.69
0.88

0.85
0.91
0.93

0.98

Detector A Epoch 4 Detector A Epoch 12
Best θ = 0.7
Best θ = 0.5
(b) After Calibration:
0.63 0.65
0.74
0.84

0.84

0.79

0.97

Detector A Epoch 4 Detector A Epoch 12
Best θ = 0.7
Best θ = 0.7

Detector B Epoch 4
Best θ = 0.9
0.66

0.68
0.89

0.79

0.99

Detector B Epoch 4
Best θ = 0.7

Figure 1: An example of confidence calibration. In order to
filter out two green pillars which not belong to the detection
classes, while keep the dog and two fire hydrants as pseudo
labels, different score thresholds are needed. After calibration, different training stages and detectors are able to share
the same score threshold. We show the confidence scores below the image with a color indicator. The dash or solid line
indicates the score below or above the threshold.

Introduction

annotations. It is highly relevant to a popular topic called
semi-supervised object detection (SSOD), whose training
data consists of a fully labeled part and an unlabeled part.
It is worth mentioning that these two tasks are complementary, since even in the semi-supervised settings, the case of
missing labels may still appear in the part of labeled data.
Considering the relevance of these two tasks, we start
from one of the most widely studied methods called
“pseudo labeling” in semi-supervised learning (Tarvainen
and Valpola 2017). Pseudo labeling utilizes the predictions
of a teacher network to produce supervision signals over unlabeled data for a student network. Therefore, it is natural to
transfer this idea to the case of sparse annotation. In terms
of pseudo labeling, the main difference between the semisupervised task and sparsely annotated task is that the image
in the former is either fully annotated or completely unla-

Remarkable progress in fully supervised object detection has
been witnessed in recent years. In order to train such an object detector, a large number of training images are required,
and bounding boxes in each image are supposed to be exhaustively annotated. However, it could be practically infeasible due to the high labor and time costs with the volume of
datasets increasing, and some of the annotations would be
unavoidably missing due to human error.
Sparsely annotated object detection (SAOD) aims to handle such a task that each training image may miss some box
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2519

