The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Can We Find Strong Lottery Tickets in Generative Models?
Sangyeop Yeo1 , Yoojin Jang1 , Jy-yong Sohn2 , Dongyoon Han3 , Jaejun Yoo1*
1

LAIT, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST)
2
University of Wisconsin-Madison
3
Naver AI Lab
sangyeop377@gmail.com, softjin@unist.ac.kr, jysohn1108@gmail.com, dongyoon.han@navercorp.com,
jaejun.yoo@unist.ac.kr (*: corresponding author)

CelebA

Abstract

LSUN
CIFAR-10 Bedroom

FFHQ

Yes. In this paper, we investigate strong lottery tickets in generative models, the subnetworks that achieve good generative performance without any weight update. Neural network
pruning is considered the main cornerstone of model compression for reducing the costs of computation and memory.
Unfortunately, pruning a generative model has not been extensively explored, and all existing pruning algorithms suffer from excessive weight-training costs, performance degradation, limited generalizability, or complicated training. To
address these problems, we propose to find a strong lottery
ticket via moment-matching scores. Our experimental results
show that the discovered subnetwork can perform similarly
or better than the trained dense model even when only 10%
of the weights remain. To the best of our knowledge, we are
the first to show the existence of strong lottery tickets in generative models and provide an algorithm to find it stably. Our
code and supplementary materials are publicly available at
https://lait-cvlab.github.io/SLT-in-Generative-Models/.

(a) Dense (11 M params)

(b) Ours (1.1 M params)

Figure 1: Visualization of dense models and our strong lottery tickets. For various datasets including CelebA, FFHQ,
LSUN Bedroom, and CIFAR-10, we compare the images
generated by (a) a trained dense generative feature matching network (GFMN); (b) a subnetwork discovered by
our method, which uses only 10% of parameters within a
randomly-initialized GFMN. Intriguingly, our method finds
the strong lottery tickets which achieve comparable or
even better generative performances over the baseline dense
model qualitatively and quantitatively (Table 1).

Introduction
State-of-the-art generative models tend to use extremely
large and complex structures for better performance (Brock,
Donahue, and Simonyan 2018; Karras, Laine, and Aila
2019; Karras et al. 2020; Ramesh et al. 2021; Radford et al.
2021). One downside of large models is the high computational costs for training, which limits their application to
edge devices such as mobile environments. This naturally
calls for the design of a new lightweight architecture or a
new compression method in generative modeling.
In this work, we focus on the model pruning techniques
that fall into the latter category. Unlike discriminative models where various pruning techniques (LeCun, Denker, and
Solla 1989; Hassibi and Stork 1992; Han et al. 2015; Frankle and Carbin 2018; Ramanujan et al. 2020; Sreenivasan
et al. 2022) have been actively studied, pruning generative
models have not been extensively explored. Moreover, it
has been found that naı̈ve application of existing pruning
methods (developed for discriminative models) to generative models leads to performance degradation and/or unstable training (Wang et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021).

Recently, several methods for pruning generative models
have been proposed and showed that it is possible to obtain a lightweight model by following the “train, prune, retrain” paradigm when tuned to generative models with special care (Li et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021;
Li et al. 2021; Tuli et al. 2021; Hou et al. 2021). For example, to overcome training instability, Hou et al. (Hou et al.
2021) introduced multiple shared discriminators to train a
slimmable generator that can flexibly change its capacity at
runtime. Li et al. (Li et al. 2021) proposed a cooperative
scheme between the generator and the discriminator to stabilize the compression during the adversarial training.
However, because their basic strategy inevitably involves
subtle balancing between training and pruning procedures,
all existing methods suffer from excessive computational
costs (Liu et al. 2021; Tuli et al. 2021; Hou et al. 2021),
performance degradation (Wang et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021;

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3267

