The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Credible Human Evaluation of Open-Domain Dialog Systems Using
Interactive Setup
Sijia Liu, Patrick Lange, Behnam Hedayatnia, Alexandros Papangelis,
Di Jin, Andrew Wirth, Yang Liu, Dilek Hakkani-Tur
Amazon Alexa AI
{sijial, patlange, behnam, papangea, djinamzn, wirandre, yangliud, hakkanit}@amazon.com

Abstract

accurate assessment of a user’s satisfaction with the conversation (Liu et al. 2016; Ghandeharioun et al. 2019). Therefore, apart from several public competitions such as Alexa
Prize1 , ConvAI2 (Dinan et al. 2019) and DSTC9 Track 3
(Mehri et al. 2022) in English, as well as Dialog System Live
Competition (Higashinaka et al. 2021) in Japanese, several
studies have adopted interactive evaluations to either annotate per-turn model responses in a multi-turn dialog (Ghandeharioun et al. 2019; Adiwardana et al. 2020), or collect
overall per-dialog ratings on a Likert scale to evaluate different aspects of conversation quality (Zhang et al. 2018; See
et al. 2019; Dinan et al. 2018; Finch and Choi 2020; Ji et al.
2022). Smith et al. (2022) compared five different interactive setups including per-turn, per-dialog and self-play evaluations, and provided a comprehensive analysis for singlemodel and pairwise evaluations. However, questions still remain regarding which interactive evaluation setup is more
appropriate for different evaluation scenarios (e.g., when
more than two models need to be evaluated).
In this work, we apply the interactive evaluation framework to multiple models with a focus on per-turn evaluation
techniques. We compare Multi-Model evaluation mechanisms with existing Single-Model and Pairwise-Model evaluations, and perform a thorough analysis across all three
mechanisms. We adopt two per-turn evaluation setups: Select One Best from All (SOBA), where users choose the best
response from a list of system response candidates and Select All That Apply (SATA) where users choose all the best
responses from the list or choose none if they don’t like
of the responses. For the latter, users will either continue
the conversation with a random system response (SATARandom), or write a suggested system response (SATAUser), which will be used in the conversation.
In contrast to (Smith et al. 2022) where model rankings are pre-assumed before running evaluations, we instead
compare the sensitivity and consistency of different evaluation setups without any assumptions on model rankings, and
then use the results to understand model performance. To
achieve this goal, we propose a methodology to determine
the required sample size given a minimum performance gap
of interest, which not only helps control evaluation costs

Evaluating open-domain conversation models has been an
open challenge due to the open-ended nature of conversations. In addition to static evaluations, recent work has started
to explore a variety of per-turn and per-dialog interactive evaluation mechanisms and provide advice on the best setup. In
this work, we adopt the interactive evaluation framework and
further apply to multiple models with a focus on per-turn
evaluation techniques. Apart from the widely used setting
where participants select the best response among different
candidates at each turn, one more novel per-turn evaluation
setting is adopted, where participants can select all appropriate responses with different fallback strategies to continue
the conversation when no response is selected. We evaluate
these settings based on sensitivity and consistency using four
GPT2-based models that differ in model sizes or fine-tuning
data. To better generalize to any model groups with no prior
assumptions on their rankings and control evaluation costs for
all setups, we also propose a methodology to estimate the required sample size given a minimum performance gap of interest before running most experiments. Our comprehensive
human evaluation results shed light on how to conduct credible human evaluations of open domain dialog systems using
the interactive setup, and suggest additional future directions.

Introduction
Building open-domain chatbots that can converse with humans freely has been a challenging area for NLP. Unlike
task-oriented conversations where task completion is critical, human users can talk about any topics during opendomain conversations. This open-ended nature thus has
posed more difficulty on evaluating models in a credible and
reproducible way. Plenty of work has focused on developing automatic evaluation metrics or performing static human evaluations to compare different conversational models.
However, automatic metrics have been shown to have very
weak correlations with human judgements on open-domain
conversations (Liu et al. 2016; Lowe et al. 2018; Mehri and
Eskenazi 2020); on the other hand, performing static human
evaluations can be both time and cost intensive (Deriu et al.
2020). Additionally, most post-hoc static evaluations cannot
reflect the quality of dialogs that are collected in a realistic interactive setup, and hence are not necessarily the most

1
https://www.amazon.science/alexa-prize/socialbot-grandchallenge

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13264

