The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning from the Wisdom of Crowds: Exploiting Similar Sessions
for Session Search
Yuhang Ye1 , Zhonghua Li1 , Zhicheng Dou2 , Yutao Zhu3 ,
Changwang Zhang1 , Shangquan Wu1 , Zhao Cao1, *
2

1
Huawei Poisson Lab, China
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
3
University of Montreal, Quebec, Canada
{yeyuhang,lizhonghua3,zhangchangwang1,wushangquan,caozhao1}@huawei.com
dou@ruc.edu.cn, yutaozhu94@gmail.com

Abstract

Query

Search engines are essential internet services, enabling users
to efficiently find the information they need. Session search
employs users’ session logs of queries to solve complex retrieval tasks, in which users search multiple times until interested documents are found. Most existing session search
models focus on the contextual information within the current search, ignoring the evidence from historical search sessions. Considering the fact that many ongoing retrieval tasks
should have already been carried out by other users with a
similar intent, we argue that historical sessions with similar
intents can help improve the accuracy of the current search
task. We propose a novel Similar Session-enhanced Ranking (SSR) model to improve the session search performance
using historical sessions with similar intents. Specifically,
the candidate historical sessions are matched by query-level
and session-level semantic similarity, and then query-level
neighbor behaviors are aggregated by a Query-guided GNN
(QGNN) while session-level neighbor behaviors are aggregated using the attention mechanism. Finally, we integrate the
refined and aggregated historical neighbor information into
the current search session. Experimental results on AOL and
Tiangong-ST datasets show that our SSR model significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art models.

Document

Query Reformulation

Click Behavior

Huawei mobile

Nova

Nova 7i vs p40

𝑞1

𝑞2

𝑞3

Session
Best Huawei Mobiles
𝑑1
2021 | Trend PK

Phones 𝑑2 HUAWEI
HUAWEI Global

huawie 7i vs huawie
𝑑
p40 - YouTube 3

Figure 1: An example of session search. Three queries and
the corresponding clicked documents are shown.

awareness of users’ previous queries (i.e., q1 Huawei mobile) and clicks, the search engine can better understand the
search intent of the following query “Nova”. In this case,
the user is more likely to look for the series of Huawei Nova
phones instead of the most-watched prime-time science series on American television with the same name “Nova”.
Existing session search works incorporate the search context information and achieve quite promising improvement
on ranking performance (Sordoni et al. 2015; Ahmad,
Chang, and Wang 2019; Qu et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020).
However, these works mainly utilize the history behavior
only within the ongoing search session. When the session
is very short, or the target query locates at the beginning
part of a search task, the search context information could be
very limited and even unavailable. As shown in (Chen et al.
2019; Qu et al. 2020), most sessions contain less than three
queries, which further confirms this data sparsity limitation
of these existing approaches.
To address the data sparsity problem, some researchers
attempted to introduce long-term interests in users’ previous
searches (Guo et al. 2019; Cheng et al. 2021) or leverage
social relationships (Zhou et al. 2021) to aggregate users’
profiles for ranking. However, these methods are mainly for
personalized ranking or recommendation, and the user-level
history information may be unavailable in private search engines due to the privacy policy. Moreover, the above methods suffer from the cold start problem when no history behavior data is available for new users or new queries.
In this paper, we go beyond the ongoing search session of
a particular user, by exploring historical behavior of all sessions to find queries or sessions with similar search intents
to the current query and session. We explicitly use these

Introduction
The goal of a search engine is to understand users’ intentions
and fulfill their information needs. Simple search tasks, such
as navigation to a popular website, can be easily achieved by
issuing one query and a click. However, for more complex
search tasks, such as comparing mobile phones, users generally need multiple search interactions.
Session search emerges as an effective approach to solve
complex search tasks, which not only focuses on the matching relationship between candidate documents with the current query but also considers users’ previous search behaviors in a session. The search session context of the current
query could possibly provide useful information to reduce
query ambiguity and help understand the actual search intent of the current query. Figure 1 shows an example of web
search session with queries and clicked documents. With the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4818

