The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Generalized Semantic Segmentation by Self-Supervised Source Domain Projection
and Multi-Level Contrastive Learning
Liwei Yang1 * , Xiang Gu1 * , Jian Sun1,2,3†
1

School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
{yangliwei, xianggu}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, jiansun@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep networks trained on the source domain show degraded
performance when tested on unseen target domain data.
To enhance the model’s generalization ability, most existing domain generalization methods learn domain invariant
features by suppressing domain sensitive features. Different from them, we propose a Domain Projection and Contrastive Learning (DPCL) approach for generalized semantic
segmentation, which includes two modules: Self-supervised
Source Domain Projection (SSDP) and Multi-Level Contrastive Learning (MLCL). SSDP aims to reduce domain
gap by projecting data to the source domain, while MLCL
is a learning scheme to learn discriminative and generalizable features on the projected data. During test time, we first
project the target data by SSDP to mitigate domain shift, then
generate the segmentation results by the learned segmentation
network based on MLCL. At test time, we can update the projected data by minimizing our proposed pixel-to-pixel contrastive loss to obtain better results. Extensive experiments
for semantic segmentation demonstrate the favorable generalization capability of our method on benchmark datasets.

Figure 1: Comparison of results for baseline (DeepLabV3+
with backbone ResNet50), our method using Selfsupervised Source Domain Projection (SSDP), and using
both SSDP and Multi-Level Contrastive Learning (MLCL).
(DG) has been widely studied to overcome this limitation.
DG aims to learn a model on source domain data which is
generalized well on the unseen target domain. The essence
of DG is to learn domain-agnostic features (Li et al. 2018a;
Dou et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2022a).
This work considers Domain Generalization Semantic
Segmentation (DGSS), in which we can only use source domain data in training. Existing DGSS methods are mainly
divided into three categories. (1) The normalization and
whitening-based methods utilize different normalization
techniques such as instance normalization or whitening to
standardize the feature distribution among different samples (Pan et al. 2018; Choi et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2022; Peng
et al. 2022). (2) Generalizable feature learning methods aim
to learn domain-agnostic representation (Chen et al. 2021;
Kim et al. 2022). (3) Domain randomization-based methods
learn synthetic to real generalization by increasing the variety of training data. (Yue et al. 2019; Peng et al. 2021; Lee
et al. 2022). However, domain randomization methods require unlabeled auxiliary datasets for generalization.
In this paper, we propose Self-supervised Source Domain Projection (SSDP) and Multi-Level Contrastive Learning (MLCL) schemes for domain generalization semantic
segmentation. Specifically, we first design SSDP, aiming to
learn a projection to map the unseen target domain data
to the source domain by projecting augmented data to its
original data in the training phase. Secondly, for augmented
data projected to the source domain, we further propose

Introduction
Deep learning (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Chen
et al. 2017; Zheng et al. 2021) has achieved breakthroughs
in semantic segmentation, benefiting from the large-scale
densely-annotated training images. Nonetheless, obtaining
the labeled image data for segmentation is time consuming
in real life. For instance, labeling a single image with resolution of 2048 × 1024 in Cityscapes (Cordts et al. 2016)
costs 1.5 hours, and even 3.3 hours for adverse weather conditions (Sakaridis, Dai, and Van Gool 2021). An alternative
solution is training with synthetic data (Richter et al. 2016;
Ros et al. 2016). However, CNNs are sensitive to domain
shift and generalize poorly from synthetic to real data.
To deal with this challenge, Domain Adaptation (DA)
methods (Zou et al. 2018; Hoffman et al. 2018; Yang and
Soatto 2020; Kundu et al. 2022) align the distributions of
source and target domains. However, DA assumes that target
data is available in the training process which is hard to fulfill in real-life scenarios. Therefore, Domain Generalization
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10789

