The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Dual-Domain Attention for Image Deblurring
Yuning Cui1 * , Yi Tao2 * , Wenqi Ren3† , Alois Knoll1
1

Technical University of Munich
MIT Universal Village Program
3
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
{yuning.cui, knoll}@in.tum.de, yitao@universal-village.org, renwq3@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Considering image deblurring as an inverse problem,
numerous approaches have been developed to deal with
blind deblurring problems and non-blind deblurring problems (Wang and Tao 2014). Non-blind deblurring means that
the blue kernel is assumed to be known and the target image
can be generated from both the kernel and the observation.
The typical methods for this category include Wiener filter (Wiener et al. 1949) and Richardson-Lucy (Richardson
1972; Lucy 1974). By contrast, dating back to the 1970s,
blind image deblurring is more practical and challenging
where the blur kernel is unknown. Many novel approaches
have been put forward to tackle it by estimating the blue kernel and sharp image successively or simultaneously (Bahat,
Efrat, and Irani 2017; Aittala and Durand 2018). However,
with various additional constraints, these methods are not
applicable in the complicated scenarios.
Recently, with the rapid development of deep learning,
multifarious methods based on convolutional neural network (CNN) have emerged as a preferable solution compared to above-mentioned methods, due to their advanced
mapping capacity from blurry image to the sharp target
(Nah, Hyun Kim, and Mu Lee 2017; Suin, Purohit, and Rajagopalan 2020; Chen et al. 2022; Zamir et al. 2021). Despite
the improved performance these methods have brought, with
the limited receptive filed of convolution, they struggle to integrate the long-range dependencies. More recently, to alleviate this issue, Transformer methods have been tailored for
deblurring to further boost the accuracy of reconstruction
(Wang et al. 2022; Tsai et al. 2022). The core component
of these approaches is self-attention mechanism where each
pixel is modulated by a weighted sum of the whole feature
map. Despite many efforts to reduce the quadratic complexity of this technique, these solutions still struggle to have
efficient implementation compared to CNN-based methods.
In this paper, we propose an efficient spatial attention
module (SAM) that combines the merits of group convolution (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) and
self-attention (Vaswani et al. 2017). Our SAM is Tanhnormalized and shares weights over the group dimension,
utilizing the group convolution mechanism to mimic the operation of self-attention. Compared to self-attention, SAM
performs information aggregation within a small region to
reduce the computational complexity and substitutes hyperbolic tangent function for Softmax from the inspiration that

As a long-standing and challenging task, image deblurring
aims to reconstruct the latent sharp image from its degraded
counterpart. In this study, to bridge the gaps between degraded/sharp image pairs in the spatial and frequency domains
simultaneously, we develop the dual-domain attention mechanism for image deblurring. Self-attention is widely used in
vision tasks, however, due to the quadratic complexity, it is
not applicable to image deblurring with high-resolution images. To alleviate this issue, we propose a novel spatial attention module by implementing self-attention in the style of
dynamic group convolution for integrating information from
the local region, enhancing the representation learning capability and reducing computational burden. Regarding frequency domain learning, many frequency-based deblurring
approaches either treat the spectrum as a whole or decompose
frequency components in a complicated manner. In this work,
we devise a frequency attention module to compactly decouple the spectrum into distinct frequency parts and accentuate the informative part with extremely lightweight learnable
parameters. Finally, we incorporate attention modules into a
U-shaped network. Extensive comparisons with prior arts on
the common benchmarks show that our model, named DualDomain Attention Network (DDANet), obtains comparable
results with a significantly improved inference speed.

Introduction
In this paper, we address the problem of blind motion deblurring whose aim is to recover the sharp image from a
degraded observation caused by motion of camera during
sensor exposure or objects in the scene (Kundur and Hatzinakos 1996; Campisi and Egiazarian 2017). This problem
is encountered in many diverse technical areas, such as remote sensing (Bertero, Boccacci, and De Mol 2021), medical imaging (Michailovich and Adam 2005), photography
(Sroubek and Flusser 2005), and self-driving cars (Zhang
et al. 2022a). Deblurring also serves as a fundamental preprocessing measure for some downstream computer vision
tasks (Sayed and Brostow 2021). Due to the ill-posed property, it has attracted considerable attention from industrial
community and academia over the years.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

479

