The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

L I MIP: Lifelong Learning to Solve Mixed Integer Programs
Sahil Manchanda and Sayan Ranu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi
{sahil.manchanda,sayanranu}@cse.iitd.ac.in

Abstract
Mixed Integer programs (MIPs) are typically solved by the
Branch-and-Bound algorithm. Recently, Learning to imitate
fast approximations of the expert strong branching heuristic
has gained attention due to its success in reducing the running
time for solving MIPs. However, existing learning-to-branch
methods assume that the entire training data is available in a
single session of training. This assumption is often not true,
and if the training data is supplied in continual fashion over
time, existing techniques suffer from catastrophic forgetting.
In this work, we study the hitherto unexplored paradigm of
Lifelong Learning to Branch on Mixed Integer Programs. To
mitigate catastrophic forgetting, we propose L I MIP, which is
powered by the idea of modeling an MIP instance in the form
of a bipartite graph, which we map to an embedding space
using a bipartite Graph Attention Network. This rich embedding space avoids catastrophic forgetting through the application of knowledge distillation and elastic weight consolidation, wherein we learn the parameters key towards retaining
efficacy and are therefore protected from significant drift. We
evaluate L I MIP on a series of NP-hard problems and establish that in comparison to existing baselines, L I MIP is up to
50% better when confronted with lifelong learning.

1

Figure 1: Illustration of catastrophic forgetting on SoA
method (Gasse et al. 2019) on Set Cover dataset. The plot
shows the rapid increase in the geometric mean of solving
time on instances of past problems when the model is further trained sequentially on instances of a new problems.

space into a search tree and then prunes subtrees that provably cannot generate an optimal solution. This is an iterative
process, which consists of making sequential decisions such
as node selection, branching variable selection, etc., to direct
the search procedure. The efficiency of the B&B algorithm
mainly depends upon the branching variable selection and
node selection (Achterberg 2007). In this work, we focus on
the former. In modern MIP solvers (Gamrath et al. 2020), the
branching variable decisions are generally based upon hardcoded heuristics designed by experts to direct the search
process to solve an MIP (Achterberg 2007). Among various heuristics, strong branching is one such heuristic that is
highly effective in reducing the size of Branch-and-Bound
tree (Achterberg 2007; Gasse et al. 2019). However, its main
disadvantage is the extremely high computational cost associated with choosing the best variable to branch. Hence, it is
rarely used in practice (Achterberg 2007; Huang et al. 2021).
In order to utilize the advantage of the powerful strong
branching heuristic, however at a lower computational cost,
recently, multiple algorithms have been developed (Gasse
et al. 2019; Khalil et al. 2016; Nair et al. 2020; Gupta et al.
2020). At their core, they use imitation learning to learn fast
approximations of the strong branching heuristic on a family of MIP instances. These algorithms estimate scores of
branching candidate variables quickly on unseen but sim-

Introduction and Related Work

Combinatorial optimization (CO) is a subclass of optimization problems that deals with optimizing a certain objective function by selecting a subset of elements from a finite set. Although CO problems are generally NP-hard (Taha
2014) from a complexity theory viewpoint, still they are
solved routinely in diverse fields such as capacity planning,
resource allocation, scheduling, and manufacturing (Taha
2014; Manchanda et al. 2020, 2022; Arora, Galhotra, and
Ranu 2017; Ranjan et al. 2022; Jain et al. 2021). It is common to formulate most of these CO problems as Mixed integer programs (MIPs) (Achterberg 2007). However, these
MIPs are difficult to solve due to the non-convexity of
their feasible region. Instead of solving it directly, their
LP-relaxed versions are solved (Achterberg 2007). Modern solvers such as SCIP (Gamrath et al. 2020) employ the
Branch-and-Bound (B&B) (Achterberg 2007) algorithm to
solve these MIPs. B&B recursively partitions the solution
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9047

