The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Two Views of Constrained Differential Privacy: Belief Revision and Update
Likang Liu* 1 , Keke Sun* 1 , Chunlai Zhou†1 , Yuan Feng 2
1

School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
Centre of Quantum Software and Information, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
micahliu2012@gmail.com, skk2020@ruc.edu.cn, czhou@ruc.edu.cn, Yuan.feng@uts.edu.au
2

Abstract

that correspond to belief revision and belief update, respectively. Upon learning a sure fact C, on the one hand, conditioning works by suppressing the possible worlds which
are inconsistent with C and normalizing the probabilities
of the remaining possible worlds. It is a fundamental approach in probabilistic reasoning and statistical inference
(Pearl 1988). On the other hand, imaging (or updating) performs by transferring the probabilities of worlds outside C
to the closest worlds in C. It is a common method to study
intervention and causality (Pearl 2009).
In this paper, we take the two views of belief revision
and update to study constrained differential privacy. Differential privacy (DP) is a mathematically rigorous definition
of privacy which addresses the paradox of learning nothing about an individual while learning useful information
about a population (Dwork et al. 2006; Dwork and Roth
2014). Differentially private data releases are often required
to satisfy a set of external constraints that reflect the legal,
ethical, and logical mandates to which the data curator is
obligated (Abowd et al. 2019; Hay et al. 2010). For example, in US Census 2020, the so-called touchstone of DP by
Dwork, the Census Bureau is constitutionally mandated to
report the total population of each state as exactly enumerated without subjecting them to any perturbation protection;
in data queries, constraints are often used to improve the accuracy while maintaining the quality of privacy protection
of the unconstrained DP mechanisms. The central question
in designing DP mechanisms with those constraints (called
constrained DP) is how to integrate randomized DP privacy
mechanisms with deterministic constraints while maintaining the standard trade-off between privacy protection and
data utility. Our main contribution is to study this integration from the perspectives of belief revision and update.
In this paper, we mainly focus on those constraints that
are known to hold also for the original datasets, which are
hence called invariants. We first give a definition of dataindependent invariants C (Definition 8), which is a subset of
the output space Rn of the privacy mechanism M . In this paper, Laplace and Gaussian mechanisms are considered. For
a given dataset D, M (D) is a (continuous) random vector
over Rn . Let PM (D) and pM (D) denote the corresponding
probability distribution and (density) function, which is regarded as an agent’s belief state. We then design constrained
DP mechanisms by performing belief change on pM (D) (or

In this paper, we provide two views of constrained differential
private (DP) mechanisms. The first one is as belief revision.
A constrained DP mechanism is obtained by standard probabilistic conditioning, and hence can be naturally implemented
by Monte Carlo algorithms. The other is as belief update. A
constrained DP is defined according to l2 -distance minimization postprocessing or projection and hence can be naturally
implemented by optimization algorithms. The main advantage of these two perspectives is that we can make full use
of the machinery of belief revision and update to show basic
properties for constrained differential privacy especially some
important new composition properties. Within the framework
established in this paper, constrained DP algorithms in the
literature can be classified either as belief revision or belief
update. At the end of the paper, we demonstrate their differences especially in utility in a couple of scenarios.

Introduction
Theories of belief revision and update have been an important field in AI community, especially in knowledge representation and database systems (van Harmelen, Lifschitz,
and Porter 2008). An agent’s beliefs about the world may
be incorrect or incomplete and she wants to change the beliefs. Such a process is known as belief revision (Alchourrón,
Gärdenfors, and Makinson 1985). Belief revision is intended
to capture changes in belief state reflecting new information
about a static world. In contrast, belief update is intended to
capture changes of belief in response to a changing world.
An agent’s beliefs may be correct at one time. But as the
world changes, for example, other agents take acts and disrupt their environment, certain facts become true and others false. The agent must accommodate these changes to
update its state of beliefs. Such a process is called belief
update (Katsuno and Mendelzon 1991). Besides the traditional symbolic formalism, probability theory can be used
to represent an agent’s belief state. In the probabilistic setting, an agent’s cognitive state is represented by a probability function p over a set Ω of possible worlds. Conditioning
and imaging are two probabilistic versions of belief change
* Equal Contribution.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6450

