The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Domain-Knowledge-Inspired Music Embedding Space and a Novel Attention
Mechanism for Symbolic Music Modeling
Zixun Guo1 * , Jaeyong Kang1 , Dorien Herremans1
1

Information Systems Technology and Design, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
{nicolas guo, jaeyong kang, dorien herremans}@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Following the success of the transformer architecture in the
natural language domain, transformer-like architectures have
been widely applied to the domain of symbolic music recently. Symbolic music and text, however, are two different modalities. Symbolic music contains multiple attributes,
both absolute attributes (e.g., pitch) and relative attributes
(e.g., pitch interval). These relative attributes shape human
perception of musical motifs. These important relative attributes, however, are mostly ignored in existing symbolic
music modeling methods with the main reason being the lack
of a musically-meaningful embedding space where both the
absolute and relative embeddings of the symbolic music tokens can be efficiently represented. In this paper, we propose
the Fundamental Music Embedding (FME) for symbolic music based on a bias-adjusted sinusoidal encoding within which
both the absolute and the relative attributes can be embedded
and the fundamental musical properties (e.g., translational invariance) are explicitly preserved. Taking advantage of the
proposed FME, we further propose a novel attention mechanism based on the relative index, pitch and onset embeddings (RIPO attention) such that the musical domain knowledge can be fully utilized for symbolic music modeling. Experiment results show that our proposed model: RIPO transformer which utilizes FME and RIPO attention outperforms
the state-of-the-art transformers (i.e., music transformer, linear transformer) in a melody completion task. Moreover, using the RIPO transformer in a downstream music generation
task, we notice that the notorious degeneration phenomenon
no longer exists and the music generated by the RIPO transformer outperforms the music generated by state-of-the-art
transformer models in both subjective and objective evaluations. The code of the proposed method is available online:
github.com/guozixunnicolas/FundamentalMusicEmbedding

1

Figure 1: Sheet music and the event representation of the
jazz standard “Giant Steps”. Rich musical domain information (i.e., motif) is reflected in the relative attributes.

in sequential modeling (Huang et al. 2019; Hsiao et al. 2021;
Huang and Yang 2020; Herremans, Chuan, and Chew 2017;
Briot, Hadjeres, and Pachet 2020). Inspired by the language
pretraining models such as Word2Vec and BERT (Mikolov
et al. 2013; Devlin et al. 2019), several attempts have been
made to discover the semantic meaning of the symbolic music tokens (SMTs) (Zhu et al. 2021; Wang and Xia 2021;
Liang et al. 2020). Symbolic music and text, however, are
different modalities. Simply adapting the transformer-based
language modeling or pretraining techniques to the symbolic
music domain will lead to the loss of rich inductive biases of
music (i.e., music domain information) and does not guarantee that the trained embedding space accurately models the
fundamental music properties. We use the first few bars of
the jazz standard: “Giant Steps” as an example to better illustrate the difference between symbolic music and text in Figure 1. In the Figure, we include the sheet music and the most
basic form of the event-based representation of the sheet music which contains a series of pitch, duration and onset tokens. The index (i.e., ordering) of the tokens is also included.
For simplicity, the performance level attributes (e.g., velocity, timbre) are omitted.
We start by listing three main differences in modeling language versus symbolic music. Firstly, since the transformer
is not position-aware, a common practice to indicate the positions of the texts is to use an index-based sinusoidal positional encoding (Vaswani et al. 2017). The index-based
positional encoding, however, is not able to fully capture

Introduction

The transformer architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017) has recently achieved remarkable successes in the natural language domain. Since symbolic music and text are both sequential, the transformer architecture, with its ability to handle global structures, has gradually replaced the recurrent
neural network (RNN) and its variants (e.g., GRU, LSTM)
* This work was supported by Singapore MOE Tier 2 Grant No.
MOE2018-T2-2-161.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5070

