The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FreeEnricher: Enriching Face Landmarks without Additional Cost
Yangyu Huang, Xi Chen, Jongyoo Kim* , Hao Yang, Chong Li, Jiaolong Yang, Dong Chen
Microsoft Research Asia
{yanghuan, xichen6, jongk, haya, chol, jiaoyan, doch}@microsoft.com,

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed significant growth of face alignment. Though dense facial landmark is highly demanded in
various scenarios, e.g., cosmetic medicine and facial beautification, most works only consider sparse face alignment. To
address this problem, we present a framework that can enrich
landmark density by existing sparse landmark datasets, e.g.,
300W with 68 points and WFLW with 98 points. Firstly, we
observe that the local patches along each semantic contour
are highly similar in appearance. Then, we propose a weaklysupervised idea of learning the refinement ability on original
sparse landmarks and adapting this ability to enriched dense
landmarks. Meanwhile, several operators are devised and organized together to implement the idea. Finally, the trained
model is applied as a plug-and-play module to the existing
face alignment networks. To evaluate our method, we manually label the dense landmarks on 300W testset. Our method
yields state-of-the-art accuracy not only in newly-constructed
dense 300W testset but also in the original sparse 300W and
WFLW testsets without additional cost.

(a) ADNet (Baseline)

(b) ADNet-FE2 (Ours)

(c) ADNet-FE5 (Ours)

Figure 1: Comparison of baseline method and our FreeEnricher method. (a) is the detected sparse landmarks by baseline ADNet (Huang et al. 2021); (b) and (c) are the enriched
dense landmarks by our FreeEnricher with ADNet. The definitions of ADNet-FE2 and ADNet-FE5 could refer to Table 1. Compared to the baseline method, FreeEnricher could
enrich landmarks to specific densities with higher accuracy.
Meanwhile, FreeEnricher merely relies on the original 68points 300W training dataset without both additional annotation and extra inference time.

Introduction
Face alignment provides semantically consistent facial landmarks in given face photos, which plays a critical role in
several face-related vision tasks, such as face recognition
(Masi et al. 2018), face parsing (Luo, Wang, and Tang 2012),
and face reconstruction (Jiang et al. 2005). Due to its importance, great efforts are devoted to the development of algorithms as well as the construction of datasets. Recently,
remarkable alignment accuracy could be achieved through
deep neural networks (Wu et al. 2018; Wang, Bo, and Fuxin
2019; Kumar et al. 2020). To successfully train such deep
models, a large number of face alignment datasets have been
published, e.g., COFW (Burgos-Artizzu, Perona, and Dollár
2013), 300W (Sagonas et al. 2013) and WFLW (Wu et al.
2018).
Despite of enormous growth in face alignment, there have
been very few researches handling dense facial landmarks.
In regard to real-world applications, dense landmarks are
highly demanded in a lot of scenarios, for instance, measuring facial metrics in a medical application and delicate

face editing and reenactment. The fundamental bottleneck
is the substantial cost of labeling dense facial landmarks. To
tackle this problem, we propose a novel framework for enriching landmarks1 to benefit both academic and industrial
scenarios.
In the literature, a 3D face model is introduced to handle
dense face alignment, where the 3D model is fit to images
to map each pixel to the 3D surface of the face template
(Zhu et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2017, 2016; Cootes et al. 1995).
By defining the landmark positions on the 3D face template, they could provide dense landmarks. However, these
approaches suffer from the limited capacity of the 3D face
model and the 2D to 3D ambiguity of the semantic landmark
definition, which results in inaccurate dense landmarks and
inconsistency with 2D features.
To mitigate these issues, we propose a weakly-supervised
approach, FreeEnricher, to freely enrich the pre-annotated

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We denote enriching landmarks by increasing landmark points
along the landmark contours.

962

