The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Unsupervised Explanation Generation via Correct Instantiations
Sijie Cheng1,2 * , Zhiyong Wu1† , Jiangjie Chen2 , Zhixing Li3 ,
Yang Liu5,6 , Lingpeng Kong1,4
1

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
2
Fudan University
3
Full Truck Alliance
4
The University of Hong Kong
5
Institute for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University
6
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University

I. Correct Instantiations Generation

Abstract
While large pre-trained language models (PLM) have shown
their great skills at solving discriminative tasks, a significant
gap remains when compared with humans for explanationrelated tasks. Among them, explaining the reason why a statement is wrong (e.g., against commonsense) is incredibly challenging. The major difficulty is finding the conflict point,
where the statement contradicts our real world. This paper
proposes N EON, a two-phrase, unsupervised explanation generation framework. N EON first generates corrected instantiations of the statement (phase I), then uses them to prompt
large PLMs to find the conflict point and complete the explanation (phase II). We conduct extensive experiments on two
standard explanation benchmarks, i.e., ComVE and e-SNLI.
According to both automatic and human evaluations, N EON
outperforms baselines, even for those with human-annotated
instantiations. In addition to explaining a negative prediction,
we further demonstrate that N EON remains effective when
generalizing to different scenarios. The resources of N EON
are available at: https://github.com/Shark-NLP/Neon.

1

John put a turkey into the fridge.

False Statement

John put a peach into the fridge.

John put an elephant into the fridge.

John put a bowl into the fridge.
…
John put a carrot into the fridge.

II. Explanation Generation
Given the facts: 1. John put a turkey into the fridge, 2. John put a peach into
the fridge, 3. John put a bowl into the fridge, …
Explain the false statement based on its difference with the facts: John put
an elephant into the fridge.
The explanation is:

Conflict Point

🤔

Large PLMs

VOLUME
Turkey
Peach
Elephant > Fridge Bowl < Fridge
…
Carrot

An elephant is much bigger than a fridge.

Introduction

Figure 1: Our proposed two-phase framework N EON (correct instantiations generation and explanation generation)
explains a false statement in ComVE (Wang et al. 2020)
task. The conflict point module is implicitly induced inside
the large pre-trained language models.

Nowadays, Explainable Natural Language Processing
(ExNLP) (Danilevsky et al. 2020) has received increasing
attention toward trustworthy NLP models. A valid explanation can not only ensure that a model solves a problem using
the corresponding knowledge rather than exploiting superficial cues or short-cuts (Niven and Kao 2019; Geva, Goldberg, and Berant 2019; Cui et al. 2021), but they can also be
used to improve model performance on downstream tasks
(Wei et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022; Creswell, Shanahan, and
Higgins 2022).
In general, there are two main types of explanations in
the field of ExNLP: highlights and free-text explanations
(Wiegreffe and Marasovic 2021). Highlights (Lei, Barzilay,
and Jaakkola 2016) methods use subsets of the input to support model prediction, thus can not solve the majority of

tasks where input does not contain rationales. In this paper,
we focus on free-text explanation, which justifies model predictions using natural language. Despite being more flexible
and human-readable, free-text explanations pose great challenges (Lin et al. 2020; Rajani et al. 2019), as they require
models’ ability to accurately understand the logic behind the
problem and express them in natural language.
In this paper, we propose a model agnostic framework to
generate free-text explanations for false statements. Given a
false statement which is against commonsense, “John put an
elephant into the fridge”, the model is expected to generate
a convincing explanation “an elephant is much bigger than
a fridge” to state the reason why the former statement is incorrect (ComVE; Wang et al. 2020). Explaining a false state-

*

This work was done during her internship at Shanghai AI
Laboratory. E-mail: sjcheng20@fudan.edu.cn.
†
Corresponding author. E-mail: wuzhiyong@pjlab.org.cn.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12700

