The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Next POI Recommendation with Dynamic Graph and Explicit Dependency
†

†

Feiyu Yin1* , Yong Liu2* , Zhiqi Shen2 , Lisi Chen1 , Shuo Shang1,3 , Peng Han1
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Sichuan Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Yibin, 644000, China
shirleyyfy@std.uestc.edu.cn, stephenliu@ntu.edu.sg, zqshen@ntu.edu.sg, lchen012@e.ntu.edu.sg, jedi.shang@gmail.com,
penghan study@foxmail.com
Abstract

based services rely on the prediction of the next POI, such
as assisting trip planning, precise advertising, and analyzing
user behavior patterns (Shang et al. 2011; Han et al. 2020).
Improving the prediction accuracy of next POI will help significantly improve the user experience.
Most existing methods treat the next POI recommendation problem as a sequential prediction task (Kong and Wu
2018; Liu et al. 2016). All these methods aim to explore the
potential regularity of users’ check-ins and reasonably infer where they will go next by summarizing their personalized preferences. Moreover, the spatio-temporal context
is also usually used to assist in obtaining the features of
users and POIs, and participating in the prediction process.
The early works employ Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)
and attention mechanisms to capture the regularity of users’
POI sequences (Cho, Myers, and Leskovec 2011; Yu et al.
2019). Recently, some graph-based models build the global
POI transition graph and user similarity graph to enrich the
learned user and POI representations (Li et al. 2021; Chen
et al. 2021).
Although these methods have achieved some success in
the next POI recommendation task, especially the models
based on Graph Neural Networks (GNN), they may still suffer from the following deficiencies.
• Construction of Graphs. Most existing graph-based
methods (Yuan, Cong, and Sun 2014; Rao et al. 2022;
Yang, Liu, and Zhao 2022) directly build graphs (e.g.,
POI transition graph and POI similarity graph) based on
the POI sequences of users. However, it is difficult for
them to mine the potential edges in the graphs, due to
the extreme sparsity of check-in data. Moreover, some
POI graphs studied in previous studies (Wang et al. 2022;
Han et al. 2022) only pay attention to the connectivity
between POIs, neglecting the weight of edges (either 1
or 0), thus increasing the difficulty in understanding POI
graphs for the sequence modeling.
• Aggregation of Neighbourhood Nodes. The POI graphs
constructed by previous methods (Feng et al. 2021; Wang
et al. 2022) are almost static. To obtain more general representations of users and POIs, they usually use specific
algorithms (e.g., graph convolutional networks) to aggregate the neighbourhood information of POIs. Taking
the POI transition graph as an example, when aggregating the POI information, the selected similar neighboring

Next Point-Of-Interest (POI) recommendation plays an important role in various location-based services. Its main objective is to predict the user’s next interested POI based on
her previous check-in information. Most existing methods directly use users’ historical check-in trajectories to construct
various graphs to assist sequential models to complete this
task. However, as users’ check-in data is extremely sparse, it
is difficult to capture the potential relations between POIs by
directly using these check-in data. To this end, we propose
the Sequence-based Neighbour search and Prediction Model
(SNPM) for next POI recommendation. In SNPM, the RotatE
knowledge graph embedding and Eigenmap methods are used
to extract POI relationships implied in check-in data, and
build the POI similarity graph. Then, we enhance the model’s
generalized representations of POIs’ general features by aggregating similar POIs. As the context is typically rich and
valuable when making Next POI predictions, the sequence
model selects which POIs to aggregate not only depends on
the current state, but also needs to consider the previous POI
sequence. Therefore, we construct a Sequence-based, Dynamic Neighbor Graph (SDNG) to find the similarity neighbourhood and develop a Multi-Step Dependency Prediction
model (MSDP) inspired by RotatE, which explicitly leverage information from previous states. We evaluate the proposed model on two real-world datasets, and the experimental
results show that the proposed method significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art POI recommendation methods.

Introduction
The development of mobile technologies greatly motivates
the popularity of location-based services. To experience
more advanced features on these services, users are more
willing to share their historical check-in data (Wang et al.
2019). The location-based services usually employ next
Point-Of-Interest (POI) recommendation systems that are
developed based on users’ check-in behaviors to enhance the
user experiences (Han et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2019). The objective of next POI recommendation is to predict a user’s next
destination based on her historical check-in records and current location. Actually, a considerable number of locations* These authors contributed equally.
†

Shuo Shang and Peng Han are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4827

