The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PASS: Patch Automatic Skip Scheme for Efficient Real-Time Video Perception on
Edge Devices
Qihua Zhou1 , Song Guo1 * , Jun Pan1 , Jiacheng Liang2 , Zhenda Xu1 , Jingren Zhou3
1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
Pennsylvania State University
3
Alibaba Group
{csqzhou, csjpan, cszxu}@comp.polyu.edu.hk, song.guo@polyu.edu.hk
ljcpsu@psu.edu, jingren.zhou@alibaba-inc.com
޽ Plug-and-Play and Task- ޿ Adapt to Diverse
independent Acceleration Downstream Tasks and
for General Usage
Preserve Model Accuracy

...

Gate n
CONV n

CONV 1

Real-time video perception tasks are often challenging over
the resource-constrained edge devices due to the concerns of
accuracy drop and hardware overhead, where saving computations is the key to performance improvement. Existing
methods either rely on domain-specific neural chips or priorly searched models, which require specialized optimization
according to different task properties. In this work, we propose a general and task-independent Patch Automatic Skip
Scheme (PASS), a novel end-to-end learning pipeline to support diverse video perception settings by decoupling acceleration and tasks. The gist is to capture the temporal similarity across video frames and skip the redundant computations
at patch level, where the patch is a non-overlapping square
block in visual. PASS equips each convolution layer with a
learnable gate to selectively determine which patches could
be safely skipped without degrading model accuracy. As to
each layer, a desired gate needs to make flexible skip decisions based on intermediate features without any annotations,
which cannot be achieved by conventional supervised learning paradigm. To address this challenge, we are the first to
construct a tough self-supervisory procedure for optimizing
these gates, which learns to extract contrastive representation,
i.e., distinguishing similarity and difference, from frame sequence. These high-capacity gates can serve as a plug-andplay module for convolutional neural network (CNN) backbones to implement patch-skippable architectures, and automatically generate proper skip strategy to accelerate different
video-based downstream tasks, e.g., outperforming the stateof-the-art MobileHumanPose (MHP) in 3D pose estimation
and FairMOT in multiple object tracking, by up to 9.43× and
12.19× speedups, respectively. By directly processing the
raw data of frames, PASS can generalize to real-time video
streams on commodity edge devices, e.g., NVIDIA Jetson
Nano, with efficient performance in realistic deployment.

Gate 2
CONV 2

Gate 1

Abstract

...
Human Pose
Estimation

Video Frame

Patch Skip
Binary
Mask
Masked Feature

CONV n

Concat

Gate n

޾ Lightweight Architecture
to Restrict Resource Cost

Object
Tracking

Output

Figure 1: PASS accelerates on-device video perception
tasks by safely skipping redundant computations on trivial
patches, while not incurring accuracy drop on the output. We
visualize CONV-n’s heatmap for demonstration purpose.
The black patches (i.e., masked with binary flag “1” and “0”
is the opposite) correspond to the skip decision learnt by the
gate, where 58/64 regions (even in foreground) are skipped.

facture,޽by using the rich contents
in video streams (Choi,
޿
Choi, and Kim 2021; Bu et al. 2021; Kondratyuk et al.
2021). Due to the rapid growth of device processing capacity and memory volume, it is a trend to transfer the
video perception tasks from conventional servers to edge
devices (Cai et al. 2020), e.g., mobile phones and IoT sensors (Tsukada, Kondo, and Matsutani 2020). This on-device
processing paradigm brings inherent benefits of addressing
privacy leakage޾(McMahan et al. 2017), reducing communication latency (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014) and
providing personalized inference (Fang, Zeng, and Zhang
2018). Unfortunately, handling video perception tasks on devices is not easy because the limited computation capacity
often becomes the performance bottleneck in real-world implementation. As a result, saving computations is the key to
build efficient on-device video perception systems.
Considering the video is comprised of sequential frames,
it is natural to capture the temporal similarity across frames
and skip the redundant computations on the trivial regions.
In video perception, the word of “region” corresponds to

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the unprecedented boom of
video perception (Habibian et al. 2021; Ghodrati, Bejnordi,
and Habibian 2021; Abati et al. 2020), which provides great
prospects of enhancing multimedia entertainment, facilitating virtual collaboration and innovating industrial manu* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3787

