The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Representation Learning by Detecting Incorrect Location Embeddings
Sepehr Sameni1 , Simon Jenni2 , Paolo Favaro1
1

Computer Vision Group, University of Bern, Switzerland
2
Adobe Research
sepehr.sameni@unibe.ch, jenni@adobe.com, paolo.favaro@unibe.ch

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel self-supervised learning (SSL) loss for image representation learning. There is a
growing belief that generalization in deep neural networks is
linked to their ability to discriminate object shapes. Since object shape is related to the location of its parts, we propose to
detect those that have been artificially misplaced. We represent object parts with image tokens and train a ViT to detect
which token has been combined with an incorrect positional
embedding. We then introduce sparsity in the inputs to make
the model more robust to occlusions and to speed up the training. We call our method DILEMMA, which stands for Detection of Incorrect Location EMbeddings with MAsked inputs.
We apply DILEMMA to MoCoV3, DINO and SimCLR and
show an improvement in their performance of respectively
4.41%, 3.97%, and 0.5% under the same training time and
with a linear probing transfer on ImageNet-1K. We also show
full fine-tuning improvements of MAE combined with our
method on ImageNet-100. We evaluate our method via finetuning on common SSL benchmarks. Moreover, we show that
when downstream tasks are strongly reliant on shape (such as
in the YOGA-82 pose dataset), our pre-trained features yield
a significant gain over prior work.1

Dolphin plank

Eight angle

Plank

Sage Koundinya

Figure 1: Yoga82 is a dataset with a shape-based task. As
these examples show, texture alone is not sufficiently indicative of the pose. Thus, models that perform well in this task
may demonstrate a strong shape discriminability.

In particular, the expectation is that image representations
may do better in the transfer learning to a shape-based task,
such as pose classification of Yoga82 (see Fig. 1). Thus, we
investigate whether adding a regularization loss that is sensitive to shape to a state-of-the-art SSL method, might lead
to better representation learning.
We propose DILEMMA, which is short for Detection of
Incorrect Location EMbeddings with MAsked inputs. In our
experiments we integrated DILEMMA with SimCLR (Chen
et al. 2020a), DINO (Caron et al. 2021) and MoCoV3 (Chen,
Xie, and He 2021), and find a consistent improvement across
the majority of downstream tasks.
With DILEMMA, the image representation is encouraged
to differentiate shapes thanks to two main components: 1)
A binary classification loss to detect the correct/incorrect
positions of object parts, and 2) the use of randomized input sparsity, so that every subset of object parts contributes
to the whole image representation. The first component is
a concept already proposed in the context prediction (Doersch, Gupta, and Efros 2015) and jigsaw puzzle SSL methods
(Noroozi and Favaro 2016). It takes also inspiration from
ELECTRA (Clark et al. 2020a), where some text tokens are
replaced by a weak generator and a discriminator is trained
to detect them. The second component, is also a concept
that has been exploited in VATT (Akbari et al. 2021) and
MAE (He et al. 2021) to reduce the computational workload
of training with ViTs (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020).
More in detail, as shown in Fig. 2, we split an image into
a grid of tiles, map them to tokens, and combine them with
positional embeddings. Then, we corrupt the positional embeddings of a fraction of the tokens before we feed them to
a ViT. In our DILEMMA loss, we classify the tokens into

Introduction
In computer vision, deep learning models trained on small
labeled datasets can benefit greatly from supervised pretraining on datasets such as ImageNet (Girshick et al. 2014).
Even more surprisingly, (He et al. 2020) showed that it is
possible to pre-train with unlabeled data (with MoCo) and
outperform pre-training with supervised learning on several downstream tasks. This led to the rapid development
of several Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) methods, such as
(Caron et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020a,b; He et al. 2020).
Representations obtained via SSL have the ability to generalize to downstream tasks such as object classification, detection, and segmentation (Deng et al. 2009; Everingham
et al. 2009; Krizhevsky 2009). Recent work suggests that
representations with a shape bias generalize better to these
tasks than those with a texture bias (Geirhos et al. 2018;
Tartaglini, Vong, and Lake 2022).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
source code: https://github.com/Separius/DILEMMA

9704

