The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Online Platforms and the Fair Exposure Problem under Homophily
Jakob Schoeffer1 * , Alexander Ritchie2 * , Keziah Naggita3 * , Faidra Monachou4 * ,
Jessie Finocchiaro4,5 * , Marc Juarez6
1

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT)
2
University of Michigan
3
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
4
Harvard University
5
Center for Research on Computation and Society (CRCS)
6
University of Edinburgh
jakob.schoeffer@kit.edu, aritch@umich.edu, knaggita@ttic.edu, monachou@stanford.edu, jessie@seas.harvard.edu,
marc.juarez@ed.ac.uk

Abstract

Gentzkow, and Shapiro 2017; Bail et al. 2018; Hawdon et al.
2020; Yarchi, Baden, and Kligler-Vilenchik 2020) and elsewhere.1 This phenomenon is often attributed to platform designs that aim to generate revenue by maximizing user engagement with promoted or shared content (e.g., news articles, opinions, ads). Motivated by the need to promote
pluralism online, this paper focuses on understanding the
spread of information under a limited platform intervention
scheme, where the platform exposes (a subset of) users of
the same affiliation to content of contrasting views. We introduce this problem and its study as the fair exposure problem.
From a historical perspective, parallels can be drawn between the fair exposure problem and the Fairness Doctrine
(Ashford 2021; Pickard 2021), a past media policy which
required that news media cover issues of public importance
by presenting diverse, opposing perspectives in an attempt
to ensure media diversity. Over the decades, the effectiveness and ethical use of this policy was questioned (Pickard
2021): for example, the doctrine enabled activists to help
combat racist broadcasting, but it also helped promote the
Anti-Equal Rights Amendment campaign (Pickard 2021).
As history has shown, interventions aimed at balancing the
exposure of the public to opposing views might have ambiguous results. Thus, the goal of this paper is to shed light
on the trade-offs that the adoption of such policies may introduce for online platforms.
Towards this goal, we develop a stylized model to understand the impact of platform interventions on the propagation of different articles over time to understand the effects
of positional polarization (cf. Yarchi, Baden, and KliglerVilenchik (2020)). Our model considers two groups of users
with different affiliations and different preferences for articles. Among two opposing articles, we assume that each
group tends to like more the article that aligns with the
group’s views. Moreover, due to homophily in social net-

In the wake of increasing political extremism, online platforms have been criticized for contributing to polarization.
One line of criticism has focused on echo chambers and the
recommended content served to users by these platforms. In
this work, we introduce the fair exposure problem: given limited intervention power of the platform, the goal is to enforce
balance in the spread of content (e.g., news articles) among
two groups of users through constraints similar to those imposed by the Fairness Doctrine in the United States in the
past. Groups are characterized by different affiliations (e.g.,
political views) and have different preferences for content.
We develop a stylized framework that models intra- and intergroup content propagation under homophily, and we formulate the platform’s decision as an optimization problem
that aims at maximizing user engagement, potentially under
fairness constraints. Our main notion of fairness requires that
each group see a mixture of their preferred and non-preferred
content, encouraging information diversity. Promoting such
information diversity is often viewed as desirable and a potential means for breaking out of harmful echo chambers. We
study the solutions to both the fairness-agnostic and fairnessaware problems. We prove that a fairness-agnostic approach
inevitably leads to group-homogeneous targeting by the platform. This is only partially mitigated by imposing fairness
constraints: we show that there exist optimal fairness-aware
solutions which target one group with different types of content and the other group with only one type that is not necessarily the group’s most preferred. Finally, using simulations with real-world data, we study the system dynamics and
quantify the price of fairness.

1

Introduction

In the wake of increasing political extremism (US Department of Justice 2021), online platforms (e.g., social media networks) have been extensively criticized for exacerbating political polarization in the United States (Boxell,

1

See https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.09727 for the full paper including the appendix and https://github.com/jfinocchiaro/fair-exposure
for all code.

* These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11899

