The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Optimizing Multiple Simultaneous Objectives for Voting and Facility Location
Yue Han, Christopher Jerrett, Elliot Anshelevich
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 110 Eighth Street, Troy, New York 12180
hany4@rpi.edu, jerrec@rpi.edu, eanshel@cs.rpi.edu

Abstract

is to choose a candidate or outcome located in some metric
space, where the distance from a voter to an outcome represents the cost of this outcome for the voter (e.g., based on
their ideological differences). When choosing where to build
a facility (or which candidate to select) for the public good
(e.g., where to build a new post office, supermarket, etc.),
we may care about minimizing the average distance from
users to the chosen facility (a utilitarian measure), or the
maximum distance (an egalitarian measure), or many other
measures of fairness or happiness. Focusing on just a single
measure may not be useful for actual policy makers, who
often want to satisfy multiple objectives simultaneously and
in fact refuse to commit themselves to a single one, as many
objectives have their own unique merits. In this paper we
instead attempt to simultaneously minimize multiple objectives. For example, what if we care about both the average
and the maximum distance to the chosen facility, and not just
about some linear combination of the two? What if we want
to choose a facility so that it is close to optimum in terms of
the average distance from the users, and at the same time is
also close to optimum in terms of the maximum distance? Is
this even possible to do?

We study the classic facility location setting, where we are
given n clients and m possible facility locations in some arbitrary metric space, and want to choose a location to build
a facility. The exact same setting also arises in spatial social choice, where voters are the clients and the goal is to
choose a candidate or outcome, with the distance from a
voter to an outcome representing the cost of this outcome for
the voter (e.g., based on their ideological differences). Unlike most previous work, we do not focus on a single objective to optimize (e.g., the total distance from clients to
the facility, or the maximum distance, etc.), but instead attempt to optimize several different objectives simultaneously.
More specifically, we consider the l-centrum family of objectives, which includes the total distance, max distance, and
many others. We present tight bounds on how well any pair
of such objectives (e.g., max and sum) can be simultaneously
approximated compared to their optimum outcomes. In particular, we show that for any such pair of objectives, it is always possible to choose an outcome which simultaneously
√
approximates both objectives within a factor of 1 + 2, and
give a precise characterization of how this factor improves
as the two objectives being optimized become more similar. For q > 2 different centrum objectives, we show that
it is always possible to approximate all q of these objectives
within a small constant, and that this constant approaches 3
as q → ∞. Our results show that when optimizing only a
few simultaneous objectives, it is always possible to form an
outcome which is a significantly better than 3 approximation
for all of these objectives.

1

More specifically, we consider l-centrum problems (Slater
1978; Tamir 2001; Peeters 1998), where we are given a set
of possible facilities F and a set of n clients C in an arbitrary
metric space with distance function d. For each client i ∈ C
there is a cost d(i, j) if we choose to build facility j ∈ F .
Then the goal is to pick one facility from F such that it minimizes the sum of the l most expensive costs induced by the
choice of facility location. Such problems generalize minimizing the total client cost (l = n), as well as the maximum
client cost (l = 1). The latter may be considered a measure
which is more fair to all the clients (since it makes sure that
all clients have small cost, not just on average), but would
have the drawback that a solution where all except a single
client have low cost would be considered the same as a solution where they all have high cost, as long as the maximum
cost stays the same. Because of this, some may argue that an
objective where we consider only the costs of the worst 10
percent of the clients may be better. In this work, we sidestep questions about which objective is best entirely. Since
each of the l-centrum objectives has its own advantages, our
goal is to simultaneously approximate multiple such objectives. This idea of simultaneously approximating l-centrum

Introduction

When working on optimization problems, it is often difficult
to pick one single objective to optimize: in most real applications different parties care about many different objectives
at the same time. For example, consider the classic setting
when we are given n clients and m possible facility locations in some metric space, and want to choose a location
to build a facility. Note that while the setting we consider
is for facility location problems, the exact same setting also
arises in spatial social choice (see e.g., Merrill III, Merrill,
and Grofman (1999); Enelow and Hinich (1984); Anshelevich et al. (2021)), where voters are the clients and the goal
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5665

