The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

LagNet: Deep Lagrangian Mechanics for Plug-and-Play Molecular
Representation Learning
Chunyan Li1,2 , Junfeng Yao1 , Jinsong Su1 , Zhaoyang Liu3 , Xiangxiang Zeng4 * , Chenxi Huang1†
1

School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
School of Informatics, Yunnan Normal University, Kunming, China
3
School of Information and Control Engineering, China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, China
4
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, China
lchy0316@gmail.com, xzeng@hnu.edu.cn, supermonkeyxi@xmu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

and Transformer (Rong et al. 2020a) to learn molecular
representation. However, these methods ignore important
3D structural features of molecules. Recently, there has
been a trend towards incorporating 3D structural features of
molecules into molecular representation for various downstream tasks (Li et al. 2021b,a). Whereas it is difficult to
obtain labeled 3D information of molecules. The molecular
conformation (the 3D coordinates of atoms in a molecule)
contains important geometric information and plays an important role in the prediction of biochemical function and
activity. The 3D structural features of a molecule largely determine the properties of drugs and the binding features of
drug targets. It has been shown that using the 3D coordinates
of atoms in 3D space can improve the accuracy of molecular
property predictions (Schütt et al. 2017; Cho and Choi 2018;
Li et al. 2021c; Yang et al. 2021). 3D structure is one of the
most critical factors in determining molecular properties and
understanding how they function in the physical world (Wu
et al. 2021).
To push the boundaries of molecular characterization into
the 3D realm, we propose LagNet from the perspective of
molecular dynamics simulations. From physics, molecules
are considered as particle systems, the motion of all particles follows the classical Newton’s laws of motion, and the
interaction between atoms satisfies the superposition principle. The predominant conformations of the molecules reflect
the equilibrium of these particle systems and are therefore
of great interest. Inspired by HamNet (Li et al. 2021c) and
PhysChem (Yang et al. 2021), in this paper, we proposed
LagNet, a plug-and-play molecular representation method
based on Lagrangian mechanism. In summary, the key contributions of our work are as follows:

Molecular representation learning is a fundamental problem
in the field of drug discovery and molecular science. Whereas
incorporating molecular 3D information in the representations of molecule seems beneficial, which is related to computational chemistry with the basic task of predicting stable 3D structures (conformations) of molecules. Existing machine learning methods either rely on 1D and 2D molecular properties or simulate molecular force field to use additional 3D structure information via Hamiltonian network. The
former has the disadvantage of ignoring important 3D structure features, while the latter has the disadvantage that existing Hamiltonian neural network must satisfy the “canonial” constraint, which is difficult to be obeyed in many cases.
In this paper, we propose a novel plug-and-play architecture LagNet by simulating molecular force field only with
parameterized position coordinates, which implements Lagrangian mechanics to learn molecular representation by preserving 3D conformation without obeying any additional restrictions. LagNet is designed to generate known conformations and generalize for unknown ones from molecular
SMILES. Implicit positions in LagNet are learned iteratively
using discrete-time Lagrangian equations. Experimental results show that LagNet can well learn 3D molecular structure
features, and outperforms previous state-of-the-art baselines
related molecular representation by a significant margin.

Introduction
Well-designed representations of molecules are the basis of
drug design and molecular property prediction. Most of the
previous deep learning-based molecular representation studies focused on 1D sequence manner using Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry System (SMILES) (Li et al. 2022a),
molecular fingerprint (Rogers and Hahn 2010) and 2D graph
(Kearnes et al. 2016) or a mixture architecture of 1D and
2D property features (Paul et al. 2018). These methods generally used off-the-shelf neural architectures such as graph
convolutional network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2016),
Message-Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) (Gilmer et al.
2017), recurrent neural network (RNN) (Li et al. 2022a)

• To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to propose a Lagrangian-based mechanism for modeling small
molecule conformations using deep neural network with
only parameterized positional coordinates to simulate
molecular dynamics processes. LagNet learns molecular
representations by maintaining 3D conformations without adhering to additional “canonial” constraints that are
difficult to obey in deep learning networks.
• Taking SMILES strings of molecules as input, LagNet
is designed to generate known molecular conformations
and can be generalized to unknown molecular conforma-

* Corresponding author: Xiangxiang Zeng
†

Corresponding author: Chenxi Huang
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5169

