The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AIO-P: Expanding Neural Performance Predictors
beyond Image Classification
Keith G. Mills1,2 * , Di Niu1 , Mohammad Salameh2 , Weichen Qiu1 , Fred X. Han2 ,
Puyuan Liu2 , Jialin Zhang3 , Wei Lu2 , Shangling Jui3
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta
2
Huawei Technologies, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
3
Huawei Kirin Solution, Shanghai, China
{kgmills, dniu, wqiu1}@ualberta.ca
{mohammad.salameh, fred.xuefei.han1, puyuan.liu, jui.shangling}@huawei.com
{zhangjialin10, robin.luwei}@hisilicon.com
Abstract

and Yang 2019; Changiz Rezaei et al. 2021; Mills et al.
2021a,c), which reduce the computational burden but do not
eliminate it. Advanced supernet schemes like Once-for-All
(OFA) (Cai et al. 2020) and BootstrapNAS (Munoz et al.
2022) introduce progressive shrinking to train a reusable supernet. Specifically, OFA supernets are robust enough that
individual architectures can be sampled for immediate evaluation on ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015).
Zero-Cost Proxies (ZCP) (Abdelfattah et al. 2021) are a
recent development aiming to correlate performance with
gradient statistics and thus can generalize to any type of network. However, the efficacy of ZCP methods depend on the
architecture and task and may not be always reliable. Other
recent schemes like NAS-Bench-301 (Zela et al. 2022),
SemiNAS (Luo et al. 2020), TNASP (Lu et al. 2021b) and
WeakNAS (Wu et al. 2021) develop neural predictors that
estimate architecture performance from network topology
and operation features. However, they model customized
architectures in specific search spaces, e.g., NAS-Bench101 (Ying et al. 2019) and 201 (Dong and Yang 2020) for
common benchmark tasks like CIFAR image classification
(Krizhevsky, Hinton et al. 2009), and cannot be directly
transferred to other challenging tasks like pose estimation or
segmentation or to architectures with new types of topologies/connections.
In this paper, we propose All-in-One Predictor (AIO-P),
a multi-task neural performance predictor which achieves
cross-task and cross-search-space transferability via predictor pretraining and domain-specific knowledge injection.
AIO-P uses Computational Graphs (CG) to represent neural architectures, which is lower-level information extracted
from TensorFlow execution and thus can model general
types of architectures. We make the observation that many
CV architectures consist of a body (e.g., ResNet) that performs feature extraction and a head that uses extracted features to generate task-specific outputs. Figure 1 illustrates
how architectures can be constructed for different tasks by
combining various types of bodies and heads. Based on such
network representations, we introduce an effective transfer
learning scheme to first pretrain AIO-P on image classification benchmarks, then infuse domain knowledge from other

Evaluating neural network performance is critical to deep
neural network design but a costly procedure. Neural predictors provide an efficient solution by treating architectures
as samples and learning to estimate their performance on a
given task. However, existing predictors are task-dependent,
predominantly estimating neural network performance on image classification benchmarks. They are also search-space dependent; each predictor is designed to make predictions for
a specific architecture search space with predefined topologies and set of operations. In this paper, we propose a novel
All-in-One Predictor (AIO-P), which aims to pretrain neural
predictors on architecture examples from multiple, separate
computer vision (CV) task domains and multiple architecture spaces, and then transfer to unseen downstream CV tasks
or neural architectures. We describe our proposed techniques
for general graph representation, efficient predictor pretraining and knowledge infusion techniques, as well as methods
to transfer to downstream tasks/spaces. Extensive experimental results show that AIO-P can achieve Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Spearman’s Rank Correlation (SRCC) below
1% and above 0.5, respectively, on a breadth of target downstream CV tasks with or without fine-tuning, outperforming
a number of baselines. Moreover, AIO-P can directly transfer
to new architectures not seen during training, accurately rank
them and serve as an effective performance estimator when
paired with an algorithm designed to preserve performance
while reducing FLOPs.

Introduction
Performance evaluation of neural network models is resource and time consuming. Several factors contribute to
its expensiveness, such as task complexity, training dataset
size, architecture topology, and training time. It is yet a main
component and the bottleneck in Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) (Elsken et al. 2019). Early NAS approaches train
sampled architectures to completion during search (Zoph
and Le 2017) while later approaches adopt weight-sharing
supernet approaches (Pham et al. 2018; Liu, Simonyan,
* Work done during an internship at Huawei.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9180

