The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ContraFeat: Contrasting Deep Features for Semantic Discovery
Xinqi Zhu, Chang Xu, Dacheng Tao
The University of Sydney, Australia
xzhu7491@uni.sydney.edu.au, c.xu@sydney.edu.au, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract

discovery methods (Voynov and Babenko 2020; Härkönen
et al. 2020; Wang and Ponce 2021; Shen and Zhou 2021;
Yüksel et al. 2021) seek semantically meaningful directions
in the latent space of pretrained GANs without supervision.
Among popular GANs, StyleGAN has shown great potential for disentangling semantics, thanks to its intermediate
W space design with a multi-layer structure. This paper focuses on StyleGAN to develop a tailored semantic discovery
model in its W space.
Although many existing models (Härkönen et al. 2020;
Shen and Zhou 2021; Yüksel et al. 2021) have demonstrated
ability in discovering semantically meaningful variations in
StyleGANs, these methods share a common problem: they
rely on manual layer-wise selection in the W space. As mentioned in (Härkönen et al. 2020), this layer-wise selection is
important for satisfactory manipulation results since entanglement can frequently happen in the discovered directions
without this process. Unfortunately, this manual selection
process is tedious and demanding because it requires humans to inspect and evaluate a large number of layer-wise
modification combinations in the W latent space.
There are two major reasons causing this problem in existing models: the first is the lack of a module designed for this
layer-selection process; the second is the lack of a criterion
that can substitute human intelligence to guide this selection.
To solve the first problem, we develop a module to predict
layer-wise attentions in the W space which simulates the
selection of latent layers to apply discovered directions. For
the second problem, we adopt a pretrained neural network to
serve as the selective guidance. This is inspired by existing
observation that the perceptual judgment of deep network
features largely agrees with human judgment (Zhang et al.
2018). In this paper, we make the hypothesis that this perceptual agreement also extends to semantic structure, e.g.
similarity in semantic changes judged by humans is agreed
by neural networks, and difference as well. Technically, we
develop a contrastive approach to encourage the discovery
of semantics that will cause perceptually consistent and orthogonal changes in the pretrained feature maps. We propose two variants of our model, with one contrasting samples in a binary manner, and another one contrasting samples with learned prototype variation patterns. With the proposed models, we can discover more disentangled semantics on StyleGANs than existing methods without relying on

StyleGAN has shown strong potential for disentangled semantic control, thanks to its special design of multi-layer intermediate latent variables. However, existing semantic discovery methods on StyleGAN rely on manual selection of
modified latent layers to obtain satisfactory manipulation results, which is tedious and demanding. In this paper, we propose a model that automates this process and achieves stateof-the-art semantic discovery performance. The model consists of an attention-equipped navigator module and losses
contrasting deep-feature changes. We propose two model
variants, with one contrasting samples in a binary manner,
and another one contrasting samples with learned prototype
variation patterns. The proposed losses are defined with pretrained deep features, based on our assumption that the features can implicitly reveal the desired semantic structure including consistency and orthogonality. Additionally, we design two metrics to quantitatively evaluate the performance of
semantic discovery methods on FFHQ dataset, and also show
that disentangled representations can be derived via a simple
training process. Experimentally, our models can obtain stateof-the-art semantic discovery results without relying on latent
layer-wise manual selection, and these discovered semantics
can be used to manipulate real-world images.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models such as GANs (Goodfellow et al.
2014) have shown superior ability in generating photorealistic images (Karras et al. 2018, 2020; Brock, Donahue,
and Simonyan 2019). Besides improving fidelity in generation, many works seek to augment these models with interpretability (Yan et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2016; Higgins
et al. 2017; Bau et al. 2019; Shen et al. 2019), which fertilizes applications such as controllable generation (Kulkarni
et al. 2015; Lample et al. 2017; Lee et al. 2018; Xing et al.
2019), domain adaptation (Peng et al. 2019; Cao et al. 2018),
machine learning fairness (Creager et al. 2019; Locatello
et al. 2019a), etc. Yet this goal can be typically achieved
via supervised learning (Kingma et al. 2014; Dosovitskiy,
Springenberg, and Brox 2014; Kulkarni et al. 2015; Lample
et al. 2017; Shen et al. 2019), another recent popular branch
of work approaches this target by semantic discovery. Instead of training a fresh generator with labels, these semantic
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11470

