The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Explaining Random Forests Using Bipolar Argumentation and Markov Networks
Nico Potyka, Xiang Yin, Francesca Toni
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, UK
{n.potyka, x.yin20, f.toni}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

Wäldchen et al. 2021). Roughly speaking, abductive explanations are sufficient reasons for a classification. Recently,
SAT encodings have been applied to compute abductive explanations in tree ensembles (Izza and Marques-Silva 2021;
Ignatiev et al. 2022) and many other logic-based explanation approaches have been investigated (Marques-Silva and
Ignatiev 2022; Cyras et al. 2021; Vassiliades, Bassiliades,
and Patkos 2021).
As random forests are essentially composed of rules, a
natural question is if we can use logical tools to reason in
more flexible ways about random forests. Since the rules
can be mutually inconsistent, non-classical reasoning approaches are a natural choice. Here, we investigate abstract
bipolar argumentation graphs (BAGs) (Amgoud et al. 2008;
Oren and Norman 2008; Boella et al. 2010; Cayrol and
Lagasquie-Schiex 2013) for this purpose. Intuitively, BAGs
allow identifying consistent subsets (extensions) of contradicting arguments and to reason about them. We will show
that the bi-stable semantics for BAGs (Potyka 2021) allows
representing random forests as BAGs such that the possible decisions made by the forest correspond to extensions
of the BAG. Finding sufficient and necessary reasons for the
classification of a random forest can then be reduced to finding sufficient and necessary reasons in argumentation frameworks (Borg and Bex 2021). In order to solve the combinatorial reasoning problems, we consider Markov network
encodings of the BAG (Potyka 2020), which also allow reasoning about almost sufficient and almost necessary reasons.
As the computational complexity of the problems is high,
we consider a probabilistic algorithm to approximate reasons and present first experimental results.
The proofs of all technical results can be found in the accompanying technical report (Potyka, Yin, and Toni 2022).

Random forests are decision tree ensembles that can be used
to solve a variety of machine learning problems. However, as
the number of trees and their individual size can be large, their
decision making process is often incomprehensible. We show
that their decision process can be naturally represented as an
argumentation problem, which allows creating global explanations via argumentative reasoning. We generalize sufficient
and necessary argumentative explanations using a Markov
network encoding, discuss the relevance of these explanations
and establish relationships to families of abductive explanations from the literature. As the complexity of the explanation
problems is high, we present an efficient approximation algorithm with probabilistic approximation guarantees.

1

Introduction and Related Work

Random forests (RFs) (Breiman 2001) are machine learning
models with various applications in areas like E-commerce,
Finance and Medicine. They consist of multiple decision
trees that use different subsets of the available features.
Given an input, every tree makes an individual decision
and the output of the random forest is obtained by a majority vote. They have low risk of overfitting; support both
classification and regression tasks and come equipped with
some feature importance measures (Breiman 2001). However, feature importance measures can be too simplistic as
they can represent neither joint effects of features (e.g.,
multi-drug interactions) nor non-monotonicity (e.g., increasing the weight may be healthy for an underweight person,
but not for an overweight person).
In recent years, a variety of other explanation methods
has been proposed. Model-agnostic feature importance measures like LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016), SHAP
(Lundberg and Lee 2017) and MAPLE (Plumb, Molitor,
and Talwalkar 2018) have similar limitations like the feature importance measures defined for random forests. Counterfactual explanations explain how an input can be modified to change the decision (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2017), but mainly explain the model locally. Another
interesting family of explanation methods are abductive explanations, also called prime implicant explanations (Shih,
Choi, and Darwiche 2018; Izza and Marques-Silva 2021;

2

Random Forests and Classes of AXps

We will focus on Random forests for classification problems here. The goal of classification is to assign class labels y to inputs x. Inputs are vectors x = (x1 , . . . , xk ),
where the i-th value belongs to some feature Xi with domain Di . We let D = ×ki=1 Di denote the set of all inputs and C the set of class labels. Figure 1 shows two decision trees for a medical classification problem where patients are diagnosed based on their age and three symptoms
A, B, C that can be present (1) or not (0). The diagnosis can

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9453

