The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ESPT: A Self-Supervised Episodic Spatial Pretext Task
for Improving Few-Shot Learning
Yi Rong1,2,3,4 , Xiongbo Lu1 , Zhaoyang Sun1 , Yaxiong Chen1,2 , Shengwu Xiong1,2,3,4 *
1

School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, China
2
Sanya Science and Education Innovation Park, Wuhan University of Technology, Sanya 572000, China
3
Hainan Yazhou Bay Seed Laboratory, Sanya 572025, China
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai 200240, China
{yrong, luxiongbo, zhaoyangsun, chenyaxiong, xiongsw}@whut.edu.cn
Abstract

due to the scarcity of data. Training deep neural networks
in such low-data regimes will inevitably lead to overfitting
problems, which can greatly reduce the generalization ability of the learned models and finally limit their applicability
in real-world scenarios. On the contrary, humans can rely on
past experience to accurately identify new objects by only
observing a small number of reference samples. By emulating such ability of human intelligence, few-shot learning has
recently shown promising results in learning novel concepts
from a few training images, and thus has become an effective approach to address the data scarcity problem in deep
learning fields.
Few-shot learning (FSL) (Li, Fergus, and Perona 2006;
Lake, Salakhutdinov, and Tenenbaum 2015; Koch et al.
2015; Vinyals et al. 2016; Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017;
Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017) aims to learn transferable
prior knowledge from a set of ”base classes” with sufficient
training samples, and then utilize such knowledge to recognize unseen ”novel classes” that only have a few reference images per class. For this purpose, the episodic learning strategy is often employed, which samples a series of
few-shot episodes from the base classes in the training phase
(Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017; Finn, Abbeel, and Levine
2017). Each episode consists of a small ”support set” and
a relatively large ”query set” that simulate the setup of the
target few-shot classification tasks encountered during the
evaluation procedure. Then with these episodes, a generic
deep model or a common optimization method (act as the
prior knowledge) is typically learned for fast adaptation to
the testing few-shot classification tasks with unseen categories. One of the main problems with most FSL methods
is that they usually only optimize a single categorical objective (e.g. cross-entropy loss). As a result, the learned models
will only capture the necessary knowledge for the classification tasks over the training classes. Therefore, these models
tend to have excessive discriminability for the base classes
but limited transferability to unseen categories, which will
finally lead to a decrease of few-shot classification performance on the novel classes.
To alleviate this problem, several recent studies (Gidaris
et al. 2019; Rajasegaran et al. 2021; Lee, Hwang, and Shin
2020; Su, Maji, and Hariharan 2020; Liu et al. 2021) propose to integrate self-supervised learning (SSL) techniques

Self-supervised learning (SSL) techniques have recently been
integrated into the few-shot learning (FSL) framework and
have shown promising results in improving the few-shot image classification performance. However, existing SSL approaches used in FSL typically seek the supervision signals
from the global embedding of every single image. Therefore,
during the episodic training of FSL, these methods cannot
capture and fully utilize the local visual information in image samples and the data structure information of the whole
episode, which are beneficial to FSL. To this end, we propose to augment the few-shot learning objective with a novel
self-supervised Episodic Spatial Pretext Task (ESPT). Specifically, for each few-shot episode, we generate its corresponding transformed episode by applying a random geometric
transformation to all the images in it. Based on these, our
ESPT objective is defined as maximizing the local spatial relationship consistency between the original episode and the
transformed one. With this definition, the ESPT-augmented
FSL objective promotes learning more transferable feature
representations that capture the local spatial features of different images and their inter-relational structural information
in each input episode, thus enabling the model to generalize better to new categories with only a few samples. Extensive experiments indicate that our ESPT method achieves new
state-of-the-art performance for few-shot image classification
on three mainstay benchmark datasets. The source code will
be available at: https://github.com/Whut-YiRong/ESPT.

Introduction
Deep learning (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015) based approaches have achieved impressive results in various image
classification tasks, such as face recognition (Meng et al.
2021), object recognition (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) and person re-identification (Li et al. 2021). However, the success of these methods relies heavily on the availability of massive training data with reliable annotations.
Unfortunately, in many practical image classification applications, collecting and manually labeling sufficient training
samples are not only expensive and time-consuming, but
also may not be feasible for some rare object categories
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9596

