The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improving Fairness in Information Exposure by Adding Links
Ruben Becker1 , Gianlorenzo D’Angelo2 , Sajjad Ghobadi2
1

Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Italy
Gran Sasso Science Institute, L’Aquila, Italy
rubensimon.becker@unive.it, gianlorenzo.dangelo@gssi.it, sajjad.ghobadi@gssi.it
2

Abstract

As online social networks play an essential role in how
we acquire information nowadays and as access to information has an important impact on our lives, more recently
researchers have started to study the IM framework in the
presence of fairness concerns as well. Fairness may be understood w.r.t. individuals or communities, the former being the special case of the latter with singleton communities. Generally, in such works, for a community C ⊆ V , one
considers the average probability σC (S) of nodes in C to
be reached from S, also called the community coverage of
C. Then the concern is to choose S in such a way that some
fairness criteria on the communities is maximized. The probably most commonly used one is the maxmin (or maximin)
criterion. In the most basic setting, studied, e.g., by Fish et
al. (2019), the goal is to find a seed set S ⊆ V of size at most
k such that the minimum probability that nodes are reached
minv∈V σv (S) is maximized.
Several articles have been published in this scope and they
have shown certain success in finding seeding strategies that
lead to fairer outcomes. Nevertheless, they are all based on
the assumption that the information spreading entity, i.e., the
agent choosing S, has an interest in spreading information
in a fair way. This assumption is however rather unrealistic in the real word. Information spreading agents may be,
and probably mostly are, purely efficiency-oriented and not
particularly interested in choosing fair seeding strategies.
In this work we take a different approach to fairness.
We do not rely on the good will of the information spreading entity, but instead modify the underlying social network
in such a way as to make efficiency-oriented information
spreading automatically fair. The modification of the network may be done by the network owner or any other entity
interested in guaranteeing fairness. While different ways of
modifying the network are perceivable, we choose the possibly most natural one – we improve the network’s connectivity by adding links. Here, we take the rather realistic approach to assume the information spreading entity to be indifferent rather than adversarial towards fairness.

Fairness in influence maximization has been a very active research topic recently. Most works in this context study the
question of how to find seeding strategies (deterministic or
probabilistic) such that nodes or communities in the network
get their fair share of coverage. Different fairness criteria have
been used in this context. All these works assume that the
entity that is spreading the information has an inherent interest in spreading the information fairly, otherwise why would
they want to use the developed fair algorithms? This assumption may however be flawed in reality – the spreading entity
may be purely efficiency-oriented. In this paper we propose
to study two optimization problems with the goal to modify the network structure by adding links in such a way that
efficiency-oriented information spreading becomes automatically fair. We study the proposed optimization problems both
from a theoretical and experimental perspective, that is, we
give several hardness and hardness of approximation results,
provide efficient algorithms for some special cases, and more
importantly provide heuristics for solving one of the problems in practice. In our experimental study we then first compare the proposed heuristics against each other and establish
the most successful one. In a second experiment, we then
show that our approach can be very successful in practice.
That is, we show that already after adding a few edges to the
networks the greedy algorithm that purely maximizes spread
surpasses all fairness-tailored algorithms in terms of ex-post
fairness. Maybe surprisingly, we even show that our approach
achieves ex-post fairness values that are comparable or even
better than the ex-ante fairness values of the currently most
efficient algorithms that optimize ex-ante fairness.

Introduction
The question of how information spreads through networks
has been studied in various research disciplines. In computer science, the so-called influence maximization (IM)
paradigm has attracted a lot of attention in the last two
decades. The IM problem can be stated as follows. Given
a social network G = (V, E) in which information spreads
according to some probabilistic model, target a set of at most
k seed nodes S ⊆ V in such a way that σ(S), the expect number of nodes that receive the information, is maximized (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2015).

Our Contribution. We formalize this problem as follows.
Given a social network G = (V, E), we want to add at most
b non-edges F ⊆ Ē = V 2 \ E to G in such a way that
the minimum community coverage is maximized when information is spread in G0 = (V, E ∪ F ) using a purely ef-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14119

