The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Formal Verification of Bayesian Mechanisms
Munyque Mittelmann1 , Bastien Maubert1 , Aniello Murano1 , Laurent Perrussel2
1

Università degli Studi di Napoli “Federico II”, Italy
2
IRIT - Université Toulouse Capitole, France
{munyque.mittelmann, laurent.perrussel}@ut-capitole.fr, {bastien.maubert, nello.murano}@gmail.com

Abstract

solving it for a specific setting: no general perspective is
considered and consequently typical properties are always
defined in terms of the specific problem.
In line with the well established logical approach to system verification (Clarke et al. 2018), the work presented in
(Wooldridge et al. 2007) advocates the use of Alternatingtime Temporal Logic (ATL) (Alur, Henzinger, and Kupferman 2002) to reason about mechanism design. Due to ATL’s
limitations regarding the expression of solution concepts
(such as Nash equilibria) as well as handling quantitative
aspects, recent works proposed the use of variants of Quantitative Strategy Logic (SL[F]) (Bouyer et al. 2019) for reasoning about mechanisms. In (Maubert et al. 2021; Mittelmann 2022), the authors demonstrate how to represent and
verify knowledge-based benchmarks and properties such as
efficiency and strategyproofness in Epistemic SL[F ]. Similarly, SL[F ] with natural strategies have been considered
for reasoning with bounded recall (Belardinelli et al. 2022).
Finally, the automated design of deterministic mechanisms
was reduced to SL[F ]-synthesis in (Mittelmann et al. 2022).
However, SL[F ] semantics is deterministic and thus the
logic is unable to express probabilistic features, which are
essential when considering Bayesian and randomized mechanisms.
This paper shows the potential of using the probabilistic version of Strategy Logic (Probabilistic Strategy Logic,
PSL) (Aminof et al. 2019) for AMD. Model-Checking
PSL-formulas is decidable in 3-EXPSPACE in the context
of memoryless strategy, a common assumption in Mechanism Design. As illustrated by recent work on the subject (Feldman et al. 2022; Varloot and Laraki 2022), randomness and imperfect information are foundational and
must be addressed by any formal verification technique for
Bayesian mechanisms. Generalizing from the deterministic
to the probabilistic setting is challenging due to several aspects. First, the wide and heterogeneous range of settings
considered in the literature obscures the path for a general
and formal approach to verification. The setting may consider deterministic or randomized mechanisms, incomplete
information about agents’ types (Bayesian mechanisms),
mixed or pure strategies, and direct or indirect mechanisms
(iterative protocols). Second, considering Bayesian mechanisms brings out different methods for evaluating a mechanism according to the time-line for revealing the incomplete

In this paper, for the first time, we study the formal verification of Bayesian mechanisms through strategic reasoning.
We rely on the framework of Probabilistic Strategy Logic
(PSL), which is well-suited for representing and verifying
multi-agent systems with incomplete information. We take
advantage of the recent results on the decidability of PSL
model checking under memoryless strategies, and reduce the
problem of formally verifying Bayesian mechanisms to PSL
model checking. We show how to encode Bayesian-Nash
equilibrium and economical properties, and illustrate our approach with different kinds of mechanisms.

Introduction
The design of mechanisms for aggregating preferences
while achieving a socially desirable outcome is a central
problem in Multi-Agent Systems (MAS). For example, an
auction is a mechanism that combines bids into a choice of
allocation and payments (Klemperer 1999). In recent years,
there has been a growing effort at designing novel mechanisms for a wide variety of problems and settings, including
peer selection (Aziz et al. 2019), hedonic coalition formation games (Bilò et al. 2018; Flammini, Kodric, and Varricchio 2022), sponsored search auctions (Gatti et al. 2015),
and diffusion auctions (Li et al. 2022). The advantages of
automating the development and/or analysis of mechanisms
are numerous (Okada, Todo, and Yokoo 2019), as these tasks
require deep knowledge of mathematics and game theory.
Furthermore, the automated approach can yield better mechanisms (in terms of the designing criteria) because it capitalizes on the particulars of the setting, e.g. the probabilistic
(or other) information that the designer has about the agents’
preferences (Sandholm 2003).
Automated Mechanism Design (AMD) was introduced
by Conitzer and Sandholm (2002). In this field, designing
mechanisms is usually modelled as a computational optimization problem. Different techniques may be used such
as neural networks (Shen, Tang, and Zuo 2019), statistical
machine learning (Narasimhan, Agarwal, and Parkes 2016),
black-box optimization algorithms (Vorobeychik, Reeves,
and Wellman 2007), as well as evolutionary search methods (Niu et al. 2012). All these techniques treat AMD by
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11621

