The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Efficient Exploration in Resource-Restricted Reinforcement Learning
Zhihai Wang1 * , Taoxing Pan1 * , Qi Zhou1 , Jie Wang1,2†
1

CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{zhwangx, tx1997,zhouqida}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

make reasonable usage of resources. In this paper, we take
the first step towards studying RL with resources that are
non-replenishable in each episode, which can be extremely
challenging and is very common in the real world. Typical
applications include robotic control with non-replenishable
energy (Kormushev et al. 2011; Kormushev, Calinon, and
Caldwell 2013) and video games with non-replenishable ingame items (Kempka et al. 2016; Resnick et al. 2018).
This paper begins by evaluating several popular RL algorithms, including proximal policy optimization (PPO)
(Schulman et al. 2017) and soft actor critic (SAC) (Haarnoja
et al. 2018), in various tasks with non-replenishable resources. We find these algorithms struggle to explore the
environments efficiently and suffer from poor sample efficiency. Moreover, we empirically show that the surprisebased exploration method (Achiam and Sastry 2017), one
of the state-of-the-art advanced exploration strategies, still
suffers from poor sample efficiency. Even worse, we observe that some of these algorithms struggle to perform
better than random agents in these tasks. We further perform an in-depth analysis of this challenge, and find that
the exploration is severely restricted by the resources. As
the available actions depend on the remaining resources
and these algorithms tend to exhaust resources rapidly, the
subsequent resource-consuming exploration is severely restricted. However, resource-consuming actions are usually
significant for achieving high rewards, such as consuming
consumable items in video games. Therefore, these algorithms suffer from inefficient exploration. (See Section 5)
To address this challenge, we first formalize the aforementioned problems as a resource-restricted reinforcement
learning (R3L), where the available actions largely depend
on the remaining resources. Specifically, we augment the
Markov Decision Process (Sutton and Barto 2018) with
resource-related information that is easily accessible in
many real-world tasks, including a key map from a state to
its remaining resources. We then propose a novel resourceaware exploration bonus (RAEB) that significantly improves the exploration efficiency by making reasonable usage of resources. Based on the observation that the accessible state set of a given state—which the agent can possibly reach from the given state—largely depends on the
remaining resources of the given state and large accessible state sets are essential for efficient exploration in these

In many real-world applications of reinforcement learning
(RL), performing actions requires consuming certain types of
resources that are non-replenishable in each episode. Typical applications include robotic control with limited energy
and video games with consumable items. In tasks with nonreplenishable resources, we observe that popular RL methods such as soft actor critic suffer from poor sample efficiency. The major reason is that, they tend to exhaust resources fast and thus the subsequent exploration is severely
restricted due to the absence of resources. To address this
challenge, we first formalize the aforementioned problem as
a resource-restricted reinforcement learning, and then propose a novel resource-aware exploration bonus (RAEB) to
make reasonable usage of resources. An appealing feature
of RAEB is that, it can significantly reduce unnecessary
resource-consuming trials while effectively encouraging the
agent to explore unvisited states. Experiments demonstrate
that the proposed RAEB significantly outperforms state-ofthe-art exploration strategies in resource-restricted reinforcement learning environments, improving the sample efficiency
by up to an order of magnitude.

1

Introduction

Performing actions requires consuming certain types of resources in many real-world decision-making tasks (Kormushev et al. 2011; Kempka et al. 2016; Bhatia, Varakantham,
and Kumar 2019; Cui et al. 2020). For example, the availability of the action “jump” depends on the remaining energy in robotic control (Grizzle et al. 2014). Another example is that the availability of a specific skill depends on
a certain type of in-game items in video games (Vinyals
et al. 2019). Therefore, making reasonable usage of resources is one of the keys to success in decision-making
tasks with limited resources. (Bhatia, Varakantham, and Kumar 2019). In recent years, reinforcement learning (RL) has
achieved success in decision-making tasks from games to
robotic control in simulators (Schulman et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2017). However, RL with limited resources has
not been well studied, and RL methods can struggle to
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10279

