The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

See Your Emotion from Gait Using Unlabeled Skeleton Data
Haifeng Lu1 , Xiping Hu1,2∗ , Bin Hu1,2∗
1

School of Information Science and Engineering, Lanzhou University
2
School of Medical Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
luhf18@lzu.edu.cn, huxp@bit.edu.cn, bh@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper focuses on contrastive learning for gait-based
emotion recognition. The existing contrastive learning approaches are rarely suitable for learning skeleton-based gait
representations, which suffer from limited gait diversity and
inconsistent semantics. In this paper, we propose a Crosscoordinate contrastive learning framework utilizing Ambiguity samples for self-supervised Gait-based Emotion representation (CAGE). First, we propose ambiguity transform
to push positive samples into ambiguous semantic space. By
learning similarities between ambiguity samples and positive
samples, our model can learn higher-level semantics of the
gait sequences and maintain semantic diversity. Second, to
encourage learning the semantic invariance, we uniquely propose cross-coordinate contrastive learning between the Cartesian coordinate and the Spherical coordinate, which brings
rich supervisory signals to learn the intrinsic semantic consistency information. Exhaustive experiments show that CAGE
improves existing self-supervised methods by 5%–10% accuracy, and it achieves comparable or even superior performance to supervised methods.

Hypersphere

Gait Sequences

Contrastive
Learning

Downstream
Task

Figure 1: We propose a self-supervised emotion recognition framework that named CAGE, which maps the gait sequences into features residing on a hypersphere space for
different downstream tasks.

human pose estimation algorithms and depth sensors, 3D
skeleton has gradually become a significant feature representation to study gait (Cao et al. 2017; Zhang 2012). Therefore, we focus on using skeleton-based gait for emotion perception.
Most existing skeleton-based methods rely on handcrafted features (Li et al. 2016; Crenn et al. 2016; Daoudi
et al. 2017). Moreover, deep learning approaches like STEP
(Bhattacharya et al. 2020a), ProxEmo (Narayanan et al.
2020), TEW (Bhattacharya et al. 2020b), and TNTC (Hu
et al. 2022), are also important method for learning gait
representations. However, all of them rely on supervised
paradigms, in which a significant number of annotations for
gait sequences are indispensable. In particular, annotating
dataset requires tremendous human workforce, which is expensive and time-consuming. Furthermore, high inter-class
similarity between emotions usually leads to an inconsistent
annotating or even mislabeling (Bhattacharya et al. 2020a;
Wang et al. 2006). Under this circumstance, how to devise an
effective method, which can learn gait representations from
unlabeled skeleton data, is a significant task.
Motivation. Recently, self-supervised learning (SSL) has
been proved effective in the field of computer vision. However, the existing contrastive learning methods usually rely

Introduction
Human emotion recognition is a vital task in the field of
affective computing. Most prior works detect human emotion through physiological signals such as electroencephalogram (EEG), electrocardiography (ECG) (Jia et al. 2021),
and non-physiological signals such as facial expressions,
tone of voice, walking styles, etc. (Ringeval et al. 2019;
Sun, Su, and Fan 2022). However, fast, effective, and reliable emotion recognition is a challenge, especially when
self-reported emotions are unreliable or people are disturbed
by environmental factors (Fernández-Dols and Ruiz-Belda
1995; Quigley, Lindquist, and Barrett 2014).
Since gait can be observed at a distance and without cooperative subjects during acquisition, it is an emerging research topic in these years (Lu et al. 2022). On the one hand,
existing physiological and psychological studies point out
that there is internal link between gait and emotions (Kleinsmith and Bianchi-Berthouze 2012; Deligianni, Guo, and
Yang 2019). On the other hand, due to the development of
∗

Corresponding authors
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1826

