The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Unbiased Heterogeneous Scene Graph Generation with Relation-Aware
Message Passing Neural Network
Kanghoon Yoon1 * , Kibum Kim1 * , Jinyoung Moon3,4 , Chanyoung Park1,2†
1

Dept. of Industrial and Systems Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
2
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
3
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, 218 Gajeong-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
4
ETRI School, University of Science and Technology, 218 Gajeong-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
ykhoon08@kaist.ac.kr, kb.kim@kaist.ac.kr, jymoon@etri.re.kr, cy.park@kaist.ac.kr
Abstract

DMP
shoe

Recent scene graph generation (SGG) frameworks have focused on learning complex relationships among multiple objects in an image. Thanks to the nature of the message passing neural network (MPNN) that models high-order interactions between objects and their neighboring objects, they are
dominant representation learning modules for SGG. However, existing MPNN-based frameworks assume the scene
graph as a homogeneous graph, which restricts the contextawareness of visual relations between objects. That is, they
overlook the fact that the relations tend to be highly dependent on the objects with which the relations are associated. In this paper, we propose an unbiased heterogeneous
scene graph generation (HetSGG) framework that captures
relation-aware context using message passing neural networks. We devise a novel message passing layer, called
relation-aware message passing neural network (RMP), that
aggregates the contextual information of an image considering the predicate type between objects. Our extensive evaluations demonstrate that HetSGG outperforms state-of-the-art
methods, especially outperforming on tail predicate classes.
The source code for HetSGG is available at https://github.
com/KanghoonYoon/hetsgg-torch.

“wearing”

“playing”

elephant

man

AMP
kid
Entity

woman

kid
holding

elephant

riding ?

AH pred. cond. Dist.

elephant

man

Product

riding

watching

wearing
watching

man

Animal
Human

shoe

kid

High confidence
Low confidence

shoe

SGG
Model

RMP
shoe
kid

…

1

kid

Overall pred. Dist.

HH pred. cond. Dist.

elephant

rail
man

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a): Scene graph represented as a heterogeneous graph. (b) Comparisons of various MPNNs. (c) Overall predicate distribution and predicate distributions conditioned on certain predicate types.

An effective scene graph representation should include
the contextual information of an image. For intuitively
understanding what it means by contextual information,
consider the triplet ⟨kid, riding, elephant⟩ in Figure 1(a).
Understanding the context around this triplet, such as “kid
holding rail” and “woman watching elephant”, would be
helpful for predicting the riding predicate between kid and
elephant, compared with the case when kid and elephant
are considered independently. Hence, recent studies for
SGG mainly focus on capturing the contextual information
based on message passing neural networks (MPNNs).
Thanks to the nature of the MPNNs that model high-order
interactions between objects and their neighboring objects,
they can naturally capture the visual context of an object
from nearby objects that exist together. Specifically, Graph
R-CNN (Yang et al. 2018) designs an MPNN to learn filtered contextual information from neighbors by identifying
important objects and relations. Moreover, direction-aware
message passing neural network (DMP) (Lin et al. 2020)
considers the direction to which the messages are propagated between two objects, and adaptive message passing
neural network (AMP) (Li et al. 2021) prevents irrelevant
proposal pairs from interacting with each other based on

Introduction

Scene graph generation (SGG) is a fundamental visual understanding task, which aims to identify objects from an image and detect their relations (i.e., predicate1 ), which can
be represented in a triplet format: ⟨subject, predicate, object⟩. A compact structural scene representation is beneficial to various image applications such as visual question answering (Ghosh et al. 2019; Zhang, Chao, and Xuan
2019), image captioning (Yang et al. 2019), and image retrieval (Schroeder and Tripathi 2020; Ramnath et al. 2019).
Hence, recent years have seen significant progress in developing methods for SGG.
However, recent SGG methods usually have shown
unsatisfactory performance due to the difficulty of learning
complex relationships among multiple objects in an image.
* These authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We use “relation” and “predicate” interchangeably.

3285

