The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Progress and Limitations of Deep Networks to Recognize Objects in Unusual Poses
Amro Abbas1 , Stéphane Deny2
1

The African Institute For Mathematical Sciences
2
Aalto University
afagiri@aimsammi.org, stephane.deny@aalto.fi

Abstract

affect the texture of objects, but do not change the global
structure of the image. [Taori et al. 2020] shows that robustness to these kinds of distortions does not transfer entirely to
natural shifts and does not represent a comprehensive measure of the network’s robustness.
Pose transformations (e.g., a bus seen upside-down)
represent an interesting case-study for networks’ robustness,
as (1) unlike simple distortions, these transformations
affect the global structure of the image, and (2) it would
be technically challenging to augment an image dataset
at scale with this type of 3D transformations. In a rare
study of its kind, [Alcorn et al. 2019] show that two
deep networks, Inception-V3 [Szegedy et al. 2016] and
ResNet50 [He et al. 2016], drastically fail to recognize objects in unusual poses, incorrectly classifying
most of the poses explored. Later, [Madan et al. 2021]
also reveal a brittleness of ResNet18 and CLIP [Radford
et al. 2021] to small changes in pose, in an adversarial setting.

Deep networks should be robust to rare events if they are to be
successfully deployed in high-stakes real-world applications.
Here we study the capability of deep networks to recognize objects in unusual poses. We create a synthetic dataset of images
of objects in unusual orientations, and evaluate the robustness
of a collection of 38 recent and competitive deep networks for
image classification. We show that classifying these images
is still a challenge for all networks tested, with an average
accuracy drop of 29.5% compared to when the objects are presented upright. This brittleness is largely unaffected by various
design choices, such as training losses, architectures, dataset
modalities, and data-augmentation schemes. However, networks trained on very large datasets substantially outperform
others, with the best network tested—Noisy Student trained
on JFT-300M—showing a relatively small accuracy drop of
only 14.5% on unusual poses. Nevertheless, a visual inspection of the failures of Noisy Student reveals a remaining gap
in robustness with humans. Furthermore, combining multiple
object transformations—3D-rotations and scaling—further degrades the performance of all networks. Our results provide
another measurement of the robustness of deep networks to
consider when using them in the real world. Code and datasets
are available at https://github.com/amro-kamal/ObjectPose.

1

In this study, we revisit the question of networks’ robustness to unusual poses using a diverse set of the latest and best
publicly available networks for image classification. We test
38 networks with a variety of different architectures, sizes,
training datasets, and training objectives on a custom dataset
of images of objects in unusual poses. Our contributions are:

Introduction

• We observe that, on unusual poses, the networks of our
collection suffer from a 14.5% to 45.5% accuracy drop
compared to usual poses. A visual inspection of networks’
failures reveal that, even for the best models, a robustness
gap remains with the human visual system.
• We provide a detailed study of the effect of in-(image)plane vs. out-of-plane object rotations, backgroundforeground congruency, and rotation angle on performance. We show that the best networks rely on a different strategy than weaker networks when it comes to
incorporating information from the background.
• By combining multiple unusual transformations—such
as object rotations and scaling—we show that such combinations lead to further performance degradation for all
networks, as predicted by a combinatorial model of error.
• In an effort to go beyond synthetic datasets, we test the
networks on images from the Common Objects in 3D
Dataset (CO3D), a dataset of objects seen in various poses,

In real-world applications, deep networks are often deployed
and used to detect harder examples than those seen in the
development test set. This has led researchers to investigate the performance of networks using more challenging
test examples, in the so-called out-of-distribution (OOD)
regime [Hendrycks et al. 2021b, Hendrycks and Dietterich
2019, Hendrycks et al. 2021a, Wang et al. 2019, Dodge and
Karam 2017, Recht et al. 2019a, Shankar et al. 2021, Geirhos
et al. 2018, 2021]. Many of the previous studies on out-ofdistribution generalization have focused on measuring the
generalization capabilities of networks to distorted images.
Notably, [Geirhos et al. 2021] show that the newest generation of very large deep networks is closing the humanmachine robustness gap on 17 different out-of-distribution
image distortion types. However, most of the transformations
used to generate these datasets are local distortions that only
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

160

