The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MulGT: Multi-Task Graph-Transformer with Task-Aware Knowledge Injection
and Domain Knowledge-Driven Pooling for Whole Slide Image Analysis
Weiqin Zhao1 , Shujun Wang2 , Maximus Yeung1 , Tianye Niu3 , Lequan Yu1,*
1

The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
3
Shenzhen Bay Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
wqzhao98@connect.hku.hk, sw991@cam.ac.uk, mcfyeung@pathology.hku.hk, niuty@szbl.ac.cn, lqyu@hku.hk
Abstract

Pathologist
Task 1

Whole slide image (WSI) has been widely used to assist automated diagnosis under the deep learning fields. However,
most previous works only discuss the SINGLE task setting
which is not aligned with real clinical setting, where pathologists often conduct multiple diagnosis tasks simultaneously.
Also, it is commonly recognized that the multi-task learning
paradigm can improve learning efficiency by exploiting commonalities and differences across multiple tasks. To this end,
we present a novel multi-task framework (i.e., MulGT) for
WSI analysis by the specially designed Graph-Transformer
equipped with Task-aware Knowledge Injection and Domain
Knowledge-driven Graph Pooling modules. Basically, with
the Graph Neural Network and Transformer as the building commons, our framework is able to learn task-agnostic
low-level local information as well as task-specific high-level
global representation. Considering that different tasks in WSI
analysis depend on different features and properties, we also
design a novel Task-aware Knowledge Injection module to
transfer the task-shared graph embedding into task-specific
feature spaces to learn more accurate representation for different tasks. Further, we elaborately design a novel Domain
Knowledge-driven Graph Pooling module for each task to
improve both the accuracy and robustness of different tasks
by leveraging different diagnosis patterns of multiple tasks.
We evaluated our method on two public WSI datasets from
TCGA projects, i.e., esophageal carcinoma and kidney carcinoma. Experimental results show that our method outperforms single-task counterparts and the state-of-the-art methods on both tumor typing and staging tasks.

Tumor Type Diagnosis
Tissue

Scanner
Task 2
Tumor Stage Diagnosis
Task 3

Whole Slide Image

Proposed
MulGT
framework

Tumor Grade Diagnosis

…

Figure 1: Illustration of the multi-task learning setting for
WSI analysis.
tomate computational WSI inspection (Wang et al. 2019b,a;
Coudray et al. 2018).
Due to the powerful expressivity of neural networks,
many deep learning-based methods have been proposed
for WSI analysis recently. However, WSIs usually have a
huge size (e.g., 150, 000 × 150, 000), and it will be expensive to obtain detailed pixel-level annotations. To overcome
such challenges, multiple instance learning (MIL) (Maron
and Lozano-Pérez 1998) becomes a promising direction
to analyze WSI from slide-level annotations. Specifically,
MIL-based approaches first extract the feature embeddings
of image tiles (i.e. patches) with a Convolution Network
(CNN) (He et al. 2016; Riasatian et al. 2021) or Vision Transformer Network (ViT) (Chen et al. 2022). Then,
the feature embeddings are fed into an aggregation network to produce the slide-level predictions. Various network architectures have been employed to aggregate the information, including Graph Neural Network (GNN) (Hou
et al. 2022; Guan et al. 2022), Transformer network (Chen
et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022), and etc. Currently, GraphTransformer architecture has also been introduced into WSI
analysis (Zheng et al. 2021) due to its nature to extract both
low-level local features and high-level global information
from the graphs (i.e.WSIs).
However, most of the above works were limited to the
setting with a single task, while pathologists often conducts more than one diagnosis results for one particular WSI

Introduction
Histopathology analysis is the gold standard method for
cancer diagnosis and prognosis. Experienced pathologists
can provide accurate analysis of biopsy specimens based
on whole slide image (WSI), i.e., the high-resolution digitalization of the entire histology slide (Khened et al. 2021;
Pataki et al. 2022). However, analyzing the WSIs is timeconsuming and laborious due to the massive size of the WSIs
and the complex colors and patterns of different tissue structures. To elevate the precision and speed of the examination, extensive research tools have been developed for au* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3606

