The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

L O N E S AMPLER : Graph Node Embeddings by Coordinated Local Neighborhood
Sampling
Konstantin Kutzkov
Teva Pharmaceuticals
kutzkov@gmail.com

Abstract
Local graph neighborhood sampling is a fundamental computational problem that is at the heart of algorithms for node
representation learning. Several works have presented algorithms for learning discrete node embeddings where graph
nodes are represented by discrete features such as attributes
of neighborhood nodes. Discrete embeddings offer several
advantages compared to continuous word2vec-like node embeddings: ease of computation, scalability, and interpretability. We present L O N E S AMPLER , a suite of algorithms for
generating discrete node embeddings by Local Neighborhood
Sampling, and address two shortcomings of previous work.
First, our algorithms have rigorously understood theoretical
properties. Second, we show how to generate approximate explicit vector maps that avoid the expensive computation of a
Gram matrix for the training of a kernel model. Experiments
on benchmark datasets confirm the theoretical findings and
demonstrate the advantages of the proposed methods.

u1

v1

u2

v2

u3

v3

u4

v4

Figure 1: Is u2 or u4 more similar to u3 ?

As an alternative, researchers proposed to use coordinated
node sampling for training discrete node embeddings (Wu
et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2019). In this setting, each sample
is an independent estimator of the similarity between nodes.
(There are different notions of node similarity but most reflect how easy it is to reach one node from another.) Thus,
sampled nodes themselves can be coordinates of the embedding vectors. We can then compare two node embeddings
by their Hamming distance. There are several advantages
of discrete embeddings over continuous embeddings. First,
we avoid the need to train a (possibly slow) word2vec-like
model. Second, the samples are the original graph nodes and
contain all meta-information provided in the original input,
be it personal data of users of a social network or the weather
conditions at railway stations. By sampling, all this information is preserved and this can lead to the design of interpretable algorithms. And finally, the algorithms are truly
local and can deal with massive or distributed graphs if only
access to the local neighborhood of each node is possible.
The ultimate goal for node embeddings is to represent the
structural roles of nodes by fixed size vectors which reflect
the similarity between nodes. However, there are different
notions of node similarity. As an example, consider the toy
graph in Figure 1. It seems that u4 is similar to u3 because
they are part of the same local clique. But on the the other
hand one can argue that u1 is more similar to u3 than u4
because they are all directly connected to a hub node like v2 .
The goal of the present work is to design scalable embedding
algorithms that can handle different similarity objectives and
have rigorously understood properties.

Introduction
Graphs are ubiquitous representation for structured data.
They model naturally occurring relations between objects
and, in a sense, generalize sequential data to more complex dependencies. Many algorithms originally designed for
learning from sequential data are thus generalized to learning from graphs. Learning continuous vector representations
of graph nodes, or node embeddings, have become an integral part of the graph learning toolbox, with applications
ranging from link prediction (Grover and Leskovec 2016)
to graph compression (Ahmed et al. 2017). The first algorithm (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014) for learning
node embeddings generates random walks, starting from
each node in the graph, and then feeds the sequences of visited nodes into a word embedding learning algorithm such as
word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013). The approach was extended
to a more general setting where random walks can consider
different properties of the local neighborhood (Grover and
Leskovec 2016; Tang et al. 2015; Tsitsulin et al. 2018). An
alternative method for training continuous node embeddings
is based on matrix factorization of (powers of) the graph adjacency matrix.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8413

