The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ODE-RSSM: Learning Stochastic Recurrent State Space Model from
Irregularly Sampled Data
Zhaolin Yuan 1 , Xiaojuan Ban 1,2,3 * , Zixuan Zhang 1 , Xiaorui Li 1 , Hong-Ning Dai 4
1

School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Beijing Key Laboratory of Knowledge Engineering for Materials Science,
University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China.
2
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Materials Genome Engineering,
University of Science and Technology Beijing.
3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Bionic Unmanned Systems, Ministry of Education,
University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China
4
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China
18810919727@163.com, banxj@ustb.edu.cn, zhangzixuan1120@163.com, lixiaorui@xs.ustb.edu.cn, hndai@ieee.org
Abstract

For the complicated input-output systems with nonlinearity
and stochasticity, Deep State Space Models (SSMs) are effective for identifying systems in the latent state space, which
are of great significance for representation, forecasting, and
planning in online scenarios. However, most SSMs are designed for discrete-time sequences and inapplicable when the
observations are irregular in time. To solve the problem, we
propose a novel continuous-time SSM named Ordinary Differential Equation Recurrent State Space Model (ODE-RSSM).
ODE-RSSM incorporates an ordinary differential equation
(ODE) network (ODE-Net) to model the continuous-time evolution of latent states between adjacent time points. Inspired
from the equivalent linear transformation on integration limits,
we propose an efficient reparameterization method for solving batched ODEs with non-uniform time spans in parallel
for efficiently training the ODE-RSSM with irregularly sampled sequences. We also conduct extensive experiments to
evaluate the proposed ODE-RSSM and the baselines on three
input-output datasets, one of which is a rollout of a private
industrial dataset with strong long-term delay and stochasticity. The results demonstrate that the ODE-RSSM achieves
better performance than other baselines in open loop prediction even if the time spans of predicted points are uneven and
the distribution of length is changeable. Code is availiable at
https://github.com/yuanzhaolin/ODE-RSSM.

Introduction
Deep learning-based dynamical system modeling, also named
deep system identification, exploits the advantages of deep
neural networks (DNN) to identify the dynamics of black-box
systems from offline input-output data. The learned model
is generally utilized for prediction, model prediction control
and model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) (Moerland,
Broekens, and Jonker 2020).
However, there are several common challenges in modeling real complicated systems. First, messy or irregular
* *Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11060

sampling data is ubiquitous in practical industrial applications (Kidger 2021). Most existing neural network-based
system identification models are discrete-time models depending on the assumption of uniform sampling intervals.
These models are restricted in real-time industrial system
with irregularly sampling time points, especially in online
scenarios where offline interpolations are incapable. Second,
although some existing continuous-time system identification models, such as Time-Aware Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) (Demeester 2020), SNODE (Quaglino et al. 2020;
Yildiz, Heinonen, and Lähdesmäki 2021) have tackled the
learning problem with irregularly sampled input-output data,
most of them only learn the system in the deterministic state
space. Deterministic models are not only inconvenient for
Monte-Carlo sampling, but are also incapable of learning
the systems that suffer from high stochasticity. Finally, the
identification model should be applicable to online mode
when handling continuous streaming data and predicting
the outputs with arbitrary prediction range (Liu et al. 2020).
This requirement further restricts the employment of endto-end encoder-decoder models, such as Latent ODE and
ODE2VAE (Rubanova, Chen, and Duvenaud 2019; Yildiz,
Heinonen, and Lähdesmäki 2019), while prefers choosing
the models with recurrent state updating.
Although previous studies have partially solved some of
the above issues, none of existing works can simultaneously
address all of them, to the best of our knowledge. In this
paper, we propose the Ordinary Differential Equation Recurrent State Space Model (ODE-RSSM), which is a stochastic
transition model defined in continuous-time (CT) domain.
The proposed ODE-RSSM incorporates an ODE-Net in the
state evolution to learn the dynamical systems with stochasticity from irregularly sampled data. Under the setting of
irregularly sampling, in order to support parallel prediction
for accelerating the training of ODE-RSSM, a reparameterization method is proposed for solving the batched ODE-Nets
with non-uniform time spans in parallel.
In experiments, we use three black-box system identification datasets to evaluate the performance of the proposed
model in multi-step open-loop prediction (Monte Carlo roll-

