The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Directed Acyclic Graph Structure Learning from Dynamic Graphs
1

1

1,2

1,2 *

Shaohua Fan , Shuyang Zhang , Xiao Wang , Chuan Shi
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
{fanshaohua, sonyazhang, xiaowang, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Estimating the structure of directed acyclic graphs (DAGs)
of features (variables) plays a vital role in revealing the latent data generation process and providing causal insights in
various applications. Although there have been many studies
on structure learning with various types of data, the structure learning on the dynamic graph has not been explored
yet, and thus we study the learning problem of node feature
generation mechanism on such ubiquitous dynamic graph data.
In a dynamic graph, we propose to simultaneously estimate
contemporaneous relationships and time-lagged interaction
relationships between the node features. These two kinds of relationships form a DAG, which could effectively characterize
the feature generation process in a concise way. To learn such
a DAG, we cast the learning problem as a continuous scorebased optimization problem, which consists of a differentiable
score function to measure the validity of the learned DAGs and
a smooth acyclicity constraint to ensure the acyclicity of the
learned DAGs. These two components are translated into an
unconstraint augmented Lagrangian objective which could be
minimized by mature continuous optimization techniques. The
resulting algorithm, named GraphNOTEARS, outperforms
baselines on simulated data across a wide range of settings
that may encounter in real-world applications. We also apply
the proposed approach on two dynamic graphs constructed
from the real-world Yelp dataset, demonstrating our method
could learn the connections between node features, which
conforms with the domain knowledge.

Type

Seafood

Type

Fastfood

Type

?

Duration

1.5h

Duration

0.5h

Duration

2h

Seafood

Bob

Bob

Type

Seafood

Duration

2h

Friend relationship
Self feature influence
Neighbor feature influence

Lisa

Mary
Time t-1

Time t

Figure 1: A toy example of feature generation process on a
dynamic graph.
is to resort to DAG structure learning, namely, learning the
edges in a graphical model from the observed data.
Existing approaches for DAG learning mostly focus on
dealing with tabular data, i.e., each sample is independently
drawn from the same distribution (IID data) (Spirtes et al.
2000; Neuberg 2003; Spirtes, Meek, and Richardson 1995;
Geiger and Heckerman 1994; Heckerman, Geiger, and Chickering 1995). Nevertheless, in real-world scenarios, there usually exists associations between samples, so the generation
of features of certain samples may be influenced by the other
samples through the links between samples. Several pioneer works have proposed constraint-based methods to learn
DAGs from static (i.e., equilibrium) graph data (Maier et al.
2010; Lee and Honavar 2016; Maier et al. 2013). They usually test the conditional independencies of the attributes of
entities in graph data to form DAGs among those variables.
However, many real-world scenarios exhibit temporal information in graph data. For example, as shown in Fig. 1,
Bob’s friends, Lisa and Mary, went to eat seafood and posted
recommendations and the duration of the meal on social media at timestamp t − 1. Bob viewed this information. When
he has enough available time at timestamp t, he will choose
to eat seafood with high probability. Hence, the generation
of the value of Bob’s meal type at timestamp t will be both
determined by the current available time and recommendation from social network at the previous timestamp. Another
example is that the risk of ones to be infected by COVID-19
may be both determined by current protection status (e.g.,

Introduction
A Bayesian network (BN) is a probabilistic graphical model
that represents a set of variables and their conditional dependencies. It has been widely used in machine learning applications (Pearl 1997; Ott, Imoto, and Miyano 2003; Friedman,
Geiger, and Goldszmidt 1997). The structure of a BN takes
the form of a directed acyclic graph (DAG) and provides a
convenient and interpretable output which is needed in today’s high-stake applications of artificial intelligence, such as
healthcare, finance and autonomous driving. The edges in a
DAG represent the directed generation relationships between
variables (e.g., features) in a system. When these edges are
not known based on prior knowledge, one possible solution
*

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7512

