The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Representations of Bi-level Knowledge Graphs for
Reasoning beyond Link Prediction
Chanyoung Chung, Joyce Jiyoung Whang*
School of Computing, KAIST
{chanyoung.chung, jjwhang}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
ImpliesProfession

Knowledge graphs represent known facts using triplets.
While existing knowledge graph embedding methods only
consider the connections between entities, we propose
considering the relationships between triplets. For example, let us consider two triplets T1 and T2 where T1 is
(Academy Awards, Nominates, Avatar) and T2 is (Avatar,
Wins, Academy Awards). Given these two base-level triplets,
we see that T1 is a prerequisite for T2 . In this paper, we define a higher-level triplet to represent a relationship between
triplets, e.g., ⟨T1 , PrerequisiteFor, T2 ⟩ where PrerequisiteFor is a higher-level relation. We define a bi-level knowledge graph that consists of the base-level and the higher-level
triplets. We also propose a data augmentation strategy based
on the random walks on the bi-level knowledge graph to augment plausible triplets. Our model called BiVE learns embeddings by taking into account the structures of the base-level
and the higher-level triplets, with additional consideration of
the augmented triplets. We propose two new tasks: triplet prediction and conditional link prediction. Given a triplet T1 and
a higher-level relation, the triplet prediction predicts a triplet
that is likely to be connected to T1 by the higher-level relation, e.g., ⟨T1 , PrerequisiteFor, ?⟩. The conditional link prediction predicts a missing entity in a triplet conditioned on another triplet, e.g., ⟨T1 , PrerequisiteFor, (Avatar, Wins, ?)⟩. Experimental results show that BiVE significantly outperforms
all other methods in the two new tasks and the typical baselevel link prediction in real-world bi-level knowledge graphs.

George Clooney,
IsA,
Actor

George Clooney,
ActsIn,
Oceans Eleven

SucceededBy
David Beckham,
HasNationality,
England

PrerequisiteFor

Barack Obama,
HoldsPosition,
President

WorksFor

David Beckham,
PlaysFor,
England National Team

Actor
England
National
Team
England

George W. Bush,
HoldsPosition,
President

Joe Biden,
HoldsPosition,
Vice President

Oceans
Eleven

Columbia
University

George
Clooney

Barack
Obama

David
Beckham

Joe
Biden

George
W. Bush

President
Vice
President

Figure 1: Example of a bi-level knowledge graph consisting
of base-level and higher-level triplets in the FBHE dataset.
The relation labels are omitted in the base-level triplets.

learning (Niu et al. 2020), these existing approaches only
enable expanding the entity-level connections.
Each triplet in a knowledge graph can have a relationship with another triplet. For example, let us consider two
base-level triplets T1 and T2 where T1 is (Joe Biden, HoldsPosition, Vice President) and T2 is (Barack Obama, HoldsPosition, President). To represent the fact that Joe Biden
was a vice president when Barack Obama was a president,
we define a higher-level triplet ⟨T1 , WorksFor, T2 ⟩ where
WorksFor is a higher-level relation. In this paper, we define
a bi-level knowledge graph that includes both the base-level
and the higher-level triplets, where the base-level triplets
correspond to the original triplets representing the relationships between entities, while the higher-level triplets represent the relationships between the base-level triplets using the higher-level relations. Based on well-known knowledge graphs, FB15K237 (Toutanova and Chen 2015) and
DB15K (Garcia-Duran and Niepert 2018), we create three
real-world bi-level knowledge graphs named FBH , FBHE ,
and DBHE . Figure 1 shows a subgraph of a bi-level knowl-

Introduction
A knowledge graph represents the relationships between entities using triplets consisting of a head entity, a relation, and
a tail entity. Knowledge graph embedding aims to represent
the entities and relations as a set of embedding vectors that
can be utilized in many modern AI applications (Ji et al.
2022; Kwak et al. 2022). Most existing knowledge graph
embedding methods generate the embedding vectors by focusing solely on how the entities are connected by the relations (Wang et al. 2017; Chung and Whang 2021; Chami
et al. 2020). Even though some methods predict missing
connections between the entities by rule mining (Meilicke
et al. 2019; Sadeghian et al. 2018) or rule-and-path-based
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4208

