The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

XClusters: Explainability-First Clustering
Hyunseung Hwang, Steven Euijong Whang
KAIST
{aguno, swhang}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

Makarychev and Shan 2021; Gamlath et al. 2021; Bandyapadhyay et al. 2022). We consider smaller decision trees
(i.e., they have fewer nodes) to be more explainable as they
are easier to read (Lipton 2018). The features that are used
for clustering are not necessarily the same as the ones for
training the decision tree as in our motivating example. Our
goal is to perform any clustering while ensuring that the decision tree trained on the clusters is as small as possible.
There is a natural tradeoff between the cluster distortion and
explainability, which we attempt to balance by solving an
optimization problem. We call our method XClusters as it
explicitly optimizes for explainable clusters.
We note that most explainable clustering approaches assume a fixed reference clustering where the clustering is
performed before being explained (Moshkovitz et al. 2020;
Laber and Murtinho 2021; Makarychev and Shan 2021;
Gamlath et al. 2021). Hence, the goal is to minimize the error of the decision tree that classifies examples to clusters.
Even for a recent work that removes outliers from clusters
for better explainability (Bandyapadhyay et al. 2022), the
clustering is still done prior to outlier removal. In addition,
if the data does not have many outliers, then removing data
for the sake of explainability may result in incorrect clustering. While these approaches have the advantage of requiring
little work on the clustering side, we contend that explainability must be incorporated in the clustering itself rather
than using a single reference clustering for a truly explainable clustering. XClusters is thus an orthogonal approach to
existing explainable clustering techniques where it can plug
in any decision tree training within the novel holistic optimization of clustering and decision tree training.
Figure 1 illustrates how XClusters can trade off the cluster distortion for better explainability. Suppose that there
are time-series trends that need to be clustered, but also
explained using separate demographic features A, B, and
C. Suppose that clustering by trend and then training a decision tree on top of the clusters results in the top figure.
While most explainable clustering works take this approach,
XClusters can further explore scenarios where the clustering
also reflects demographic similarity and results in a smaller
decision tree (bottom left) or the number of clusters is increased to reduce their distortion (bottom right). Notice that
these two objectives affect each other and thus cannot be
achieved separately. For example, reducing the cluster dis-

We study the problem of explainability-first clustering where
explainability becomes a first-class citizen for clustering. Previous clustering approaches use decision trees for explanation, but only after the clustering is completed. In contrast,
our approach is to perform clustering and decision tree training holistically where the decision tree’s performance and
size also influence the clustering results. We assume the attributes for clustering and explaining are distinct, although
this is not necessary. We observe that our problem is a monotonic optimization where the objective function is a difference
of monotonic functions. We then propose an efficient branchand-bound algorithm for finding the best parameters that lead
to a balance of cluster distortion and decision tree explainability. Our experiments show that our method can improve
the explainability of any clustering that fits in our framework.

Introduction
Explainable AI is becoming critical as AI is widely used in
our everyday lives. A fundamental issue is that models are
usually optimized for accuracy before being explained. As
a result, significant effort is needed to make sense out of
trained models, especially for complex ones. Even so, the
explainability may not be sufficient to fully trust.
Instead, we contend that explainability must be a firstclass citizen instead and focus on unsupervised learning.
In particular, we propose the new problem explainable-first
clustering where clustering is performed while balancing accuracy and explainability. As a motivating example, consider a temporal relational database that shows credit card
spending trends for customers. In order to identify the key
trends, a straightforward approach is to cluster the trends
by Euclidean or Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) (Berndt
and Clifford 1994) distances. However, when explaining the
clusters, each cluster may be a collection of a wide range of
customer demographics, which makes it difficult to explain
concisely. Instead, we would also like the clusters to be easy
to describe as well.
More formally, we assume that the clustering is explained
using decision trees, a problem that has attracted significant interest lately under the name of explainable clustering (Moshkovitz et al. 2020; Laber and Murtinho 2021;
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7962

