The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Local Intrinsic Dimensional Entropy
Rohan Ghosh1 , Mehul Motani1,2
1
2

College of Design and Engineering, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore
N.1 Institute for Health, Institute for Digital Medicine (WisDM), Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore
rghosh92@gmail.com, motani@nus.edu.sg

Entropy for discrete sample spaces X (|X | < ∞) is essentially a fundamental property of the space. If one were
to map the elements of a finite X to another space X ′ using
a bijection, X ′ will have the same entropy as X . Therefore,
bijective transformations such as shift and scaling will yield
the same discrete entropy. Furthermore, the notion of surprise, which is often associated with entropy, aptly applies
to the case of finite X , as a larger spread of the distribution
essentially points to less certainty about the outcome of any
random draw from X . It is also worth noting that any deterministic function, which maps a finite X to another finite
space X ′ , can only reduce discrete entropy, as deterministic
maps should not increase the amount of information.
It is interesting to note then, that the counterpart of entropy measures for continuous spaces, such as differential
entropy and other variants (Renyi 1960; Shannon 1948),
don’t satisfy the same desirable properties as discrete entropy. First, we note that differential entropy can change
significantly in response to trivial bijective maps, such as
simply scaling the axes by a factor of α. In fact, for a
continuous random variable (RV) X ∈ Rd , we have that
h(αX) = h(X) + log |α|, where h(.) denotes the differential entropy. Second, we reason that the notion of distribution
spread cannot be used as a measure of surprise for continuous distributions. This is because if one were to simply scale
the axes by α, we can directly tune the spread of the distribution. By doing so, one would be able to yield arbitrarily
higher measures of surprise by simply processing the RV
X with a bijective map such as scaling. Note that we cannot do this for discrete entropy, as bijections such as scaling
and translation do not alter the discrete entropy of the space.
Third, similar to our previous arguments, we see that simply scaling the variable to have a much higher spread can
increase differential entropy arbitrarily, and thus processing
can increase differential entropy, contrary to how discrete
entropy behaves. Note that similar conclusions would follow even if one were to estimate the differential entropy after normalizing the variance of X, by replacing the scaling
transformation with any other scale-preserving distortion.
Towards Local Measures of Surprise: We next consider
how to quantify surprise for continuous spaces. We start by
noting that maximum entropy for a discrete set X is log |X |,
and thus depends on the cardinality of the set. In contrast, for
continuous spaces of d dimensions Rd , the cardinality is ac-

Abstract
Most entropy measures depend on the spread of the probability distribution over the sample space X , and the maximum entropy achievable scales proportionately with the sample space cardinality |X |. For a finite |X |, this yields robust
entropy measures which satisfy many important properties,
such as invariance to bijections, while the same is not true
for continuous spaces (where |X | = ∞). Furthermore, since
R and Rd (d ∈ Z+ ) have the same cardinality (from Cantor’s correspondence argument), cardinality-dependent entropy measures cannot encode the data dimensionality. In this
work, we question the role of cardinality and distribution
spread in defining entropy measures for continuous spaces,
which can undergo multiple rounds of transformations and
distortions, e.g., in neural networks. We find that the average
value of the local intrinsic dimension of a distribution, denoted as ID-Entropy, can serve as a robust entropy measure
for continuous spaces, while capturing the data dimensionality. We find that ID-Entropy satisfies many desirable properties and can be extended to conditional entropy, joint entropy
and mutual-information variants. ID-Entropy also yields new
information bottleneck principles and also links to causality.
In the context of deep learning, for feedforward architectures,
we show, theoretically and empirically, that the ID-Entropy
of a hidden layer directly controls the generalization gap for
both classifiers and auto-encoders, when the target function is
Lipschitz continuous. Our work primarily shows that, for continuous spaces, taking a structural rather than a statistical approach yields entropy measures which preserve intrinsic data
dimensionality, while being relevant for studying various architectures.

Introduction and Motivation
In this paper, we consider an alternative interpretation of
what outlines a good measure of information, particularly in
the context of sample spaces which can repeatedly undergo
continuous transformations of any kind. This applies to domains where data can undergo multiple rounds of processing and distortion, for example, in machine learning with
deep neural networks. Our objective here is to find whether
a robust information measure can be defined in this context,
which ideally satisfies the various properties exhibited by
discrete entropy, which is defined for discrete spaces.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7714

