The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

NLIP: Noise-Robust Language-Image Pre-training
Runhui Huang1 , Yanxin Long1 , Jianhua Han2 , Hang Xu2 ,
Xiwen Liang1 , Chunjing Xu2 , Xiaodan Liang1 *
1

Shenzhen campus of Sun Yat-sen University,
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{huangrh9, longyx9}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, hanjianhua4@huawei.com, chromexbjxh@gmail.com,
liangcici5@gmail.com, xuchunjing@huawei.com, xdliang328@gmail.com
Abstract

Noisy Probability
San Cristobal
Island

Large-scale cross-modal pre-training paradigms have recently shown ubiquitous success on a wide range of downstream tasks, e.g., zero-shot classification, retrieval and image captioning. However, their successes highly rely on the
scale and quality of web-crawled data that naturally contain
much incomplete and noisy information (e.g., wrong or irrelevant content). Existing works either design manual rules to
clean data or generate pseudo-targets as auxiliary signals for
reducing noise impact, which do not explicitly tackle both the
incorrect and incomplete challenges at the same time. In this
paper, to automatically mitigate the impact of noise by solely
mining over existing data, we propose a principled Noiserobust Language-Image Pre-training framework (NLIP) to
stabilize pre-training via two schemes: noise-harmonization
and noise-completion. First, in noise-harmonization scheme,
NLIP estimates the noise probability of each pair according to the memorization effect of cross-modal transformers, then adopts noise-adaptive regularization to harmonize
the cross-modal alignments with varying degrees. Second,
in noise-completion scheme, to enrich the missing object information of text, NLIP injects a concept-conditioned crossmodal decoder to obtain semantic-consistent synthetic captions to complete noisy ones, which uses the retrieved visual
concepts (i.e., objects’ names) for the corresponding image
to guide captioning generation. By collaboratively optimizing noise-harmonization and noise-completion schemes, our
NLIP can alleviate the common noise effects during imagetext pre-training in a more efficient way. Extensive experiments show the significant performance improvements of our
NLIP using only 26M data over existing pre-trained models (e.g., CLIP, BLIP) on 12 zero-shot classification datasets
(e.g., +8.6% over CLIP on average accuracy), MSCOCO image captioning (e.g., +1.9 over BLIP trained with 129M data
on CIDEr) and zero-shot image-text retrieval tasks.

Embedding
Space 0.99
0.99

0.1
0.1

Noisy

Baseball in
College
Clean
(a) Noise-harmonization

Concept
VLM Vocabulary
wine, wine tasting
Concept-conditioned
Cross-modal Decoder
a man and woman standing
next to each other holding wine
(b) Noise-completion

Figure 1: Illustration of two proposed schemes. (a) Noiseharmonization: NLIP estimates the noise probability of each
image-text pair and enforces the pairs with larger noise probability to have fewer similarities in embedding space. (b)
Noise-completion: NLIP generates enriched descriptions via
a concept-conditioned captioner by taking visual concepts
retrieved from a vocabulary as auxiliary inputs.

et al. 2021), image captioning (Wang et al. 2021) and textto-image generation (Patashnik et al. 2021), etc. Previous
works (Radford et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022a) show that the
downstream performance of VLMs highly relies on the scale
or the quality of pre-training image-caption pairs. However, considering the prohibitive expense of acquiring highquality annotated image-caption datasets (Lin et al. 2014),
current paradigms resort to collecting increasingly larger
sizes of unlabeled image-text datasets (Thomee et al. 2016;
Sharma et al. 2018), largely overlooking the prevalent noise
in the web. They thus lead to the heavier computation burden and make the pre-training process severely unstable due
to the negative impact of noise.
To leverage the advantages of both quality and scale, several attempts have been made to mitigate the negative impact
of noisy pairs. On the one hand, some filtering and postprocessing procedures (Sharma et al. 2018; Changpinyo
et al. 2021; Jia et al. 2021) have been designed to clean up
the large-scale unlabeled data for pre-training. On the other
hand, few works explore automatic ways during training.
For example, ALBEF (Li et al. 2021) resorts to a momentum
model to generate pseudo-targets as additional supervision.
BLIP (Li et al. 2022a) uses a filter to remove the noisy data
rectified by the similarity of image-text pairs and a captioner
to regenerate texts. NCR (Huang et al. 2021) utilizes the loss

Introduction
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) (Yao et al. 2021; Radford
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021; Jia et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022a)
pre-trained with image-text pairs has shown its extraordinary
zero-shot transfer abilities in different downstream tasks, including zero-shot classification (Radford et al. 2021; Yao
et al. 2021), image-text retrieval (Radford et al. 2021; Yao
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

926

