The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Fair Generative Model Using LeCam Divergence
Soobin Um1 , Changho Suh2
1

2

Graduate School of AI, KAIST
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST
{sum, chsuh}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

and Koyama 2018) which employ such labels to easily generate an arbitrary number of samples for minority groups.
In many practically-relevant scenarios, however, such labels
are often unavailable.
To address the challenge, one pioneering work (Choi et al.
2020) develops a novel debiasing technique that employs
the reweighting idea (Ren et al. 2018; Kamiran and Calders
2012; Byrd and Lipton 2019) to put more weights to underrepresented samples, thereby promoting fair sample generation across demographic groups. One key feature of the
technique is to identify the bias (reflected in the weights)
via a small and unlabelled reference dataset. While it enjoys significant fairness performance for moderate sizes of
the reference dataset, it may provide a marginal gain for a
more practically-relevant case of a small set size where the
weight estimation is often inaccurate, as hinted by the metalearning literature (Ren et al. 2018; Shu et al. 2020). We also
find such phenomenon in our experiments; see Table 1 for
details.
Contribution: In this work, we take a distinct approach to address the issue w.r.t. the small reference set
size. We still rely upon a balanced unlabelled reference
dataset, yet employing a statistical notion, LeCam (LC)divergence (Le Cam 2012), instead of the reweighting approach. One important feature of the LC-divergence was
emphasized by Tseng et al. (2021) in the context of GANs.
The divergence captures well the distance between real and
generated samples even in the limited size of training data,
thereby serving as a regularized loss in the design of a discriminator. This robustness aspect of the divergence motivates us to incorporate the LC-divergence in quantifying
the degree of unfairness particularly when an employed reference set size is small. Specifically we compute the LCdivergence between reference and generated samples. We
then promote fair sample generation by adding the LCdivergence as a regularization term into conventional optimization (e.g., GAN-based optimization (Goodfellow et al.
2014; Nowozin, Cseke, and Tomioka 2016; Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017)). We employ the variational optimization technique w.r.t. the LC-divergence (Tseng et al. 2021) to
translate the regularized optimization into an implementable
form. We also conduct extensive experiments on three
benchmark real datasets: CelebA (Liu et al. 2015), UTKFace (Zhang, Song, and Qi 2017), and FairFace (Karkkainen

We explore a fairness-related challenge that arises in generative models. The challenge is that biased training data with
imbalanced demographics may yield a high asymmetry in
size of generated samples across distinct groups. We focus
on practically-relevant scenarios wherein demographic labels
are not available and therefore the design of a fair generative model is non-straightforward. In this paper, we propose
an optimization framework that regulates the unfairness under such practical settings via one statistical measure, LeCam
(LC)-divergence. Specifically to quantify the degree of unfairness, we employ a balanced-yet-small reference dataset
and then measure its distance with generated samples using
the LC-divergence, which is shown to be particularly instrumental to a small size of the reference dataset. We take a
variational optimization approach to implement the LC-based
measure. Experiments on benchmark real datasets demonstrate that the proposed framework can significantly improve
the fairness performance while maintaining realistic sample
quality for a wide range of the reference set size all the way
down to 1% relative to training set.

Introduction
High-quality realistic samples synthesized thanks to recent
advances in generative models (Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2019; Goodfellow et al. 2014; Karras, Laine, and
Aila 2019) have played a crucial role to enrich training data
for a widening array of applications such as face recognition,
natural language processing, and medical imaging (Wang,
Wang, and Lian 2019; Chang, Chuang, and Lee 2018; Yi,
Walia, and Babyn 2019). One challenge concerning fairness
arises when generative models are built upon biased training data that preserve unbalanced representations of demographic groups. Any existing bias in the dataset can readily be propagated to the learned model, thus producing biased generations towards certain demographics. The unbalanced generated samples may often yield undesirable performances against underrepresented groups for downstream
applications. One natural way to ensure fair sample generation is to exploit demographic labels (if available) to build
a fair generative model, e.g., via conditional GANs (Mirza
and Osindero 2014; Odena, Olah, and Shlens 2017; Miyato
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10034

