The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DiFA: Differentiable Feature Acquisition
Aritra Ghosh and Andrew Lan
University of Massachusetts Amherst
arighosh@cs.umass.edu, andrewlan@cs.umass.edu

Abstract

education, where in online learning platforms or intelligent
tutoring systems, we can test a student’s knowledge on certain concepts using assessment questions and craft a better
learning plan, but we need to limit the number of questions
to ask to avoid overwhelming the student (Siemens 2013).
Thus, dynamically acquiring relevant features is important to
both minimize the feature acquisition cost and maximize prediction performance, with a significant impact on real-world
applications (Shim, Hwang, and Yang 2018).
We note that the feature acquisition task is different from
the feature selection or dimensionality reduction task, where
the goal is to select a static subset of features for all data
points to reduce the number of input variables (Guyon and
Elisseeff 2003; Li et al. 2017; Cai et al. 2018). In contrast,
the dynamic feature acquisition task, i.e., selecting the next
feature to acquire based on past observation, has similarities
to the active learning task, where we need to actively select
the next data point to label. Thus, many active learning-based
heuristics (such as uncertainty sampling, diversity sampling,
etc.) can be extended to the task of feature acquisition (Lewis
and Gale 1994; Brinker 2003; Settles 2009). Some earlier
works in active feature acquisition use uncertainty sampling,
expected utility gain, or variance-based approaches (Melville
et al. 2004; Saar-Tsechansky, Melville, and Provost 2009;
Huang et al. 2018; Gong et al. 2019; Ma et al. 2019). For
example, the efficient dynamic discovery of high-value information (EDDI) method uses a probabilistic model to find the
expected utility using information gained from each unobserved feature and acquire the feature with the highest value
(Ma et al. 2019). EDDI uses a variational autoencoder with
arbitrary conditioning (VAEAC) probabilistic model (Ivanov,
Figurnov, and Vetrov 2018) to estimate a latent variable from
partially observed features and compute the joint distribution
of both missing features and the target variable. This joint
distribution enables one to compute the expected information
gain to greedily acquire the next feature based on mutual
information. However, these static heuristics-based feature
acquisition policies are neither optimal nor data-driven and
cannot improve with more training data.
To address this limitation, some prior works (Shim, Hwang,
and Yang 2018; Li and Oliva 2021) reformulate the feature
acquisition task as a Markov decision process (MDP) where
the policy selects the next feature to acquire based on the
current MDP state, which is a function of the observed fea-

Feature acquisition in predictive modeling is an important
task in many practical applications. For example, in patient
health prediction, we do not fully observe their personal features and need to dynamically select features to acquire. Our
goal is to acquire a small subset of features that maximize
prediction performance. Recently, some works reformulated
feature acquisition as a Markov decision process and applied
reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms, where the reward reflects both prediction performance and feature acquisition cost.
However, RL algorithms only use zeroth-order information
on the reward, which leads to slow empirical convergence,
especially when there are many actions (number of features)
to consider. For predictive modeling, it is possible to use firstorder information on the reward, i.e., gradients, since we are
often given an already collected dataset. Therefore, we propose differentiable feature acquisition (DiFA), which uses a
differentiable representation of the feature selection policy to
enable gradients to flow from the prediction loss to the policy parameters. We conduct extensive experiments on various
real-world datasets and show that DiFA significantly outperforms existing feature acquisition methods when the number
of features is large.

Introduction
The dominant paradigm of supervised learning assumes access to fully observed feature vectors and target values during
the training of predictive models. However, access to fully observed data points is impractical in many real-world scenarios.
In many applications, a model can acquire additional information (e.g., features) at an acquisition cost. Thus, the model
should know when to acquire a feature and what features to
acquire before making a prediction. For example, consider a
doctor assessing the health of a patient: initially, the doctor
may only know a few symptoms the patient is experiencing.
The doctor needs to dynamically decide what additional information to ask for and further diagnostic tests to perform.
Acquiring results from all possible tests is infeasible due to
time and financial constraints. Therefore, the doctor needs
to assess the health of the patient, dynamically acquire additional information under practical constraints, and decide
on future treatment for the patient using this acquired information (Qayyum et al. 2020). A similar situation happens in
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7705

