The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Ultrafast Euclidean Shortest Path Computation Using Hub Labeling
Jinchun Du, Bojie Shen, Muhammad Aamir Cheema
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
{jinchun.du, bojie.shen, aamir.cheema}@monash.edu

Abstract

to the number of labels stored for the two vertices). Hub
labeling is the state-of-the-art approach for efficiently computing shortest distances in graphs such as road networks (Li
et al. 2017) but it has not been previously used for solving
ESPP. Our experimental study shows that a straightforward
application of hub labeling for ESPP does not improve EPS
as the algorithm still needs to consider |Vs | × |Vt | candidate
paths. We overcome this limitation by a novel adaptation of
hub labeling and create labels for Euclidean plane to allow
efficient query processing. Below we provide an overview
of our approach called Euclidean Hub Labeling (EHL).

Finding shortest paths in a Euclidean plane containing polygonal obstacles is a well-studied problem motivated by a variety of real-world applications. The state-of-the-art algorithms
require finding obstacle corners visible to the source and target, and need to consider potentially a large number of candidate paths. This adversely affects their query processing cost.
We address these limitations by proposing a novel adaptation of hub labeling which is the state-of-the-art approach for
shortest distance computation in road networks. Our experimental study conducted on the widely used benchmark maps
shows that our approach is typically 1-2 orders of magnitude
faster than two state-of-the-art algorithms.

• During the preprocessing, we construct a visibility graph
on the convex corners/vertices of the polygonal obstacles. Hub labels for each vertex in this graph are computed. We superimpose a uniform grid on the Euclidean
plane and copy the labels of each vertex v onto each cell
c if c is visible from v. Several novel pruning rules are applied to significantly reduce the number of labels stored.
• During online query processing, we use the labels stored
in the grid cells cs and ct containing s and t, respectively.
These labels are joined in time linear in the number of labels in the two cells and the shortest distance is obtained.
Additional auxiliary information stored in each label is
used to efficiently recover the shortest path.

Introduction
Given a source s and a target t in a Euclidean plane containing polygonal obstacles, we study Euclidean Shortest
Path Problem (ESPP) which is to compute the shortest obstacle avoiding path between s and t. Due to its applications in robotics (Mac et al. 2016), indoor location-based
services (Cheema 2018) and computer games (Sturtevant
2012b), efficiently computing ESPP has been extensively
studied. Some of the most notable works include any-angle
pathfinding approaches such as Anya (Harabor et al. 2016),
navigation-mesh-based techniques such as Polyanya (Cui,
Harabor, and Grastien 2017), advanced visibility graph techniques such as hierarchical sparse visibility graph (Oh and
Leong 2017), and the techniques based on distance oracles
such as End Point Search (EPS) (Shen et al. 2020).
EPS is the state-of-the-art ESPP algorithm and provides
very efficient query processing by exploiting a compressed
path database (CPD) (Botea 2011). However, as we explain
in the next section, it still requires Polyanya to find the obstacle corners (i.e., vertices) visible from s and t, and needs
to consider |Vs | × |Vt | candidate paths where |Vs | and |Vt |
are the number of vertices visible from s and t, respectively.
We present an approach addressing the above-mentioned
limitations. Our approach utilises hub labeling (Abraham
et al. 2011) which computes a set of labels for each vertex in
a graph such that the shortest distance between any two vertices can be computed efficiently (specifically, in time linear

We evaluate EHL using a variety of widely used grid
map benchmarks (Sturtevant 2012a) and compare against
Polyanya and EPS, the two state-of-the-art algorithms. Our
results indicate that EHL provides 1-2 orders of magnitude
faster query performance compared to Polyanya and EPS
at the expense of larger (but reasonable) preprocessing time
and memory. We also show that the grid size used by EHL
provides a trade-off between the preprocessing cost (build
time and memory) and query performance.

Preliminaries
A polygon representing an obstacle is defined by a set of
points called vertices. A convex vertex is a vertex that is
located at a convex corner of the polygon. A non-convex
vertex is located at a concave corner. A pair of points in the
plane are visible to each other (also called co-visible) iff a
straight line connecting them does not pass through any obstacle. A path P between a source s and a target t is an
ordered set of points ⟨p1 ,p2 , · · · , pn ⟩ such that, for each

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12417

