The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Second-Order Quantified Boolean Logic
Jie-Hong R. Jiang
Graduate Institute of Electronics Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
jhjiang@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract

and various solvers and preprocessors are available (Biere
et al. 2021; Scholl and Wimmer 2018).
The second-order quantified Boolean formula (SOQBF)
extends QBF in the allowance of function variables and
their quantification. Its satisfiability checking has complexity corresponding to the exponential-time hierarchy (EXPH)
(Dawar, Gottlob, and Hella 1998), as was established in
(Lohrey 2012; Lück 2016). The connection between SOQBF and EXPH is similar to that between QBF and the
polynomial-time hierarchy (PH) (Stockmeyer 1976). Essentially, DQBFs are an elementary class of SOQBFs with
only one level of existential quantifiers over function variables. SOQBFs can be powerful to succinctly encode decision problems that have no succinct QBF encoding. There
are recent efforts studying variants (Hannula et al. 2016) and
special fragments (Hannula et al. 2020) of SOQBFs.
In this work, we study second-order quantified Boolean
logic in the aspects of representation and interpretation,
proof system, and countermodel extraction. The main results
include
• presenting a procedure of quantifier elimination converting SOQBFs to QBFs and a game interpretation of SOQBF semantics (Section 3),
• devising a sound and complete refutation proof system
(Section 4),
• developing an algorithm of extracting a countermodel,
namely, a winning strategy under the game-theoretic interpretation of SOQBF, from a refutation proof (Section 5), and
• showing potential applications of SOQBFs in system design and multi-agent planning (Section 6).
With these advances, we anticipate practical tools whose development may open new avenues for tackling computation
problems too challenging to be formulated previously.

Second-order quantified Boolean formulas (SOQBFs) generalize quantified Boolean formulas (QBFs) by admitting
second-order quantifiers on function variables in addition to
first-order quantifiers on atomic variables. Recent endeavors
establish that the complexity of SOQBF satisfiability corresponds to the exponential-time hierarchy (EXPH), similar to
that of QBF satisfiability corresponding to the polynomialtime hierarchy (PH). This fact reveals the succinct expression power of SOQBFs in encoding decision problems not
efficiently doable by QBFs. In this paper, we investigate
the second-order quantified Boolean logic with the following
main results: First, we present a procedure of quantifier elimination converting SOQBFs to QBFs and a game interpretation of SOQBF semantics. Second, we devise a sound and
complete refutation-proof system for SOQBF. Third, we develop an algorithm for countermodel extraction from a refutation proof. Finally, we show potential applications of SOQBFs in system design and multi-agent planning. With these
advances, we anticipate practical tools for development.

1

Introduction

Theoretical and practical advancements in Boolean satisfiability (SAT) (Biere et al. 2021) have made it an important technology enabling various complex computation
tasks in artificial intelligence, hardware design, software engineering, among others. The frontiers of satisfiability research are continuously extended to (non-)Boolean queries
involving different types of quantifiers. Notably, the quantified Boolean formula (QBF) allows existential and universal quantifiers to appear in an expression. The dependency quantified Boolean formula (DQBF) (Peterson and
Reif 1979) further extends QBF by allowing Henkin quantifiers (Henkin 1961) to explicitly specify the dependencies of
existential variables on universal variables. These extensions
make the underlying computational complexity lifted from
the NP-completeness of SAT (Cook 1971), to the PSPACEcompleteness of QBF (Stockmeyer and Meyer 1973), and
to the NEXP-completeness of DQBF (Peterson and Reif
1979). To date, practical decision procedures for checking
the QBF and DQBF satisfiability are under active research,

2

Preliminaries

In this work, we are concerned with two types of variables,
including atomic variables, represented with lower-case letters, e.g., x, y, and function variables, represented with, e.g.,
f, g. In the sequel, we do not specify a variable type when
it is clear from the context. A variable set is represented
with a upper-case letter, e.g., X = {x1 , . . . , xn }, F =
{f1 , . . . , fn }. The cardinality of a set X is denoted as |X|.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4007

