The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Predicate Invention for Bilevel Planning
Tom Silver* 1 , Rohan Chitnis* 2 , Nishanth Kumar1 , Willie McClinton1 ,
Tomás Lozano-Pérez1 , Leslie Kaelbling1 , Joshua Tenenbaum1
1

MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
2
Meta AI
{tslvr, njk, wbm3, tlp, lpk, jbt}@mit.edu, ronuchit@meta.com

Abstract

block1 and block2. State abstraction alone is useful for
decision-making, but predicates go further: together with
operators, predicates enable the use of highly-optimized
domain-independent AI planners (Helmert 2006).
We consider a problem setting where a small set of goal
predicates are available and sufficient for describing task
goals, but practically insufficient for bilevel planning. For
example, in a block stacking domain (Figure 1), we start
with On and OnTable, but have no predicates for describing whether a block is currently held or graspable. Our aim
is to invent new predicates to enrich the state abstraction beyond what can be expressed with the goal predicates alone,
leading to stronger reasoning at the abstract level.
What objective should we optimize to learn predicates for
bilevel planning? First, consider our real objective: we want
a predicate set such that bilevel planning is fast and successful, in expectation over a task distribution, when we use
those predicates to learn operators and samplers for planning. Unfortunately, this real objective is far too expensive
to use directly, since even a single evaluation requires neural
network sampler training and bilevel planning.
In this work, we propose a novel surrogate objective that
is deeply connected to our real bilevel-planning objective,
but is tractable for predicate learning. Our main insight is
that demonstrations can be used to analytically approximate
bilevel planning time. To leverage this objective for predicate learning, we take inspiration from the program synthesis literature (Menon et al. 2013; Ellis et al. 2020), and
learn predicates via a hill-climbing search through a grammar, with the search guided by the objective. After predicate
learning, we use the predicates to learn operators and samplers. All three components can then be used for efficient
bilevel planning on new tasks.
In experiments across four robotic planning environments, we find predicates, operators, and samplers learned
from 50–200 demonstrations enable efficient bilevel planning on held-out tasks that involve different numbers of objects, longer horizons, and larger goal expressions than seen
in the demonstrations. Furthermore, predicates learned with
our proposed surrogate objective substantially outperform
those learned with objectives inspired by previous work,
which are based on prediction error (Pasula, Zettlemoyer,
and Kaelbling 2007; Jetchev, Lang, and Toussaint 2013),
bisimulation (Konidaris, Kaelbling, and Lozano-Perez 2018;

Efficient planning in continuous state and action spaces is
fundamentally hard, even when the transition model is deterministic and known. One way to alleviate this challenge is
to perform bilevel planning with abstractions, where a highlevel search for abstract plans is used to guide planning in
the original transition space. Previous work has shown that
when state abstractions in the form of symbolic predicates
are hand-designed, operators and samplers for bilevel planning can be learned from demonstrations. In this work, we
propose an algorithm for learning predicates from demonstrations, eliminating the need for manually specified state
abstractions. Our key idea is to learn predicates by optimizing a surrogate objective that is tractable but faithful to our
real efficient-planning objective. We use this surrogate objective in a hill-climbing search over predicate sets drawn from a
grammar. Experimentally, we show across four robotic planning environments that our learned abstractions are able to
quickly solve held-out tasks, outperforming six baselines.

1

Introduction

Hierarchical planning is a powerful approach for decisionmaking in environments with continuous states, continuous
actions, and long horizons. A crucial bottleneck in scaling
hierarchical planning is the reliance on human engineers to
manually program domain-specific abstractions. For example, in bilevel sample-based task and motion planning (Srivastava et al. 2014; Garrett et al. 2021), an engineer must design (1) symbolic predicates; (2) symbolic operators; and (3)
samplers that propose different refinements of the symbolic
operators into continuous actions. However, recent work has
shown that when predicates are given, operators and samplers can be learned from a modest number (50–200) of
demonstrations (Silver et al. 2021; Chitnis et al. 2022). Our
objective in this work is to learn predicates that can then be
used to learn operators and samplers.
Predicates in bilevel planning represent a discrete state
abstraction of the underlying continuous state space (Li,
Walsh, and Littman 2006; Abel, Hershkowitz, and Littman
2017). For example, On(block1, block2) is an abstraction that discards the exact continuous poses of
* These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12120

