The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Topological Distance Games
Martin Bullinger1 , Warut Suksompong2
1

School of Computation, Information and Technology, Technical University of Munich
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore

Abstract

the opposite end of the table, as you are much more likely to
engage in a conversation with the former person than the latter. Similarly, you will in all likelihood run into your office
neighbor more frequently than you encounter your colleague
at the other end of the corridor.
With these motivating examples in mind, we introduce
a class of games that we call topological distance games
(TDGs). An instance of TDG contains a topology graph,
which is an undirected graph that specifies the locations
to which the agents can be assigned. The influence that an
agent i has on another agent j is j’s inherent utility for i
scaled by a factor depending on the distance between the two
agents on the topology graph; if the two agents are not connected on the graph, they have no influence on each other.
TDGs combine important aspects of several well-studied
coalition formation settings, including hedonic games, social distance games, and Schelling games—we discuss these
connections in detail in Section 1.2. We sometimes assume
that the scaling factor is the reciprocal of the distance between the two agents, but most of our results also hold for
arbitrary (strictly decreasing) distance factor functions. Following additively separable hedonic games (ASHGs), we
then take the utility of an agent for an assignment to be the
sum of all other agents’ influences on the agent in question.
Our formal model is described in Section 2.

We introduce a class of strategic games in which agents are
assigned to nodes of a topology graph and the utility of an
agent depends on both the agent’s inherent utilities for other
agents as well as her distance from these agents on the topology graph. This model of topological distance games (TDGs)
offers an appealing combination of important aspects of several prominent settings in coalition formation, including (additively separable) hedonic games, social distance games, and
Schelling games. We study the existence and complexity of
stable outcomes in TDGs—for instance, while a jump stable
assignment may not exist in general, we show that the existence is guaranteed in several special cases. We also investigate the dynamics induced by performing beneficial jumps.

1

Introduction

You arrive at a hotel for your organization’s annual banquet,
and some of the seats at the tables have already been taken.
You would like to sit close to your friends who work in the
same team or share similar hobbies. On the other hand, you
want to stay away from colleagues whom you had unpleasant interactions with lately. Which seat should you take?
Once everyone has picked a seat, would you regret not having chosen a different seat? Similar issues arise when assigning faculty members to offices in the department building,
students to desks in a classroom, or employees to cottages at
a company retreat.
Recently, Bilò, Monaco, and Moscardelli (2022) introduced the model of hedonic games with fixed-size coalitions, wherein the agents are to be partitioned into coalitions
whose sizes have been determined in advance, for example,
by the sizes of the tables at the banquet. They assumed additively separable utilities, meaning that the utility of an agent
for a coalition is the sum of her utilities for the individual
agents in her coalition. While their model partially captures
some of the aforementioned scenarios—for instance, each
table at the banquet can be considered as one coalition—
it neglects an important aspect common in such scenarios:
the agents are typically assigned to specific locations, and
agents prefer to be located close to their friends and far from
their enemies. In our banquet scenario, a person sitting next
to you has a higher influence on your utility than someone at

1.1

Our Results

We study a fundamental notion of stability in our setting—
jump stability—which requires that no agent would rather
jump to some empty node than stay at her current node.
In Section 3, we warm up by considering the case where
agents’ utilities are symmetric, that is, for any pair of agents
i and j, i’s inherent utility for j is the same as j’s inherent
utility for i. We show that for any distance factor function,
there exists a jump stable assignment; on the other hand,
finding such an assignment is a PLS-complete problem.
In Section 4, we investigate the more general setting
where the utilities are not necessarily symmetric. We observe that a jump stable assignment may no longer exist,
even when there are only two agents. On the other hand,
if utilities are non-negative and the friendship graph1 is
1
That is, the directed graph indicating (ordered) pairs of agents
i, j such that i’s inherent utility for j is positive.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5549

