The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Testing the Channels of Convolutional Neural Networks
Kang Choi, Donghyun Son, Younghoon Kim, Jiwon Seo*
Hanyang University
{kangchoi21, sondh, nogaussian, seojiwon}@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract

modules, and their violations often result in invalid system
states (Ernst et al. 2007; Martin, Livshits, and Lam 2005).
In this paper, we employ these testing strategies in software engineering for neural networks. In particular, we propose channel-wise testing of CNNs, which is a test generation technique for convolutional neural networks. The channels in CNNs are, to some extent, similar to the functions
and modules in software; they both are logical units of larger
systems. As with unit testing in software engineering, testing individual channels in a modular manner helps to debug and understand neural networks. We generate test data
to separately examine the behavior of individual channels
and check for their (in)consistencies. With this consistency
information, we rank the test data and report (potentially)
defect-inducing inputs and the corresponding channels.
With channel-wise testing, we aim to find defects in
CNNs (i.e., unintended inference outcome) that are caused
by channels having deviant behavior in high or low activation levels. To this end, we designed FtGAN, an extension
to GAN that tests the channels of target CNNs. FtGAN is
trained, in an unsupervised manner, to find the latent variables that are correlated with the CNNs’ channels. Using FtGAN, we gradually vary the latent variables in the generated
test data, which then affects the correlated channels in the
tested CNNs. To identify inconsistent behavior of the channels with generated test data (compared to that with training
data), we define unexpectedness score that compares the inference computations and estimates their inconsistency.
This paper proposes channel-wise testing of CNNs. Our
contributions are threefold: 1) we designed FtGAN to test
selected channels of CNNs (Section 3), 2) we developed
channel selection algorithm to find representative channels
for testing (Section 4), and 3) we identify defect-inducing
test data with unexpectedness score, which uses channel correlations to estimate inconsistencies in the inference computation (Section 5). Our evaluation shows that FtGAN helps
to find real and synthetic defects in neural networks.

Neural networks have complex structures, and thus it is hard
to understand their inner workings and ensure correctness. To
understand and debug convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
we propose techniques for testing the channels of CNNs. We
design FtGAN, an extension to GAN, that can generate test
data with varying the intensity (i.e., sum of the neurons) of a
channel of a target CNN. We also proposed a channel selection algorithm to find representative channels for testing. To
efficiently inspect the target CNN’s inference computations,
we define unexpectedness score, which estimates how similar the inference computation of the test data is to that of the
training data. We evaluated FtGAN with five public datasets
and showed that our techniques successfully identify defective channels in five different CNN models.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are used in many application
domains. As more DNN models are deployed, it becomes
more important to ensure that they function correctly and reliably. However, due to their complexity, it is difficult to analytically verify the correctness of DNNs (Katz et al. 2017).
To practically test neural networks, test input generation
has been studied. Most well-known is adversarial example generation that finds minimal perturbation to input to
deceive a target neural network (Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2014). The perturbed input, i.e. adversarial examples, may be used to assess the robustness of DNNs for adversarial attack. While the techniques are effective in finding
adversarial examples, they focus on low-level neuron operations and do not examine, for example, the interactions of
the feature maps in convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
Testing is a widely studied topic in software engineering.
Many techniques have been developed to test the correctness
of software systems. For example, test input generation explores the ranges of certain variables such as array indices
and find the inputs to induce buffer overflow (Haller et al.
2013; Xie, Chou, and Engler 2003). Also, a common technique in software testing is to check for inconsistencies in
parts of larger systems (Engler et al. 2001); Researchers discovered that implicit invariants exist for certain functions or

2

Related Work and Motivation

We describe existing studies that are closely relevant to our
work, that is, adversarial attacks, semantic image transformations, and coverage-guided testings. Then we discuss our
preliminary experiments that motivated this study.

* Corresponding author and principal investigator

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14774

