The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On the Sample Complexity of Representation Learning in Multi-Task Bandits
with Global and Local Structure
Alessio Russo* , Alexandre Proutiere
Division of Decision and Control Systems
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, SE
{alessior,alepro}@kth.se
Abstract

timal arm for each task using the fewest number of samples, while allowing to transfer knowledge across tasks. The
problem is modelled as follows: in each round, the learner
actively selects a task, and then selects an arm from a finite
set of arms. Upon selecting an arm, the learner observes a
random reward from an unknown distribution that represents
the performance of her action in that particular task. To allow
the transfer of knowledge across the various tasks, we study
the problem for a simple, albeit useful model. We assume
that the arms available to the learner consist of two components: one that is shared across tasks (that we call representation) and one that is task-specific (that we call predictor).
Importantly, the optimal arms for the various tasks share the
same representation. The benefit of using this model is that
we can study the sample complexity of learning the best
shared representation across tasks while learning the taskspecific best action.
Contribution-wise1 , in this work we derive instancespecific sample complexity lower bounds satisfied by any
(δG , δH )-PAC algorithm (such an algorithm identifies the
best representation with probability at least 1 − δG , and
the best predictors with probability at least 1 − δH ). Again,
our lower bounds can be decomposed into two components,
one for learning the representation, and one for learning
the predictors. We devise an algorithm, OSRL-SC, which
can learn the optimal representation, and predictors, separately, and whose sample complexity approaches the lower
bound, scaling at most as H(G log(1/δG ) + X log(1/δH )).
Technically, we also show a novel regularization technique
to obtain unique allocations in best-arm identification problems with fixed confidence. Finally, we present numerical
experiments to illustrate the gains in terms of sample complexity one may achieve by transferring knowledge across
tasks. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first
to study how tasks should be scheduled toward a sampleoptimal instance-specific best-arm identification algorithm.

We investigate the sample complexity of learning the optimal arm for multi-task bandit problems. Arms consist of
two components: one that is shared across tasks (that we
call representation) and one that is task-specific (that we call
predictor). The objective is to learn the optimal (representation, predictor)-pair for each task, under the assumption that
the optimal representation is common to all tasks. Within
this framework, efficient learning algorithms should transfer
knowledge across tasks. We consider the best-arm identification problem with fixed confidence, where, in each round, the
learner actively selects both a task, and an arm, and observes
the corresponding reward. We derive instance-specific sample complexity lower bounds, which apply to any algorithm
that identifies the best representation, and the best predictor
for a task, with prescribed confidence levels. We devise an
algorithm, OSRL-SC, that can learn the optimal representation, and the optimal predictors, separately, and whose sample
complexity approaches the lower bound. Theoretical and numerical results demonstrate that OSRL-SC achieves a better
scaling with respect to the number of tasks compared to the
classical best-arm identification algorithm. The code can be
found here https://github.com/rssalessio/OSRL-SC.

Introduction
Learning from previous tasks and transferring this knowledge may significantly improve the process of learning
new tasks. This idea, at the core of transfer learning (Pan
and Yang 2009; Skinner 1965; Woodworth and Thorndike
1901), lifelong learning (Thrun 1996) and multi-task learning (Baxter et al. 2000; Caruana 1995, 1997), has recently
triggered considerable research efforts with applications in
both supervised and reinforcement learning. Previous work
on transfer and multi-task learning has mostly focused on
batch learning problems (Lazaric 2012; Pan and Yang 2009),
where when a task needs to be solved, a training dataset is
directly provided. Online learning problems, where samples
for a given task are presented to the learner sequentially,
have been much less studied (Taylor and Stone 2009; Zhan
and Taylor 2015).
In this paper, we consider a multi-task Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem, where the objective is to find the op-

Related work. Multi-task learning has been investigated
under different assumptions on the way the learner interacts
with tasks. One setting concerns batch learning (often referred to as learning-to-learn), where the training datasets for
all tasks are available at the beginning (Baxter et al. 2000;

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
All the proofs and numerical details can be found here
https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.15129.

9658

