The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

UEQMS: UMAP Embedded Quick Mean Shift Algorithm for High Dimensional
Clustering
Abhishek Kumar1, 3 , Swagatam Das2 , Rammohan Mallipeddi3
1

IAI, TCG Creast, Kolkata, India-700091
Electronics and Communication Sciences Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, Indian-700108
3
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Republic of Korea - 41566
abhishek.kumar.eee13@iitbhu.ac.in, swagatam.das@isical.ac.in, mallipeddi@knu.ac.kr
2

Abstract

Ngo 2018; Ismkhan 2018), Felzenszwalb method (Felzenszwalb and Huttenlocher 2004), simple linear iterative clustering (SLIC) (Achanta et al. 2012), and Spectral clustering (Huang et al. 2020). On the other hand, each iteration
in MS takes O(n2 ) time, making it computationally expensive. In other words, the computational complexity associated with finding each point’s neighboring data points is
quadratic in the number of data points. Although MS has superior performance in image segmentation, significant computational cost limits its use in high-resolution image segmentation. To address this issue, a faster variant of MS,
called MeanShift++ (MS++), was recently proposed in (Jang
and Jiang 2021), in which the input space is partitioned into
grid cells, and each data point updates its position towards
the approximated mode by referencing the data points within
its neighboring grid cells. MS++ is ideal for handling extremely large datasets with low dimensionalities, such as in
image segmentation. In (Jang and Jiang 2021), MS++ was
shown to attain a speedup of 1000 times compared to the
vanilla MS. Since MS++’s runtime is dependent on O(3d )
for a d-dimensional dataset, it becomes extremely slower for
d ≥ 5 datasets. Therefore, its application is only limited to
low-dimensional clustering applications. To address this issue, one may think of integrating a dimensionality reduction
technique as a pre-processing step to MS++.

The mean shift algorithm is a simple yet very effective clustering method widely used for image and video segmentation as well as other exploratory data analysis applications.
Recently, a new algorithm called MeanShift++ (MS++) for
low-dimensional clustering was proposed with a speedup of
4000 times over the vanilla mean shift. In this work, starting with a first-of-its-kind theoretical analysis of MS++, we
extend its reach to high-dimensional data clustering by integrating the Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection
(UMAP) based dimensionality reduction in the same framework. Analytically, we show that MS++ can indeed converge
to a non-critical point. Subsequently, we suggest modifications to MS++ to improve its convergence characteristics. In
addition, we propose a way to further speed up MS++ by
avoiding the execution of the MS++ iterations for every data
point. By incorporating UMAP with modified MS++, we design a faster algorithm, named UMAP embedded quick mean
shift (UEQMS), for partitioning data with a relatively large
number of recorded features. Through extensive experiments,
we showcase the efficacy of UEQMS over other state-of-theart algorithms in terms of accuracy and runtime.

Introduction
Automatic detection of the meaningful groups or clusters
in a dataset is a fundamental task in unsupervised learning. Mean Shift (MS) (Cheng 1995) emerged as a nonparametric mode-seeking approach to detect the dense regions in a point cloud. Using a sequence of such momdeseeking iterates through kernel density estimation, MS automatically estimates the number of clusters in a dataset. Due
to its simplicity and effectiveness, MS and its variants were
widely used in applications such as object tracking (Comaniciu, Ramesh, and Meer 2003; Leichter, Lindenbaum, and
Rivlin 2010; Ning et al. 2012; Kumar et al. 2022), unsupervised image and video segmentation (Park, Lee, and Park
2009; Zhou, Wang, and Schaefer 2011; Tao, Jin, and Zhang
2007; Paris 2008; Paris and Durand 2007), and general image processing (Barash and Comaniciu 2004; Bigdeli et al.
2017).
For low-dimensional clustering and segmentation tasks,
the popularity of MS exceeded those of other wellstudied algorithms, such as k-means (Zhao, Deng, and

Nonnegative matrix factorization (Lee and Seung 1999),
Principle Component Analysis (Pearson 1901), and Canonical Correlation Analysis (Andrew et al. 2013) are commonly
used unsupervised dimensionality reduction (DR) methods.
Such models suffer from limitations over the representational abilities and cannot identify the non-linear hidden relations among data points in the data very efficiently (Guo,
Lin, and Ye 2021). On the other hand, popular non-linear
dimensionality reduction techniques can be distinguished
by their emphasis on preserving global structure and local structure of the data. Isomap (Tenenbaum, Silva, and
Langford 2000) is a well-known DR technique that emphasizes more on preserving global structure of the data,
while t-SNE (Van der Maaten and Hinton 2008) emphasizes
more on preserving global structure of the data. Although
UMAP (McInnes, Healy, and Melville 2018) emphasizes
more on preserving local structure of the data, it can also
preserves global structure more effectively. In recent years,
autoencoders (AE) (Tschannen, Bachem, and Lucic 2018)

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8386

