The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Bugs in the Data: How ImageNet Misrepresents Biodiversity
Alexandra Sasha Luccioni* 1 , David Rolnick* 2
1

Hugging Face
McGill University, Mila
sasha.luccioni@huggingface.co, drolnick@cs.mcgill.ca
2

Abstract

dataset (Deng et al. 2009) that is used widely in categorical
object recognition (with 32k citations to date). More than
a quarter of the dataset consists of images of wild animals.
However, no wildlife experts were consulted in creating the
dataset, and the choice of classes and images has never been
analyzed, despite the considerable role that these data have
ultimately played in shaping widely used ML models.
Here, we examine the 269 classes of wild animals in
ImageNet-1k, working with expert ecologists to evaluate
both the class definitions and the images included in each
class. Our main findings are the following:

ImageNet-1k is a dataset often used for benchmarking machine learning (ML) models and evaluating tasks such as image recognition and object detection. Wild animals make up
27% of ImageNet-1k but, unlike classes representing people
and objects, these data have not been closely scrutinized. In
the current paper, we analyze the 13,450 images from 269
classes that represent wild animals in the ImageNet-1k validation set, with the participation of expert ecologists. We
find that many of the classes are ill-defined or overlapping,
and that 12% of the images are incorrectly labeled, with
some classes having >90% of images incorrect. We also find
that both the wildlife-related labels and images included in
ImageNet-1k present significant geographical and cultural biases, as well as ambiguities such as artificial animals, multiple species in the same image, or the presence of humans. Our
findings highlight serious issues with the extensive use of this
dataset for evaluating ML systems, the use of such algorithms
in wildlife-related tasks, and more broadly the ways in which
ML datasets are commonly created and curated.

• Over 12% of the wildlife images are incorrectly labeled,
with some classes having over 90% incorrect labels.
• Many images are problematic in other ways, including
the presence of humans (6.7% of images), multiple types
of animals in the same image (4.5%), images too blurry
for identification (2.2%), and images of fake animals
such as stuffed toys (1.4%).
• Both the class definitions and images are strongly biased
towards the U.S. and Europe, vastly under-representing
biodiversity from other geographies.
• Many classes in the dataset are not clearly defined
(11.5% of classes) or overlap with other classes (11.9%).

Introduction
Datasets are a crucial part of the development, evaluation
and eventual deployment of machine learning (ML) systems.
Large datasets such as ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) and MSCOCO (Lin et al. 2014) have been used for years both as
inputs for training ML models for downstream tasks and as
benchmarks for evaluating model efficacy. There are many
choices involved implicitly or explicitly in the creation of
a labeled dataset, including how classes are defined as well
as the way datapoints are assigned to them. Recent research
has placed increased scrutiny on many popular datasets, uncovering biases (Prabhu and Birhane 2021), duplicates (Barz
and Denzler 2020) and problematic class definitions (Crawford and Paglen 2019). Such dataset shortcomings can have
serious impacts on the behavior of the models they are used
to train, and can also make it difficult to evaluate the true
effectiveness of ML systems, since metrics such as accuracy
are impacted by biases or inaccuracies in the evaluation set.
The ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge
(ILSVRC) dataset, commonly called ImageNet-1k, (Russakovsky et al. 2015) is a subset of the full ImageNet

By leveraging the concrete nature of wildlife images,
where individual species (including their geographic provenance) can be readily identified, we provide a novel window
into the many weaknesses of ImageNet-1k as a benchmark
dataset. Our findings also raise significant concerns about
various real-world ML applications where ImageNet-1k is
used, as well as highlighting the fundamental importance of
domain expertise in crafting ML benchmark datasets.

Related Work
Our work is relevant to several research directions, ranging from empirical studies on the impact of label errors on
model performance to analyses of the values embedded in
ML datasets. We briefly summarize work in these fields in
the paragraphs below.
A brief history of ImageNet. Since the creation in 2009
of the original ImageNet dataset (Deng et al. 2009), containing 21,000 classes, it has gone through numerous iterations, including the 1k version created for the ImageNet

* These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14382

