The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Overcoming Forgetting in Fine-Grained Urban Flow Inference via Adaptive
Knowledge Replay
Haoyang Yu,* Xovee Xu,* Ting Zhong,† Fan Zhou †
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan 610054, China
haoyang.yu417@outlook.com, xovee@live.com, {zhongting, fan.zhou}@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

UrbanFM (Liang et al. 2019) is the first work formulates
the FUFI problem and proposes a distributional upsampling
module and an external factor fusing subnet for tackling the
problem. Subsequent works improve UrbanFM from several important aspects, e.g., the spatial constraint, external
factors, and memory cost. Specifically, FODE (Zhou et al.
2020b) and UrbanODE (Zhou et al. 2021) – based on neural
ordinary differential equations (ODEs) – are proposed to address the numerical instability problem in FUFI by an affine
coupling layer and a pyramid attention network. MT-CSR
(Li et al. 2022) addresses the FUFI problem with incomplete
urban flow map. DeepLGR (Liang et al. 2020) revisits the
limitations of convolutional neural network (CNN) and tries
to learn global spatial dependencies and local feature representations of the flow dynamics. UrbanPy (Ouyang et al.
2022) is the state-of-the-art FUFI model which extends UrbanFM by proposing a cascading strategy based on the pyramid architecture, a propose-and-correct component, and a
new distribution loss.

Fine-grained urban flow inference (FUFI) problem aims at inferring the high-resolution flow maps from the coarse-grained
ones, which plays an important role in sustainable and economic urban computing and traffic management. Previous
models addressed the FUFI problem from spatial constraint,
external factors, and memory cost. However, utilizing the new
urban flow maps to calibrate the learned model is very challenging due to the “catastrophic forgetting” problem and is
still under-explored. In this paper, we make the first step in
FUFI and present CUFAR – Continual Urban Flow inference
with Adaptive knowledge Replay – a novel framework for inferring the fine-grained citywide traffic flows. Specifically, (1)
we design a spatial-temporal inference network that can extract better flow map features from both local and global levels; (2) then we present an adaptive knowledge replay (AKR)
training algorithm to selectively replay the learned knowledge to facilitate the learning process of the model on new
knowledge without forgetting. In addition, we also propose a
knowledge discriminator to avoid “negative replaying” issue
introduced by noisy urban flow maps. Extensive experiments
on four large-scale real-world FUFI datasets demonstrate that
our proposed model consistently outperforms strong baselines and effectively mitigates the forgetting problem. Source
code is available at: https://github.com/PattonYu/CUFAR.

Motivations. Despite the promising results achieved in
prior works, several potential improvements are worth exploring. First, although existing works have designed globallocal architectures such as pyramid mechanism (Ouyang
et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2021), global-local context module (Liang et al. 2020), and Transformer (Zhou, Zhou, and
Liu 2021; Liang et al. 2022a) to learn the long-range dependencies between local regions at different granularity,
they are still inefficient in modeling the spatial relations of
urban flows while also considering the temporal flow dynamics. Second, prior methods learn each FUFI dataset in
isolation and retrain the entire model with the newly obtained fine-grained urban flow maps, leaving the previous
data unexploited. One straightforward solution is to train
all the data at once. However, it has two drawbacks: (1)
noise data may be introduced from the older flow maps that
have different flow distributions; (2) the computation overhead becomes unaffordable as time goes on. Another solution is to continually fine-tune the trained model from previous data on the new data, which is efficient and feasible to
take advantage of the learned urban flow knowledge. However, fine-tuning directly on the new data is very prone to the
“catastrophic forgetting” problem – i.e., much of the learned
knowledge is overridden upon learning the new knowledge

Introduction
Fine-grained urban flow analysis, prediction, and inference
are important applications of smart city development and urban computing. They have been used for traffic management
and urban transportation planning (Cleophas et al. 2019;
Liang et al. 2022b; Zheng et al. 2014; Liang et al. 2019),
benefiting from the fast urbanization, vast data generated
from IoT devices, and the new computing technologies in
recent years (Zhong et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2022). However,
extensive resources such as electricity and manpower are
consumed for deploying and maintaining the system. Finegrained urban flow inference (FUFI), which tries to infer the
high-resolution flow map from the corresponding coarsegrained one, is proposed as an important step toward an
environmental-friendly and sustainable urban traffic system.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5393

