The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

GRASMOS: Graph Signage Model Selection for Gene Regulatory Networks
Angelina Brilliantova, Hannah Miller, Ivona Bezáková
Rochester Institute of Technology, 102 Lomb Memorial Drive, Rochester, NY 14623
lb9849@rit.edu, hm@mail.rit.edu, ib@cs.rit.edu

Abstract
Signed networks (networks with positive and negative edges)
commonly arise in various domains from molecular biology
to social media. The edge signs – i.e., the graph signage –
represent the interaction pattern between the vertices and can
provide insights into the underlying system formation process.
Generative models considering signage formation are essential
for testing hypotheses about the emergence of interactions and
for creating synthetic datasets for algorithm benchmarking
(especially in areas where obtaining real-world datasets is
difficult).
In this work, we pose a novel Maximum-Likelihood-based optimization problem for modeling signages given their topology
and showcase it in the context of gene regulation. Regulatory
interactions of genes play a key role in the process of organism development, and when broken can lead to serious
organism abnormalities and diseases. Our contributions are
threefold: First, we design a new class of signage models for
a given topology, and, based on the parameter setting, we
discuss its biological interpretations for gene regulatory networks (GRNs). Second, we design algorithms computing the
Maximum Likelihood – depending on the parameter setting,
our algorithms range from closed-form expressions to MCMC
sampling. Third, we evaluated the results of our algorithms
on synthetic datasets and real-world large GRNs. Our work
can lead to the prediction of unknown gene regulations, novel
biological hypotheses, and realistic benchmark datasets in the
realm of gene regulation.

Introduction
Networks with positive and negative edges (signed networks)
are ubiquitous across various domains. They work well for
situations when the objects modeled as network vertices have
positive and negative interactions. Accounting for edge types
helps substantially with many important network-related
problems, such as missing link prediction (Li, Fang, and
Zhang 2017; Li et al. 2020), node ranking (Li, Fang, and
Zhang 2019), network synchronization (Monteiro et al. 2022).
Signed networks were successfully applied to model social
interactions (trust/distrust in Epinions (Xu et al. 2019), epidemic spreading (Li et al. 2021), political interactions between US Congressmen (Thomas, Pang, and Lee 2006), and
gene regulation (Mason et al. 2009).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12364

One of the most interesting things about signed networks
is the distribution of signs on the edges - i.e., the signage.
Systems modeled by signed networks rarely exhibit random
interactions between their elements - instead, they follow
certain interaction patterns, that could provide insights into
the underlying formation process. Generative models considering signage formation are essential for testing hypotheses
about the emergence of interactions, as well as creating synthetic datasets for algorithm benchmarking (especially in
areas where obtaining real-world datasets is difficult).
One of the fields affected by the scarcity of realistic signed
network datasets is gene regulation. The diversity of cells,
organs, and eventually organisms arises from regulatory interactions between genes through their biochemical products
(proteins or RNAs). If a gene product increases the synthesis
of a target gene product, the corresponding directed edge is
modeled as positive; if it decreases, the edge is modeled as
negative. The set of all regulatory interactions along with a set
of genes is called a gene regulatory network (GRN). GRNs
play a key role in the process of organism development, and
when broken can lead to serious organism abnormalities and
diseases (Alon 2019). Understanding gene regulation mechanisms as well as identifying drug interventions often rely on
reconstructing GRNs from the dynamics of the corresponding gene transcripts (Zhang et al. 2017; Lopes-Ramos et al.
2020).
In this work, we designed a new class of signage models for
gene regulatory networks along with a maximum-likelihoodbased framework assessing their goodness-of-fit. Our signage
models work for scenarios in which the graph topology is
formed first and later refined with the edge signs. Motivated
by underlying biological processes, our models involve latent
non-overlapping groups of nodes and the edge signs are generated based on the endpoints’ groups. A real-life example is
forming social interactions in a closed community (e.g. dormitories) in which one gets acquainted with the people one
lives and interacts with and later decides on their attitude to
them. Some evolutionary hypotheses suggest a similar origin
of gene regulation, with the genome structure defining the
gene interactions in the course of species divergence (Bylino,
Ibragimov, and Shidlovskii 2020; Wittkopp and Kalay 2012).
Signage models facilitate the comparison of node interactions regardless of the underlying topology – this might be
useful for graphs generated with different topologies but fol-

