The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Exploring Temporal Information Dynamics in Spiking Neural Networks
Youngeun Kim1 , Yuhang Li1 , Hyoungseob Park1 , Yeshwanth Venkatesha1 ,
Anna Hambitzer2 , Priyadarshini Panda1
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA
2
Technology Innovation Institute, Abu Dhabi, UAE
{youngeun.kim, yuhang.li, hyoungseob.park, yeshwanth.venkatesha, priya.panda}@yale.edu, Anna.Hambitzer@tii.ae

Abstract

aim to improve accuracy of SNNs on standard image recognition tasks while maintaining higher efficiency than ANNs
(Wu et al. 2019; Comsa et al. 2020; Mostafa 2017; Li et al.
2021a; Deng et al. 2022).
Although most of the existing works on SNN assert that
they might improve (or leverage) the temporal dynamics
of spikes (Wu et al. 2018; Fang et al. 2021b; Kim and
Panda 2020; Masquelier, Albantakis, and Deco 2011; Neftci,
Mostafa, and Zenke 2019), yet, an explicit analysis of temporal information dynamics is still missing. In this paper,
we ask several important questions for understanding such
fundamental characteristics of SNNs: What are temporal information dynamics inside SNNs? How can we measure the
temporal information dynamics? How do the temporal information dynamics affect the overall learning performance?
Understanding the dynamics will enable us to apprehend the
learning representations inside SNNs which may help to develop better temporal training algorithms, find new use-cases
for SNNs for conventional AI (and possibly computational
neuroscience) applications, and also explore new theoretical
directions for SNN research.
To this end, we present a first-of-its-kind study to understand temporal information dynamics in SNNs through the
lens of Fisher information. In this study, we select a ResNet
model with Leak-Integrated-and-Fire spiking neuron as a
baseline, which is widely used in classification task (Zheng
et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021b; Fang et al. 2021a). We measure
the Fisher information of an SNN at each timestep, where we
find the temporal information distribution varies as training
goes on. Specifically, we find that information in an SNN
shifts from latter timesteps to earlier timesteps as training
progresses. We call this phenomenon as temporal information concentration (TIC). This is a novel observation, and
therefore, we investigate whether the TIC phenomenon is a
function of specific training variables such as architecture,
dataset, and optimization strategy. Through extensive experiments, we found that TIC is a common characteristic of
SNNs during training.
Furthermore, we explore the impact of TIC on the performance of networks (i.e., accuracy and robustness). To
this end, we design a loss function that can manipulate the
Fisher information at each timestep. The results show that
TIC significantly affects the robustness of SNN against both
adversarial perturbations and standard input noise (such as

Most existing Spiking Neural Network (SNN) works state that
SNNs may utilize temporal information dynamics of spikes.
However, an explicit analysis of temporal information dynamics is still missing. In this paper, we ask several important
questions for providing a fundamental understanding of SNNs:
What are temporal information dynamics inside SNNs? How
can we measure the temporal information dynamics? How do
the temporal information dynamics affect the overall learning
performance? To answer these questions, we estimate the
Fisher Information of the weights to measure the distribution
of temporal information during training in an empirical
manner. Surprisingly, as training goes on, Fisher information
starts to concentrate in the early timesteps. After training,
we observe that information becomes highly concentrated in
earlier few timesteps, a phenomenon we refer to as temporal
information concentration. We observe that the temporal
information concentration phenomenon is a common learning
feature of SNNs by conducting extensive experiments on
various configurations such as architecture, dataset, optimization strategy, time constant, and timesteps. Furthermore, to
reveal how temporal information concentration affects the
performance of SNNs, we design a loss function to change
the trend of temporal information. We find that temporal
information concentration is crucial to building a robust SNN
but has little effect on classification accuracy. Finally, we
propose an efficient iterative pruning method based on our
observation on temporal information concentration. Code
is available at https://github.com/Intelligent-ComputingLab-Yale/Exploring-Temporal-Information-Dynamics-inSpiking-Neural-Networks.

Introduction
Within the last decade, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs)
have received huge attention as a low-power alternative to
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) (Roy, Jaiswal, and Panda
2019; Christensen et al. 2022; Lobo et al. 2020; Wang, Lin,
and Dang 2020). SNNs process visual information in an
event-driven manner using sparse binary spikes over multiple timesteps that make them an attractive option for lowpower neuromorphic hardware implementation (Akopyan
et al. 2015; Davies et al. 2018; Furber et al. 2014). Recent
years have witnessed a surge in SNN algorithmic works that
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8308

