The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Emergent Quantized Communication
Boaz Carmeli, Ron Meir, Yonatan Belinkov*
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
boaz.carmeli@campus.technion.ac.il, rmeir@ee.technion.ac.il, belinkov@technion.ac.il

Continuous

Abstract
Symbol

The field of emergent communication aims to understand the
characteristics of communication as it emerges from artificial agents solving tasks that require information exchange.
Communication with discrete messages is considered a desired characteristic, for both scientific and applied reasons.
However, training a multi-agent system with discrete communication is not straightforward, requiring either reinforcement
learning algorithms or relaxing the discreteness requirement
via a continuous approximation such as the Gumbel-softmax.
Both these solutions result in poor performance compared to
fully continuous communication. In this work, we propose
an alternative approach to achieve discrete communication
– quantization of communicated messages. Using message
quantization allows us to train the model end-to-end, achieving superior performance in multiple setups. Moreover, quantization is a natural framework that runs the gamut from continuous to discrete communication. Thus, it sets the ground
for a broader view of multi-agent communication in the deep
learning era.

1

Word
Message

N/A

Gumbel-softmax
0

0.69

0

Quantized

1

Single symbol

1.0

0.10

-0.23

4.0

1.0

7.0

0.10

-0.23

0.69

0

0

1

4.0

2.0

7.0

0.72

-0.54

-0.21

1

0

0

7.0

1.0

2.0

Figure 1: Top: Symbol, word, and message elements for continuous, Gumbel-softmax, and quantized communication
modes. Bottom: Accuracy (Y-axis) achieved by the three
communication modes vs. number of candidates (X-axis),
in the Object game. Continuous communication leads to
good performance on the end task but does not use symbols.
Gumbel-softmax sends one word per symbol, but requires a
recurrent channel and does not work well in practice. Quantized communication enables discrete and successful communication. Detailed channel parameters are provided in
section 5.

Introduction

A key aspect in emergent communication systems is the
channel by which agents communicate when trying to
accomplish a common task. Prior work has recognized
the importance of communicating over a discrete channel
(Havrylov and Titov 2017; Lazaridou and Baroni 2020;
Vanneste et al. 2022). From a scientific point of view, investigating the characteristics of communication that emerges
among artificial agents may contribute to our understanding
of human language evolution. And from a practical point of
view, discrete communication is required for natural human–
machine interfaces. Thus, a large body of work has been
concerned with enabling discrete communication in artificial multi-agent systems (Foerster et al. 2016; Havrylov
and Titov 2017, inter alia). However, the discretization requirement poses a significant challenge to neural multiagent systems, which are typically trained with gradientbased optimization. Two main approaches have been proposed in the literature for overcoming this challenge, namely

using reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms (Williams
1992; Lazaridou, Peysakhovich, and Baroni 2016) or relaxing the discrete communication with continuous approximations such as the Gumbel-softmax (Jang, Gu, and Poole
2016; Havrylov and Titov 2017). The RL approach maintains discreteness, but systems optimized with the Gumbelsoftmax typically perform better in this setting. However,
Gumbel-softmax training is effectively done with continuous communication. Both discretization approaches perform
far worse than a system with fully continuous communication. In short, the more discrete the channel, the worse the
system’s performance.
In this work, we propose a new framework for discrete
communication in multi-agent systems, based on quantization (Figure 1, top). Drawing inspiration from work on ef-

* Supported by the Viterbi Fellowship in the Center for Computer Engineering at the Technion.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11533

