The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ShiftDDPMs: Exploring Conditional Diffusion Models
by Shifting Diffusion Trajectories
Zijian Zhang1 , Zhou Zhao1 * , Jun Yu2 , Qi Tian3
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
School of Computer Science and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University
3
Huawei Cloud & AI
ckczzj@zju.edu.cn, zhaozhou@zju.edu.cn, yujun@hdu.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com
2

Abstract
Diffusion models have recently exhibited remarkable abilities
to synthesize striking image samples since the introduction
of denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs). Their
key idea is to disrupt images into noise through a fixed forward process and learn its reverse process to generate samples from noise in a denoising way. For conditional DDPMs,
most existing practices relate conditions only to the reverse
process and fit it to the reversal of unconditional forward process. We find this will limit the condition modeling and generation in a small time window. In this paper, we propose a
novel and flexible conditional diffusion model by introducing
conditions into the forward process. We utilize extra latent
space to allocate an exclusive diffusion trajectory for each
condition based on some shifting rules, which will disperse
condition modeling to all timesteps and improve the learning capacity of model. We formulate our method, which we
call ShiftDDPMs, and provide a unified point of view on existing related methods. Extensive qualitative and quantitative
experiments on image synthesis demonstrate the feasibility
and effectiveness of ShiftDDPMs.

sample from

early-stage

(unconditional)

critical-stage

late-stage

image
manifold

mixed sampling procedure (input 0~9 when conditional sampling)
late-stage

critical-stage

early-stage

Figure 1: Exploration of the mechanism of conditional
DDPMs. We grid 1000 timesteps with a step size of 50
and perform grid-search for (t1 , t2 ) paris to find the shortest
critical-stage that can ensure high accuracy of conditional
generation. For MNIST, it is (400, 600).

Introduction and Motivation
Deep generative models such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014), Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2013), autoregressive models (Van Oord, Kalchbrenner, and Kavukcuoglu
2016) and normalizing flows (Rezende and Mohamed 2015)
have shown remarkable abilities to model complex data distributions and synthesize high-quality samples in various
fields. Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015) are recently brought back into focus by denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020),
which exhibits competitive image synthesis results and has
been applied in a wide range of data modalities.
Generally, DDPMs gradually disrupt images by adding
noise through a fixed forward process and learn its reverse
process to generate samples from noise in a denoising way.
There are two main methods to achieve conditional DDPMs.
One is to learn an estimator that can compute the similarity
between conditions and noisy data and use it to guide pretrained unconditional DDPMs to sample towards specified

conditions (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021). Another is to train a
conditional DDPM from scratch by incorporating conditions
into the function approximator of the reverse process. Both
methods try to fit their conditional reverse process to the reversal of fixed unconditional forward process. This brings up
a question: Can we design a more effective forward process
utilizing given conditions to form a new type of conditional
DDPMs and benefit from it?
We investigate this question by exploring the mechanism
of how conditional DDPMs achieve conditional sampling
based on unconditional forward process, similar to that in
PDAE (Zhang, Zhao, and Lin 2022). We conduct some experiments, shown in Figure 1. Concretely, we train an unconditional DDPM and a conditional one on MNIST (LeCun
et al. 1998), respectively. The conditional one incorporates
class labels (one-hot vector) into the function approximator of parameterized reverse process. The top two rows respectively show the latents xt sampled from x0 for various
t and the samples generated by the unconditional DDPM

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3552

