The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learnable Path in Neural Controlled Differential Equations
Sheo Yon Jhin1 * , Minju Jo1 * , Seungji Kook1 , Noseong Park1
1

Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea,
sheoyonj,alflsowl12,202132139,noseong@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

scientific time-series data can be clearly described by differential equations (Chen et al. 2018; Rubanova, Chen, and
Duvenaud 2019; Kidger et al. 2020). For instance, there
exist various differential equation-based models for physical, social scientific, and financial phenomena and some of
them received Nobel prizes, e.g., the Black–Scholes–Merton
model (Black and Scholes 1973). In this regard, we consider
that differential equation-based approaches are one of the
most suitable strategies in designing time-series models, especially for real-world data. Neural controlled differential
equations (NCDEs) (Kidger et al. 2020) are breakthrough
concepts to interpret recurrent neural networks (RNNs) in
a continuous manner. While the initial value determines
the solution of differential equation in neural ordinary differential equations (NODEs) (Chen et al. 2018), NCDEs
keep reading time-evolving values (as in RNNs) and their
solutions are determined by the entire input. In this regard, NCDEs are a continuous analogue to RNNs and they
show the state-of-the-art performance for many time-series
datasets. We compare the solution z(T ) of NODEs and
NCDEs as follows:
1. For NODEs,
Z T
z(T ) = z(0) +
f (z(t), t; θf )dt;
(1)

Neural controlled differential equations (NCDEs), which are
continuous analogues to recurrent neural networks (RNNs),
are a specialized model in (irregular) time-series processing. In comparison with similar models, e.g., neural ordinary differential equations (NODEs), the key distinctive characteristics of NCDEs are i) the adoption of the continuous path created by an interpolation algorithm from each
raw discrete time-series sample and ii) the adoption of the
Riemann–Stieltjes integral. It is the continuous path which
makes NCDEs be analogues to continuous RNNs. However,
NCDEs use existing interpolation algorithms to create the
path, which is unclear whether they can create an optimal
path. To this end, we present a method to generate another
latent path (rather than relying on existing interpolation algorithms), which is identical to learning an appropriate interpolation method. We design an encoder-decoder module based
on NCDEs and NODEs, and a special training method for it.
Our method shows the best performance in both time-series
classification and forecasting.

Introduction
Deep learning for time-series data is one of the most active
research fields in machine learning since many real-world
applications deal with time-series data. For instance, timeseries forecasting is a long-standing research problem, ranging from stock price forecasting to climate and traffic forecasting (Reinsel 2003; Fu 2011; Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2018;
Wu et al. 2019; Guo et al. 2019; Song et al. 2020; Huang
et al. 2020; Bai et al. 2020; Chen, Segovia-Dominguez, and
Gel 2021; Fang et al. 2021; Choi et al. 2022; Hwang et al.
2021). Time-series classification (Fawaz et al. 2019) and
time-series anomaly detection (Zhang et al. 2019) are also
popular. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs), such as LSTM
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), GRU (Chung et al.
2014) and so on, have been typically used for these purposes. Recently, however, researchers extended the basis of
the time-series processing model design to differential equations (far beyond classical RNNs), e.g., neural ordinary differential equations (NODEs) and neural controlled differential equations (NCDEs). It is already well known that much

0

2. For NCDEs,
Z T
z(T ) = z(0) +

f (z(t); θf )dX(t)

(2)

0

Z T
= z(0) +

f (z(t); θf )
0

dX(t)
dt,
dt

(3)

where X(t) is a continuous path created from a raw discrete time-series sample {(xi , ti )}N
i=0 by an interpolation
algorithm, where ti means the time-point of the observation xi , t0 = 0, tN = T and ti < ti+1 (cf. Fig. 1(a)).
Note that NCDEs keep reading the derivative of X(t)
def
over time, denoted Ẋ(t) = dX(t)
dt , whereas NODEs do
not. Given fixed θf (after training), z(0) solely determines the evolutionary trajectory from z(0) to z(T ) in
NODEs.
In NCDEs, the time-derivative of X(t), dX(t)
dt , is considdz(t)
ered to define the time-derivative of z(t), dt , which means

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8014

