The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Parameterized Algorithms for Colored Clustering
Leon Kellerhals1 , Tomohiro Koana1 , Pascal Kunz1,2 , and Rolf Niedermeier1
1

Technische Universität Berlin, Algorithmics and Computational Complexity, Berlin, Germany
2
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Algorithm Engineering, Berlin, Germany
{leon.kellerhals, tomohiro.koana, p.kunz.1}@tu-berlin.de

Abstract

by patients prior to an ER visit. Other settings with similar
interaction categorization by type include coauthorship networks (categorized by publication venue) and copurchasing
networks (categorized by type of purchase).
Angel et al. (2016) introduced an approach to finding such
category-sensitive clusters, which we will call C OLORED
C LUSTERING (CC): Given an edge-colored graph, the goal
is to color the vertices in a way that maximizes the number
of stable edges: edges whose endpoints are both assigned the
same color as the edge. Angel et al. (2016) proved the problem to be NP-hard and gave approximation algorithms as
well as tractable special cases for the problem. Their approximation algorithm was improved by Ageev and Kononov
(2014) and Alhamdan and Kononov (2019). Cai and Leung
(2018) studied the parameterized complexity of the problem,
giving FPT algorithms with respect to the number k of stable edges2 and to the number r of unstable edges. Amburg,
Veldt, and Benson (2020) introduced the problem under a
different name and for hypergraphs. Veldt (2022) continued
the study of the problem on hypergraphs. In several of the
examples listed above, it is sensible to model the interactions as hypergraphs.

In the C OLORED C LUSTERING problem, one is asked to cluster edge-colored (hyper-)graphs whose colors represent interaction types. More specifically, the goal is to select as many
edges as possible without choosing two edges that share an
endpoint and are colored differently. Equivalently, the goal
can also be described as assigning colors to the vertices in a
way that fits the edge-coloring as well as possible.
As this problem is NP-hard, we build on previous work by
studying its parameterized complexity. We give a 2O(k) ·
nO(1) -time algorithm where k is the number of edges to be
selected and n the number of vertices. We also prove the existence of a kernel of size O(k5/2 ), resolving an open problem posed in the literature. We consider parameters that are
smaller than k, the number of edges to be selected, and r, the
number of edges that can be deleted. Such smaller parameters are obtained by considering the difference between k or
r and some lower bound on these values. We give both algorithms and lower bounds for C OLORED C LUSTERING with
such parameterizations. Finally, we settle the parameterized
complexity of C OLORED C LUSTERING with respect to structural graph parameters by showing that it is W[1]-hard with
respect to both vertex cover number and tree-cut width, but
fixed-parameter tractable with respect to slim tree-cut width.

Related work. Another clustering model which also captures edge colors is chromatic correlation clustering (Bonchi
et al. 2015), in which the goal is to cluster the vertices
such that the number of edge modifications (additions, deletions, recolorings) to obtain a disjoint set of monochromatic cliques is minimized. This approach penalizes missing edges, that is, edges that need to be added such that
each cluster becomes a clique. Chromatic correlation clustering generalizes correlation clustering (Bansal, Blum, and
Chawla 2004) and thus is NP-hard even for one color. C OL ORED C LUSTERING does not penalize such missing edges
and becomes more tractable: it is polynomial-time solvable for two colors. Closely related to graph clustering in
edge-colored graphs is the field of clustering multi-layer
graphs (Mucha et al. 2010; Chen et al. 2018). In that scenario, the layers do not relate to a cluster type. Another related problem is the M AXIMUM E DGE -C OLORABLE S UB GRAPH (Agrawal et al. 2022), in which the goal is to prop-

Introduction
Graph clustering is one of the most fundamental tasks in
analyzing data that captures interactions between entities.
The idea is that if two vertices are in the same cluster, then
the corresponding entities are similar in terms of their interactions. Typical approaches lead to meaningful clusterings
whenever the edges model interactions of the same type,
possibly with weights. Those approaches are not, however,
designed to deal with data that captures interactions of different types. There are several settings in which the clusters
should capture similarity not only in terms of interactions,
but in terms of types of interactions. For instance, brain
coactivation graphs capture which brain regions are active
or inactive at the same time when exposed to certain types
of stimuli (Crossley et al. 2013). In the Drug Abuse Warning
Network,1 interactions describe combinations of drugs taken
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.samhsa.gov/data/data-we-collect/dawn-drugabuse-warning-network

2

Roughly speaking, an FPT algorithm with respect to k has a
running time of f (k) · nO(1) , where k is the parameter and n is the
instance size.

4400

