The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Semi-attention Partition for Occluded Person Re-identification
Mengxi Jia1, 3 * , Yifan Sun3 , Yunpeng Zhai4 , Xinhua Cheng4 , Yi Yang5 , Ying Li2†
1

School of Software and Microelectronic, Peking University, Beijing, China
National Engineering Center of Software Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Baidu Research
4
Peking University, China
5
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
{mxjia, ypzhai, li.ying}@pku.edu.cn,
Conflict

Abstract
This paper proposes a Semi-Attention Partition (SAP) method
to learn well-aligned part features for occluded person reidentification (re-ID). Currently, the mainstream methods employ either external semantic partition or attention-based partition, and the latter manner is usually better than the former one.
Under this background, this paper explores a potential that the
“weak” semantic partition can be a good teacher for the “strong”
attention-based partition. In other words, the attention-based
student can substantially surpass its noisy semantic-based
teacher, contradicting the common sense that the student usually achieves inferior (or comparable) accuracy. A key to this
effect is: the proposed SAP encourages the attention-based
partition of the (transformer) student to be partially consistent
with the semantic-based teacher partition through knowledge
distillation, yielding the so-called semi-attention. Such partial consistency allows the student to have both consistency
and reasonable conflict with the noisy teacher. More specifically, on the one hand, the attention is guided by the semantic
partition from the teacher. On the other hand, the attention
mechanism itself still has some degree of freedom to comply
with the inherent similarity between different patches, thus
gaining resistance against noisy supervision. Moreover, we
integrate a battery of well-engineered designs into SAP to
reinforce their cooperation (e.g., multiple forms of teacherstudent consistency), as well as to promote reasonable conflict
(e.g., mutual absorbing partition refinement and a supervision
signal dropout strategy). Experimental results confirm that the
transformer student achieves substantial improvement after
this semi-attention learning scheme, and produces new stateof-the-art accuracy on several standard re-ID benchmarks.

Cooperation

SemiCross-attention

SemiSelf-attention

Distillation

2

Attention-based
Partition Student

Proxy-to-patch
Affinity

Patch-to-patch
Affinity

Noisy Semantic
Partition Teacher

(a)
Part 1

…

Part m Global

Input

Attention learned without teacher

Teacher partition

Attention learned with teacher
(b)

Figure 1: (a) Semi-attention partition is learned by cooperation (patch/proxy-to-patch consistency) and reasonable
conflict with the teacher. (b) In SAP, the student (with teacher
guidance) learns more discriminative part attention than
the pure-attention baseline, and further surpasses the noisy
teacher through reasonable student-teacher conflict

Introduction

problem brings additional distractions from the background,
therefore significantly compromising the re-ID accuracy.
Learning well-aligned part features is a mainstream solution for occluded re-ID. It conducts part-to-part comparison
(He et al. 2018b,a, 2019) by aligning the visible body parts
and measuring their similarities separately. According to the
image partition strategy, existing occluded re-ID methods
can be divided into two categories: one approach (Gao et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2020; He and Liu 2020) uses external cues
from semantic partition (e.g., pose estimation and human
parsing), while the other one (Sun et al. 2019a; Li et al. 2021;
Zhu et al. 2021; He et al. 2021) uses attention mechanism for
partition. Currently, the semantic-based approach is inferior

This paper considers the occluded person re-identification (reID) (Zheng, Yang, and Hauptmann 2016; Zhai et al. 2020a).
Basically, re-ID aims to identify the same person across multiple non-overlapping camera views. Occluded re-ID further
raises a critical challenge, i.e., the persons are partially occluded during observation. This challenge is very common
among realistic re-ID scenarios, where the pedestrian sometimes appears in cluttered or crowded scenes. The occlusion
*Work done during an internship at Baidu Research.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

998

