The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Deep Latent Regularity Network for Modeling Stochastic Partial Differential
Equations
Shiqi Gong1 * † , Peiyan Hu1 , Qi Meng2† , Yue Wang2 ,
Rongchan Zhu3 , Bingguang Chen1 , Zhiming Ma1 , Hao Ni4, 5† , Tie-Yan Liu2
1

Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Microsoft Research AI4Science
3
Bielefeld University
4
Department of Mathematics, University College London
5
The Alan Turing Institute

Abstract

dynamical systems. Plenty of scientific models are formulated in the form of SPDEs, such as Φ4 model arising in
the stochastic quantisation of quantum field theory (Hairer
2014a), and stochastic Navier-Stokes equations modeling
the statistics of turbulent flows (Buckmaster and Vicol 2019)
in atmospheric science. Since SPDEs are so important in scientific areas, studying their dynamics from both theoretical
and numerical aspects is of vital importance in both mathematics and physics.
Recently, integrating AI techniques with differential
equations to accelerate the dynamics simulation is very popular and there have been many deep learning models arisen
(Kovachki et al. 2021; Lu, Jin, and Karniadakis 2019). A
promising setup is using deep neural networks to model the
solution of parametric PDEs, which maps from input functions (e.g., initial functions) to their corresponding solutions.
For example, Neural Operators (Kovachki et al. 2021) and
DeepONet (Lu, Jin, and Karniadakis 2019) are two network
architectures that can model the PDE operator with theoretical guarantees on universal approximation. These models are trained by supervised learning, relying on pre-given
training samples, which are usually generated by the traditional numerical solver. However, SPDEs usually have poor
regularity w.r.t the time variable for function-valued noise
and singularity w.r.t space for space-time white noise that
these models do not take into consideration. Directly applying these kinds of models to learn SPDEs’ solutions will
meet two problems. The first is the universality of these
models to approximate the map from the random forcing
to SPDEs’ solutions is not guaranteed (e.g., the space-time
white noise does not lie in the function spaces in Assumption
1 in Neural Operator (Li et al. 2020c).). The second is that
the sample complexity will be large if the ground truth mapping is rough, i.e., it requires more training samples, but the
computational cost of acquiring samples relies on numerical
solvers which may be expensive.
The model feature vectors (Chevyrev, Gerasimovics, and
Weber 2021) inspired by the regularity structure theory
(Hairer 2014b) compose a set of bases of SPDEs’ mild solution. They have improved regularity compared to the random forcing and have previously been treated as a fixed

Stochastic partial differential equations (SPDEs) are crucial
for modelling dynamics with randomness in many areas including economics, physics, and atmospheric sciences. Recently, using deep learning approaches to learn the PDE solution for accelerating PDE simulation becomes increasingly
popular. However, SPDEs have two unique properties that
require new design on the models. First, the model to approximate the solution of SPDE should be generalizable over
both initial conditions and the random sampled forcing term.
Second, the random forcing terms usually have poor regularity whose statistics may diverge (e.g., the space-time white
noise). To deal with the problems, in this work, we design
a deep neural network called Deep Latent Regularity Net
(DLR-Net). DLR-Net includes a regularity feature block as
the main component, which maps the initial condition and the
random forcing term to a set of regularity features. The processing of regularity features is inspired by regularity structure theory and the features provably compose a set of basis to
represent the SPDE solution. The regularity features are then
fed into a small backbone neural operator to get the output.
We conduct experiments on various SPDEs including the dynamic Φ41 model and the stochastic 2D Navier-Stokes equation to predict their solutions, and the results demonstrate that
the proposed DLR-Net can achieve SOTA accuracy compared
with the baselines. Moreover, the inference time is over 20
times faster than the traditional numerical solver and is comparable with the baseline deep learning models.

Introduction
Stochastic partial differential equations (SPDEs) are crucial
for modeling dynamics in many areas including economics
(Barone-Adesi and Whaley 1987), physics (Uhlenbeck and
Ornstein 1930), atmospheric sciences (Hasselmann 1976),
biology (Wilkinson 2018), etc. SPDEs, generalized from
PDEs, take random forcing terms into consideration, and
they are widely used to study the statistical mechanics of
* This work was done when he was visiting Microsoft Research.
†
Corresponds to Shiqi Gong (gongshiqi15@mails.ucas.ac.cn),
Qi Meng (meq@microsoft.com), Hao Ni (h.ni@ucl.ac.uk).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7740

