The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Markov Decision Processes with Time-Varying Geometric Discounting
Jiarui Gan1 , Annika Hennes2 , Rupak Majumdar3 , Debmalya Mandal3 , Goran Radanovic3
1
University of Oxford
Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf
3
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
jiarui.gan@cs.ox.ac.uk, annika.hennes@hhu.de, rupak@mpi-sws.org, dmandal@mpi-sws.org, gradanovic@mpi-sws.org
2

Abstract

particular those pertaining to human decision making under uncertainty, time-varying discount factors are essential
for capturing long-run utilities. For example, it is shown
in laboratory settings that human decision makers often exhibit time-inconsistent behavior: people prefer $50 in three
years plus three weeks to $20 in three years, yet prefer $20
now over $50 in three weeks (Green, Fristoe, and Myerson
1994). Such behaviors are better explained through timevarying discount factors. Unfortunately, many of the aforementioned results break with time-varying discounting. As
Strotz showed (Strotz 1955), geometric discounting with a
constant discounting factor is the only discount function that
satisfies dynamic- or time-consistency.
In this paper, we study a model of infinite-horizon MDPs
with time-varying geometric discounting. Our model seizes
the idea of geometric discounting, but generalizes the discount factor to a function of time. In each time step, the function produces a discount factor, and the agent’s incentive is
defined by the geometrically discounted sum of its future rewards with respect to this discount factor. Hence, the agent
aims at optimizing a different objective in each time step.
This changing incentive gives rise to a game-theoretic approach, proposed and studied in a series of works in the literature (Strotz 1955; Pollak 1968; Peleg and Yaari 1973; Lattimore and Hutter 2014; Jaśkiewicz and Nowak 2021; Lesmana and Pun 2021). Via this approach, the behavior of the
sole agent in the process is interpreted as playing against its
future selves in a sequential game. Analyzing the subgame
perfect equilibrium (SPE) is therefore a naturally associated
task, which we aim to address in this paper.
More concretely, Figure 1 presents an example that compares the behavior of this model to the standard model of geometric discounting, illustrating how time-varying geometric discounting can lead to time-inconsistency. In the example, the agent has to decide between getting a reward of 100
at time step 3 (option A) and getting a slightly increased
reward of 110 one time step later (option B). This decision problem is captured by the MDP in Figure 1c. Under
the standard geometric discounting, the preference order of
these two outcomes does not change over time: as illustrated
in Figure 1a, an agent that discounts its future with a constant factor 0.75 would always prefer option A, no matter
at time step 0 or 1. This is not anymore the case with timevarying discounting. An agent who applies a discount factor

Canonical models of Markov decision processes (MDPs) usually consider geometric discounting based on a constant discount factor. While this standard modeling approach has led
to many elegant results, some recent studies indicate the necessity of modeling time-varying discounting in certain applications. This paper studies a model of infinite-horizon MDPs
with time-varying discount factors. We take a game-theoretic
perspective—whereby each time step is treated as an independent decision maker with their own (fixed) discount factor—
and we study the subgame perfect equilibrium (SPE) of the
resulting game as well as the related algorithmic problems.
We present a constructive proof of the existence of an SPE
and demonstrate the EXPTIME-hardness of computing an
SPE. We also turn to the approximate notion of ϵ-SPE and
show that an ϵ-SPE exists under milder assumptions. An algorithm is presented to compute an ϵ-SPE, of which an upper bound of the time complexity, as a function of the convergence property of the time-varying discount factor, is provided.

1

Introduction

Ever since Samuelson’s foundational work introduced the
discounted utility theory (Samuelson 1937), discounted utility models have played a central role in sequential decision
making. Building on earlier work that recognized the influence of time on individuals’ valuations of goods (e.g., see
(Rae 1905; Jevons 1879; von Böhm-Bawerk 1922; Fisher
1930) and the discussion in (Loewe 2006)), Samuelson proposed a utility model in which a decision maker attempts to
optimize the discounted sum of their utilities with a constant
discount factor applied in every time step; this is known as
geometric or exponential discounting.
Geometric discounting leads to many elegant and wellknown results. In the context of Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Puterman 1994), it results in the decision
maker’s preferences over the policies being invariant over
time. Moreover, it is key to the existence and polynomialtime computability of an optimal policy. These results have
contributed greatly to the popularity and wide applicability of the MDPs. Nevertheless, in many applications, in
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11980

