The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning to Select from Multiple Options
Jiangshu Du1 , Wenpeng Yin2 , Congying Xia3 , Philip S. Yu1
1

University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
2
Penn State University, State College, PA, USA
3
Salesforce Research, Palo Alto, CA, USA
{jdu25, psyu}@uic.edu, wenpeng@psu.edu, c.xia@salesforce.com

Abstract
Many NLP tasks can be regarded as a selection problem from
a set of options, e.g., classification tasks, multi-choice QA, etc.
Textual entailment (TE) has been shown as the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) approach to dealing with those selection problems.
TE treats input texts as premises (P), options as hypotheses (H),
then handles the selection problem by modeling (P, H) pairwise. Two limitations: (i) the pairwise modeling is unaware of
other options, which is less intuitive since humans often determine the best options by comparing competing candidates;
(ii) the inference process of pairwise TE is time-consuming,
especially when the option space is large. To deal with the
two issues, this work first proposes a contextualized TE model
(Context-TE) by appending other k options as the context
of the current (P, H) modeling. Context-TE is able to learn
more reliable decision for the H since it considers various context. Second, we speed up Context-TE by coming up with
Parallel-TE, which learns the decisions of multiple options
simultaneously. Parallel-TE significantly improves the inference speed while keeping comparable performance with
Context-TE. Our methods are evaluated on three tasks (ultrafine entity typing, intent detection and multi-choice QA) that
are typical selection problems with different sizes of options.
Experiments show our models set new SOTA performance;
particularly, Parallel-TE is faster than the pairwise TE by k
times in inference.

Introduction
The NLP consists of various tasks and many of them are
essentially a selection problem from a set of options. For
instance, text classification selects the correct labels for the
input text from all label candidates; given a paragraph and
multiple answer candidates, multi-choice question answering (QA) selects the correct answer among all the choices.
Textual entailment (TE) has been widely applied as the SOTA
technique for solving these selection problems, e.g., intent
detection (Xia et al. 2021), ultra-fine entity typing (Li, Yin,
and Chen 2022), coreference resolution (Yin et al. 2020),
relation extraction (Xia et al. 2021; Sainz et al. 2021), event
argument extraction (Sainz et al. 2022), etc.
For those selection tasks, traditional classifiers treat all labels as indices, ignoring their semantics which, however, are
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

the core supervision in zero- and few-shot learning. In contrast, TE reserves and exploits the original label information
by constructing premise-hypothesis pairs, where premises
(P) are texts and hypotheses (H) are transformed from labels.
Then, TE selects an option by predicting if an option-oriented
H can be entailed by the input P. In addition to using a unified
textual entailment framework to solve various selection problems, another benefit is that the availability of large-scale
entailment datasets, such as MNLI (Williams, Nangia, and
Bowman 2018) and DocNLI (Yin, Radev, and Xiong 2021),
can provide rich indirect supervision to handle those target
problems when task-specific supervision is limited. However,
there are two main limitations for the standard TE methods.
First, TE pairs one input text only with a single option. Thus,
all options are treated independently when the model makes
decisions. In contrast, humans usually perform the selection
in a more intuitive way: comparing all options and select the
best one. Second, at the inference phase, the TE model needs
to compare a text with all possible options one by one, which
is inefficient especially when the option space is large. Take
the ultra-fine entity typing (Choi et al. 2018) as an example,
its 10k types take the TE model 35 seconds for each test instance and about 19.4 hours 1 to infer the entire test set (Li,
Yin, and Chen 2022).
To overcome the limitations of standard TE, we introduce
two novel approaches for option inference. First, inspired by
the intuition that a model can be more powerful if it can find
the correct answers even under the disturbance from other options, we propose a contextualized TE model (Context-TE).
It appends other k options as an extra context of the standard
(P, H) pairs during training. In this way, the model makes the
decision not only depending on the current option H but also
considering a more informative context. Thus, the prediction on H is more reliable, but Context-TE is as slow as the
standard TE in terms of inference. Second, we improve the efficiency of Context-TE by introducing a parallel TE method
(Parallel-TE). Parallel-TE learns an option’s representation based on other options and makes the decisions of
k options simultaneously. Therefore, the inference time of
Parallel-TE is faster than Context-TE by k times.
We evaluate our proposed models on three tasks: ultrafine entity typing (UFET (Choi et al. 2018), few-shot in1

12754

Experiments run at an NVIDIA TITAN RTX.

