The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FacT: Factor-Tuning for Lightweight Adaptation on Vision Transformer
Shibo Jie, Zhi-Hong Deng*
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
{parsley, zhdeng}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

19-Task Average Accuracy on VTAB-1k

78

Recent work has explored the potential to adapt a pre-trained
vision transformer (ViT) by updating only a few parameters so as to improve storage efficiency, called parameterefficient transfer learning (PETL). Current PETL methods
have shown that by tuning only 0.5% of the parameters, ViT
can be adapted to downstream tasks with even better performance than full fine-tuning. In this paper, we aim to further
promote the efficiency of PETL to meet the extreme storage
constraint in real-world applications. To this end, we propose
a tensorization-decomposition framework to store the weight
increments, in which the weights of each ViT are tensorized
into a single 3D tensor, and their increments are then decomposed into lightweight factors. In the fine-tuning process,
only the factors need to be updated and stored, termed FactorTuning (FacT). On VTAB-1K benchmark, our method performs on par with NOAH, the state-of-the-art PETL method,
while being 5× more parameter-efficient. We also present
a tiny version that only uses 8K (0.01% of ViT’s parameters) trainable parameters but outperforms full fine-tuning and
many other PETL methods such as VPT and BitFit. In fewshot settings, FacT also beats all PETL baselines using the
fewest parameters, demonstrating its strong capability in the
low-data regime.

Full
BitFit
VPT
Adapter
AdaptFormer
LoRA
NOAH
FacT-TT (Ours)
FacT-TK (Ours)

Average Acc (%)

76
74
72
70
68
66
64

10 2

10 1

100

101

# trainable param (M)

102

Figure 1: Average accuracy vs. number of trainable parameters (log axis) on VTAB-1K benchmark. Our FacT significantly reduces the number of trainable parameters.

all bias parameters (Zaken, Goldberg, and Ravfogel 2022)).
Recently, LoRA (Hu et al. 2022) also shows that optimizing
the low-rank decomposition matrices of weight increments1
of the dense layers is a promising way to adapt large models.
However, though LoRA’s matrix decomposition significantly reduces the storage overhead of fine-tuned dense
layers, it is far from exploiting the low-rank properties of
neural networks to the extreme. Inspired by recent work
on compression of the transformer-based pre-trained language models (PLMs) (Wang et al. 2022), we infer that during fine-tuning, the weight increments of pre-trained ViT
are also redundant in terms of intra-weight rank and interweight rank. The former is reflected in that the dense increments matrix can be low-rank as in LoRA, while the latter is implied by the fact that cross-layer weight-sharing
has already been adopted in some lightweight ViT structures (Zhang et al. 2022), which is not taken into consideration by LoRA. To fully develop the potential of PETL,
we propose a tensorization-decomposition framework. Instead of decomposing the weight increment matrices individually like LoRA, we represent the whole ViT as a single

Introduction
The de-facto paradigm for achieving state-of-the-art performance on visual tasks involves pre-training on large datasets
like ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009), and then fully fine-tuning
on downstream tasks. However, this paradigm is not storageefficient because each downstream task necessitates the storage of an entire model, which becomes prohibitive in some
scenarios (e.g., storing customized models for each user) as
the size of vision models grows exponentially.
To promote storage efficiency, recent work on parameterefficient transfer learning (PETL) attempts to fine-tune only
a small part of the parameters to adapt the large pre-trained
models to downstream tasks. These methods either insert additional trainable structures (e.g., adapters (Houlsby et al.
2019) or prompt tokens (Jia et al. 2022)) to a frozen vision
transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) backbone or selectively fine-tune some of the ViT’s own parameters (e.g.,
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We refer to the weight’s change during fine-tuning as its increment, which is a matrix or tensor of the same shape as the weight.

1060

