The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Cross-Modality Earth Mover’s Distance for Visible Thermal Person
Re-identification
Yongguo Ling1 , Zhun Zhong2 , Zhiming Luo1 , Fengxiang Yang1 , Donglin Cao1 * ,
Yaojin Lin3 , Shaozi Li1 , Nicu Sebe2
2

1
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, China
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento, Italy
3
School of Computer Science, Minnan Normal University, China
yongguo ling@sina.com {zhiming.luo, yangfx.stu, another, szlig}@xmu.edu.cn
{zhun.zhong, niculae.sebe}@unitn.it yjlin@mnnu.edu.cn

𝑣1 𝑣2 𝑣3 𝑣4

Abstract
Visible thermal person re-identification (VT-ReID) suffers
from inter-modality discrepancy and intra-identity variations.
Distribution alignment is a popular solution for VT-ReID,
however, it is usually restricted to the influence of the intraidentity variations. In this paper, we propose the CrossModality Earth Mover’s Distance (CM-EMD) that can alleviate the impact of the intra-identity variations during modality alignment. CM-EMD selects an optimal transport strategy
and assigns high weights to pairs that have a smaller intraidentity variation. In this manner, the model will focus on
reducing the inter-modality discrepancy while paying less attention to intra-identity variations, leading to a more effective
modality alignment. Moreover, we introduce two techniques
to improve the advantage of CM-EMD. First, Cross-Modality
Discrimination Learning (CM-DL) is designed to overcome
the discrimination degradation problem caused by modality alignment. By reducing the ratio between intra-identity
and inter-identity variances, CM-DL leads the model to learn
more discriminative representations. Second, we construct
the Multi-Granularity Structure (MGS), enabling us to align
modalities from both coarse- and fine-grained levels with the
proposed CM-EMD. Extensive experiments show the benefits
of the proposed CM-EMD and its auxiliary techniques (CMDL and MGS). Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on two VT-ReID benchmarks.

𝑣1 𝑣2 𝑣3 𝑣4

𝑡1
𝑡3 𝑡4 𝑡1 𝑡2
𝑣1 𝑣2 𝑣3 𝑣4

𝑡3
(a)

𝑡4 Suffer from intraidentity variations

𝑣1 𝑣2 𝑣3 𝑣4

𝑡1
𝑡3 𝑡4 𝑡1 𝑡2

𝑡2

𝑡2

𝑡3

𝑡4

Select an optimal
transport strategy

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Traditional distribution alignment. The randomly selected pairs usually have high intra-identity variations, hindering the reduction of inter-modality discrepancy. (b) Distribution alignment with Cross-Modality Earth
Mover’s Distance (CM-EMD). Our CM-EMD assigns large
weights to pairs that have less intra-identity variations, leading the model to focus on reducing the modality discrepancy
rather than intra-identity variations.

Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) is critical in a safety surveillance system, aiming at matching a query of interest from a
set of gallery images captured by non-overlapping cameras.
Traditional ReID (Lin et al. 2019; Wu, Zhu, and Gong 2020;
Zheng et al. 2021) assumes that the images are collected by
RGB cameras. However, the appearance characteristics of
visible (RGB) images are largely relying on the illumination
conditions and will be highly influenced by the poor illumination (e.g., night-time). To handle the night-time context, the ReID community has captured night-time images
by thermal cameras and proposed a task called visible thermal person re-identification (VT-ReID) (Ye et al. 2019). This

task is a cross-modality retrieval problem, aiming to search
a query of one modality (e.g., visible) from the gallery of another modality (e.g., thermal). VT-ReID is more challenging
than the traditional ReID, because we need to jointly overcome the inter-modality discrepancy caused by visible and
thermal cameras and the intra-identity variations caused by
different factors (such as view, pose and background).
Distribution alignment (Pu et al. 2020; Hao et al. 2019a;
Dai et al. 2018) is a popular and effective solution for VTReID, which aims to reduce the distribution gap between
visible and thermal modalities. However, the existence of
intra-identity variations may interfere with the optimization of distribution alignment. For example, given a training
mini-batch, the randomly selected cross-modality pairs of

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1631

