The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

GRIP: Graph Representation of Immune Repertoire
Using Graph Neural Network and Transformer
Yongju Lee1 * , Hyunho Lee1 * , Kyoungseob Shin1 * , Sunghoon Kwon1,2
1

Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
2
Bio-Max Institute, Seoul National University
taliq lee@snu.ac.kr, eyebis208@snu.ac.kr, arquina94@snu.ac.kr, skwon@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

have been developed to predict the properties of individual immune receptor such as their binding ability with specific pathogens, protein structure, and the cancer relatedness
of immune receptor (Beshnova et al. 2020; Davidsen et al.
2019; Jin et al. 2021; Mason et al. 2021)
Still, a method for analyzing the immune repertoire, a collection of immune receptors, is necessary. The role of immune receptors during the immune response can be better
understood by investigating the immune repertoire. The immune repertoire shows the systematic immune status of an
individual through the chronological history of the immune
receptor. Thus, we can understand which immune status that
immune receptor is in during the immune response. However, analyzing the immune repertoire is a challenging multiple instance learning (MIL) problem. Although immune
repertoire consists of few thousands to millions of immune
receptors, few subsets of immune receptor is relevant to the
specific disease. Thus, to diagnosis a disease based on immune repertoire, the model needs to detect the few subset
of immune receptor from immune repertoire (Emerson et al.
2017; Mora and Walczak 2019). In addition, even if the immune repertoire datasets of certain disease are collated, it is
difficult to recognize shared immune receptors because each
individual has a unique pathogen exposure history (Greiff
et al. 2017). Previous deep learning methods attempted to
solve the challenging problem of set-based MIL methods,
which consider each immune receptor as an unordered (permutation invariant) dataset. All the extant methodologies,
such as k-mer-based feature count or LSTM-like feature extraction combined with an attention-based module, consider
the immune repertoire as a set (Figure 1a-b).
However, the immune repertoire is not a set-like data
structure. Rather, inside the body, it forms a graph-like
structure to defeat pathogens (Bashford-Rogers et al. 2013;
Hozumi and Tonegawa 1976; Wu et al. 2015). Two types
of immune receptors originate from T cells (T cell receptor,
TCR) and B cells (B cell receptor, BCR). The BCR forms
a more dynamic graph-like structure during the immune
response. When B cells, at their pathogen-unexperienced
state, encounter the pathogens that enter the body, they undergo proliferation and differentiation to optimize the BCR
for the specific pathogens. The B cells introduce the mutations within the BCR (somatic hyper mutation, SHM) and
change their isotype to efficiently defeat the pathogens (class

The immune repertoire is a collection of immune receptors
that has emerged as an important biomarker for both diagnostic and therapeutic of cancer patients. In terms of deep learning, analyzing immune repertoire is a challenging multipleinstance learning problem in which the immune repertoire of
an individual is a bag, and the immune receptor is an instance.
Although several deep learning methods for immune repertoire analysis are introduced, they consider the immune repertoire as a set-like structure that doesn’t take account of the
nature of the immune response. When the immune response
occurs, mutations are introduced to the immune receptor sequence sequentially to optimize the immune response against
the pathogens that enter our body. As a result, immune receptors for the specific pathogen have the lineage of evolution;
thus, immune repertoire is better represented as a graph-like
structure. In this work, we present our novel method graph
representation of immune repertoire (GRIP), which analyzes
the immune repertoire as a hierarchical graph structure and
utilize the collection of graph neural network followed by
graph pooling and transformer to efficiently represents the
immune repertoire as an embedding vector. We show that
GRIP predict the survival probability of cancer patients better than the set-based methods and graph-based structure is
critical for performance. Also, GRIP provides interpretable
results, which prove that GRIP adequately use the prognosisrelated immune receptor and give further possibility to use
the GRIP as the novel biomarker searching tool.

Introduction
The importance of the immune system in tumor studies is
increasing because of the emerging next-generation cancer
therapies that directly target immune cells or utilize them as
mediators (Thorsson et al. 2018). The immune receptor is a
protein that expressed on the surface of immune cell to recognize the disease agents or pathogens entered our body. It
consists of a amino acid sequence that typically 300 long
and is important for the immune response (Slamon et al.
2011). In case of tumor, tumor cells are pathogens in our
body that immune cells recognize and attempt to defeat by
infiltrating the tumor mass. Owing to the importance and
utility of immune receptors, several deep learning methods
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5160

