The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PATRON: Perspective-Aware Multitask Model for Referring Expression
Grounding Using Embodied Multimodal Cues
Md Mofijul Islam, Alexi Gladstone, Tariq Iqbal
School of Engineering and Applied Science, University of Virginia
{mi8uu,abg4br,tiqbal}@virginia.edu

Abstract

terances, which is known as referring expression comprehension (REF) (Yang, Li, and Yu 2019; Yu et al. 2016; Kamath et al. 2021; Akula et al. 2021). These models are often
trained in non-embodied settings, where the visual scenes
contain objects but disregard human nonverbal signals. Consequently, these models cannot generalize well in comprehending real-world human interactions.
Several recent works have attempted to address the task
of comprehending referring expressions by incorporating
nonverbal gestures with verbal utterances in embodied settings (known as embodied referring expression comprehension (E-REF)) (Chen et al. 2021; Schauerte and Fink 2010).
However, some crucial issues remain unaddressed in these
recent works. Particularly, most embodied referring expression datasets only capture human interactions from an observer perspective with exo-centric views. People innately
use an understanding of perspective, which can be observed
in how humans interchangeably use perspectives from the
speaker and the observer when referring to objects during
interactions. For example, a person can refer to an object as
“the red lamp to the left of the black hat” from the speaker’s
perspective or “the red lamp to the right of the black hat”
from the observer’s perspective (Fig. 1). Thus, understanding perspectives can help a model to ground relations and
objects. However, the existing datasets do not contain data
from other perspectives (e.g., speaker, observer, neutral) and
visual views (e.g., exo, ego, top) to train such a model.
Recent works studied REF and E-REF by designing two
separate tasks: a relation grounding task (Goyal et al. 2020;
Dai, Zhang, and Lin 2017; Zhuang et al. 2017; Zhang et al.
2017) and an object grounding task (Chen et al. 2021;
Achlioptas et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2022; Kazemzadeh et al.
2014). In a non-embodied setting, the relation grounding
task is defined as determining whether a verbal utterance
appropriately describes the spatial relationships between objects in a visual scene. In an embodied setting, this relation
grounding task is defined as determining whether a verbal
utterance and nonverbal signals (gazes and pointing gestures) refer to the same object. The object grounding task
aims to identify a referred object using a verbal utterance
and nonverbal gestures. These tasks have many use-cases in
real-world interactions. For example, if a person verbally describes an object but nonverbally points to another object,
an AI-driven agent can identify these incoherent multimodal

Humans naturally use referring expressions with verbal utterances and nonverbal gestures to refer to objects and events.
As these referring expressions can be interpreted differently
from the speaker’s or the observer’s perspective, people effectively decide on the perspective in comprehending the expressions. However, existing models do not explicitly learn perspective grounding, which often causes the models to perform
poorly in understanding embodied referring expressions. To
make it exacerbate, these models are often trained on datasets
collected in non-embodied settings without nonverbal gestures and curated from an exocentric perspective. To address these issues, in this paper, we present a perspectiveaware multitask learning model, called PATRON, for relation
and object grounding tasks in embodied settings by utilizing verbal utterances and nonverbal cues. In PATRON, we
have developed a guided fusion approach, where a perspective grounding task guides the relation and object grounding
task. Through this approach, PATRON learns disentangled
task-specific and task-guidance representations, where taskguidance representations guide the extraction of salient multimodal features to ground the relation and object accurately.
Furthermore, we have curated a synthetic dataset of embodied
referring expressions with multimodal cues, called CAESARPRO. The experimental results suggest that PATRON outperforms the evaluated state-of-the-art visual-language models.
Additionally, the results indicate that learning to ground perspective helps machine learning models to improve the performance of the relation and object grounding task. Furthermore, the insights from the extensive experimental results
and the proposed dataset will enable researchers to evaluate
visual-language models’ effectiveness in understanding referring expressions in other embodied settings.

Introduction
Humans naturally use multimodal cues, such as verbal utterances and non-verbal signals (gazes and pointing gestures),
to refer to objects and events, known as referring expressions
(McNeill 2012; Arbib, Liebal, and Pika 2008; Liszkowski
et al. 2006, 2004; Tomasello 2010; Tang et al. 2020; Stacy
et al. 2020; Kratzer et al. 2020). In prior work, understanding
referring expressions has been generally modeled as grounding relations and objects in visual scenes using verbal utCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

971

