The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Reducing ANN-SNN Conversion Error through Residual Membrane Potential
Zecheng Hao1 , Tong Bu1,2 , Jianhao Ding1 , Tiejun Huang1,2 , Zhaofei Yu1,2 *
1

School of Computer Science, Peking University
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
zechenghao@pku.edu.cn, putong30@pku.edu.cn, djh01998@stu.pku.edu.cn, {tjhuang,yuzf12}@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Generally, two main approaches are proposed to train
deep SNNs: (1) backpropagation with surrogate gradient (Neftci, Mostafa, and Zenke 2019; Kim, Kim, and Kim
2020), (2) ANN-SNN conversion (Cao, Chen, and Khosla
2015; Rueckauer et al. 2016). Unlike the surrogate gradientbased learning method that requires more GPU computing
than ANN training, ANN-SNN conversion directly trains a
source ANN and then converts it to an SNN by replacing the
ReLU activation with IF neurons, which is regarded as the
most effective way to train deep SNNs.
Although ANN-SNN conversion can achieve comparable
performance as ANNs on large-scale datasets, it often requires large time-steps to match the firing rates of SNNs to
the activation value of ANNs. There is still a performance
gap between ANNs and SNNs under the condition of low latency. Many researchers have made great efforts to eliminate
these errors to achieve high-performance converted SNNs
with low latency (Han, Srinivasan, and Roy 2020; Ding et al.
2021; Ho and Chang 2021; Deng and Gu 2021; Li et al.
2021a; Li, Ma, and Furber 2022). However, unevenness error (Bu et al. 2022b), which refers to the deviation caused
by different temporal sequences of spike arrival on activation layers, has not been effectively resolved and seriously
suffers the performance of converted SNNs.
In this paper, by analyzing and deducing the distribution
of unevenness error, we propose an optimization strategy
based on residual membrane potential (SRP), which can decrease unevenness error and improve network performance
effectively under low latency. Our main contributions are
summarized as follows:

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have received extensive
academic attention due to the unique properties of low power
consumption and high-speed computing on neuromorphic
chips. Among various training methods of SNNs, ANN-SNN
conversion has shown the equivalent level of performance
as ANNs on large-scale datasets. However, unevenness error, which refers to the deviation caused by different temporal sequences of spike arrival on activation layers, has not
been effectively resolved and seriously suffers the performance of SNNs under the condition of short time-steps. In
this paper, we make a detailed analysis of unevenness error
and divide it into four categories. We point out that the case
of the ANN output being zero while the SNN output being
larger than zero accounts for the largest percentage. Based
on this, we theoretically prove the sufficient and necessary
conditions of this case and propose an optimization strategy based on residual membrane potential to reduce unevenness error. The experimental results show that the proposed
method achieves state-of-the-art performance on CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, and ImageNet datasets. For example, we reach
top-1 accuracy of 64.32% on ImageNet with 10-steps. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first time ANN-SNN
conversion can simultaneously achieve high accuracy and
ultra-low-latency on the complex dataset. Code is available
at https://github.com/hzc1208/ANN2SNN SRP.

Introduction
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), known as the third generation of artificial neural networks (Maass 1997), have shown
distinctive properties and remarkable advantages of temporal information processing capability and high biological
plausibility (Roy, Jaiswal, and Panda 2019). As each neuron delivers binary spikes only when the membrane potential
reaches the threshold, the calculation in SNNs has the property of high-sparsity and multiplication-free, which brings
unique advantages of low power consumption on neuromorphic chips (Schemmel et al. 2010; Furber et al. 2012;
Merolla et al. 2014; Davies et al. 2018; Pei et al. 2019; DeBole et al. 2019). Despite these, it remains challenging to
train high-performance and low-latency SNNs.

1 We divide unevenness error into four cases according to
the outputs of ANNs and SNNs. We systematically analyze the distribution of unevenness error under these four
cases and point out that the case of the ANN output being zero while the SNN output being larger than zero accounts for the largest percentage.
2 We theoretically establish the mathematical relationship
between residual membrane potential and the specific
case of unevenness error, and propose an optimization
strategy based on residual membrane potential to reduce
unevenness error.

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3 We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method
on CIFAR-10/100, and ImageNet. Our method outper11

