The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PiCor: Multi-Task Deep Reinforcement Learning with Policy Correction
Fengshuo Bai1, 2 , Hongming Zhang3 , Tianyang Tao4 , Zhiheng Wu1, 2 ,
Yanna Wang2 , Bo Xu2, 5 *
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Alberta
4
Université Paris-Saclay
5
Nanjing Artificial Intelligence Research of IA
{baifengshuo2020, boxu}@ia.ac.cn
Abstract

getting (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017). The training of subsequent
tasks can make the knowledge of previously learned tasks
abruptly lost. To mitigate catastrophic forgetting, alternate
training on multiple tasks becomes a general way (Teh et al.
2017; Arora et al. 2018). However, alternate policy training means gradient interference among different tasks. Policy can easily get distracted by certain tasks due to varying learning speeds (Chen et al. 2018; Hessel et al. 2019),
which causes the algorithm to focus on those salient tasks
at the expense of generality. Some works provide solutions
based on knowledge transfer and representation sharing (Teh
et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2020; D’Eramo et al. 2020; Yang et al.
2020). However, these methods require expert-level policies
or high-quality representations among all tasks, which are
difficult and impractical.
To overcome the gradient interference and improve learning efficiency, we propose PiCor, an efficient framework for
multi-task DRL. The critical insight is to alternately optimize the policy on sampled tasks while also correcting
the negative interference on other tasks. Specifically, PiCor
splits the learning into two phases, Policy Optimization and
Policy Correction. The policy optimization phase samples
a task from the task distribution and performs policy learning with task-specific experience replay using any DRL algorithm. The policy correction phase first constructs a performance constraint set that approximates the performance
improvement area considering all tasks. The constraint set
is dynamically adjusted by adaptive weight adjusting to balance the learning speeds and guarantee a lower bound of
average performance among tasks. The intermediate policy
learned in the policy optimization phase is corrected by a
probability metric (e.g, KL divergence) to keep it in the constraint set which controls the negative gradient interference.
Our contribution is three-fold:

Multi-task deep reinforcement learning (DRL) ambitiously
aims to train a general agent that masters multiple tasks simultaneously. However, varying learning speeds of different
tasks compounding with negative gradient interference makes
policy learning inefficient. In this work, we propose PiCor, an
efficient multi-task DRL framework that splits learning into
policy optimization and policy correction phases. The policy
optimization phase improves the policy by any DRL algothrim on the sampled single task without considering other
tasks. The policy correction phase first constructs a performance constraint set with adaptive weight adjusting. Then the
intermediate policy learned by the first phase is constrained to
the set, which controls the negative interference and balances
the learning speeds across tasks. Empirically, we demonstrate
that PiCor outperforms previous methods and significantly
improves sample efficiency on simulated robotic manipulation and continuous control tasks. We additionally show that
adaptive weight adjusting can further improve data efficiency
and performance.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 2018) combining with deep neural networks (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015) shows powerful capabilities on various single-task
decision-making problems, including board games (Silver
et al. 2017, 2018), video games (Mnih et al. 2015; Vinyals
et al. 2019), robotic control (Levine et al. 2016; Rajeswaran
et al. 2018; Kalashnikov et al. 2018), and some industrial
applications (Mao et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2019). Despite the
learning algorithm is general, the solution is not; each agent
can only solve the one task it was trained on. To make the RL
agent more general, many new methods focus on multi-task
learning settings that solve multiple tasks at once. However,
current approaches still suffer from sample inefficiency, this
makes multi-task DRL difficult to train a general agent for
practical applications.
One of the most straightforward methods is to continually train the policy on various tasks leveraging existing
single-task learning algorithm. Unfortunately, neural networks are proven to suffer from inevitable catastrophic for-

• We propose PiCor, a novel and efficient multi-task DRL
algorithm framework, which mitigates gradient interference and balances learning speeds among different tasks.
• We enhance this framework with adaptive weight adjusting and task-specific experience replay, to further balance
the learning progress among tasks. Both techniques are
pivotal for the empirical success of PiCor.
• Experiments demonstrate that our method PiCor outperforms other state-of-the-art multi-task DRL methods

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6728

