The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

RLEKF: An Optimizer for Deep Potential with Ab Initio Accuracy
Siyu Hu1,2 * , Wentao Zhang3 * , Qiuchen Sha1,2 , Feng Pan3 ,
Lin-Wang Wang4 , Weile Jia1 , Guangming Tan1 , Tong Zhao1†
1

State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Advanced Materials, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
4
Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
husiyu20b@ict.ac.cn, zhang wt@pku.edu.cn, shaqiuchen22@mails.ucas.ac.cn, panfeng@pkusz.edu.cn,
lwwang@semi.ac.cn, {jiaweile,tgm,zhaotong}@ict.ac.cn
Abstract

methods. In 1992, Ercolessi and Adam first introduced ML
for describing potentials with an accuracy comparable to
that obtained by ab initio methods (Ercolessi and Adams
1992, 1994), and to date, methods like ACE (Drautz 2019;
Lysogorskiy et al. 2021), SNAP (Thompson et al. 2015),
and GPR (Bartók et al. 2010) are developed and widely
used in physical problems such as copper and silicon, tantalum, bulk crystals. The second approach is based on neural network (NN) and was first introduced in 2007 by Belher and Parrinello (Behler and Parrinello 2007). The neural
network MD (NNMD) method approximates both atomic
energy (Ei ) and force (Fi ) with a local neighboring environment, and the atomic potential energy surface is trained
through tons of data generated from first-principles calculations. One current state-of-the-art is the Deep Potential (DP)
model, which combines large NN and physical symmetries
(translation, rotation, and permutation invariance) for accurately describing the high-dimensional configuration space
of interatomic potential. Although the corresponding package DeePMD-kit can reach 10 billion atoms when scaling to
the top supercomputers (Jia et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2022) in
model inference , training procedure of an individual model
can still take from hours to days and is the bottleneck.

It is imperative to accelerate the training of neural network
force field such as Deep Potential, which usually requires
thousands of images based on first-principles calculation and
a couple of days to generate an accurate potential energy surface. To this end, we propose a novel optimizer named reorganized layer extended Kalman filtering (RLEKF), an optimized version of global extended Kalman filtering (GEKF)
with a strategy of splitting big and gathering small layers
to overcome the O(N 2 ) computational cost of GEKF. This
strategy provides an approximation of the dense weights error covariance matrix with a sparse diagonal block matrix for
GEKF. We implement both RLEKF and the baseline Adam
in our αDynamics package and numerical experiments are
performed on 13 unbiased datasets. Overall, RLEKF converges faster with slightly better accuracy. For example, a test
on a typical system, bulk copper, shows that RLEKF converges faster by both the number of training epochs (×11.67)
and wall-clock time (×1.19). Besides, we theoretically prove
that the updates of weights converge and thus are against
the gradient exploding problem. Experimental results verify
that RLEKF is not sensitive to the initialization of weights.
The RLEKF sheds light on other AI-for-science applications
where training a large neural network (with tons of thousands
parameters) is a bottleneck.

The two most commonly used training methods are
Adam (Kingma and Ba 2014) and stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Saad 1998) in NNMD packages due to their
integration in NN framework such as TensorFlow and
PyTorch. For example, many NNMD packages such as
HDNNP (Behler 2014), SIMPLE-NN (Lee et al. 2019)
adopt Adam in the training of interatomic potential. Yet
these optimizers have a slow convergence rate in searching
for the optimal solution on the landscape and can take up to
hundreds of epochs in training one NNMD model with thousands of training data. Moreover, SGD suffers from gradient
exploding without proper control of the learning rate.

Introduction
Ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) has been the method
of choice in modeling physical phenomena from a microscopic scale, for example, water (Rahman and Stillinger
1971; Stillinger and Rahman 1974), alloy (Wang et al.
2009), nanotube (Raty, Gygi, and Galli 2005), and even protein (Karplus and Kuriyan 2005). However, the cubic scaling of the first-principles methods (Meier, Laino, and Curioni 2014) has hindered both spatial and temporal scales
of AIMD packages within thousands of atoms and picoseconds on modern supercomputers. To overcome the “scaling
wall” of AIMD, two types of machine-learned MD (MLMD)
methods are adopted. The first one is based on classical ML

Global extended Kalman filtering (Chui, Chen et al. 2017)
(GEKF) is a good choice in both convergence and robustness. For example, RuNNer (Behler 2011) adopts GEKF as
an optimizer in its training of a simple three-layer fully connected NN with 1000 parameters or so. As shown in (Singraber et al. 2019), RuNNer can achieve 0.69 meV/atom in
Energy RMSE and 35.5 meV/Å in Force RMSE for H2 O

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7910

