The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multiwinner Voting with Possibly Unavailable Candidates
Markus Brill1,2 , Hayrullah Dindar1 , Jonas Israel1 , Jérôme Lang3 ,
Jannik Peters1 , Ulrike Schmidt-Kraepelin1
1

Research Group Efficient Algorithms, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
3
CNRS, Université Paris-Dauphine, PSL, LAMSADE, France
markus.brill@warwick.ac.uk, hayrullah.dindar@tu-berlin.de, j.israel@tu-berlin.de, lang@lamsade.dauphine.fr,
jannik.peters@tu-berlin.de, u.schmidt-kraepelin@tu-berlin.de
ALG and ML, candidate c2 for CG, candidate c3 for ALG,
and candidate c4 for ML. If the goal of the selection process
is to maximize some notion of representation among the different groups, it is plausible that the preference over subsets
of candidates is such that {c1 , c2 } is best, and that {c3 , c4 }
is better than {c2 , c3 } and {c2 , c4 }. Thus, it is optimal in the
first stage to invite c1 , and then to invite c2 if c1 is available
and otherwise to invite c3 . We see that whether a candidate is
available or not influences the selection of further candidates.
There are two interpretations of availability queries. We
will assume here that they are binding: once a candidate is
queried, she is irrevocably included in the selection if she is
available — think of inviting plenary speakers at a conference; it is not possible to revoke already accepted invitations.
The case of non-binding queries is discussed in Section 5.
The context we described is a multiwinner variant of the
unavailable candidate model (Lu and Boutilier 2010): voters
express their preferences over a set of potential candidates,
but only a subset of them will eventually be available; the
output then is a ranked list of candidates, according to which
candidates are queried; and the first one who is available is
selected. Our context is similar but the need to select several
candidates raises two complications: the query policy should
be conditional on offers already accepted or rejected, and
when selecting candidates to query, one should keep in mind
proportionality targets bearing on the global selection.

Abstract
Selecting a committee that meets diversity and proportionality criteria is a challenging endeavor that has been studied
extensively in recent years. This task becomes even more
challenging when some of the selected candidates decline the
invitation to join the committee. Since the unavailability of one
candidate may impact the rest of the selection, inviting all candidates at the same time may lead to a suboptimal committee.
Instead, invitations should be sequential and conditional on
which candidates invited so far accepted the invitation: the solution to the committee selection problem is a query policy. If
invitation queries are binding, they should be safe: one should
not query a candidate without being sure that whatever the
set of available candidates possible at that stage, her inclusion
will not jeopardize committee optimality. Assuming approvalbased inputs, we characterize the set of rules for which a safe
query exists at every stage. In order to parallelize the invitation process, we investigate the computation of safe parallel
queries, and show that it is often hard. We also study the existence of safe parallel queries with respect to proportionality
axioms such as extended justified representation.

1

Introduction

In multiwinner voting the goal is to select a set of candidates
based on preferences expressed by voters. In the usual setting
there is a given set of candidates out of which a fixed-size
subset has to be chosen. This, however, does not capture
many real-life scenarios.
For instance, consider a university department hiring multiple researchers across multiple groups simultaneously. The
hiring committee will view the researchers’ applications, and
based on the preferences of the members of the hiring committee, the university selects a subset of candidates to offer a
position. However, of these suitable candidates, not all might
accept the offer, after which new candidates need to be invited. When choosing these new candidates, it might play
a prominent role which candidates initially accepted their
offer and which declined. As an example, assume there are
three groups in the computer science department: algorithms
(ALG), machine learning (ML), and cryptography (CG), representing respectively 3/8, 3/8, and 1/4 of the department; and
four candidates c1 , c2 , c3 , c4 . Candidate c1 is interesting for

Our contribution. In this paper, we formalize the mentioned model and adapt the concept of a query policy
(Boutilier et al. 2014) to multiwinner elections. Such a policy
queries candidates for their availability, with the constraint
that a queried candidate has to be included in the selection
once they signal their availability.
We then study common approval-based committee (ABC)
rules and investigate whether these rules admit a safe query
policy, i.e., a policy that only queries candidates that are
guaranteed to be included in an optimal selection whenever
they are available, whatever the other available candidates are.
We show that under a mild technical assumption a necessary
and sufficient condition for a rule to admit a safe query policy
is “sequentiality” (to be formally defined later). This allows
us to show, in particular, that Phragmén’s sequential rule
and the Method of Equal Shares admit a safe query policy,
and that Proportional Approval Voting (PAV) and other non-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5532

