The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

STOA-VLP: Spatial-Temporal Modeling of Object and Action for
Video-Language Pre-training
Weihong Zhong1 , Mao Zheng2 , Duyu Tang3 , Xuan Luo2 , Heng Gong1 ,
Xiaocheng Feng1,4 * , Bing Qin1,4
1

Harbin Institute of Technology
2
Tencent MLPD
3
Independent Researcher
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{whzhong, hgong, xcfeng, qinb}@ir.hit.edu.cn, {moonzheng, ttssxuanluo}@tencent.com,
tangduyu.nlp@hotmail.com
Abstract

00:22

Caption: A man in a red Tshirt asks his white dog to
sit down and walks away
from it.

00:17

Question: What did the
monkey do after fighting
with the cat?
Answer: Jump

(a)

Although large-scale video-language pre-training models,
which usually build a global alignment between the video
and the text, have achieved remarkable progress on various
downstream tasks, the idea of adopting fine-grained information during the pre-training stage is not well explored. In
this work, we propose STOA-VLP, a pre-training framework
that jointly models object and action information across spatial and temporal dimensions. More specifically, the model
regards object trajectories across frames and multiple action
features from the video as fine-grained features. Besides, We
design two auxiliary tasks to better incorporate both kinds
of information into the pre-training process of the videolanguage model. The first is the dynamic object-text alignment task, which builds a better connection between object trajectories and the relevant noun tokens. The second is
the spatial-temporal action set prediction, which guides the
model to generate consistent action features by predicting actions found in the text. Extensive experiments on three downstream tasks (video captioning, text-video retrieval, and video
question answering) demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed STOA-VLP (e.g. 3.7 Rouge-L improvements on MSRVTT video captioning benchmark, 2.9% accuracy improvements on MSVD video question answering benchmark, compared to previous approaches).

00:00

(b)
00:00

Figure 1: (a): A video captioning example. Recognitions of
salient objects and movements of objects are important clues
for generating the caption. (b): A video question answering
example. To answer this question, a fine-grained connection
between salient objects should be built, as well as object
movements and their different interactions should be carefully analyzed.

ferent interactions should be carefully analyzed. A coarsegrained method can easily fail at handling such information.
Efforts have been made by previous pre-training approaches to maintain fine-grained information from different
aspects. Although achieved promising improvements, these
methods still have some limitations: (1) Objects are usually moving and changing across time. Existing methods (Li
et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022) usually utilize fixed bounding boxes to model objects, leading to an insufficient understanding of object movements in the video. (2) There can
be multiple overlapping actions at the same time range, triggered by different object interactions in different spatial regions. Existing methods (Zhu and Yang 2020) focus on only
one action representation for each video clip, which leads to
an information loss. As Figure 1 shows, the main content of
the video can be described by the movement of objects and
the interaction between them. Therefore, an ideal approach
is to incorporate these two kinds of information into the pretraining stage for fine-grained spatial-temporal modeling.
In this paper, we tackle the above problems by proposing a new pre-training framework—STOA-VLP: SpatialTemporal Modeling of Object and Action for Video-

Introduction
With the introduction of large-scale datasets, video-language
pre-training methods learn to build adaptive cross-modal
representations for downstream video-text understanding
and generation tasks. Previous dominant approaches focus
on learning an overall alignment from raw video and text
data (Lei et al. 2021; Bain et al. 2021), lacking modeling of
fine-grained information. Meanwhile, fine-grained information can be necessary for understanding the video scene in
many situations. For example, as Figure 1(a) depicts, generating such captions requires detailed dynamic modeling
of relevant objects and movements across time. To answer
questions like Figure 1(b), a fine-grained object-text alignment is required, as well as object movements and their dif* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3715

