The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Daycare Matching in Japan: Transfers and Siblings
Zhaohong Sun1 , Yoshihiro Takenami1 , Daisuke Moriwaki1 , Yoji Tomita1 , Makoto Yokoo 2
1

AI Lab, CyberAgent Inc, Japan
2
Kyushu University, Japan

Abstract

those whose guardians are suffering from diseases or disabilities, usually take precedence over others. Nearly all slots are
assigned at the beginning of April each year via a centralized algorithm that takes into consideration of both families’
preferences and priorities over children.
The existence of siblings makes this problem resemble
hospital-doctor matching with couples in which a couple of
doctors participates in the job market and submits a joint
preference over pairs of hospitals (Roth 1984). Two obvious
distinctions are that some children may be initially enrolled
and one family may have more than two children. A recent
work studies school choice in Chile where both transfers and
siblings are considered (Correa et al. 2022). However, they
assume families have restrictive higher-first preferences (i.e.
families prioritize the assignment of their children in higher
grades), while in the Japanese daycare matching problem
families can submit their preferences over any possible combination of daycare centers.
We are actively collaborating with several municipalities
and our objective is to design transparent matching algorithms that compute desirable outcomes efficiently. A fundamental question is which properties are deemed suitable
and appropriate for this setting. Stability is a standard solution concept for two-sided matching problems and has been
widely applied in practice (Roth 2008). It is often decomposed into individual rationality, non-wastefulness, and fairness in the literature on school choice (Abdulkadiroğlu and
Sönmez 2003). We carefully generalize these properties to
meet the expectations of municipalities and design a centralized algorithm to achieve them.
We summarize our contributions below:
• Our first contribution is to formalize a realistic model of
the daycare matching market in Japan based on real-life
data sets. To our best knowledge, we are the first to study
a two-sided matching problem in which i) children may
have their initial enrollment and ii) two or more siblings
can submit a joint preference over any possible combination of daycare centers. We compare our model with
several representative papers in Table 1 and discuss more
papers in the section on related work.
• We generalize some well-studied concepts including individual rationality, non-wastefulness, and stability by
taking the initial enrollment and siblings’ joint preferences into account. We adapt these concepts based on the

In this paper, we study a daycare matching problem in Japan
and report the design and implementation of a new centralized algorithm. There are two features that make this market
different from the classical hospital-doctor matching problem: i) some children are initially enrolled and prefer to be
transferred to other daycare centers; ii) one family may be associated with two or more children and is allowed to submit
preferences over combinations of daycare centers. We revisit
some well-studied properties including individual rationality,
non-wastefulness, as well as stability, and generalize them to
this new setting. We design an algorithm based on integer
programming (IP) that captures these properties and conduct
experiments on five real-life data sets provided by three municipalities. Experimental results show that i) our algorithm
performs at least as well as currently used methods in terms
of numbers of matched children and blocking coalition; ii)
we can find a stable outcome for all instances, although the
existence of such an outcome is not guaranteed in theory.

Introduction
Due to a high demand for daycare services and an increasing number of mothers in the workforce, a large number of
children are placed on a waiting list each year in Japan, especially in the metropolitan area. The shortage of daycare facilities has become one of the most serious social issues. The
Japanese Government provides daycare centers with subsidies to relieve the financial burden of early childhood education. Currently, kindergartens and daycare centers are free
of charge for children of age from 3 to 5 and fees are deducted for children younger than 3 years old. Although the
national number of children on the waiting list dropped dramatically to 5634 in April 2021 from the peak over 26000
a few years ago, the government is still concerned about the
situation after the COVID-19 pandemic.
The allocation of children to daycare centers in Japan is
not based on a first-come, first-served basis. Families with
several children first report to their local municipality their
preferences over combinations of daycare centers and the
municipality then generates a priority ordering over children based on its own scoring system. Children from lowincome households and single-parent families, as well as
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14487

