The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Reward-Poisoning Attacks on Offline Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Young Wu, Jeremy McMahan, Xiaojin Zhu, Qiaomin Xie
University of Wisconsin-Madison
yw@cs.wisc.edu, jmcmahan@wisc.edu, jerryzhu@cs.wisc.edu, qiaomin.xie@wisc.edu

Abstract

tasks; misinform economic agents about the state of the
economy and guide them to make irrational investments or
saving decisions; or cause the non-player characters in a
video game to behave improperly to benefit certain human
players. In this paper, we study the security threat posed
by reward-poisoning attacks on offline MARL. Here, the attacker wants the agents to learn a target policy π † of the attacker’s choosing (π † does not need to be an equilibrium in
the original Markov Game). Meanwhile, the attacker wants
to minimize the amount of dataset manipulation to avoid detection and accruing high cost. This paper studies optimal
offline MARL reward-poisoning attacks. Our work serves as
a first step toward eventual defense against reward-poisoning
attacks.

In offline multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL),
agents estimate policies from a given dataset. We study
reward-poisoning attacks in this setting where an exogenous
attacker modifies the rewards in the dataset before the agents
see the dataset. The attacker wants to guide each agent into a
nefarious target policy while minimizing the Lp norm of the
reward modification. Unlike attacks on single-agent RL, we
show that the attacker can install the target policy as a Markov
Perfect Dominant Strategy Equilibrium (MPDSE), which rational agents are guaranteed to follow. This attack can be
significantly cheaper than separate single-agent attacks. We
show that the attack works on various MARL agents including uncertainty-aware learners, and we exhibit linear programs to efficiently solve the attack problem. We also study
the relationship between the structure of the datasets and the
minimal attack cost. Our work paves the way for studying
defense in offline MARL.

Our Contributions
We introduce reward-poisoning attacks in offline MARL.
We show that any attack that reduces to attacking singleagent RL separately must be suboptimal. Consequently, new
innovations are necessary to attack effectively. We present a
reward-poisoning framework that guarantees the target policy π † becomes a Markov Perfect Dominant Strategy Equilibrium (MPDSE) for the underlying Markov Game. Since
any rational agent will follow an MPDSE if it exists, this ensures the agents adopt the target policy π † . We also show the
attack can be efficiently constructed using a linear program.
The attack framework has several important features.
First, it is effective against a large class of offline MARL
learners rather than a specific learning algorithm. Second,
the framework allows partially decentralized agents who
can only access their own individual rewards rather than
the joint reward vectors of all agents. Lastly, the framework
only makes the minimal assumption on the rationality of the
learners that they will not take dominated actions.
We also give interpretable bounds on the minimal cost to
poison an arbitrary dataset. These bounds relate the minimal attack cost to the structure of the underlying Markov
Game. Using these bounds, we derive classes of games that
are especially cheap or expensive for the attacker to poison.
These results show which games may be more susceptible
to an attacker, while also giving insight to the structure of
multi-agent attacks.
In the right hands, our framework could be used by a
benevolent entity to coordinate agents in a way that im-

Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has achieved
tremendous empirical success across a variety of tasks
such as autonomous driving, cooperative robotics, economic
policy-making, and video games. In MARL, several agents
interact with each other and the underlying environment,
and each of them aims to optimize their individual longterm reward (Zhang, Yang, and Başar 2021). Such problems are often formulated under the framework of Markov
Games (Shapley 1953), which generalizes the Markov Decision Process model from single-agent RL. In offline MARL,
the agents aim to learn a good policy by exploiting a precollected dataset without further interactions with the environment or other agents (Pan et al. 2022; Jiang and Lu 2021;
Cui and Du 2022; Zhong et al. 2022). The optimal solution
in MARL typically involves equilibria concepts.
While the above empirical success is encouraging, MARL
algorithms are susceptible to data poisoning attacks: the
agents can reach the wrong equilibria if an exogenous attacker manipulates the feedback to agents. For example,
a third-party attacker may want to interfere with traffic to
cause autonomous vehicles to behave abnormally; teach
robots an incorrect procedure so that they fail at certain
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10426

