The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improved Kernel Alignment Regret Bound for Online Kernel Learning
Junfan Li, Shizhong Liao∗
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China
{junfli,szliao}@tju.edu.cn

√
The minimax lower bound on the regret is Ω( T ) for the
Hinge loss function (Abernethy et al. 2008). The online gradient
√ descent (OGD) algorithm (Zinkevich 2003) enjoys a
O( T ) upper bound which is optimal w.r.t. T . OGD still
suffers two weaknesses. (i) It nearly stores all of the observed examples, and thus suffers a O(dt) computational
complexity (i.e., space and per-round time complexity),
√
which is prohibitive for large-scale datasets. (ii) The O( T )
bound is too pessimistic for certain benign environments. In
practice, the data might be learnt easily or have some√intrinsic structures that can be used to circumvent the Ω( T )
barrier. Most of the previous algorithms only address the
first weakness. Such algorithms store limited examples or
construct explicit feature mapping. For instance, the BOGD
and FOGD algorithm (Zhao et al. 2012; Lu et al. 2016)
suffer
√ a O(dB) computational complexity and achieve a
O( T + √TB ) 1 regret bound, where B is the size of budget or the number of random features. The NOGD algorithm
(Lu et al. 2016) which uses Nyström approach√to construct
T
explicit feature mapping, enjoys a regret of O( T + B
) at
2
a computational complexity of O(dB + B ) . The above
algorithms reduce the computational complexity at the expense of regret bound. The SkeGD algorithm (Zhang and
Liao 2019) which uses randomized sketching to
√ construct
explicit feature mapping, enjoys a regret of O( T B) at a
computational complexity of O(dBpoly(ln T )). Although
the results are better for a constant B, they become worse in
the case of B = Θ(T µ ), 0 < µ < 1.
The only algorithm that addresses both weaknesses simultaneously is B(AO)2 KS (Liao and Li 2021). It achieves a
1
4
regret of
√ O((AT T ln T ) ) at a computational complexity
of O(d AT T ln T ). The kernel alignment, AT , measures
how well the kernel function matches with the data. If we
choose a good kernel function, then AT = o(T
√ ) is possible.
In this case, B(AO)2 KS circumvents the Ω( T ) barrier and
only suffers a o(T ) computational complexity. If we choose
a bad kernel function, B(AO)2 KS still nearly matches the
results of OGD. A natural
√ question arises: Is it possible to
achieve a regret of O( AT ) at a computational complexity
of O(poly(ln T ))? An algorithm with such characteristics

Abstract
In this paper, we improve the kernel alignment regret
bound for online kernel learning in the regime of the
Hinge loss function. Previous algorithm achieves a regret of
1
O((AT T ln T ) 4 ) at a√computational complexity (space and
per-round time) of O( AT T ln T ), where AT is called kernel alignment. We propose an algorithm whose regret bound
and computational complexity are better than previous results. Our results depend on the decay rate of eigenvalues
of the kernel matrix. If the eigenvalues of the kernel matrix
decay
√ exponentially, then our algorithm enjoys a regret of
O( AT ) at a computational complexity of O(ln2 T ). Oth1
erwise, our algorithm enjoys a regret
of O((AT T ) 4 ) at a
√
computational complexity of O( AT T ). We
p extend our algorithm to batch learning and obtain a O( T1 E[AT ]) excess
√
risk bound which improves the previous O(1/ T ) bound.

Introduction
Online kernel learning is a popular non-parametric method
for solving large-scale batch learning and online learning
problems. Online kernel learning algorithms only pass the
data once and thus are computationally efficient. Specifically, ∀t = 1, . . . , T , an online learning algorithm receives
an instance xt ∈ Rd . Then it selects a hypothesis ft ∈ H and
makes prediction ft (xt ). H = {f ∈ H|kf kH ≤ U }, where
H is a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). After that,
the algorithm observes yt and suffers a loss `(ft (xt ), yt ). In
an online learning setting, {(xt , yt )Tt=1 } may not be i.i.d.,
and can even be adversarial. We focus on the online prediction performance, and aim to minimize the cumulative losses
PT
t=1 `(ft (xt ), yt ). We usually use the regret to measure the
performance, which is defined as follows,
∀f ∈ H, Reg(f ) =

T
X

[`(ft (xt ), yt ) − `(f (xt ), yt )]. (1)

t=1

An effective algorithm must ensure Reg(f ) = o(T ), which
implies the average loss of the algorithm converges to that
of the optimal hypothesis. In this paper, `(·, ·) is the Hinge
loss function, and yt ∈ {−1, 1}.
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The regret bound of BOGD is obtained from Eq.(14) in (Zhao
et al. 2012).

8597

