The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Grouping Matrix Based Graph Pooling with Adaptive Number of Clusters
Sung Moon Ko1 , Sungjun Cho1 , Dae-Woong Jeong1 , Sehui Han1 , Moontae Lee1,2 , Honglak Lee1
1

LG AI Research
University of Illinois Chicago
{sungmoon.ko, sungjun.cho, dw.jeong, hansse.han, moontae.lee, honglak}@lgresearch.ai
2

Abstract

node into a smaller number of clusters (Ying et al. 2018).
Later gPool (Gao and Ji 2019) and SAGPool (Lee, Lee, and
Kang 2019) incorporated the attention mechanism into pooling, while MinCutPool proposed grouping the nodes into
clusters by minimizing the relaxed K-way normalized minimum cut objective (Bianchi, Grattarola, and Alippi 2019).
In most inductive setups, there is no single number of
clusters that is suitable across all graphs in the dataset. Particularly in molecular graphs, the number of functional groups
often determines useful chemical characteristics and behaviors, while varying significantly across different molecules.
Nonetheless, existing pooling methods require the number of
clusters as a hyperparameter and operate under the assumption that all graphs share the same number of clusters (Ranjan,
Sanyal, and Talukdar 2020). This is undesirable as it not only
requires hyperparameter tuning, but also imposes a strong
inductive bias that deteriorates downstream performance.
To overcome this challenge, we propose GMP OOL, a general pooling framework that does not require an universal
number of clusters as a user hyperparameter. Figure 1 depicts
the overall framework of GMP OOL. The core intuition is that
the product of a pooling matrix with itself forms a grouping
matrix, where each (i, j)-th entry indicates the pairwise clustering similarity: whether the nodes i and j are pooled to the
same clusters. For each graph, GMP OOL parameterizes the
clustering similarities in its grouping matrix via a classification layer. Finally, we perform SVD on the grouping matrix to
obtain the pooling matrix such that the overall rank represents
the suitable number of clusters. We also test a single-pooling
variant NGMP OOL that does not perform any decomposition,
but rather uses the grouping matrix as is. In real-world molecular property prediction tasks, we show that our approach
outperforms previous baselines, while successfully learning
suitable clusters.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:

Graph pooling is a crucial operation for encoding hierarchical structures within graphs. Most existing graph pooling
approaches formulate the problem as a node clustering task
which effectively captures the graph topology. Conventional
methods ask users to specify an appropriate number of clusters
as a hyperparameter, then assume that all input graphs share
the same number of clusters. In inductive settings where the
number of clusters can vary, however, the model should be
able to represent this variation in its pooling layers in order to
learn suitable clusters. Thus we propose GMP OOL, a novel
differentiable graph pooling architecture that automatically determines the appropriate number of clusters based on the input
data. The main intuition involves a grouping matrix defined as
a quadratic form of the pooling operator, which induces use
of binary classification probabilities of pairwise combinations
of nodes. GMP OOL obtains the pooling operator by first computing the grouping matrix, then decomposing it. Extensive
evaluations on molecular property prediction tasks demonstrate that our method outperforms conventional methods.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) learn representations of
individual nodes based on the connectivity structure of an
input graph. For graph-level prediction tasks, the standard
procedure globally pools all the node features into a single
graph representation without weight difference, then feeds
the representation to a final prediction layer. This process
implies that information only propagates through node-tonode edges, rendering the model unable to hierarchically
aggregate information efficiently beyond local convolution.
However, a hierarchical structure can encode the global
topology of graphs that is useful for effective learning of
long range interactions. Therefore, designing a pooling architecture which respects the graph structure is crucial for
downstream tasks such as social network analyses (Kipf
and Welling 2017; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017) and
molecule property predictions (Duvenaud et al. 2015; Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Bruna et al. 2013;
Coley et al. 2017; Scarselli et al. 2009; Jin et al. 2018).
As an alternative to global pooling, DiffPool first proposed
an end-to-end differentiable pooling by soft-classifying each

• We design a grouping matrix based pooling operator that
does not require users to specify the number of clusters a
priori.
• We propose GMP OOL and NGMP OOL. GMP OOL performs SVD on the grouping matrix to obtain the pooling
matrix, whereas NGMP OOL utilizes the grouping matrix
as is.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We demonstrate the power of our methods both quantita8334

