The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

STAGE: Span Tagging and Greedy Inference Scheme for Aspect Sentiment Triplet
Extraction
Shuo Liang1,2 , Wei Wei†,1,2 , Xian-Ling Mao3 , Yuanyuan Fu2,4 , Rui Fang2,4 , Dangyang Chen2,4
1

Cognitive Computing and Intelligent Information Processing (CCIIP) Laboratory,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Joint Laboratory of HUST and Pingan Property & Casualty Research (HPL)
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
4
Ping An Property & Casualty Insurance company of China, Ltd
shuoliang@hust.edu.cn, weiw@hust.edu.cn, maoxl@bit.edu.cn,
fuyuanyuan83@gmail.com, fangrui051@pingan.com.cn, chendangyang273@pingan.com.cn
Triplets

Abstract

Sentences

Aspect Sentiment Triplet Extraction (ASTE) has become an
emerging task in sentiment analysis research, aiming to extract triplets of the aspect term, its corresponding opinion
term, and its associated sentiment polarity from a given sentence. Recently, many neural networks based models with different tagging schemes have been proposed, but almost all of
them have their limitations: heavily relying on 1) prior assumption that each word is only associated with a single role
(e.g., aspect term, or opinion term, etc. ) and 2) word-level
interactions and treating each opinion/aspect as a set of independent words. Hence, they perform poorly on the complex
ASTE task, such as a word associated with multiple roles or
an aspect/opinion term with multiple words. Hence, we propose a novel approach, Span TAgging and Greedy infErence
(STAGE), to extract sentiment triplets in span-level, where
each span may consist of multiple words and play different roles simultaneously. To this end, this paper formulates
the ASTE task as a multi-class span classification problem.
Specifically, STAGE generates more accurate aspect sentiment triplet extractions via exploring span-level information
and constraints, which consists of two components, namely,
span tagging scheme and greedy inference strategy. The former tag all possible candidate spans based on a newly-defined
tagging set. The latter retrieves the aspect/opinion term with
the maximum length from the candidate sentiment snippet to
output sentiment triplets. Furthermore, we propose a simple
but effective model based on the STAGE, which outperforms
the state-of-the-arts by a large margin on four widely-used
datasets. Moreover, our STAGE can be easily generalized to
other pair/triplet extraction tasks, which also demonstrates
the superiority of the proposed scheme STAGE.

Love the stability of the Mac
(a)

software and operating
system .

(b)

(c)

Keyboard good sized and
easy to use .

Aspect
Term

Opinion
Term

Senti
ment

stability

Love

Positive

Mac
software

Love

Positive

stability

Positive

Love

Positive

stability

Positive

good sized

Positive

easy to use

Positive

easy

Positive

operating
system
Keyboard
use

After replacing the hard drive hard drive
battery
the battery stopped working
( 3 months of use ) which was
frustrating.

replacing

Neutral

stopped
working

Negative

Figure 1: Examples of ASTE task from the real-world
dataset. In each sentence, aspect terms are in blue and opinion terms are in rounded rectangles.

2022). Indeed, ASTE can be decomposed into several subtasks, such as Aspect Term Extraction (ATE) (Li and Lam
2017; Xu et al. 2018; Dai and Song 2019), Opinion Term
Extraction (OTE) (Fan et al. 2019; Dai and Song 2019),
Aspect-Based Sentiment Classification (ABSC) (Zhang, Li,
and Song 2019; Tang et al. 2020; Liang et al. 2022), and
Aspect-Opinion Pair Extraction (AOPE) (Wang et al. 2017;
Zhao et al. 2020). And a straightforward method is to independently extract elements of sentiment triplet through those
subtasks in a pipeline fashion (Peng et al. 2020; Chen et al.
2021). However, the primary obstacle for those pipeline
methods is the well-known error propagation problem.
Later, many efforts resort to extracting sentiment triplets
in an end-to-end framework (Xu et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2020;
Zhang et al. 2020; Yu Bai Jian et al. 2021; Xu, Chia, and
Bing 2021; Mukherjee et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021; Chen
et al. 2022; Liu, Li, and Li 2022). Some works (Mukherjee et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021) formulate it as a generative problem and achieve good performance under the
benefit of existing generative pre-trained models, such as
BART (Lewis et al. 2020) and T5 (Raffel et al. 2020). In
addition, most of end-to-end approaches focus on design-

Introduction
Aspect Sentiment Triplet Extraction (ASTE) aims to identify all sentiment triplets from an input sentence, namely,
the aspect term (a) with its corresponding opinion term (o)
and sentiment polarity (s) (as shown in Figure 1). It can be
applied in many downstream tasks, such as dialogue generation (Liu et al. 2022; Wei et al. 2021, 2019) and recommendation system (Wang et al. 2022; Zou et al. 2022; Zhao et al.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
† Corresponding Author

13174

