The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Moral Machine or Tyranny of the Majority?
Michael Feffer, Hoda Heidari* , Zachary C. Lipton*
Carnegie Mellon University
{mfeffer,hheidari,zlipton}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract

long debated Trolley Problems (Thomson 1985), which generally take the form of inescapable decisions among normatively undesirable alternatives. Notably, these problems typically lack clear-cut answers, and people’s judgments are often
sensitive to subtle details in the provided context.

With Artificial Intelligence systems increasingly applied in
consequential domains, researchers have begun to ask how
these systems ought to act in ethically charged situations where
even humans lack consensus. In the Moral Machine project,
researchers crowdsourced answers to “Trolley Problems” concerning autonomous vehicles. Subsequently, Noothigattu et al.
(2018) proposed inferring linear functions that approximate
each individual’s preferences and aggregating these linear
models by averaging parameters across the population. In this
paper, we examine this averaging mechanism, focusing on
fairness concerns in the presence of strategic effects. We investigate a simple setting where the population consists of
two groups, with the minority constituting an α < 0.5 share
of the population. To simplify the analysis, we consider the
extreme case in which within-group preferences are homogeneous. Focusing on the fraction of contested cases where the
minority group prevails, we make the following observations:
(a) even when all parties report their preferences truthfully, the
fraction of disputes where the minority prevails is less than
proportionate in α; (b) the degree of sub-proportionality grows
more severe as the level of disagreement between the groups
increases; (c) when parties report preferences strategically,
pure strategy equilibria do not always exist; and (d) whenever
a pure strategy equilibrium exists, the majority group prevails
100% of the time. These findings raise concerns about stability
and fairness of preference vector averaging as a mechanism
for aggregating diverging voices. Finally, we discuss alternatives, including randomized dictatorship and median-based
mechanisms.

Questions about whose values are represented and what objectives are optimized in ML-based systems have become
especially salient in light of documented instances of algorithmic bias in deployed systems (Angwin et al. 2016; Buolamwini and Gebru 2018; Obermeyer et al. 2019). Faced with
questions of whose values ought to prevail when a judgment
must be made, some AI ethics researchers have advocated
participatory machine learning, a family of methods for democratizing decisions by incorporating the views of a variety
of stakeholders (Lee et al. 2019; Ilvento 2020; Jung et al.
2021). For example, a line of papers on preference elicitation
tasks stakeholders with choosing among sets of alternatives
(Ilvento 2020; Lee et al. 2019; Jung et al. 2021; Hiranandani, Narasimhan, and Koyejo 2020; Hiranandani et al. 2020;
Freedman et al. 2020). In many of these studies, the hope is to
compute a socially aligned objective function (Lee et al. 2019;
Freedman et al. 2020) or fairness metric (Ilvento 2020; Hiranandani et al. 2020; Hiranandani, Narasimhan, and Koyejo
2020).
In a pioneering study, Awad et al. (2018) introduced the
Moral Machine, a large-scale crowdsourcing study in which
millions of participants from around the world were presented with autonomous driving scenarios in the style of
Trolley Problems. Participants were shown images depicting
two possible outcomes and asked which alternative they preferred. In one scenario, the first alternative might be to collide
with a barrier and sacrifice several young passengers, and the
second to pulverize two elderly pedestrians in a crosswalk.
Utilizing the Moral Machine dataset, Noothigattu et al. (2018)
proposed methods for inferring each participant’s preferences.
Specifically, they represent each alternative by a fixed-length
vector of attributes, x, and each participant’s scoring function
as the dot product between their preference vector θ and the
alternative x. The objective is to infer parameters θ so that
whenever an individual prefers one alternative over another,
the preferred alternative receives a higher score. To aggregate
these preference vectors across a population, Noothigattu
et al. (2018) propose to simply average them. Faced with

Introduction
Machine learning (ML) has increasingly been employed to
automate decisions in consequential domains including autonomous vehicles, healthcare, hiring, finance, and criminal
justice. These domains present many ethically charged decisions, where even knowledgeable humans may lack consensus about the right course of action. Consequently, AI researchers have been forced to consider how to resolve normative disputes when competing values come into conflict. The
formal study of such ethical quandaries long predates the advent of modern AI systems. For example, philosophers have
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5974

