The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Mixture Manifold Networks: A Computationally Efficient Baseline for Inverse
Modeling
Gregory P. Spell1 , Simiao Ren1 , Leslie M. Collins1 , Jordan M. Malof2
1

Duke University, Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Durham, NC USA
2
University of Montana, Department of Computer Science, Missoula, MT USA
{gregory.spell, simiao.ren, leslie.collins}@duke.edu, jordan.malof@umontana.edu

Abstract

a particular challenge for deep learning approaches to learning inverse models, as conventional deep neural networks
(DNNs) only predict a single output for a given input, and
furthermore, the methods used to train DNNs (e.g., gradient
descent) typically do not account for non-uniqueness.
A variety of approaches have been proposed to address illposed problems of this kind (Aster, Borchers, and Thurber
2018), however, we focus in this work on recent DNN-based
approaches, termed here as deep inverse models (DIMs)
(Ardizzone et al. 2019; Ren, Padilla, and Malof 2020). Recent DIMs often fall into one of two major classes that
share common advantages and disadvantages: generative
and iterative. Generative models address non-uniqueness by
learning a conditional probability distribution P r(x|y), and
then sampling candidate solutions from this distribution.
DIMS of this kind include the (conditional) Variational Autoencoders (cVAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2013), Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Salimans et al. 2016),
and conditional Invertible Neural Networks (cINNs) (Kruse
et al. 2019). The other class of DIM, iterative models, involve randomly sampling a large set of solution candidates
(e.g., from a uniform distribution), and then iteratively refining these solutions (e.g., using gradient descent, or evolutionary approaches). DIMs of this kind include evolutionary
algorithms (Zhang et al. 2020; Johnson and Rahmat-Samii
1997; Rahmat-Samii 2003) and the Neural-Adjoint (Ren,
Padilla, and Malof 2020).
Generative models are computationally fast; however,
they are often less accurate than Iterative methods. As reported in (Ren, Padilla, and Malof 2020), these models often produce solutions near - but not precisely at – the true
solution. Because they are probabilistic, they are unlikely
to sample exact solutions, even when the conditional distribution places substantial probability mass over the exact solution. By contrast, iterative models are highly accurate, but suffer from substantially greater computational
burden, due to the need for an iterative (sequential) refinement procedure at test time. Sequential methods are often
several orders of magnitude slower than generative counterparts. For many practical problems, such as those in scientific computing (e.g., materials design (Khatib et al. 2021),
geophysics (Snieder and Trampert 1999), astronomy (Lucy
1994), oceanography (Wunsch 1996)) this burden can be tolerated, either because real-time operation is unnecessary, or

We propose and show the efficacy of a new method to address generic inverse problems. Inverse modeling is the task
whereby one seeks to determine the control parameters of
a natural system that produce a given set of observed measurements. Recent work has shown impressive results using
deep learning, but we note that there is a trade-off between
model performance and computational time. For some applications, the computational time at inference for the best performing inverse modeling method may be overly prohibitive
to its use. We present a new method that leverages multiple
manifolds as a mixture of backward (e.g., inverse) models in a
forward-backward model architecture. These multiple backwards models all share a common forward model, and their
training is mitigated by generating training examples from the
forward model. The proposed method thus has two innovations: 1) the multiple Manifold Mixture Network (MMN) architecture, and 2) the training procedure involving augmenting backward model training data using the forward model.
We demonstrate the advantages of our method by comparing
to several baselines on four benchmark inverse problems, and
we furthermore provide analysis to motivate its design.

Introduction
We consider the goal of solving generic inverse problems,
which arise in a multitude of scientific fields. Suppose we
have an observable variable y ∈ RM , which manifests from
a mapping of a forward process over a control variable x ∈
RD . We write this forward mapping as:
y = f (x)
(1)
For many scientific endeavors, while y may be a measurement of a system, the variable of greater interest is the control variable x. This motivates the task whereby, given f , we
seek to determine the inverse model, g = f −1 (y), such that:
x = f −1 (y)
(2)
which we will also refer to as the backward process. For
many real physical systems, this inverse process is ill-posed,
in that there can be several (or sufficiently similar) settings
of x which correspond to a single observed y (e.g., nonuniqueness of solutions). This ”one-to-many” aspect poses
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9874

