The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Planning for Learning Object Properties
Leonardo Lamanna1,2 , Luciano Serafini1 , Mohamadreza Faridghasemnia3 , Alessandro Saffiotti3 ,
Alessandro Saetti2 , Alfonso Gerevini2 , Paolo Traverso1
1

Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
Department of Information Engineering, University of Brescia, Italy
3
Center for Applied Autonomous Sensor Systems, University of Örebro, Sweden
llamanna@fbk.eu, serafini@fbk.eu, mohamadreza.farid@oru.se, asaffio@aass.oru.se, alessandro.saetti@unibs.it,
alfonso.gerevini@unibs.it, traverso@fbk.eu
2

Abstract

This is also in agreement with the emerging popular research
area of interactive perception (Bohg et al. 2017). When perception functions are modelled by (deep) neural networks,
an open and interesting challenge is whether agents can autonomously decide when and how to improve their perception models, by collecting the needed training data and using
them to train the neural network.
In this paper, we explore a way to address this challenge
with an automated planning approach. In particular, we design a PDDL planning domain (McDermott et al. 1998) for
planning to learn (or improve) the perceptual capabilities of
the agent. We focus on the problem of automatically training
neural networks able to recognize properties of objects, e.g.,
open/closed, by relying on a pre-trained object detector. We
extend a PDDL planning domain, called base domain, with
new actions and predicates for learning properties of object
types. Such an extension, called learning domain, is specified in a meta-language of the base language. It contains
the reification of properties and types of the base language.
For instance, if Is Open is a property of the base domain,
the learning domain contains the object ‘is open’ of type
Property. Furthermore, the learning domain contains actions for collecting training examples for properties, and actions for training the network with them.
The online learning of object properties is obtained by
planning in the union of the base and learning domains, and
by executing the generated plan. The base domain allows
the agent to plan to reach a state where the agent can observe an object with a certain property, e.g., a state where
Is Open(box0 ) is true. The learning domain allows the
agent to plan for actions that collect observations of objects
with the property being true, e.g., take pictures of box0 ,
which is known to be open, and add them to the positive
training examples for the property Is Open. In this way, the
agent automatically maps low level perceptions (e.g., images
of an open box) into the symbolic property of objects at the
abstract planning level (e.g., “the box is open” in PDDL).
We provide an experimental evaluation both in a photorealistic simulated environment (Kolve et al. 2017) and in a
real world setting. In the simulated environment, we evaluate
the ability to learn certain object properties under two different conditions of object detection: noisy and ground truth.
The results indicate that the approach is able to successfully
learn and recognize the object properties with high preci-

Autonomous agents embedded in a physical environment
need the ability to recognize objects and their properties
from sensory data. Such a perceptual ability is often implemented by supervised machine learning models, which
are pre-trained using a set of labelled data. In real-world,
open-ended deployments, however, it is unrealistic to assume to have a pre-trained model for all possible environments. Therefore, agents need to dynamically learn/adapt/extend their perceptual abilities online, in an autonomous way,
by exploring and interacting with the environment where they
operate. This paper describes a way to do so, by exploiting
symbolic planning. Specifically, we formalize the problem of
automatically training a neural network to recognize object
properties as a symbolic planning problem (using PDDL). We
use planning techniques to produce a strategy for automating
the training dataset creation and the learning process. Finally,
we provide an experimental evaluation in both a simulated
and a real environment, which shows that the proposed approach is able to successfully learn how to recognize new object properties.

Introduction
Agents embedded in a physical environment, like autonomous robots, need the ability to perceive objects in the
environment and recognize their properties. For instance, a
robot operating in an indoor environment should be able to
recognize whether a certain box found in the environment is
open or closed. From these perceptions the agent can build
and use abstract representations of the states of the environment to reach its goals by automatic planning techniques.
The common approach to provide an agent with such perceptual capabilities consists in pre-training offline a (set of)
perception models from hundreds of thousands of annotated
data (e.g., images or other sensory data). See for instance
(Asai 2019; Dengler et al. 2021; Lamanna et al. 2022).
In offline training approaches, the perception capabilities
are fixed once and for all. This is in stark contrast with a
main requirement in many robotics applications: agents embedded in real-world, open-ended environments should be
able to dynamically and autonomously improve their perceptual abilities by actively exploring their environments.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12005

