The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Purifier: Defending Data Inference Attacks via Transforming Confidence Scores
Ziqi Yang1,2,3 , Lijin Wang1 , Da Yang1 , Jie Wan1 ,
Ziming Zhao1 , Ee-Chien Chang6 , Fan Zhang1,4,5 * , Kui Ren1,2,3,4
1
Zhejiang University
ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center
3
Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Cyberspace Governance of Zhejiang Province
4
Jiaxing Research Institute, Zhejiang University
5
Zhengzhou Xinda Institute of Advanced Technology, 6 National University of Singapore
{yangziqi, wanglijin, yangda, wanjie, zhaoziming, fanzhang, kuiren}@zju.edu.cn, changec@comp.nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract
Neural networks are susceptible to data inference attacks such
as the membership inference attack, the adversarial model
inversion attack and the attribute inference attack, where the
attacker could infer useful information such as the membership, the reconstruction or the sensitive attributes of a data
sample from the confidence scores predicted by the target classifier. In this paper, we propose a method, namely P URIFIER,
to defend against membership inference attacks. It transforms
the confidence score vectors predicted by the target classifier and makes purified confidence scores indistinguishable in
individual shape, statistical distribution and prediction label
between members and non-members. The experimental results show that P URIFIER helps defend membership inference
attacks with high effectiveness and efficiency, outperforming
previous defense methods, and also incurs negligible utility
loss. Besides, our further experiments show that P URIFIER is
also effective in defending adversarial model inversion attacks
and attribute inference attacks. For example, the inversion error is raised about 4+ times on the Facescrub530 classifier,
and the attribute inference accuracy drops significantly when
P URIFIER is deployed in our experiment.

Introduction
Machine learning has been provided as a service by many
platforms, transforming various aspects of daily life such
as handling users’ sensitive data. Users access these models through prediction APIs which return a confidence score
or a label. Many studies have indicated that the prediction
information of a sample could be exploited to perform data
inference attacks to get information about this sample (Shokri
et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2019; Song and Shmatikov 2020). Data
inference attacks could be largely divided into two categories.
The first kind of attack aims at inferring distributional information about a class by observing the prediction changes of
different samples (An et al. 2022; Mehnaz et al. 2022), while
the second kind of attack is to infer the individual information
of a sample by observing its specific output such as the membership inference attacks (Nasr, Shokri, and Houmansadr
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author

10871

2018; Salem et al. 2018; Hui et al. 2021; Yeom et al. 2018; Li
and Zhang 2021; Li, Li, and Ribeiro 2021), adversarial model
inversion attacks (Yang et al. 2019) and attribute inference
attacks (Song and Shmatikov 2020). In this paper, we focus
on the second type of data inference attack.
Among these data inference attacks, membership inference
attack (Shokri et al. 2017) is one of the most important and
exemplary attacks, where the adversary is asked to determine whether a sample is in the target model’s training set.
Many studies acknowledge that the confidence scores tell
more prediction information beyond the label and thus they
should be provided in the output. Therefore, a number of
approaches have been proposed to defend the membership inference attack while preserving the confidence scores (Shokri
et al. 2017; Salem et al. 2018; Nasr, Shokri, and Houmansadr
2018; Abadi et al. 2016; Jia et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2022). On
the other hand, some studies believe that removing the confidence information in the output is a way of defending the
membership inference attack. However, these defenses are
broken by label-only attacks (Yeom et al. 2018; ChoquetteChoo et al. 2021; Li, Li, and Ribeiro 2021), whereby only
the predicted label is exploited to infer the membership.
The major cause of membership inference attacks is
that the outputs are distinguishable for members and nonmembers. For example, a model always behaves more confidently on predicting the training data (members) than predicting the testing data (non-members). The prediction differences between members and non-members exist in individual
shape, statistical distribution and prediction label. (1) The
target classifier often assigns a higher probability to the predicted class when given a member, making confidence scores
distinguishable in individual shape. This is exploited by many
attacks (Salem et al. 2018; Nasr, Shokri, and Houmansadr
2018) (2) Confidence scores in members and non-members
are also distinguishable in statistical distribution. Our experiments show that confidence scores on the members are
more clustered in the encoded latent space, while those on
non-members are more scattered. BlindMI (Hui et al. 2021)
exploits this difference to infer membership. (3) In addition,
the confidence scores on members and non-members are different in prediction label. Members have a higher probability
of being correctly classified than non-members, which leads
to the difference in classification accuracy and is exploited
by label-only attacks (Yeom et al. 2018; Li and Zhang 2021;

