The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CDTA: A Cross-Domain Transfer-Based Attack with Contrastive Learning
Zihan Li1 , Weibin Wu1 , Yuxin Su1 * , Zibin Zheng1 , Michael R. Lyu2
1

School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
lizh523@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {wuwb36, suyx35, zhzibin}@mail.sysu.edu.cn, lyu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
2

Abstract

There are mainly two categories of adversarial attacks:
white-box attacks and black-box attacks. In most cases,
deep models are opaque to their users, so a white-box attack, which requires full knowledge of the target model, can
hardly be used in real life. Black-box attacks, as a type of
approach that restrict the information available to attackers,
can better evaluate the robustness of a model in practice.
Black-box attacks can be roughly divided into transferbased attacks and query-based attacks (Akhtar and Mian
2018). Query-based attacks generate adversarial perturbations by massively querying target models (Guo et al. 2019).
However, massive queries can be easily detected and then
blocked, which limits the practical applicability of querybased attacks. Transfer-based attacks work by employing the
transferability of adversarial samples. The transferability of
adversarial samples refers to the phenomenon that the adversarial examples generated via one deep model can also
fool another deep model, even though they have different
architectures and parameters. Therefore, transfer-based attacks can pose a severe threat to the security of DNNs. Nevertheless, current studies on transfer-based attacks are majorly concentrated on the cross-architecture setting (Wu et al.
2020a, 2021; Zhang et al. 2022a). This setting assumes that
the surrogate models used by attackers share the same training data distribution with the target models. However, this
assumption hardly holds in practice, because the owners of
deployed deep models scarcely release their training data to
the public.
Therefore, in this work, we focus on transfer-based attacks in a cross-domain setting, which can more faithfully
reflect the realistic threat to DNNs. Specifically, a crossdomain transfer-based attack works by generating adversarial samples via a surrogate model on a source domain,
and then directly using the generated adversarial samples
to fool target black-box models with different architectures
and parameters on completely different target domains. Existing cross-domain transfer-based attacks usually have limited attack success rates (Naseer et al. 2019; Zhang et al.
2022b), which makes cross-domain transfer-based attacks
under-explored.
To this end, we propose a Cross-Domain Transfer-Based
Attack (CDTA). Specifically, we train a feature extractor on
a source domain and use it to produce adversarial examples to fool target black-box models on completely different

Despite the excellent performance, deep neural networks
(DNNs) have been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial examples. Besides, these examples are often transferable among
different models. In other words, the same adversarial example can fool multiple models with different architectures
at the same time. Based on this property, many black-box
transfer-based attack techniques have been developed. However, current transfer-based attacks generally focus on the
cross-architecture setting, where the attacker has access to
the training data of the target model, which is not guaranteed in realistic situations. In this paper, we design a CrossDomain Transfer-Based Attack (CDTA), which works in the
cross-domain scenario. In this setting, attackers have no information about the target model, such as its architecture
and training data. Specifically, we propose a contrastive spectral training method to train a feature extractor on a source
domain (e.g., ImageNet) and use it to craft adversarial examples on target domains (e.g., Oxford 102 Flower). Our
method corrupts the semantic information of the benign image by scrambling the outputs of both the intermediate feature layers and the final layer of the feature extractor. We
evaluate CDTA with 16 target deep models on four datasets
with widely varying styles. The results confirm that, in terms
of the attack success rate, our approach can consistently
outperform the state-of-the-art baselines by an average of
11.45% across all target models. Our code is available at
https://github.com/LiulietLee/CDTA.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been applied to many
applications, even in some security-critical areas. Examples
include autonomous driving (Kumar et al. 2021), face recognition (Singh et al. 2020), and assisted medical diagnosis (Li
et al. 2020). However, large numbers of works have shown
that DNNs can be easily fooled by adversarial examples,
which are usually generated by attaching a tiny but carefully
crafted perturbation to a benign image (Szegedy et al. 2014;
Wu et al. 2020b). Therefore, developing adversarial attack
methods to figure out the vulnerability of deep models is
important for improving their security.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1530

