The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ShadowFormer: Global Context Helps Shadow Removal
Lanqing Guo1 , Siyu Huang2 , Ding Liu3 , Hao Cheng1 , Bihan Wen1 *
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Harvard University, USA
3
ByteDance Inc, USA
{lanqing001, hao006, bihan.wen}@ntu.edu.sg, huang@seas.harvard.edu, liuding@bytedance.com

Abstract

32

Recent deep learning methods have achieved promising results in image shadow removal. However, most of the existing approaches focus on working locally within shadow and
non-shadow regions, resulting in severe artifacts around the
shadow boundaries as well as inconsistent illumination between shadow and non-shadow regions. It is still challenging for the deep shadow removal model to exploit the global
contextual correlation between shadow and non-shadow regions. In this work, we first propose a Retinex-based shadow
model, from which we derive a novel transformer-based network, dubbed ShandowFormer, to exploit non-shadow regions to help shadow region restoration. A multi-scale channel attention framework is employed to hierarchically capture
the global information. Based on that, we propose a ShadowInteraction Module (SIM) with Shadow-Interaction Attention
(SIA) in the bottleneck stage to effectively model the context correlation between shadow and non-shadow regions.
We conduct extensive experiments on three popular public
datasets, including ISTD, ISTD+, and SRD, to evaluate the
proposed method. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance by using up to 150× fewer model parameters.1

Ours-Large
Ours-Small

PSNR (dB)

31

30

Zhu et al.
(AAAI2022)

29

DHAN
(AAAI2021)

CANet
(ICCV2021)

28
ST-CGAN
(CVPR2018)

27

0

Fu et al.
(CVPR2021)

80
160
240
320
# Number of parameters (Millions)

400

Figure 1: The PSNR performance, v.s., the number of model
parameters of shadow removal models on ISTD dataset.

deep models trained from large-scale training data. Comparing to many classic image restoration tasks, shadow removal
is more challenging due to the following aspects: 1) The
shadow patterns are arbitrary, diverse, and sometimes with
highly-complex trace structures, posing challenges to supervised deep learning for achieving “trace-less” image recovery; 2) The shadow degradation is spatially non-uniform,
leading to illumination and color inconsistency between the
shadow and non-shadow regions.
Recent shadow removal algorithms (Le and Samaras
2019; Fu et al. 2021) attempted to tackle the first challenge
by designing a separate refinement module to minimize
the remaining shadow trace in the recovered images. Besides, DeshadowNet (Qu et al. 2017) proposed to suppress
the boundary trace artifacts by re-generating a more accurate shadow density matte. These methods, though mitigate
the boundary trace artifacts at a certain level, adopt a suboptimal deep restoration framework that incorporated multiple post-processing modules with huge computational overheads as shown in Figure 1. On the other hand, many deep
shadow removal algorithms fail to preserve the illumination and color consistency in the recovered image (Qu et al.
2017; Le and Samaras 2019; Fu et al. 2021), by largely ignoring the global contextual correlation amongst the shadow
and non-shadow regions. A more recent method (Chen et al.

Introduction
Shadow is a ubiquitous phenomenon in capturing optical
images under the condition of the light being partially or
completely blocked. Shadow degrades the image quality
by limiting both the human perception (Cucchiara et al.
2003; Nadimi and Bhanu 2004) as well as many subsequent
vision tasks, e.g., object detection, tracking, and semantic segmentation (Jung 2009; Sanin, Sanderson, and Lovell
2010; Zhang et al. 2018). Various solutions have been proposed for image shadow removal, including the classic approaches (Gryka, Terry, and Brostow 2015; Zhang, Zhang,
and Xiao 2015; Xiao et al. 2013) that applied the physicsbased illumination models. Such methods are highly limited in practice as the assumptions made in the illumination
models are usually too restrictive for real-world shadow images. Recent methods (Qu et al. 2017; Hu et al. 2020) applied deep learning for image shadow removal, which have
achieved remarkable performance thanks to highly flexible
* Corresponding author: Bihan Wen.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

710

https://github.com/GuoLanqing/ShadowFormer

