The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Minimax AUC Fairness: Efficient Algorithm with Provable Convergence
Zhenhuan Yang1 * , Yan Lok Ko2 , Kush R. Varshney3 , Yiming Ying2†
1
Etsy, Inc, Brooklyn, New York, USA
University at Albany, State University of New York, Albany, New York, USA
3
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, New York, USA
zhenhuan.yang@hotmail.com, yko@albany.edu, krvarshn@us.ibm.com, yying@albany.edu
2

Abstract

most widely used performance metrics in classification tasks
with class-imbalance and when the relative costs of false
positives and false negatives are difficult to pin down, and in
bipartite ranking tasks. Learning a scoring function by maximizing its AUC — instead of the accuracy — () (Cortes and
Mohri 2003; Gao et al. 2013; Ying, Wen, and Lyu 2016; Liu
et al. 2020; Lei and Ying 2021; Yang and Ying 2022; Zhao
et al. 2011; Yang et al. 2021a). However, there is not yet
much work on AUC-related fairness in machine learning.
Properly defining group-level AUC fairness leads to two
categories of metrics, depending on the specific groups to
which the positive and negative examples belong. The first
type, intra-group AUC, constrains both positive and negative examples to the same group. The second type, intergroup AUC,1 computes the metric with positive and negative examples being from different groups. On one hand,
by only focusing on intra-group AUC, one does not fully
account for all possible disparate impacts.2 Indeed, as observed by Kallus and Zhou (2019), similar intra-group AUCs
may still lead to a disparate impact where positive examples
of one group are misranked below negative examples of another group. On the other hand, we also witness from the
synthetic experiment in Figure 1 that solely relying on intergroup AUC fairness can overlook unfairness with respect to
the intra-group AUC. These two observations strongly suggest that to mitigate disparate impact when the performance
metric is the AUC score, one should consider both inter- and
intra-group AUC fairness during the learning process.
In this paper, we follow the Rawlsian principle of maximin welfare for distributive justice (Rawls 2001) and formalize our fairness goal as follows:

The use of machine learning models in consequential decision making often exacerbates societal inequity, in particular
yielding disparate impact on members of marginalized groups
defined by race and gender. The area under the ROC curve
(AUC) is widely used to evaluate the performance of a scoring function in machine learning, but is studied in algorithmic fairness less than other performance metrics. Due to the
pairwise nature of the AUC, defining an AUC-based group
fairness metric is pairwise-dependent and may involve both
intra-group and inter-group AUCs. Importantly, considering
only one category of AUCs is not sufficient to mitigate unfairness in AUC optimization. In this paper, we propose a minimax learning and bias mitigation framework that incorporates both intra-group and inter-group AUCs while maintaining utility. Based on this Rawlsian framework, we design an
efficient stochastic optimization algorithm and prove its convergence to the minimum group-level AUC. We conduct numerical experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets
to validate the effectiveness of the minimax framework and
the proposed optimization algorithm.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed an increasing recognition that
allocation decisions unfavorable to people from vulnerable
groups (defined by sensitive attributes such as race, gender,
and age) worsen with the use of machine learning. Alongside, a burgeoning set of mitigation algorithms has been developed (Agarwal et al. 2018; Calders, Kamiran, and Pechenizkiy 2009; Calmon et al. 2017; Chouldechova and Roth
2020; Donini et al. 2018; Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016; Lohia et al. 2019; Pleiss et al. 2017; Zafar et al. 2017). Recognizing that they are only a small sliver of all actions that
may be taken when viewing the program of justice holistically, the aim of bias mitigation is to ensure that the output of
a classifier is not dependent on sensitive attributes. Most existing work focuses on statistical fairness metrics composed
of entries of the classifier’s confusion matrix.
On another front of machine learning, the area under the
ROC curve (AUC) (Hanley and McNeil 1982) is one of the

Find a scoring function that maximizes the minimum of
inter-group AUC and intra-group AUC.
Unlike usual discrimination-aware approaches that put constraints on the norm of fairness metrics, the maximin principle does not introduce unnecessary harm (Ustun, Liu, and
Parkes 2019; Martinez, Bertran, and Sapiro 2020). Hence it
is more natural for our initial purpose of learning via AUC
maximization.

* This work was mostly done while Zhenhuan Yang was a stu-

1

Kallus and Zhou (2019) originally name this xAUC.
We use the term disparate impact in the general sense of inequality in outcomes across groups, not in the specific sense of the
ratio of selection rates across groups.

dent at University at Albany, SUNY.
†
Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

11909

