The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Real or Fake Text?: Investigating Human Ability to Detect Boundaries
between Human-Written and Machine-Generated Text
Liam Dugan∗ , Daphne Ippolito∗ , Arun Kirubarajan, Sherry Shi, Chris Callison-Burch
University of Pennsylvania
{ldugan, daphnei, kiruba, shershi, ccb}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
As text generated by large language models proliferates, it
becomes vital to understand how humans engage with such
text, and whether or not they are able to detect when the
text they are reading did not originate with a human writer.
Prior work on human detection of generated text focuses on
the case where an entire passage is either human-written or
machine-generated. In this paper, we study a more realistic
setting where text begins as human-written and transitions to
being generated by state-of-the-art neural language models.
We show that, while annotators often struggle at this task,
there is substantial variance in annotator skill and that given
proper incentives, annotators can improve at this task over
time. Furthermore, we conduct a detailed comparison study
and analyze how a variety of variables (model size, decoding
strategy, fine-tuning, prompt genre, etc.) affect human detection performance. Finally, we collect error annotations from
our participants and use them to show that certain textual genres influence models to make different types of errors and that
certain sentence-level features correlate highly with annotator
selection. We release the RoFT dataset: a collection of over
21,000 human annotations paired with error classifications to
encourage future work in human detection and evaluation of
generated text.

1

Figure 1: In the boundary detection task, players see one sentence at a time from a passage and try to guess when the passage transitions from human-written to machine-generated.

(Ippolito et al. 2020; Gehrmann, Strobelt, and Rush 2019;
Clark et al. 2021). In this work, we instead frame detection
as a boundary-detection task: given a document that starts off
as human-written and at some point transitions to machinegenerated, can annotators detect the transition point? The
boundary detection setting is more informative than the classification setting because it better aligns with how LMs are
used to generate text in practice—in typical usage, a generative system is provided with a prompt and asked to produce
a continuation. By measuring human skill at the boundary
detection task, we can make progress toward quantifying the
risks associated with LMs; while simultaneously evaluating
the performance of different generative systems.
We collect annotations using RoFT, the website introduced in Dugan et al. (2020) which poses the boundary detection task as a game. In each game round, players are shown
one sentence at a time and earn points for guessing close to
the true boundary (Figure 1). They are also asked to select
a reason for why they made their decision. In our analysis
of these annotations, we find that players vary substantially
in their detection ability and that factors such as the amount
of time taken to complete a game round and total number of
game rounds played correlate with success.
We discuss how various factors such as the genre of

Introduction

Neural language models (LMs) are capable of generating increasingly natural-sounding text. One growing worry is that
bad actors may attempt to pass off automatically-generated
text as genuine. For example, Zellers et al. (2019) discuss
the dangers of machine-generated news articles, Martens and
Maalej (2019) document how easy it is to buy fake app store
reviews, and Weidinger et al. (2021) chronicles how LMs
can potentially be used to spread misinformation, fraud, and
other harmful text. These harms will inevitably become more
and more prevalent as language models become better and
cheaper to deploy. Thus, it is important to answer the question: just how susceptible are humans to being duped by
machine-generated text?
Existing studies of the ability of humans to detect generated text have focused on the binary question of whether or
not a provided document contains any generated text at all
∗

Equal Contribution
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12763

