The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Progressive Multi-View Human Mesh Recovery with Self-Supervision
Xuan Gong1,2 , Liangchen Song1,2 , Meng Zheng1 , Benjamin Planche1 ,
Terrence Chen1 , Junsong Yuan2 , David Doermann2 , Ziyan Wu1
1

United Imaging Intelligence, Cambridge MA 02140 USA
2
University at Buffalo, Buffalo NY 14260 USA
xuangong@buffalo.edu, lsong8@buffalo.edu, meng.zheng@uii-ai.com, benjamin.planche@uii-ai.com,
terrence.chen@uii-ai.com, jsyuan@buffalo.edu, doermann@buffalo.edu, ziyan.wu@uii-ai.com
Abstract

Sengupta, Budvytis, and Cipolla 2020; Yu et al. 2021). Most
of the self-supervised approaches only focus on single view
tasks. Although works such as Kocabas, Karagoz, and Akbas (2019); Wandt et al. (2021) employ multi-view geometry
for self-supervised training, for testing they infer on individual images independently, even when multi-view data are
available. We believe that there commonly exist multi-view
images in real scenarios, but self-supervised multi-view human pose/mesh estimation remains relatively unexplored.
Some works have taken steps to eliminate the requirements of 3D human mesh annotation. Pavlakos et al. (2017)
explore 3D geometry of the camera setup to lift from multiview 2D joints to 3D pictorial structure. But the training
process highly relies on multi-view imagery and only estimate human pose excluding human shape. Liang and Lin
(2019) generate multi-view human RGB images from existing SMPL (Loper et al. 2015) pose and shape parameters. But its synthetic paired data only helps to improve the
performance of model trained with real image-3D annotations. Although these works have deliberately designed human textures, light, background during rendering, the model
only trained with its synthetic data can hardly generalize
to real scenarios due to the domain gap between real and
synthetic images. It is obvious that the rendered images can
hardly generalize to the real images in the wild.
On the other hand, proxy representations (e.g., joints, silhouettes) are commonly used as intermediate representation
in human mesh recovery (HMR) task, and can serve as good
transition to bridge RGB image and SMPL parameters: 1)
synthetic-to-real domain gap is smaller for proxy representation, thus can be more easily bridged; 2) a vast amount
of SMPL parameters can be rendered into proxy representations to formulate paired synthetic data; 3) there exist multiple well-trained models predicting image to these 2D lowerdimensionality representations, which are relatively more
robust and generalized compared with 3D mesh predictors.
To this point, we propose to train with multi-view synthetic data for multi-view human mesh estimation. Compared to single-view synthetic training (Pavlakos et al. 2018;
Sengupta, Budvytis, and Cipolla 2020; Yu et al. 2021; Gong
et al. 2022; Zheng et al. 2022), two challenges specific to
multi-view synthetic training arise. First, an additional domain gap between the real testing data and synthetic training
data can be easily introduced due to inconsistency between

To date, little attention has been given to multi-view 3D human mesh estimation, despite real-life applicability (e.g., motion capture, sport analysis) and robustness to single-view
ambiguities. Existing solutions typically suffer from poor
generalization performance to new settings, largely due to
the limited diversity of image-mesh pairs in multi-view training data. To address this shortcoming, people have explored
the use of synthetic images. But besides the usual impact
of visual gap between rendered and target data, syntheticdata-driven multi-view estimators also suffer from overfitting
to the camera viewpoint distribution sampled during training which usually differs from real-world distributions. Tackling both challenges, we propose a novel simulation-based
training pipeline for multi-view human mesh recovery, which
(a) relies on intermediate 2D representations which are more
robust to synthetic-to-real domain gap; (b) leverages learnable calibration and triangulation to adapt to more diversified
camera setups; and (c) progressively aggregates multi-view
information in a canonical 3D space to remove ambiguities
in 2D representations. Through extensive benchmarking, we
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed solution especially for unseen in-the-wild scenarios.

Introduction
As a key step to several human-centric applications, 3D human mesh estimation from multi-view images has shown superiority beyond monocular image as it eliminates common
ambiguities among single-image scenarios. Most successes
in 3D human mesh recovery are demonstrated by supervised
training. However, such models hardly generalize to in-thewild scenarios due to the lack of sufficient and diverse 3D
annotations paired with multi-view images.
When collected training data are insufficient and infeasible to generalize, simulated training data can be a useful
alternative. Works have been done to synthetically generate and render images of human bodies for dense pose estimation (Zhu, Karlsson, and Bregler 2020), depth estimation (Varol et al. 2017), 3D pose estimation (Rogez and
Schmid 2016; Varol et al. 2017; Kundu et al. 2020; Patel
et al. 2021), 3D human reconstruction (Zheng et al. 2019;
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
This work was carried out during the internship of X. Gong
and L. Song at United Imaging Intelligence, Cambridge, MA.

676

