The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Reinforcement Causal Structure Learning on Order Graph
Dezhi Yang1,2 , Guoxian Yu1,2 , Jun Wang2, * , Zhengtian Wu3 , Maozu Guo4
1
School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
SDU-NTU Joint Centre for AI Research, Shandong University, Jinan, China
3
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Suzhou University of Science and Technology, Suzhou, China
4
College of Elec. & Inf. Eng., Beijing University of Civil Engineering and Architecture, Beijing, China
dzyang@mail.sdu.edu.cn, {gxyu, kingjun}@sdu.edu.cn, wzht8@mail.usts.edu.cn, guomaozu@bucea.edu.cn
2

to each DAG G and search the DAG with the best score in
the DAG space:

Abstract
Learning directed acyclic graph (DAG) that describes the
causality of observed data is a very challenging but important task. Due to the limited quantity and quality of observed
data, and non-identifiability of causal graph, it is almost impossible to infer a single precise DAG. Some methods approximate the posterior distribution of DAGs to explore the
DAG space via Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), but the
DAG space is over the nature of super-exponential growth,
accurately characterizing the whole distribution over DAGs
is very intractable. In this paper, we propose Reinforcement
Causal Structure Learning on Order Graph (RCL-OG) that
uses order graph instead of MCMC to model different DAG
topological orderings and to reduce the problem size. RCLOG first defines reinforcement learning with a new reward
mechanism to approximate the posterior distribution of orderings in an efficacy way, and uses deep Q-learning to update
and transfer rewards between nodes. Next, it obtains the probability transition model of nodes on order graph, and computes the posterior probability of different orderings. In this
way, we can sample on this model to obtain the ordering with
high probability. Experiments on synthetic and benchmark
datasets show that RCL-OG provides accurate posterior probability approximation and achieves better results than competitive causal discovery algorithms.

min S(G), s.t. G ∈ DAGs
G

(1)

However, due to the combinatorial nature of acyclic constraints, the search complexity is generally considered to
be NP-hard (Chickering, Heckerman, and Meek 2004).
Most methods employ heuristic strategies. To name a few,
GES (Chickering 2002) greedily adds edges that increase
the score of DAG the most; and max-min hill climbing
(Tsamardinos, Brown, and Aliferis 2006) searches DAGs in
the space reduced by constraint-based methods. Some other
methods align learning an optimal DAG with learning an
optimal DAG topological ordering, and search causal structures in a smaller ordering space (Teyssier and Koller 2005;
Raskutti and Uhler 2018; Bernstein et al. 2020).
Most score-based methods can only provide a single DAG
or its Markov equivalent class with the best score, which
may produce poor results, especially in the case of limited
data, poor data quality, and unidentifiable causal graphs. Different from score-based methods (Tsamardinos, Brown, and
Aliferis 2006; Huang et al. 2018), MCMC-based methods
(Madigan, York, and Allard 1995; Niinimäki, Parviainen,
and Koivisto 2016; Deleu et al. 2022) infer the posterior
probability of the DAG structure P (G|D) from the observation dataset D to account for the epistemic uncertainty over
graph structures. However, the too huge DAG combination
space makes it very difficult to characterize the DAG posterior distribution via MCMC and even produces slow mixing.
In this paper, we propose a deep reinforcement learning
based solution (RCL-OG) that approximates the posterior
probability of DAG topological orderings using order graph.
The order graph can clearly capture the generation process
of each kind of ordering, and sampling the order can be
regarded as a Markov decision process, starting from the
empty set, by selecting one variable to join the set based on
the ordered variables. By designing new transition rewards
for the nodes of the order graph, we give the formula for
calculating the probability of transition between nodes and
prove the detailed-balance condition. We show that computing the transfer rewards is a dynamic programming problem,
so we use the Nature DQN (Mnih et al. 2015) strategy with
a new target function to approximate the transfer rewards, as
outlined in Figure 1.

Introduction
Causal discovery can reveal the causal mechanisms underlying natural phenomena, it has been attracting the attention of many disciplines (Pearl 2009). The golden standard
for causal discovery is to conduct randomized intervention
experiments, which is however restricted by various factors
(i.e., cost and ethics) and even infeasible. Therefore, inferring causal structure from passively observable data is more
attractive and the only road for causal discovery (Pearl 2009;
Peters, Janzing, and Schölkopf 2017).
The causal graph captures the underlying causal mechanism of the data, where nodes and edges correspond to
variables and causality between variables, respectively. The
causal graph typically is a directed acyclic graph (DAG). To
find causal graphs, score-based methods assign a score S(G)
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10737

