The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Teaching to Learn:
Sequential Teaching of Learners with Internal States
Mustafa Mert Çelikok1 , Pierre-Alexandre Murena1 , Samuel Kaski1, 2
1

Aalto University
The University of Manchester
mustafamert.celikok@aalto.fi, pierre-alexandre.murena@aalto.fi, samuel.kaski@aalto.fi
2

Abstract

learners who can learn to learn, to achieve better generalization amongst similar learning tasks (Griffiths et al. 2019).
The optimal strategies for teaching learners with fixed inductive biases differ from the strategies for learners who are
able to learn better inductive biases.
The mathematical framework we present in this paper
shows that if a learner’s initial biases are unsuitable for the
current task and cannot change, the teacher may have no
choice but to hide parts of the training data from the learner
in order to teach them a good model. More specifically, the
learner can be taught a better model by hiding parts of the
data than by providing the full dataset. For teaching machine
learning algorithms, this teaching strategy is close to datapoisoning (Mei and Zhu 2015), and for teaching humans, it
is undesirable behaviour which attempts to manipulate the
learner. However, considering that the learner’s biases can
change and be influenced by the teacher induces a completely different teaching strategy: helping the learner refine
their internal state, essentially teaching them better inductive biases. This empowers the learners by teaching them to
perform better during the learning phase, with assistance of
the teacher, but also in future tasks, even in the absence of a
teacher. We refer to this more advanced teaching strategy as
Teaching to Learn (TtL).
In this paper, we present a mathematical framework for
TtL. We formalize this setting as a two-player game involving a learner and a teacher, and take the perspective of the
teacher. We unify the definition of inductive biases in machine learning algorithms (e.g. model family, initialization
etc.) and in humans (prior task knowledge, meta-knowledge,
etc.), and model both cases as a latent internal state of the
learner. A key difference of the new framework from conventional machine teaching is that the internal state of the
learner changes over time as a result of the teacher’s actions.
Thus, in the new framework, the task of the teacher consists
not only of guiding the learner towards a model close enough
to the best model possible, but also of guaranteeing that the
learner will be able to learn good models without supervision in future similar tasks. To do so, the teacher needs to
lead the learner to an internal state which consists of inductive biases that are suitable for current and future tasks.
The main contributions are: (i) We generalize sequential
machine teaching to a setting where the learner has an internal state which affects their preferences over models, and

In sequential machine teaching, a teacher’s objective is to
provide the optimal sequence of inputs to sequential learners in order to guide them towards the best model. However,
this teaching objective considers a restricted class of learners
with fixed inductive biases. In this paper, we extend the machine teaching framework to learners that can improve their
inductive biases, represented as latent internal states, in order
to generalize to new datasets. We introduce a novel framework in which learners’ inductive biases may change with
the teaching interaction, which affects the learning performance in future tasks. In order to teach such learners, we propose a multi-objective control approach that takes the future
performance of the learner after teaching into account. This
framework provides tools for modelling learners with internal states, humans and meta-learning algorithms alike. Furthermore, we distinguish manipulative teaching, which can
be done by effectively hiding data and also used for indoctrination, from teaching to learn which aims to help the learner
become better at learning from new datasets in the absence of
a teacher. Our empirical results demonstrate that our framework is able to reduce the number of required tasks for online meta-learning, and increases independent learning performance of simulated human users in future tasks.

Introduction
Pedagogical systems can be described as intelligent systems
in which an agent, called the teacher, transmits information to a second agent, called the learner in order to help
them learn a target concept (Shafto, Goodman, and Griffiths
2014). Machine teaching has emerged as a computational
model for pedagogical systems, which addresses the problem of finding the best training data that can guide a learner,
human or machine alike (Patil et al. 2014; Chen et al. 2018),
to a target model with minimal effort (Zhu 2015; Goldman
and Kearns 1995). However, conventional machine teaching
considers a restricted class of learners which have fixed inductive biases (e.g. parameter initialization, model family,
network architecture, variable selection etc.) and hyperparameters. Learners in this class are not able to update their
inductive biases during the learning process, which excludes
machine learning methods such as meta-learning and human
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5939

