The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

GRLSTM: Trajectory Similarity Computation with Graph-Based Residual LSTM
†

†

Silin Zhou1* , Jing Li2* , Hao Wang3 , Shuo Shang1,4 , Peng Han1
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
4
Sichuan Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Yibin, 644000, China
{zhousilinxy, wanghao.hku, jedi.shang}@gmail.com, {jingli.phd, penghan study}@hotmail.com
Abstract

p1

The computation of trajectory similarity is a crucial task in
many spatial data analysis applications. However, existing
methods have been designed primarily for trajectories in Euclidean space, which overlooks the fact that real-world trajectories are often generated on road networks. This paper
addresses this gap by proposing a novel framework, called
GRLSTM (Graph-based Residual LSTM). To jointly capture the properties of trajectories and road networks, the proposed framework incorporates knowledge graph embedding
(KGE), graph neural network (GNN), and the residual network into the multi-layer LSTM (Residual-LSTM). Specifically, the framework constructs a point knowledge graph to
study the multi-relation of points, as points may belong to
both the trajectory and the road network. KGE is introduced
to learn point embeddings and relation embeddings to build
the point fusion graph, while GNN is used to capture the
topology structure information of the point fusion graph. Finally, Residual-LSTM is used to learn the trajectory embeddings.To further enhance the accuracy and robustness of the
final trajectory embeddings, we introduce two new neighborbased point loss functions, namely, graph-based point loss
function and trajectory-based point loss function. The GRLSTM is evaluated using two real-world trajectory datasets,
and the experimental results demonstrate that GRLSTM outperforms all the state-of-the-art methods significantly.

e12

p2

e23

p8
p7
Dual Edge

e67

p6
Virtual Edge

e56

p3
e35
p5

p4

Road Network Edge

Figure 1: An example of multi-relation of points on the road
network. {p1 , p2 , p3 , p4 , p5 , p6 , p7 , p8 } is a point set of the
road network and ⟨p1 , p2 , p3 , p5 , p6 , p7 ⟩ is a trajectory sequence. There are three types of edges: (i) Virtual edges
(e.g., {e12 , e35 }) exist solely in trajectories and do not exist
in the road network, (ii) Dual edges (e.g., {e23 , e56 }) exist
in both the road network and trajectories. (iii) Road network
edges (e.g., e67 ) exist solely in the road network.
Chen, Özsu, and Oria 2005) adopt pairwise matching and
rely on dynamic programming to compute the optimal alignments, which results in quadratic time complexity O(n2 ),
where n is the average length of trajectories. Thus, these
methods are not desirable for large-scale trajectory data.
To address this issue, some recent studies (Li et al. 2018;
Yao et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020) propose to leverage
embedding-based similarity computation methods, where
each trajectory is encoded as a latent vector with deep learning models. This means that the trajectory similarity can be
computed in linear time with vector similarity computation.
Although these methods mentioned above are effective
for measuring trajectory similarity in Euclidean space, they
are not as effective as expected for computing trajectory similarity on the road network. Road network (Wang et al. 2021)
refers to a road system consisting of various roads that are
interconnected and interwoven into a network. Previously, a
handful of studies (Chen et al. 2010; Shang et al. 2017b; Li,
Cong, and Cheng 2020) have attempted to solve the problem
of trajectory similarity computation on road networks. Especially, these studies adopt hand-crafted heuristic approaches
to align trajectories to the road network and define some effective similarity functions (Shang et al. 2017b) to measure
trajectory similarity over the road network. However, these

Introduction
With the ubiquitousness of GPS-enabled devices, massive
trajectory data is being collected at an unprecedented rate. A
trajectory portrays the spatial-temporal motion of an object
over a while. Trajectory similarity computation is an essential function in many real-world applications, such as trajectory clustering (Lee, Han, and Whang 2007), anomaly trajectory detection (Meng et al. 2019), route planning(Shang
et al. 2012; Chen et al. 2019; Chen, Shang, and Guo 2020;
Chen et al. 2021), transportation optimizations (Zheng et al.
2013; Yang et al. 2021; Zheng et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021),
and trajectory matching (Shang et al. 2014, 2017a).
Many existing metrics (Yi, Jagadish, and Faloutsos 1998;
Vlachos, Gunopulos, and Kollios 2002; Chen and Ng 2004;
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Shuo Shang and Peng Han are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4972

