The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Frequency Selective Augmentation for Video Representation Learning
Jinhyung Kim1 * , Taeoh Kim2 , Minho Shim2 , Dongyoon Han3 , Dongyoon Wee2 , Junmo Kim4
2

1
LG AI Research
NAVER CLOVA Video
3
NAVER AI Lab
4
KAIST

Abstract

downstream tasks (Tian et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2021). However, augmentations for video SSL have not been sufficiently
explored yet. For videos, in terms of spatial dimension, the
standard practice is adopting typical image augmentations
in a temporally consistent way, i.e., applying the same augmentation to every frame (Qian et al. 2021). Meanwhile, a
few previous works have investigated augmentations in the
temporal dimension, including sampling a distant clip (Feichtenhofer et al. 2021), sampling clips with different temporal scales (Dave et al. 2021) or playback speeds (Chen
et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2021a; Duan et al. 2022), and dropping certain frames (Pan et al. 2021). Although effective,
sampling-based augmentations in the temporal dimension
inevitably modulate a video as a whole regardless of signals in a clip varying at different rates. These methods are
limited in resolving the spatial bias problem (Li, Li, and Vasconcelos 2018) of video datasets which requires distinguishing motion-related features from static objects or scenes.
Adding a static frame (Wang et al. 2021b) is a simple heuristic to attenuate the temporally stationary signal, but it is hard
to generalize to the real world’s non-stationary signal in the
spatio-temporal dimension. The need for a more general way
to selectively process a video signal depending on the spatial
and temporal changing rates motivates us to consider frequency domain analysis.
In digital signal processing, converting a signal to the frequency domain using discrete Fourier transform (DFT), then
processing the signal is widely used in many applications.
Filtering in the frequency domain is one example that attenuates a specific frequency range to remove undesirable
components, such as noise, from the signal. With its effectiveness in mind, we propose filtering video signals in the
frequency domain to discard unnecessary information while
keeping desired features for the SSL model to learn.
Fig. 1 shows the outcome of filtering out low-frequency
components (LFC) from videos. When the spatial filter is applied, plain surfaces of objects in the scene are erased while
their boundary or shapes are remained. As for the temporal
filter, stationary parts of the video, e.g., static objects or the
background, are removed while dynamic parts, e.g., a person moving, are retained. These results are aligned with the
previous discoveries that high-frequency components (HFC)
carry essential information for image and video understanding (Wang et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2020).

Recent self-supervised video representation learning methods
focus on maximizing the similarity between multiple augmented views from the same video and largely rely on the
quality of generated views. However, most existing methods
lack a mechanism to prevent representation learning from
bias towards static information in the video. In this paper,
we propose frequency augmentation (FreqAug), a spatiotemporal data augmentation method in the frequency domain
for video representation learning. FreqAug stochastically removes specific frequency components from the video so that
learned representation captures essential features more from
the remaining information for various downstream tasks.
Specifically, FreqAug pushes the model to focus more on
dynamic features rather than static features in the video via
dropping spatial or temporal low-frequency components. To
verify the generality of the proposed method, we experiment
with FreqAug on multiple self-supervised learning frameworks along with standard augmentations. Transferring the
improved representation to five video action recognition and
two temporal action localization downstream tasks shows
consistent improvements over baselines.

Introduction
There has been growing attention on transferring knowledge
from large-scale unsupervised learning to various downstream tasks in natural language processing (Devlin et al.
2018; Radford et al. 2019) and computer vision (Chen et al.
2020a; He et al. 2020; Grill et al. 2020) communities. Considering data accessibility and possible applications, video
representation learning has great potential as a tremendous
amount of videos with diverse contents are created, shared,
and consumed every day. In fact, unsupervised or selfsupervised learning (SSL) of video via learning invariance
between multimodal or multiple augmented views of an instance is being actively studied (Han, Xie, and Zisserman
2020; Alayrac et al. 2020; Recasens et al. 2021; Huang et al.
2021b; Qian et al. 2021; Feichtenhofer et al. 2021).
Recent studies in image SSL indicate that a careful selection of data augmentation is crucial for the quality of the
feature (Wen and Li 2021) or for improving performance in
* This work is done during Ph.D. program at KAIST.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1124

