The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

InstanceFormer: An Online Video Instance Segmentation Framework
Rajat Koner* 1,3 , Tanveer Hannan* 1,3 , Suprosanna Shit2 , Sahand Sharifzadeh1 ,
Matthias Schubert1,3 , Thomas Seidl1,3 , Volker Tresp1,3
1

Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich
2
Technical University of Munich
3
MCML
{koner, hannan}@dbs.ifi.lmu.de

Abstract
Recent transformer-based offline video instance segmentation (VIS) approaches achieve encouraging results and significantly outperform online approaches. However, their reliance on the whole video and the immense computational
complexity caused by full Spatio-temporal attention limit
them in real-life applications such as processing lengthy
videos. In this paper, we propose a single-stage transformerbased efficient online VIS framework named InstanceFormer,
which is especially suitable for long and challenging videos.
We propose three novel components to model short-term
and long-term dependency and temporal coherence. First, we
propagate the representation, location, and semantic information of prior instances to model short-term changes. Second,
we propose a novel memory cross-attention in the decoder,
which allows the network to look into earlier instances within
a certain temporal window. Finally, we employ a temporal
contrastive loss to impose coherence in the representation of
an instance across all frames. Memory attention and temporal coherence are particularly beneficial to long-range dependency modeling, including challenging scenarios like occlusion. The proposed InstanceFormer outperforms previous
online benchmark methods by a large margin across multiple datasets. Most importantly, InstanceFormer surpasses offline approaches for challenging and long datasets such as
YouTube-VIS-2021 and OVIS. Code is available at https:
//github.com/rajatkoner08/InstanceFormer.

Figure 1: Comparison of performance (AP) vs. model size
(params) in YTVIS-21 with existing offline and online models. InstanceFormer outperforms all existing methods with
comparable or fewer parameters. See Tab. 2 for references.
et al. 2022), and scene-graph generation (Shit et al. 2022),
recent transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) based methods
achieve remarkable success on offline VIS. These offline approaches predominantly employ Spatio-temporal attention
(Wang et al. 2021) on the complete video or accumulate
all frame-specific instance representations (Wu et al. 2021;
Cheng et al. 2021). Thanks to the simultaneous attention
over all frames from past and future, offline approaches can
classify and segment instances with high precision even under challenging scenarios. However, relying on full videos
and having an intractable Spatio-temporal complexity limits the application of offline methods to real-world scenarios where the videos are very long or streamed online. In
contrast, online approaches can be employed in real-time
and are applicable to long videos because of their sequential frame-by-frame processing. However, current online approaches suffer from a large performance gap compared to
offline methods. The performance gap can mostly be attributed to a lack of long-term temporal dependency (Yang
et al. 2021b, 2019) or semantic data association (Li et al.
2021; Han et al. 2022). We set three objectives to address
these major obstacles for improving online VIS.
In a video, object instances usually change their appearance or location gradually. To explicitly capture the gradual
changes in a scene, our first objective is to emphasize the
immediate past with a robust instance propagation module.

Introduction
Video Instance Segmentation (VIS) (Yang et al. 2019)
aims to simultaneously classify, segment, and track objects throughout video sequences. Therefore, VIS provides
a holistic video understanding for various downstream tasks
like autonomous driving and AR/VR applications. A vast
amount of literature has been proposed to address VIS and
can be grouped into two categories offline and online. Offline methods (Wu et al. 2021; Cheng et al. 2021; Hwang
et al. 2021; Fang et al. 2021) process an entire video at once
while online methods (Han et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2021b)
process it sequentially as a stream.
As in many computer vision applications, such as, object detection (Zhu et al. 2020), object tracking (Meinhardt
* Joint first-authorship and equal contributions.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1188

