The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Learning to Discover Money Laundering Sub-network in Massive
Transaction Network
Ziwei Chai1, 2 , Yang Yang* 1 , Jiawang Dan3 , Sheng Tian3 , Changhua Meng3 ,
Weiqiang Wang3 , Yifei Sun1
1

Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
Beijing Huairou Laboratory, Beijing, China
3
Ant Group, Hangzhou, China
{zwchai, yangya, yifeisun}@zju.edu.cn, {yancong.djw, tiansheng.ts, changhua.mch, weiqiang.wwq}@antgroup.com
2

Suspicious?

v

Abstract

v

Normal Transaction
Money Laundering Transaction
v Transaction to be Identified

AML SYSTEM

Anti-money laundering (AML) systems play a critical role in
safeguarding global economy. As money laundering is considered as one of the top group crimes, there is a crucial need
to discover money laundering sub-network behind a particular money laundering transaction for a robust AML system.
However, existing rule-based methods for money laundering
sub-network discovery is heavily based on domain knowledge and may lag behind the modus operandi of launderers.
Therefore, in this work, we first address the money laundering sub-network discovery problem with a neural network
based approach, and propose an AML framework AMAP
equipped with an adaptive sub-network proposer. In particular, we design an adaptive sub-network proposer guided by
a supervised contrastive loss to discriminate money laundering transactions from massive benign transactions. We conduct extensive experiments on real-word datasets in AliPay
of Ant Group. The result demonstrates the effectiveness of
our AMAP in both money laundering transaction detection
and money laundering sub-network discovering. The learned
framework which yields money laundering sub-network from
massive transaction network leads to a more comprehensive
risk coverage and a deeper insight to money laundering strategies.

Blocked

v

v
ML Transaction
Detection
ML Sub-network
Discovering

v
Money Laundering
Sub-network

Figure 1: An illustration of real-world transaction network
in Alipay. A robust AML system is expected to discover ML
sub-network of a suspicious ML transaction for comprehensive risk coverage.
among benign transactions and difficult to be uncovered. According to financial institutes rules, the flow of money must
be fully tracked. As a consequence, for a comprehensive risk
coverage, a robust anti-money laundering (AML) system is
expected not only to identify and block a certain suspicious
ML transaction (ML transaction detection), but also to unveil the suspicious ML sub-network from massive transaction networks (ML sub-network discovery).
Many existing methods aiming to build AML systems
have been extensively studied. They are mainly divided
into two categories: 1). Rule-based methods have been very
popular among the commercial institutions in the past few
decades (Chen et al. 2018). The rule-based AML system is
based on embedded rules which were developed by consultants and domain experts. The key issue of rule-based
systems is that keeping the rules up-to-date all the time is
extremely hard. 2). Machine/Deep learning-based methods
learn models by exploring massive amounts of historical
transaction data. For example, Kingdon (2004) proposes an
extension of support vector machine (SVM) to detect unusual customer behaviour. Deng et al. (2009) propose an active learning procedure through a sequential design method.
As graph neural networks (GNNs) have become the de facto
tool for performing machine learning tasks on graphs in recent years, Weber et al. (2019) use a GNN for detecting ML
transactions.
However, aforementioned methods are specific to AML

Introduction
Money laundering (ML), aiming at giving illegally-gained
proceeds (i.e.“dirty money”) a legitimate appearance (i.e.
“clean”), has been one of the major threat for economy and
society for decades . It’s estimated that the amount of money
laundered globally every year accounts for 2-5% of global
GDP and is expected to continue to grow (Kute et al. 2021).
Typically, the illegitimate funds to be laundered are transferred around, sometimes through numerous complex financial transactions, until the illegal source of the funds is disguised (Force 1999). Figure 1 shows a typical case of money
laundering transaction sub-network (ML sub-network) observed in a real-world online payment system of AliPay1 .
Money laundering transaction chains may often be hidden
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
One of the biggest online payment system in the world that
belongs to Ant Group

14153

