The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Dynamic Structure Pruning for Compressing CNNs
Jun-Hyung Park1 , Yeachan Kim2 , Junho Kim2 , Joon-Young Choi2 , SangKeun Lee1,2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
{irish07, yeachan, monocrat, johnjames, yalphy}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract

without using special hardware or libraries (Li et al. 2017).
In contrast, structure pruning directly discards high-level
structures of tensors. Among the structure pruning methods,
pruning channels, filters, and layers are commonly more
favorable because they can easily achieve acceleration on
general hardware and libraries (Li et al. 2017; He, Zhang,
and Sun 2017; He et al. 2018a).
Nevertheless, pruning with a finer granularity is expected
to be capable of better efficiency, due to the higher degree
of freedom of connectivity (Mao et al. 2017). Intra-channel
pruning (Wen et al. 2016; Yu et al. 2017; Meng et al. 2020)
focuses on finding a new pruning granularity that can provide
realistic compression and acceleration benefits by decomposing a filter or channel into smaller components. For example,
grouped kernel pruning (Zhong et al. 2022) has found a generally accelerable granularity by grouping filters and pruning
channels within a group. Although these methods have empirically shown better pruning rates compared with channel
and filter pruning, they have several limitations that can potentially degrade pruning results. First, they typically use a
static and strictly constrained pruning granularity in a layer,
such as a regular structure of adjacent kernels (Wen et al.
2016) and a channel of evenly grouped filters (Zhong et al.
2022). Such granularity limits the degree of freedom, which
possibly degrades pruning performance. Second, they utilize
hand-crafted heuristics in determining a pruning granularity.
In prior methods, a pruning granularity is determined heuristically based on the number of filters (Zhong et al. 2022) or the
shape of kernels (Meng et al. 2020). Hence, information on
how a set of weights delivers important features for a given
task may not be properly identified and utilized.
In this work, we introduce a novel intra-channel pruning method called dynamic structure pruning to address the
abovementioned issues. Our method automatically learns
dynamic pruning granularities in each layer based on the
grouped kernel pruning scheme (Zhong et al. 2022). As
shown in Figure 1, the pruning granularity is changed dynamically depending on which and how many filters are grouped
together. Hence, we aim to identify optimal pruning granularities by learning filter groups for effective pruning. Because
identifying optimal filter groups is challenging due to their
discrete nature and exponential search space, we propose a
differentiable group learning method inspired by research
on architecture search (Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2019; Xie

Structure pruning is an effective method to compress and accelerate neural networks. While filter and channel pruning
are preferable to other structure pruning methods in terms
of realistic acceleration and hardware compatibility, pruning
methods with a finer granularity, such as intra-channel pruning,
are expected to be capable of yielding more compact and computationally efficient networks. Typical intra-channel pruning
methods utilize a static and hand-crafted pruning granularity
due to a large search space, which leaves room for improvement in their pruning performance. In this work, we introduce
a novel structure pruning method, termed as dynamic structure
pruning, to identify optimal pruning granularities for intrachannel pruning. In contrast to existing intra-channel pruning
methods, the proposed method automatically optimizes dynamic pruning granularities in each layer while training deep
neural networks. To achieve this, we propose a differentiable
group learning method designed to efficiently learn a pruning
granularity based on gradient-based learning of filter groups.
The experimental results show that dynamic structure pruning
achieves state-of-the-art pruning performance and better realistic acceleration on a GPU compared with channel pruning.
In particular, it reduces the FLOPs of ResNet50 by 71.85%
without accuracy degradation on the ImageNet dataset. Our
code is available at https://github.com/irishev/DSP.

Introduction
Network pruning removes redundant weights or neurons from
neural networks (Han et al. 2015; Li et al. 2017; He, Zhang,
and Sun 2017). Since deep neural networks (DNNs) are typically over-parameterized (Denton et al. 2014; Ba and Caruana
2014), pruning techniques can reduce the network size without a significant accuracy loss by identifying and removing
redundant weights. Hence, network pruning can address problems in the deployment of DNNs on low-end devices with
limited space and computational capacity.
Most approaches in network pruning are classified into
two categories; weight pruning (Han et al. 2015; Guo, Yao,
and Chen 2016) and structure pruning (Li et al. 2017; He,
Zhang, and Sun 2017; Mao et al. 2017). Weight pruning
deletes individual weights in a network. However, because
of the irregular structures generated by weight pruning, it
is difficult to leverage the high efficiency of pruned models
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9408

