The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Tackling Data Heterogeneity in Federated Learning with Class Prototypes
Yutong Dai1 , Zeyuan Chen2 , Junnan Li2 , Shelby Heinecke2 , Lichao Sun1 , Ran Xu2
1

Lehigh University
Salesforce Research
{yud319, lis221}@lehigh.edu, {zeyuan.chen, junnan.li, shelby.heinecke, ran.xu}@salesforce.com
2

Abstract

While PFL methods address data heterogeneity, class imbalance combined with data heterogeneity remains overlooked. Class imbalance occurs when clients’ data consists
of different class distributions and the client may not possess
samples of a particular class at all. Ideally, the personalized
model can perform equally well in all classes that appeared
in the local training dataset. For example, medical institutions have different distributions of medical records across
diseases (Ng et al. 2021), and it is crucial that the personalized model can detect local diseases with equal precision.
Meanwhile, the currently adopted practice of evaluating the
effectiveness of PFL methods can also be biased. Specifically, when evaluating the accuracy, a single balanced testing
dataset is split into multiple local testing datasets that match
clients’ training data distributions. Then each personalized
model is tested on the local testing dataset, and the averaged accuracy is reported. However, in the presence of class
imbalance, such an evaluation protocol will likely give a biased assessment due to the potential overfitting of the dominant classes. It is tempting to borrow techniques developed
for centralized class imbalance learning, like re-sampling or
re-weighting the minority classes. However, due to the data
heterogeneity in the FL setting, different clients might have
different dominant classes and even have different missing
classes; hence the direct adoption may not be applicable.
Furthermore, re-sampling would require the knowledge of
all classes, potentially violating the privacy constraints.
Recent works in class imbalanced learning in non-FL settings (Kang et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2020) suggest decoupling the training procedure into the representation learning
and classification phases. The representation learning phase
aims to build high-quality representations for classification,
while the classification phase seeks to balance the decision
boundaries among dominant classes and minority classes.
Interestingly, FL works such as (Oh, Kim, and Yun 2021;
Chen and Chao 2021) find that the classifier is the cause of
performance drop and suggest that learning strong shared
representations can boost performance.
Consistent with the findings in prior works, as later shown
in Figure 1, we observe that representations for different
classes are uniformly distributed over the representation
space and cluster around the class prototype when learned
with class-balanced datasets. However, when the training set
is class-imbalanced, as is the case for different clients, rep-

Data heterogeneity across clients in federated learning (FL)
settings is a widely acknowledged challenge. In response,
personalized federated learning (PFL) emerged as a framework to curate local models for clients’ tasks. In PFL, a common strategy is to develop local and global models jointly the global model (for generalization) informs the local models, and the local models (for personalization) are aggregated
to update the global model. A key observation is that if we
can improve the generalization ability of local models, then
we can improve the generalization of global models, which
in turn builds better personalized models. In this work, we
consider class imbalance, an overlooked type of data heterogeneity, in the classification setting. We propose FedNH, a
novel method that improves the local models’ performance
for both personalization and generalization by combining the
uniformity and semantics of class prototypes. FedNH initially
distributes class prototypes uniformly in the latent space and
smoothly infuses the class semantics into class prototypes.
We show that imposing uniformity helps to combat prototype
collapse while infusing class semantics improves local models. Extensive experiments were conducted on popular classification datasets under the cross-device setting. Our results
demonstrate the effectiveness and stability of our method over
recent works.

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017) is an emerging area that attracts significant interest in the machine learning community due to its capability to allow collaborative
learning from decentralized data with privacy protection.
However, in FL, clients may have different data distributions, which violates the standard independent and identically distribution (i.i.d) assumption in centralized machine
learning. The non-i.i.d phenomenon is known as the data
heterogeneity issue and is an acknowledged cause of the performance degradation of the global model (Tan et al. 2022a).
Moreover, from the client’s perspective, the global model
may not be the best for their tasks. Therefore, personalized
federated learning (PFL) emerged as a variant of FL, where
personalized models are learned from a combination of the
global model and local data to best suit client tasks.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7314

