The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Editing Boolean Classifiers: A Belief Change Perspective
Nicolas Schwind1 , Katsumi Inoue2,3 , Pierre Marquis4,5
1

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo, Japan
2
National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
3
The Graduate University for Advanced Studies, SOKENDAI, Tokyo, Japan
4
Univ. Artois, CNRS, CRIL, F-62300 Lens, France
5
Institut Universitaire de France
nicolas-schwind@aist.go.jp, inoue@nii.ac.jp, marquis@cril.fr
We assume that both inputs ϕ and µ are represented as
propositional formulae. Doing so, ϕ identifies both the classifier under consideration and, through its set of models, the
associated concept. On the other hand, µ’s models represent
new positive (resp. negative) pieces of evidence in the case
of a positive (resp. negative) edit. This representation choice
allows one to deal with a number of existing ML classifiers: in an eXplainable AI perspective, many works have
shown recently how ML classifiers C of various types can
be associated with Boolean circuits ϕC , exhibiting the same
input-output behaviours (i.e., the predictions made using C
are precisely the same ones as those made using ϕC ). The
ML models that are concerned include not only decision
trees (Izza, Ignatiev, and Marques-Silva 2020; Audemard
et al. 2021) and decision lists (Ignatiev and Silva 2021), but
also a number of ML models that are usually considered as
less interpretable, like random forests (Audemard, Koriche,
and Marquis 2020; Izza and Marques-Silva 2021), gradient boosted trees (Ignatiev 2020), some Bayes nets (Shih,
Choi, and Darwiche 2018, 2019), and binary neural networks (Narodytska et al. 2018; Shi et al. 2020). Accordingly,
classifiers C from those families can be taken into account
in our framework, using ϕC as a representation of C since
the two are prediction-equivalent.

Abstract
This paper is about editing Boolean classifiers, i.e., determining how a Boolean classifier should be modified when new
pieces of evidence must be incorporated. Our main goal is
to delineate what are the rational ways of making such edits.
This goes through a number of rationality postulates inspired
from those considered so far for belief revision. We give a
representation theorem and present some families of edit operators satisfying the postulates.

Introduction
Alice, a bank employee, receives Bob, a customer who
wants to obtain a loan. Bob has a low income, but no debts.
His record shows that he had already requested a loan in the
past, and had fully reimbursed it. The bank management has
recently provided Alice with an AI algorithm (a pre-trained
predictor) to help her decide which issue to give to any loan
application. Alice is asked to use this algorithm which recommends against granting Bob the requested loan due to the
fact that he is not the owner of his principal residence. However, Alice is experienced and remembers of two customers
Cindy and Dan with a profile similar to Bob’s, who both had
previously been granted a loan without any issue. Hence,
Alice’s expertise led her not to follow the recommendation
of the AI algorithm and to grant Bob the loan requested.
But Alice would like to do more to avoid that the problem
encountered arises again with future clients having similar
profiles. She wonders what could be done to this end.
The research question tackled in this paper is relevant to
Alice’s concern. We focus on Boolean classifiers ϕ: given an
instance represented as a world, i.e., a truth assignment of all
the variables of interest, ϕ classifies the instance as positive
when it is a model of ϕ, and as negative when it is a countermodel of ϕ. The concept associated with ϕ is the set of all
positive instances. Our very purpose is to determine how a
Boolean classifier ϕ that has already been learned should be
modified when new pieces of positive evidence / negative evidence µ (that may conflict with predictions of the classifier)
are considered. We call such change operations on Boolean
classifiers positive edit / negative edits (respectively), and
we note them + and − .

Edit operations are connected to incremental concept
learners, like Mitchell’s Candidate Elimination Algorithm
(Mitchell 1977), Schlimmer and Granger’s STAGGER
(Schlimmer and Fisher 1986), Fisher’s COBWEB (Fisher
1987), and Gallant’s Pocket Algorithm (Gallant 1988). Such
systems, also referred to as on-line learning systems, are
suited to learning scenarios when a whole training set is not
available a priori but examples arrive over time. Borrowing
the criteria used in (Maloof and Michalski 2000) to draw a
typology of such systems, edit operations characterize online learning systems with (full) concept memory (the role
played by the classifier ϕ), temporal batch (the set of models of µ is a new set of examples in the case of a positive
edit, and a new set of counter-examples in the case of a
negative edit), and no instance memory (the examples and
counter-examples used to induce ϕ are not stored). However,
previous work about incremental concept learners was typically centered on aspects that are not considered in this paper. These included the design of a number of on-line learners (based on specific concept representations, e.g., decision

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6516

