The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards a Holistic Understanding of Mathematical Questions
with Contrastive Pre-training
Yuting Ning1,2 , Zhenya Huang1,2 , Xin Lin1,2 , Enhong Chen1,2 * ,
Shiwei Tong1,2 , Zheng Gong1,2 , Shijin Wang2,3
1
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application,
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
3
iFLYTEK AI Research (Central China), iFLYTEK Co., Ltd.
{ningyt, linx, tongsw, gz70229}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {huangzhy, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn, sjwang3@iflytek.com

Abstract

special components (e.g., formulas) and complex mathematical logic, which require more domain knowledge for comprehensive understanding. Therefore, mathematical question
understanding is a crucial but challenging issue in intelligent education field, which has attracted widespread attention (Davies et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2022).
In the literature, there are many efforts for mathematical
question understanding, including task-specific (Ughade and
Kumbhar 2019) and pre-training methods (Yin et al. 2019).
Task-specific methods focus on one specific aspect of questions (e.g., difficulty), which require massive expertise for
human annotations and suffer from the label sparsity (Huang
et al. 2021a). Therefore, pre-training has been utilized for
this task and has shown strong effectiveness recently.
Pre-training methods (Yin et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2022) aim
to learn comprehensive question representations on largescale unlabeled data and benefit various applications (e.g.,
difficulty estimation). However, existing methods, such as
MathBERT (Peng et al. 2021), mainly focus on the details
of question content, but lack the consideration of holistic
meanings from a mathematical perspective, which is more
important. As shown in Figure 1, although Q1 and Q2 are
literally different, they are typically considered mathematically similar, as they have similar holistic purposes with the
same mathematical knowledge and similar solutions. Therefore, we hope to design special pre-training methods for
understanding holistic meanings of mathematical questions.
However, there are many challenges along this line. First,
compared with general texts (e.g., user reviews) and other
educational questions (e.g., literature questions), mathematical questions are more complex with special components
(e.g., formulas), and require more mathematical knowledge
and logic to understand. For example, in Figure 1, the formula f (x) = ex − 1 implies that the question examines
the mathematical knowledge Power Function, and greatly
affects the solution. Besides, mathematical terms, which are
often treated as synonyms generally, may have quite different mathematical properties (e.g., circle and ellipse). Therefore, pre-training methods for general texts could not be directly applied to mathematical questions. Second, the holistic mathematical purposes of questions are more important
than literal details. For example, in Figure 1, although the
contents of Q1 and Q2 are quite different (e.g., different

Understanding mathematical questions effectively is a crucial
task, which can benefit many applications, such as difficulty
estimation. Researchers have drawn much attention to designing pre-training models for question representations due to
the scarcity of human annotations (e.g., labeling difficulty).
However, unlike general free-format texts (e.g., user comments), mathematical questions are generally designed with
explicit purposes and mathematical logic, and usually consist
of more complex content, such as formulas, and related mathematical knowledge (e.g., Function). Therefore, the problem of holistically representing mathematical questions remains underexplored. To this end, in this paper, we propose
a novel contrastive pre-training approach for mathematical
question representations, namely QuesCo, which attempts to
bring questions with more similar purposes closer. Specifically, we first design two-level question augmentations, including content-level and structure-level, which generate literally diverse question pairs with similar purposes. Then,
to fully exploit hierarchical information of knowledge concepts, we propose a knowledge hierarchy-aware rank strategy
(KHAR), which ranks the similarities between questions in
a fine-grained manner. Next, we adopt a ranking contrastive
learning task to optimize our model based on the augmented
and ranked questions. We conduct extensive experiments on
two real-world mathematical datasets. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our model.

Introduction
Online learning systems, such as Coursera1 and edX2 , have
attracted much attention worldwide in recent years (Anderson 2008; Lockee 2021). These online learning systems have
collected massive educational questions, and provide personalized applications based on the understanding of these
questions (Benedetto et al. 2020a). For example, we should
understand the difficulties of questions to recommend suitable questions for learners with different abilities (Benedetto
et al. 2020b). Especially, among all educational questions,
mathematical questions are more difficult to understand with
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.coursera.org/
2
https://www.edx.org/

13409

