The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Speaker Turn-Aware Multi-Task Adversarial Network
for Joint User Satisfaction Estimation and Sentiment Analysis
Kaisong Song1,2 , Yangyang Kang1∗ , Jiawei Liu3 * , Xurui Li1 , Changlong Sun1 , Xiaozhong Liu4
1

Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
3
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
4
Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, USA
kaisong.sks@alibaba-inc.com, yangyang.kangyy@alibaba-inc.com, laujames2017@whu.edu.cn
xurui.lxr@alibaba-inc.com, changlong.scl@taobao.com, xliu14@wpi.edu
2

Abstract

Service Staff

User

Hi, I applied for a return yesterday,
and have already sent the product :).

User Satisfaction Estimation is an important task and increasingly being applied in goal-oriented dialogue systems to estimate whether the user is satisfied with the service. It is
observed that whether the user’s needs are met often triggers various sentiments, which can be pertinent to the successful estimation of user satisfaction, and vice versa. Thus,
User Satisfaction Estimation (USE) and Sentiment Analysis
(SA) should be treated as a joint, collaborative effort, considering the strong connections between the sentiment states
of speakers and the user satisfaction. Existing joint learning frameworks mainly unify the two highly pertinent tasks
over cascade or shared-bottom implementations, however
they fail to distinguish task-specific and common features,
which will produce sub-optimal utterance representations for
downstream tasks. In this paper, we propose a novel Speaker
Turn-Aware Multi-Task Adversarial Network (STMAN) for
dialogue-level USE and utterance-level SA. Specifically, we
first introduce a multi-task adversarial strategy which trains
a task discriminator to make utterance representation more
task-specific, and then utilize a speaker-turn aware multi-task
interaction strategy to extract the common features which
are complementary to each task. Extensive experiments conducted on two real-world service dialogue datasets show that
our model outperforms several state-of-the-art methods.

Sentiment Speaker
States
change

OK

0
1

How do you return the freight to
me, I paid 10 CNY.

0

It is not a quality problem, so
you should pay the freight.
The sleeves are too fat, isn’t
it a quality problem?
This is not a quality problem.
If it is not a quality problem, what else is?
You means no sleeves?
Is it broken?

1
0

Unsatisfied

1
0
0
1

Figure 1: A typical serving rating system and an unsatisfied
service dialogue with sentiment and speaker turn change labels. Graphic emoji denotes positive, neutral or negative. Label 1 or 0 denotes whether speaker turn changes or not.
Intuitively, whether the user is satisfied with a service staff
largely depends on the fulfillment of the user’s needs. The
workflow of a typical service rating system is displayed in
Figure 1. The user interacts with the online service staff in
the free-form multi-turn dialogue, which is the basic service
mode on E-commerce platform. A complete dialogue will
be input into the rating system for satisfaction rating. The
user expresses positive sentiments in the beginning and interacts with the service staff by using a textual smiley face
“:)”. As the conversation progresses, sentiment states of the
user gradually change from positive to negative, and the user
is ultimately very unsatisfied and fails to reach an agreement
with the service staff on the return issue. Automatically detecting such low-quality and unsatisfying service is important. For the retail shopkeepers, they can quickly locate such
service dialogue and find out the reason to take remedial actions, such as “user return visit” and “staff service improvement”. For the platforms, by detecting and analyzing such
cases, they can define clear-cut rules, say “not fitting well is
not a quality issue, and the buyers should pay the freight.”
User satisfaction often relates to many linguistic and sta-

Introduction
The proliferation of complaint and impolite language within
service dialogues can create salient social and financial issues, such as marketing harassment and brand reputation
damage. Many platforms have built their serving rating systems that rate the suitability and quality of online service.
For example, over 77% of buyers on Taobao1 communicated
with sellers before placing an order (Gao and Zhang 2011).
User satisfaction estimation (USE) is an important yet challenging task, which has drawn great attention from both industries and research communities (Song et al. 2019; Liu
et al. 2021b; Higashinaka et al. 2019; Deng et al. 2022).
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.taobao.com/

13582

