The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MixFairFace: Towards Ultimate Fairness via MixFair Adapter in Face
Recognition
Fu-En Wang1,2 , Chien-Yi Wang1 , Min Sun2 , Shang-Hong Lai1,2
1

Microsoft AI R&D Center, Taiwan
National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
fulton84717@gapp.nthu.edu.tw, chienyiwang0922@gmail.com, sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw, lai@cs.nthu.edu.tw
2

Abstract
Although significant progress has been made in face recognition, demographic bias still exists in face recognition systems. For instance, it usually happens that the face recognition performance for a certain demographic group is lower
than the others. In this paper, we propose MixFairFace framework to improve the fairness in face recognition models. First
of all, we argue that the commonly used attribute-based fairness metric is not appropriate for face recognition. A face
recognition system can only be considered fair while every
person has a close performance. Hence, we propose a new
evaluation protocol to fairly evaluate the fairness performance
of different approaches. Different from previous approaches
that require sensitive attribute labels such as race and gender for reducing the demographic bias, we aim at addressing the identity bias in face representation, i.e., the performance inconsistency between different identities, without the
need for sensitive attribute labels. To this end, we propose
MixFair Adapter to determine and reduce the identity bias of
training samples. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that
our MixFairFace approach achieves state-of-the-art fairness
performance on all benchmark datasets.

1

FPR

C1 C2 C3

A1 A2 A3

FPR

FPR
STD = 0
Fair?
Caucasian
African
(a) Attribute-Based

Identity

Identity

STD = 3.5
Not Fair

Identity
C1 A1 C2 A2 C3 A3
(b) Identity-Based

Figure 1: For face recognition, the attribute-based (e.g., race)
fairness metric is not enough to represent the bias level in the
face representation. The above example demonstrates that
although the false positive rate (FPR) is the same for African
and Caucasian, there can be high skewness between each
identity regardless of their race. In this work, we thus aim to
reduce the variance of identity-based FPR to pursue ultimate
fairness in face recognition.

Introduction

With the rise of responsible AI in recent years, ethnicity issues such as demographic bias or fairness start to be discovered in face recognition systems (Xu et al. 2021; Dhar
et al. 2021). It is a common phenomenon that the performance of deep neural networks is largely inconsistent
across different demographic groups such as race and gender, and several approaches for solving demographic bias in
face recognition have been proposed in recent years. For instance, (Wang and Deng 2020) adopted reinforcement learning to learn a policy that automatically adjusts the margin of
loss functions to balance the performance inconsistency between each demographic group. (Gong, Liu, and Jain 2020;
Dhar et al. 2021) adopted an adversarial training to suppress sensitive attribute features. However, as addressed in
(Xu et al. 2021), most existing approaches require sensitive
attribute labels (e.g., race and gender) for training the networks, which restricts the scalability for being extended to
large-scale datasets since sensitive attributes need to be ac-

curately annotated by humans. In addition to the requirement of sensitive attributes, our experimental results show
that the evaluation process adopted by existing works cannot
precisely demonstrate the real fairness distribution of each
demographic group. In other words, we found the previous
evaluation protocol highly underestimates the bias between
different racial groups on benchmark datasets.
To precisely evaluate the bias between different racial
groups, we propose a new evaluation protocol which consists of both attribute-based and identity-based metrics. For
attribute-based metrics, we focus on evaluating the performance inconsistency between different races. As illustrated
in Figure 1, we found that the attribute-based metrics usually
raise a fairness “skewness” problem even if the performance
inconsistency between races is small. Hence, our identitybased metrics aim to measure the “identity bias”, which is
defined as the performance variance between “each identity”. In this way, we can prevent the skewness issue and
consider everyone fairly to achieve ultimate fairness without

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14531

