The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Spectral Feature Augmentation for Graph Contrastive Learning and Beyond
Yifei Zhang1 , Hao Zhu2,3 , Zixing Song1 , Piotr Koniusz3,2, * , Irwin King1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Australian National University
3
Data61/CSIRO
{yfzhang, zxsong, king}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk; allenhaozhu@gmail.com; piotr.koniusz@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
Although augmentations (e.g., perturbation of graph edges,
image crops) boost the efficiency of Contrastive Learning
(CL), feature level augmentation is another plausible, complementary yet not well researched strategy. Thus, we present a
novel spectral feature argumentation for contrastive learning
on graphs (and images). To this end, for each data view, we estimate a low-rank approximation per feature map and subtract
that approximation from the map to obtain its complement.
This is achieved by the proposed herein incomplete power
iteration, a non-standard power iteration regime which enjoys
two valuable byproducts (under mere one or two iterations):
(i) it partially balances spectrum of the feature map, and (ii) it
injects the noise into rebalanced singular values of the feature
map (spectral augmentation). For two views, we align these
rebalanced feature maps as such an improved alignment step
can focus more on less dominant singular values of matrices
of both views, whereas the spectral augmentation does not
affect the spectral angle alignment (singular vectors are not
perturbed). We derive the analytical form for: (i) the incomplete power iteration to capture its spectrum-balancing effect,
and (ii) the variance of singular values augmented implicitly
by the noise. We also show that the spectral augmentation improves the generalization bound. Experiments on graph/image
datasets show that our spectral feature augmentation outperforms baselines, and is complementary with other augmentation strategies and compatible with various contrastive losses.

View1
View2

Unaligned Views

Balance the Spectrum

Inject Spetral Noise

Align the orientation

Figure 1: Our GCL with spectral feature augmentation by the
incomplete power iteration implicitly performs three steps.
Let blue and red ellipses represent spectra of feature maps
Hα and Hβ of two views.

Introduction
Semi-supervised and supervised Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) (Velickovic et al. 2018; Hamilton, Ying, and
Leskovec 2017; Song, Zhang, and King 2022; Zhang et al.
2022b) require full access to class labels. However, unsupervised GNNs (Klicpera, Bojchevski, and Günnemann 2019;
Wu et al. 2019; Zhu and Koniusz 2021; Chen et al. 2023)
and recent Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) models do not
require labels (Song et al. 2021; Pan et al. 2018) to train
embeddings. Among SSL methods, Contrastive Learning
(CL) achieves comparable performance with its supervised
counterparts on many tasks (Chen et al. 2020; Gao, Yao, and
Chen 2021; Zhang and Zhu 2019, 2020). CL has also been
* Corresponding author. PK was primarily concerned with the
theoretical analysis (e.g., Prop. 2 & 3).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11289

applied recently to the graph domain. A typical Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) method forms multiple graph views
via stochastic augmentation of the input to learn representations by contrasting so-called positive samples with negative
samples (Zhu et al. 2020; Peng et al. 2020; Zhu, Sun, and
Koniusz 2021; Zhu and Koniusz 2022; Zhang et al. 2022c).
As an indispensable part of GCL, the significance of graph
augmentation has been well studied (Zhu et al. 2021b; Yin
et al. 2022).
Popular random data augmentations are just one strategy to
construct views, and their noise may affect adversely downstream tasks (Suresh et al. 2021; Tian et al. 2020). Thus, some
works (Yin et al. 2022; Tian et al. 2020; Suresh et al. 2021)
learn graph augmentations but they require supervision.
The above issue motivates us to propose a simple/efficient
data augmentation model which is complementary with existing augmentation strategies. We target Feature Augmentation
(FA) as scarcely any FA works exist in the context of CL
and GCL. In the image domain, a simple FA (Upchurch et al.
2017; Bengio et al. 2013) showed that perturbing feature
representations of an image results in a representation of another image where both images share some semantics (Wang
et al. 2019). However, perturbing features randomly ignores
covariance of feature representations, and ignores semantics
correlations. Hence, we opt for injecting random noise into

