The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

KT-Net: Knowledge Transfer for Unpaired 3D Shape Completion
†

†

Zhen Cao1* , Wenxiao Zhang2* , Xin Wen3 , Zhen Dong1
Yu-Shen Liu4 , Xiongwu Xiao1 , Bisheng Yang1
1

Wuhan University
Singapore University of Technology and Design
3
JD Logistics
4
Tsinghua University
{zhen.cao,dongzhenwhu,xwxiao,bshyang}@whu.edu.cn, wenxxiao.zhang@gmail.com
wenxin16@jd.com, liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

However, in spite of the great progress achieved by these supervised methods, the completion performance is still limited by the insufficiency of paired training data, which is
caused by the difficulty of obtaining the complete ground
truth for incomplete shape in real-world scenarios.
A promising solution to this problem is to train the completion network in an unpaired manner. That is, the network is only fed by collections of complete and incomplete shapes without paired correspondence. Such intuition
is driven by the easy access to the incomplete scanning in
the real-world, and the large amount of complete shapes
from many large-scaled 3D shape datasets (Chang et al.
2015; Pan et al. 2021). However, a typical challenge of unpaired shape completion task is the absence of the one-toone strong supervision for each incomplete shape. Previous methods (e.g. Cycle4Completion (Wen et al. 2021a) and
Pcl2Pcl (Chen, Chen, and Mitra 2019)) usually consider the
adversarial global feature matching framework as the basic
solution to this challenge, which can implicitly bridge the
distribution gap between the incomplete and the complete
shapes. However, the global feature based adversarial learning framework may lose the detailed geometric information
encoded in different levels of the network, which may lead to
low completion quality. On the other hand, implicitly aligning the feature can not fully explore the corresponding relationship between incomplete and complete shapes. Another
representative work ShapeInversion (Zhang et al. 2021) introduces GAN inversion for shape completion with the help
of a well-pretrained generator and a proper latent code. But
it takes much time to search for the appropriate latent code
during the inference stage, and an inappropriate latent code
might cause disaster completion results.
Inspired by the great success of knowledge distillation
(Hinton et al. 2015), we propose a new perspective to the
unpaired shape completion task, which is how to transfer
the knowledge from the complete shape domain into the
incomplete shape domain. In this paper, the term ”knowledge” specifically refers to the common representation in
the latent space of the complete shape, which should be distilled to guide the completion process for incomplete input.
This idea raises several questions: (1) How to implement a
knowledge transfer process? (2) Where should the knowledge transfer take place? (3) How to evaluate the effect of
knowledge transfer? (4) How to restore high-fidelity shape

Unpaired 3D object completion aims to predict a complete
3D shape from an incomplete input without knowing the correspondence between the complete and incomplete shapes.
In this paper, we propose the novel KT-Net to solve this task
from the new perspective of knowledge transfer. KT-Net elaborates a teacher-assistant-student network to establish multiple knowledge transfer processes. Specifically, the teacher
network takes complete shape as input and learns the knowledge of complete shape. The student network takes the incomplete one as input and restores the corresponding complete shape. And the assistant modules not only help to transfer the knowledge of complete shape from the teacher to the
student, but also judge the learning effect of the student network. As a result, KT-Net makes use of a more comprehensive understanding to establish the geometric correspondence
between complete and incomplete shapes in a perspective of
knowledge transfer, which enables more detailed geometric
inference for generating high-quality complete shapes. We
conduct comprehensive experiments on several datasets, and
the results show that our method outperforms previous methods of unpaired point cloud completion by a large margin.
Code is available at https://github.com/a4152684/KT-Net.

Introduction
Point clouds, as a popular representation form of 3D geometries, have drawn a growing research concern in many fields,
such as computer vision (Qi et al. 2017a), robotics (Liu
2015) and auto-navigation (Yue et al. 2018). However, the
raw point clouds obtained by 3D scanning devices are often
sparse, noisy and incomplete, which requires pre-processing
(e.g. completion, denoising) before the downstream tasks. In
this paper, we focus on the specific task to predict the complete shape for an incomplete point cloud, where the missing shape is usually caused by the limited scanning view and
occlusion. Previous deep learning based studies in this field
(Yuan et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2020; Xie
et al. 2020) usually rely on the paired supervision of incomplete shape and its corresponding complete ground truth.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

286

