The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Less Is More Important: An Attention Module Guided by Probability Density
Function for Convolutional Neural Networks
Jingfen Xie, Jian Zhang
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China
xiejf@stu.pku.edu.cn, zhangjian.sz@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

operators, e.g., convolution, activation, normalization, pooling or customized meta-structure (referred to as module
in this paper). Rather than devising the entire architecture,
many efforts have focused on developing advanced blocks to
boost CNNs, e.g., stacked convolutions (Szegedy et al. 2015)
and residual units (He et al. 2016). However, constructing
these blocks needs empirical expert knowledge, and costs
enormous trials and time. Recently, researchers present automated machine learning (AutoML) techniques to allow automatic architecture construction (Zoph and Le 2016).
In addition to devising blocks, another important research
area is plug-and-play attention modules (Hu, Shen, and Sun
2018; Woo et al. 2018), which can tell where to focus and
how to recalibrate feature maps within a block, thus enabling the network to learn more informative features. Besides, attention modules are designed independently from
architecture, and thus, can be plugged into various networks.
Overall, attention modules enjoy the merits of representation effectiveness and application universality. Many studies
explore how to generate attention weights for each channel
or each spatial region, respectively categorized as channel
attention (Hu, Shen, and Sun 2018; Wang et al. 2020) and
spatial attention (Jaderberg et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2018).
To integrate the above two dimensions, some works (Woo
et al. 2018; Fu et al. 2019) propose to first separately predict
channel and spatial weights, and then conduct a fusion operator to produce the final attention. There also exists literature
(Wang et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2021) that explores a more direct way and jointly generates a 3D (height, width, channel)
attention map in both spatial and channel dimensions.
However, most existing attention modules are heuristic
without a sound interpretation, and thus, require significant empirical engineering to design structure and operators
within the module. To deal with the above defects, we propose a Probability Density Function (PDF) guided Attention Module, dubbed PdfAM, which enjoys a sound motivation and requires few empirical structure designs. Specifically, the proposed design is based on our interesting ‘less is
more important’ observation that pixels with less occurrence
are prone to highlight foreground objects or textural details,
both with great importance for computer vision tasks, as
shown in Fig. 1 (c) and (e). Considering that it’s heavy and
noise-sensitive to directly use histograms to calculate the occurrence frequency of pixel values, we adopt PDF values to

Attention modules, which adaptively weight and refine features according to the importance of the input, have become
a critical technique to boost the capability of convolutional
neural networks. However, most existing attention modules
are heuristic without a sound interpretation, and thus, require empirical engineering to design structure and operators
within the modules. To handle the above issue, based on our
‘less is more important’ observation, we propose an Attention Module guided by Probability Density Function (PDF),
dubbed PdfAM, which enjoys a rational motivation and requires few empirical structure designs. Concretely, we observe that pixels with less occurrence are prone to be textural
details or foreground objects with much importance to aid vision tasks. Thus, with PDF values adopted as a smooth and
anti-noise alternative to the pixel occurrence frequency, we
design our PdfAM by first estimating the PDF based on some
distribution assumption, and then predicting a 3D attention
map via applying a negative correlation between the attention
weights and the estimated PDF values. Furthermore, we develop learnable PDF-rescale parameters so as to adaptively
transform the estimated PDF and predict a customized negative correlation. Experiments show that our PdfAM consistently boosts various networks under both high- and low-level
vision tasks, and also performs favorably against other attention modules in terms of accuracy and convergence.

Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are incredibly powerful in exploring visual imagery and have brought great
success in many computer vision problems, including highlevel tasks (e.g., image classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012) and video understanding (Tran et al.
2018)) and low-level tasks (e.g., image restoration (Zhang
et al. 2017) and video restoration (Wang et al. 2019)). Various studies have explored better designs on CNN structures
and shown high improvements, thus demonstrating the great
significance of constructing a strong CNN in vision research.
A modern CNN usually consists of several stages, and
each stage contains a few blocks. Such a block is built with
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
This work was supported in part by Shenzhen General Research Project under Grant JCYJ20220531093215035. Corresponding author: Jian Zhang.

2947

