The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Lifelong Variational Autoencoder via Online Adversarial Expansion Strategy
Fei Ye and Adrian G. Bors
Department of Computer Science, University of York, York YO10 5GH, UK
fy689@york.ac.uk, adrian.bors@york.ac.uk

Abstract
The Variational Autoencoder (VAE) suffers from a significant
loss of information when trained on a non-stationary data distribution. This loss in VAE models, called catastrophic forgetting, has not been studied theoretically before. We analyse the
forgetting behaviour of a VAE in continual generative modelling by developing a new lower bound on the data likelihood, which interprets the forgetting process as an increase in
the probability distance between the generator’s distribution
and the evolved data distribution. The proposed bound shows
that a VAE-based dynamic expansion model can achieve better performance if its capacity increases appropriately considering the shift in the data distribution. Based on this analysis, we propose a novel expansion criterion that aims to preserve the information diversity among the VAE components,
while ensuring that it acquires more knowledge with fewer
parameters. Specifically, we implement this expansion criterion from the perspective of a multi-player game and propose
the Online Adversarial Expansion Strategy (OAES), which
considers all previously learned components as well as the
currently updated component as multiple players in a game,
while an adversary model evaluates their performance. The
proposed OAES can dynamically estimate the discrepancy
between each player and the adversary without accessing task
information. This leads to the gradual addition of new components while ensuring the knowledge diversity among all
of them. We show theoretically and empirically that the proposed extension strategy can enable a VAE model to achieve
the best performance given an appropriate model size.

Figure 1: The scheme for the proposed Online Adversarial
Expansion Strategy (OAES). We assume that a VAE-based
Dynamic Expansion Model has already trained t components. At each training step, the generator, discriminator,
and the current component (t) are trained on the memory
buffer while all other components are frozen. At the evaluation phase, we treat the generation of all previously learnt
components (1,· · · ,t-1) and the current component (t) as real
and fake images, which are then fed into the discriminator
for deciding the model’s expansion.

Bound (ELBO), used as its objective function :
log pθ (x) ≥ Eqω (z|x) [log pθ (x | z)]

Introduction

− DKL [qω (z | x) || p (z)] := LELBO (x; {θ, ω}) ,

The Variational Autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling
2013) is one of the most popular deep generative models,
which defines an encoding-decoding process for images. A
VAE consists of two modules : an inference model mapping an image x to a low-dimensional latent variable z and
a decoder recovering x from z. The VAE is a likelihoodbased model which is optimized
R by maximizing the sample
log-likelihood log pθ (x) = log pθ (x | z)p(z)dz. However,
this objective function is intractable for optimization since
it requires integrating over all z. A VAE introduces a lower
bound to the sample log-likelihood, called Evidence Lower

(1)

where p(z) = N (0, I) and pθ (x | z) are the prior and
decoding distribution, respectively. DKL [·] is the Kullback–Leibler divergence. Existing works aiming for the improvement of VAE are mainly deriving a tighter ELBO
to the data log-likelihood, which is implemented by using importance sampling (Burda, Grosse, and Salakhutdinov 2015; Domke and Sheldon 2018), a more expressive
posterior (Kim and Pavlovic 2020; Maaløe et al. 2016;
Kim and Pavlovic 2020), or hierarchical variational models
(Molchanov et al. 2019; Vahdat and Kautz 2020).
However, these methods can only guarantee a tight ELBO
for a static data domain and do not consider the circumstances of lifelong learning. Recently, (Ye and Bors 2022f)

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10909

