The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MSDC: Exploiting Multi-State Power Consumption in Non-intrusive Load
Monitoring Based on a Dual-CNN Model
Jialing He1,3 , Jiamou Liu2 , Zijian Zhang3,4 * , Yang Chen 5 , Yiwei Liu 6 , Bakh Khoussainov 7 ,
Liehuang Zhu 3
1
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China, 400044
School of Computer Science, The University of Auckland, Auckland 1142, New Zealand
3
School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, 100081
4
Southeast Institute of Information Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Fujian China, 351100
5
Strong AI Lab, The University of Auckland, Auckland 1142, New Zealand
6
Defence Industry Secrecy Examination and Certification Center, Beijing, China, 100089
7
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China,
611731
hejialing@cqu.edu.cn, {jiamou.liu, yang.chen}@auckland.ac.nz, {zhangzijian, liehuangz}@bit.edu.cn,
yiweiliu disecc@163.com, bmk@uestc.edu.cn
2

Abstract

(Dinesh, Makonin, and Bajić 2019; Wang, Zhang, and Ren
2018; Kong et al. 2017) and malfunction detection (Shao
et al. 2017; Green et al. 2019; Rashid et al. 2019).
NILM is a classical example of a single-channel blind
source separation (BSS) task such as the infamous cocktail
party problem, i.e., extracting multiple data sources from a
single mixed observation. BSS is known to be highly underdetermined (Naik, Wang et al. 2014). To date, the mainstream solutions for BSS have relied on statistical modeling.
In the NILM literature, hidden Markov models (HMM) (Zia,
Bruckner, and Zaidi 2011) and conditional random fields
(CRF) (Azaza and Wallin 2017) are two popular modeling paradigms to capture the operations of household appliances. As an appliance’s power consumption signal is very
much dictated by (1) the appliances’ states which have (stable) power consumption levels, i.e., power states, and (2) the
patterns of the power state transitions, these models embed
appliances’ power states and state transitions. This information is in turn used for statistical inference of power signals.
A severe limitation of these mainstream solutions is computational complexity. For large households that contain many
appliances with potentially many power states, these methods tend to incur unreasonable computational costs. Moreover, they perform poorly for unseen appliances as the inferred model only fits appliances used for training.
Recent advances in deep learning techniques have presented new pathways to address these limitations. More
specifically, one can model the NILM problem as a
sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) learning task: Training a
deep learning model that maps the aggregated power signal to the target per-appliance power signals. Based on this
idea, several NILM solutions have been introduced utilizing
various neural network architectures such as convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), recurrent neural networks (RNNs),
long-short-term memory (LSTM), denoising autoencoders
(Kelly and Knottenbelt 2015a; Mauch and Yang 2015; Hsu
et al. 2019), and transformers (Yue et al. 2020).
In this paper, we argue that the existing neural-based mod-

Non-intrusive load monitoring (NILM) aims to decompose
aggregated electrical usage signal into appliance-specific
power consumption and it amounts to a classical example
of blind source separation tasks. Leveraging recent progress
on deep learning techniques, we design a new neural NILM
model Multi-State Dual CNN (MSDC). Different from previous models, MSDC explicitly extracts information about
the appliance’s multiple states and state transitions, which in
turn regulates the prediction of signals for appliances. More
specifically, we employ a dual-CNN architecture: one CNN
for outputting state distributions and the other for predicting
the power of each state. A new technique is invented that utilizes conditional random fields (CRF) to capture state transitions. Experiments on two real-world datasets REDD and
UK-DALE demonstrate that our model significantly outperform state-of-the-art models while having good generalization capacity, achieving 6%-10% MAE gain and 33%-51%
SAE gain to unseen appliances.

1

Introduction

Energy efficiency amounts to one of the major challenges
facing today’s families (Alahakoon and Yu 2016). Smart
grids, through their ability to meter and monitor energy
consumption to the level of individual households, provide
fine-grained data to discover patterns in a user’s behaviors.
With these patterns, appropriate strategies can be implemented to improve power efficiency (Wilson, Hargreaves,
and Hauxwell-Baldwin 2015). A critical issue of this technology is non-intrusive load monitoring (NILM): dissecting
aggregated energy consumption signals of a household – the
usual input to smart meters – into per-appliance signals (Hart
1992). NILM is important not only to accurately unravel the
household’s power consumption patterns (Çimen et al. 2020;
Hassan et al. 2022), but also to tasks such as load forecasting
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5078

