The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Effective Integration of Weighted Cost-to-Go and Conflict Heuristic within
Suboptimal CBS
Rishi Veerapaneni, Tushar Kusnur, Maxim Likhachev
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{rveerapa, tkusnur, mlikhach}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Conflict-Based Search (CBS) is a popular multi-agent path
finding (MAPF) solver that employs a low-level single agent
planner and a high-level constraint tree to resolve conflicts.
The vast majority of modern MAPF solvers focus on improving CBS by reducing the size of this tree through various
strategies with few methods modifying the low level planner.
Typically low level planners in existing CBS methods use an
unweighted cost-to-go heuristic, with suboptimal CBS methods also using a conflict heuristic to help the high level search.
In this paper, we show that, contrary to prevailing CBS beliefs, a weighted cost-to-go heuristic can be used effectively
alongside the conflict heuristic in two possible variants. In
particular, one of these variants can obtain large speedups, 2100x, across several scenarios and suboptimal CBS methods.
Importantly, we discover that performance is related not to the
weighted cost-to-go heuristic but rather to the relative conflict
heuristic weight’s ability to effectively balance low-level and
high-level work. Additionally, to the best of our knowledge,
we show the first theoretical relation of prioritized planning
and bounded suboptimal CBS and demonstrate that our methods are their natural generalization.

high-level work

fast low level
more CT nodes

explicitly trade oﬀ
low and high level work

slow low level
less CT nodes

low-level work

Figure 1: CBS’s original low-level planner finds shortest
paths ignoring additional conflicts created, resulting in a
large amount of constraint tree (CT) nodes for the high-level
search to resolve the conflicts. Suboptimal CBS (ECBS,
EECBS) utilize a low-level focal search that minimizes future conflicts alongside path length, resulting in a slower low
level planner but substantially reducing the high level work
and boosting performance. Our Weighted Focal method improves performance by finding a sweet spot in the middle.
We introduce a hyper-parameter r in the low-level focal
search which controls trading off low level work (finding
paths) and high level work (resolving conflicts), allowing us
to find low-level plans faster with a little more high level
work than current suboptimal CBS methods.

Introduction
Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is the problem of computing collision-free paths for a team of agents in a known
environment while minimizing a measure of their travel
times. This is required for several real-world tasks such as
the smooth operation of automated warehouses (Li et al.
2020b), robot soccer (Biswas et al. 2014), collaborative
manufacturing (Sun and Mills 2002), coverage (Kusnur et al.
2021), and others. MAPF is a challenging problem and is
shown to be NP-complete (Ratner and Warmuth 1986).
Prioritized Planning (PP) (Erdmann and Lozano-Perez
1987) is a fast multi-agent planning approach that sequentially plans agents avoiding earlier agents with better “priority”, and has been applied to several domains (Wu, Bhattacharya, and Prorok 2020; Čáp et al. 2015; Velagapudi,
Sycara, and Scerri 2010). However PP provides no guarantees on completeness or bounded suboptimality.
Conflict-Based Search (CBS) is a popular complete and
optimal MAPF solver that employs a low-level single agent

planner and a high-level constraint tree (CT) to resolve conflicts. Several methods speed up CBS by reducing the CT
size by explicitly pruning branches, selectively expanding
branches, adding sets of constraints, detecting symmetries,
and improving high-level heuristics (Boyarski et al. 2015,
2021; Li et al. 2019, 2020a, 2021).
Enhanced CBS (ECBS) (Barer et al. 2014) introduced the
first bounded-suboptimal version of CBS, utilizing a focal
search on the high level as well as another focal search planner on the low level that minimizes path conflicts with other
agents and therefore decreases the CT size. ECBS specifically mentions how modifying the low level planner to use a

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Please see https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.11624 for a detailed version with supplementary material.

11691

