The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Faster Fair Machine via Transferring Fairness Constraints to Virtual Samples
Zhou Zhai1 , Lei Luo2 , Heng Huang 3 , Bin Gu 1, 4 *
1
2

School of Computer and Software, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, P.R.China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, P.R.China
3
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, USA
4
Department of Machine Learning, MBZUAI, United Arab Emirates
zhouzhai@nuist.edu.cn, luoleipitt@gmail.com, henghuanghh@gmail.com, jsgubin@gmail.com
Abstract

classifier, previous works in fairness measures and bias mitigation can be divided into two broad types.
Specifically, the first one treats the underlying classifier
as a black box and implements a wrapper that works by preprocessing the data or post-processing the classifier’s predictions (Calmon et al. 2017; Chzhen et al. 2019). Existing
pre-processing approaches are specific to particular definitions of fairness and typically seek to come up with a single
transformed data set that will work across all learning algorithms, which, in practice, leads to classifiers that still exhibit substantial unfairness. In contrast, post-processing allows a broader definition of fairness and produces provable
fairness guarantees. However, post-processing would lead to
unpredictable losses in accuracy and requires test-time access to the protected attribute.
The second one modifies existing fair classifiers through
relaxing the desired definitions of fairness (Wu, Zhang, and
Wu 2019; Donini et al. 2018; Cotter et al. 2019; Gu et al.
2022). For example, (Zafar et al. 2017b) learnt the convex
margin-based classifiers by imposing linear constraints on
the covariance between the predicted labels and the values
of certain features. (Zafar et al. 2017a) utilized the discipline
convex-concave program to handle the scenarios where disparate treatment and disparate mistreatment can be avoided.
(Agarwal et al. 2018) provided a method to compute a nearly
optimal fair classifier with respect to linear fairness constraints, like demographic parity or equalized odds, by the
Lagrangian method.
Although a lot of fair classification algorithms have been
proposed as mentioned above, all of them suffer from one
or more of the following limitations. (i) Existing efficient
solvers to original learning problems were not compatible
to the fairness constraints which makes us to re-explore
new tailored algorithms to accomplish fairness classification. However, the new tailored algorithms are normally not
as efficient as the original ones. (ii) Existing fairness algorithms cannot support all types of fairness constraints as
shown in Table 1. (iii) Fairness notions can be relaxed into
linear and non-linear proxy fairness constraints. However,
existing algorithms cannot handle both of them for each type
of fairness notion. To sum up, it is still an open problem to
design a faster and flexible classification algorithm that can
handle all fairness notions regarding both linear and nonlinear proxy functions.

Fair classification is an emerging and important research topic
in machine learning community. Existing methods usually
formulate the fairness metrics as additional inequality constraints, and then embed them into the original objective. This
makes fair classification problems unable to be effectively
tackled by some solvers specific to unconstrained optimization. Although many new tailored algorithms have been designed to attempt to overcome this limitation, they often increase additional computation burden and cannot cope with
all types of fairness metrics. To address these challenging issues, in this paper, we propose a novel method for fair classification. Specifically, we theoretically demonstrate that all
types of fairness with linear and non-linear covariance functions can be transferred to two virtual samples, which makes
the existing state-of-the-art classification solvers be applicable to these cases. Meanwhile, we generalize the proposed
method to multiple fairness constraints. We take SVM as an
example to show the effectiveness of our new idea. Empirically, we test the proposed method on real-world datasets and
all results confirm its excellent performance.

Introduction
Fair classification has been a topic of intense study in machine learning due to concerns to bias with respect to sensitive attributes, e.g., against African-Americans while predicting future criminals (Flores, Bechtel, and Lowenkamp
2016) or NYPD stop-question-and-frisk program (Goel et al.
2016). Fairness means that there is no prejudice or favoritism based on the sensitive attributes (e.g. race, gender)
of individuals or groups (Mehrabi et al. 2021). Since fairness is a complex and multi-faceted concept that depends on
environment and culture, a number of notions are proposed
to assess how fair a classifier is with respect to a sensitive
group when compared to another, e.g., disparate treatment
(Xu et al. 2018), demographic parity (Barocas and Selbst
2016) and disparate mistreatment (e.g., average odds difference and equal opportunity difference) (Zafar et al. 2017a).
A number of recent works have focused on designing the fair
classification algorithms that satisfy one or multiple fairness
constraints. According to whether to modify the underlying
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11918

