The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fast Converging Anytime Model Counting*
Yong Lai 1 , Kuldeep S. Meel 2 , Roland H. C. Yap 2
1

Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, China
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore

Abstract

As a result, researchers have studied approximate techniques
to solve real-world instances of model counting.
The current state-of-the-art approximate counting techniques can be categorized into three classes based on the
guarantees over estimates (Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi
2013). Let φ be a formula with Z models. A counter in the
first class is parameterized by (ε, δ), and computes a model
count of φ that lies in the interval [(1+ε)−1 Z, (1+ε)Z] with
confidence at least 1 − δ. ApproxMC (Chakraborty, Meel,
and Vardi 2013, 2016) is a well-known counter in the first
class. A counter in the second class is parameterized by δ,
and computes a lower (or upper) bound of Z with confidence
at least 1 − δ including tools such as MBound (Gomes, Sabharwal, and Selman 2006) and SampleCount (Gomes et al.
2007). Counters in the third class provide weaker guarantees, but offer relatively accurate approximations in practice and state-of-the-art counters include satss (Gogate and
Dechter 2011) and STS (Ermon, Gomes, and Selman 2012).
We remark that some counters in the third class can be converted into a counter in the second class. Despite significant
efforts in the development of approximate counters over the
past decade, scalability remains a major challenge.
In this paper, we focus on the third class of counters to
achieve scalability. To this end, it is worth remarking that
a well-known problem for this class of approximate model
counters is slow convergence. Indeed, in our experiments,
we found satss and STS do not converge in more than one
hour of CPU time for many instances, whereas an exact
model counter can solve those instances in several minutes
of CPU time. We seek to remedy this. Firstly, we notice that
each sample generated by a model counter in the third class
represents a set of models of the original CNF formula. Secondly, we make use of knowledge compilation techniques to
accelerate the convergences. Since knowledge compilation
languages can often be seen as a compact representation of
the model set of the original formula; we infer the convergence of the approximate counting by observing whether a
full compilation is reached. By storing the existing samples
into a compiled form, we can also speed up the subsequent
sampling by querying the current stored representation.
We generalize a recently proposed language called CCDD
(Lai, Meel, and Yap 2021), which was shown to support efficient exact model counting, to represent the existing samples. The new representation, partial CCDD, adds two new

Model counting is a fundamental problem which has been influential in many applications, from artificial intelligence to
formal verification. Due to the intrinsic hardness of model
counting, approximate techniques have been developed to
solve real-world instances of model counting. This paper designs a new anytime approach called PartialKC for approximate model counting. The idea is a form of partial knowledge
compilation to provide an unbiased estimate of the model
count which can converge to the exact count. Our empirical analysis demonstrates that PartialKC achieves significant
scalability and accuracy over prior state-of-the-art approximate counters, including satss and STS. Interestingly, the empirical results show that PartialKC reaches convergence for
many instances and therefore provides exact model counting
performance comparable to state-of-the-art exact counters.

1

Introduction

Given a propositional formula φ, the model counting problem (#SAT) is to compute the number of satisfying assignments of φ. Model counting is a fundamental problem in computer science which has a wide variety of
applications in practice, ranging from probabilistic inference (Roth 1996; Chavira and Darwiche 2008), probabilistic
databases (Van den Broeck and Suciu 2017), probabilistic
programming (Fierens et al. 2015), neural network verification (Baluta et al. 2019), network reliability (Dueñas-Osorio
et al. 2017), computational biology (Sashittal and El-Kebir
2019), and the like. The applications benefit significantly
from efficient propositional model counters.
In his seminal work, Valiant (1979) showed that model
counting is #P-complete, where #P is the set of counting
problems associated with NP decision problems. Theoretical investigations of #P have led to the discovery of strong
evidence for its hardness. In particular, Toda (1989) showed
that PH ⊆ P #P , i.e. each problem in the polynomial hierarchy can be solved with just one call to a #P oracle. Although
there has been large improvements in the scalability of practical exact model counters, the issue of hardness is intrinsic.
* The author list has been sorted alphabetically by last name;
this should not be used to determine the extent of authors’ contributions.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4025

