The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Foresee What You Will Learn:
Data Augmentation for Domain Generalization in Non-stationary Environment
Qiuhao Zeng1 , Wei Wang1 , Fan Zhou2 , Charles Ling1 , Boyu Wang1 *
1

University of Western Ontario, Canada
2
Beihang University, China

Abstract
Existing domain generalization aims to learn a generalizable
model to perform well even on unseen domains. For many
real-world machine learning applications, the data distribution often shifts gradually along domain indices. For example, a self-driving car with a vision system drives from dawn
to dusk, with the sky darkening gradually. Therefore, the system must be able to adapt to changes in ambient illumination and continue to drive safely on the road. In this paper,
we formulate such problems as Evolving Domain Generalization, where a model aims to generalize well on a target
domain by discovering and leveraging the evolving pattern
of the environment. We then propose Directional Domain
Augmentation (DDA), which simulates the unseen target features by mapping source data as augmentations through a
domain transformer. Specifically, we formulate DDA as a
bi-level optimization problem and solve it through a novel
meta-learning approach in the representation space. We evaluate the proposed method on both synthetic datasets and realworld datasets, and empirical results show that our approach
can outperform other existing methods.

1

Source

Target

Figure 1: The data distribution shifts along a smoothing
curve in a low-dimensional manifold: The appearance of a
female changes over years. We capture the data evolving direction (grey arrow) between observed source domains and
predict the evolving direction (black arrow) towards the unseen domain beyond the last observed distribution.

vironment (Muandet, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf 2013; Arjovsky et al. 2019a; Sagawa et al. 2019). These methods
may collapse when the learning tasks are collected from
a non-stationary environment. For example, environmental changes due to illumination, seasons, or weather conditions can pose significant challenges for an outdoor robot
equipped with vision systems (Wulfmeier, Bewley, and Posner 2018; Hoffman, Darrell, and Saenko 2014; Lampert
2015). Since the evolving patterns are not taken into account,
the existing popular DG methods are not able to handle
such problems properly (Muandet, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf
2013; Li et al. 2018b; Arjovsky et al. 2019b).
To alleviate the aforementioned issues, one can take advantage of data shift patterns in non-stationary environments. For example, when deploying a face recognition system to search for a missing person, the system may be built
only on photos from childhood to adolescence that were
taken decades ago. In such a scenario, the system can benefit from modelling the domain shift along the age to predict a person’s current appearance (Fig. 1). In this work, we
address this problem under the evolving domain generalization (EDG) scenario (Nasery et al. 2021; Qin, Wang, and Li
2022), where the source domains are sampled from a changing environment, and the objective is to train a model that
generalizes well on an unseen target domain by capturing
and leveraging the evolving pattern of the environment.

Introduction

One common assumption in conventional machine learning
methods is that the training and test data are sampled from
the same distribution. However, in many real-world problems, this assumption does not hold, and the data distribution can shift in changing environments. Consequently, a
model learned from training data often fails to generalize
well on the data sampled from a shifting distribution, especially when the target data is not accessible. To address
the problem of domain shift, domain generalization (DG)
is proposed to train a model with source domains that can
generalize to unseen target domains.
Most existing DG methods aim to extract domaininvariant features by either statistical distance minimization (Muandet, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf 2013; Albuquerque
et al. 2019; Shui, Wang, and Gagné 2022; Zhou et al.
2021a) or adversarial learning (Li et al. 2018b; Volpi et al.
2018; Zhou et al. 2020a), implicitly assuming that all
the domains are independently sampled from a static en* Corresponding author: Boyu Wang.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11147

