The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Curriculum Temperature for Knowledge Distillation
Zheng Li 1 , Xiang Li 1 * , Lingfeng Yang 2 , Borui Zhao 3 ,
Renjie Song 3 , Lei Luo 2 , Jun Li 2 , Jian Yang 1 *
1
Nankai University
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
3
Megvii Technology
zhengli97@mail.nankai.edu.cn, {xiang.li.implus, csjyang}@nankai.edu.cn,
zhaoborui.gm@gmail.com, songrenjie@megvii.com, {yanglfnjust, cslluo, junli}@njust.edu.cn
2

Abstract

learn the suitable temperature via meta-learning. However,
it has certain limitations that require an additional validation
set to train the temperature module, which complicates
the training process. Besides, it mainly focuses on the
strong data augmentation condition, neglecting that most
existing KD methods work under normal augmentation.
Directly combining MKD with existing distillation methods
under strong augmentation may cause severe performance
degradation (Das et al. 2020).

Most existing distillation methods ignore the flexible role of
the temperature in the loss function and fix it as a hyperparameter that can be decided by an inefficient grid search.
In general, the temperature controls the discrepancy between
two distributions and can faithfully determine the difficulty
level of the distillation task. Keeping a constant temperature, i.e., a fixed level of task difficulty, is usually suboptimal for a growing student during its progressive learning
stages. In this paper, we propose a simple curriculum-based
technique, termed Curriculum Temperature for Knowledge
Distillation (CTKD), which controls the task difficulty level
during the student’s learning career through a dynamic and
learnable temperature. Specifically, following an easy-to-hard
curriculum, we gradually increase the distillation loss w.r.t.
the temperature, leading to increased distillation difficulty in
an adversarial manner. As an easy-to-use plug-in technique,
CTKD can be seamlessly integrated into existing knowledge distillation frameworks and brings general improvements at a negligible additional computation cost. Extensive
experiments on CIFAR-100, ImageNet-2012, and MS-COCO
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

In human education, teachers always train students with
simple curricula, which start from easier knowledge and
gradually present more abstract and complex concepts when
students grow up. This curriculum learning paradigm has
inspired various machine learning algorithms (Caubrière
et al. 2019; Duan et al. 2020). In knowledge distillation,
LFME (Xiang, Ding, and Han 2020) adopt the classic curriculum strategy and propose to train the student gradually using samples ordered in an easy-to-hard sequence.
RCO (Jin et al. 2019) propose to utilize the sequence of the
teacher’s intermediate states as the curriculum to gradually
guide the learning of a smaller student. The progressive curricula based on data samples and models can help students
learn better representations during distillation, but it requires
a careful curriculum design and complex computational process, making it hard to deploy into existing methods.

Introduction
Knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean
2015) (KD) has received increasing attention from both
academic and industrial researchers in recent years. It
aims at learning a comparable and lightweight student by
transferring the knowledge from a pretrained heavy teacher.
The traditional process is implemented by minimizing
the KL-divergence loss between two predictions obtained
from the teacher/student model with a fixed temperature
in the softmax layer. As depicted in (Hinton, Vinyals, and
Dean 2015; Liu et al. 2022; Chandrasegaran et al. 2022),
the temperature controls the smoothness of distribution
and can faithfully determine the difficulty level of the loss
minimization process. Most existing works (Tung and Mori
2019; Chen et al. 2020; Ji et al. 2021) ignore the flexible
role of the temperature and empirically set it to a fixed value
(e.g., 4). Differently, MKD (Liu et al. 2022) proposes to

In this paper, we propose a simple and elegant curriculumbased approach, called Curriculum Temperature for Knowledge Distillation (CTKD), which enhances the distillation
performance by progressively increasing the learning difficulty level of the student through a dynamic and learnable temperature. The temperature is learned during the student’s training process with a reversed gradient that aims
to maximize the distillation loss (i.e., increasing the learning difficulty) between teacher and student in an adversarial manner. Specifically, the student is trained under a designed curriculum via the learnable temperature: following
the easy-to-hard principle, we gradually increase the distillation loss w.r.t. the temperature, resulting in increased learning difficulty through simply adjusting the temperature dynamically. This operation can be easily implemented by a
non-parametric gradient reversal layer (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015) to reverse the gradients of the temperature, which
hardly introduces extra computation budgets. Furthermore,

* Corresponding Author. This work is partially done when
Zheng Li is an intern at Megvii.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1504

