The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On Grounded Planning for Embodied Tasks with Language Models
1

2

3

1

1

1

Bill Yuchen Lin * , Chengsong Huang * , Qian Liu , Wenda Gu , Sam Sommerer , Xiang Ren
1

University of Southern California
2
Fudan University
3
Sea AI Lab
{yuchen.lin, wendagu, sommerer, xiangren}@usc.edu, huangcs19@fudan.edu.cn, liuqian@sea.com

Abstract
Task: Move a teapot
from the stove to a shelf.

Language models (LMs) have demonstrated their capability
in possessing commonsense knowledge of the physical world,
a crucial aspect of performing tasks in everyday life. However, it remains unclear whether they have the capacity to
generate grounded, executable plans for embodied tasks. This
is a challenging task as LMs lack the ability to perceive the
environment through vision and feedback from the physical
environment. In this paper, we address this important research
question and present the first investigation into the topic. Our
novel problem formulation, named G-PlanET, inputs a highlevel goal and a data table about objects in a specific environment, and then outputs a step-by-step actionable plan for
a robotic agent to follow. To facilitate the study, we establish
an evaluation protocol and design a dedicated metric, KAS,
to assess the quality of the plans. Our experiments demonstrate that the use of tables for encoding the environment and
an iterative decoding strategy can significantly enhance the
LMs’ ability in grounded planning. Our analysis also reveals
1
interesting and non-trivial findings.

1

Grounded planning
Ø Turn right and walk to the stove.

LMs

Ø Pick up the tea pot on the left side of the stove.
Ø Turn left and walk to the shelves on the right.
Ø Place the tea pot on the middle shelf to the left
of the glass container.

Figure 1: The task of grounded planning for embodied tasks
(G-PlanET). The input to the LMs is a goal with a specific
environment, and the output is a step-by-step plan that can
guide a robot to complete the task.

Introduction

Pre-trained language models (LMs) demonstrate exceptional
proficiency in a wide range of natural language processing
(NLP) tasks such as question answering, machine translation, and summarization. They indeed capture some commonsense knowledge about our physical world such as
“birds can fly”. However, the question of whether LMs can
exhibit reasoning abilities within a grounded, realistic setting remains an open issue. This is because LMs lack the
sensory experiences and physical interactions with the environment that enable human beings to grasp the nuances of
real-life situations and plan for completing tasks.
Embodied robotics learning is a growing field that seeks
to create artificial intelligence agents capable of navigating and performing tasks within real-world environments, typically simulated through physical engines such
as AI2THOR (Kolve et al. 2017). The ALFRED benchmark (Shridhar et al. 2020) represents one of the pioneering

datasets that bridges the gap between NLP and robotics, providing a platform for investigating language-directed agents.
The objective of these studies is to design and test agents
that can translate language instructions into sequences of
low-level actions that enable the agent to manipulate objects
within an environment and achieve a desired outcome (e.g.,
cleaning an object and placing it elsewhere).
However, the primary emphasis of the ALFRED benchmark and related datasets is on the comprehension of preestablished plans, rather than the ability to reason and independently plan within a realistic environment. Prior research
focuses on the capacity of agents to comprehend and execute step-by-step plans, but not on their capacity for decomposing tasks and generating such plans, which represents a
more advanced skill. Additionally, the role of LMs has received limited examination in the context of these benchmarks, where they are mainly used as encoders for embedding token sequences, rather than for planning or reasoning.

*
The first two authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Our project website at https://inklab.usc.edu/G-PlanET.

13192

