The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

An Adaptive Layer to Leverage Both Domain and Task Specific Information from
Scarce Data
Gaël Guibon1,2 , Matthieu Labeau1 , Luce Lefeuvre2 , Chloé Clavel1
1

LTCI, Télécom-Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
Direction Technologies, Innovation & Projets Groupe, SNCF
gael.guibon@gmail.com, {gael.guibon,matthieu.labeau,chloe.clavel}@telecom-paris.fr, luce.lefeuvre@sncf.fr
2

Abstract

with customer service chats, which implies that available
data is scarce, confidential, and thus difficult to label – not to
mention, costly. In this context, we investigate the best way
to adapt an existing model to two multi-class classification
tasks: predict the customer satisfaction, and predict the status
of the customer problem, which are both conversation-level
labels. For the former, we consider a representation of customer satisfaction as discrete polarity labels. For the latter,
we consider the status of the problem as 5 possible values:
aborted, problem solved, solution to be tested, problem outof-scope or no solution available. As far as we know, this
work is the first on customer problem status identification,
even more in the context of customer service. We make the
hypothesis that automatically predicting complex labels such
as the status of a problem is feasible, even with a very small
quantity of data.

Many companies make use of customer service chats to help
the customer and try to solve their problem. However, customer service data is confidential and as such, cannot easily be
shared in the research community. This also implies that these
data are rarely labeled, making it difficult to take advantage
of it with machine learning methods. In this paper we present
the first work on a customer’s problem status prediction and
identification of problematic conversations. Given very small
subsets of labeled textual conversations and unlabeled ones,
we propose a semi-supervised framework dedicated to customer service data leveraging speaker role information to adapt
the model to the domain and the task using a two-step process. Our framework, Task-Adaptive Fine-tuning, goes from
predicting customer satisfaction to identifying the status of
the customer’s problem, with the latter being the main objective of the multi-task setting. It outperforms recent inductive
semi-supervised approaches on this novel task while only
considering a relatively low number of parameters to train
on during the final target task. We believe it can not only
serve models dedicated to customer service but also to any
other application making use of confidential conversational
data where labeled sets are rare. Source code is available at
https://github.com/gguibon/taft

In order to study this use-case, we use confidential customer service data that we annotated. Indeed, as far as we
know, there is no publicly available dataset which contains
a two-level annotation scheme in customer service chats,
and no dataset containing status of problem resolution as labels. A real dedicated dataset is thus mandatory, even though
it is confidential. The context of customer service implies
that only a few conversations are available, and even fewer
could be labeled, due to confidentiality. We decide to tackle
this joint issue by using semi-supervised learning. The most
fitting existing method in the literature seems to be domainadaptive pre-training (Konlea and Jannidisa 2020; Wu et al.
2021), which consists in adapting an existing pre-trained language model to a new domain by continuing training with
the Masked Language Model objective on new data. However, we suspect our data to be too scarce for this, and we
propose a method to apply semi-supervised learning to adapt
an existing, pre-trained language model by using a substitute,
simple task, which does not imply any additional labeling
cost. In the context of customer service, we choose to use
speaker role information, which is almost always available.
By doing so, we want to verify that trying to predict simple
information already embedded in the structure of the data is a
reliable way to replace predicting missing words, i.e masked
language modelling. Secondly, in order to tackle these two
classification tasks, we experiment with multi-task learning.
Our approach lies on using a supplementary adaptive layer,
which we will use to transition from our adaptive task of

Introduction
Customer service is a crucial matter for companies (customer satisfaction, etc.) and academics (better understanding
of dyadic conversations); however, customer service software clients require better handling. Indeed, customer service holds many obstacles, such as non publicly available
data, huge annotation cost, confidentiality issues on several
levels, and so on. This also implies multiple levels of analysis: conversation level, and utterance level. While this dual
level of analysis has only been recently tackled in the literature (Yang et al. 2022), a conversation-level label has never
been considered as a prediction target in this context. Studies
focus mainly on predicting utterance-level labels (Zadeh et al.
2018a,b; Hazarika et al. 2018; Majumder et al. 2019). In
this work, we consider both levels of conversational analysis,
as our main purpose is to detect problematic conversations.
To do so, we place ourselves in the use-case of a company
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7757

