The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improving Long-Horizon Imitation through Instruction Prediction
Joey Hejna1 , Pieter Abbeel2 , Lerrel Pinto3
1
Stanford University
University of California, Berkeley
3
New York University
jhejna@cs.stanford.edu, pabbeel@berkeley.edu, lerrel@cs.nyu.edu
2

Abstract

that compound overtime in the offline setting. Ultimately,
this leads to sub-par performance over long horizons that
can usually only be improved by carefully collecting additional expert data (Ross, Gordon, and Bagnell 2011). Second, deep-learning based policies are more likely to overfit
small training datasets, making them unable to generalize
to new test-time scenarios. On the other hand, humans have
the remarkable ability to interpolate previous knowledge and
solve unseen long-horizon tasks. After observing an environment, we might deduce plan or sequence of the steps to
follow to complete our objective. However, imitation learning agents are not required to construct plans by default
– they are usually trained to only output action sequences
given seen observations. This begs the question: how can
we make agents reason better in long-horizon tasks?
An attractive solution lies in language instructions, the
same medium humans use for mental planning (Gleitman
and Papafragou 2005). Several prior works directly provide
agents with language instructions to follow (Anderson et al.
2018; Shridhar et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2019). Unfortunately,
such approaches require the specification of exhaustive instructions at test time for systems to function. A truly intelligent agent ought to be able to devise its own plan and
execute it, with only a handful of demonstrations. We propose improving policy learning in the low-data regime by
having agents predict planning instructions in addition to
their immediate next action. As we do not input instructions
to the policy, we can plan without their specification at test
time. Though prior works have used hierarchical structures
that generate their own instructions to condition on (Chen,
Gupta, and Marino 2021; Hu et al. 2019; Jiang et al. 2019),
we surprisingly find that just predicting language instructions is in itself a powerful objective to learn good representations for planning. Teaching agents to output language
instructions for completing tasks has two concrete benefits.
First, it forces them to learn at a higher level of abstraction where generalization is easier. Second, by outputting
multi-step instructions agents explicitly consider the future.
Practically, we teach agents to output instructions by adding
an auxiliary instruction prediction network to transformerbased policy networks, as in seq2seq translation (Vaswani
et al. 2017). Our approach can be interpreted as translating
observations or trajectories into instructions.
We test our representation learning method in limited data

Complex, long-horizon planning and its combinatorial nature pose steep challenges for learning-based agents. Difficulties in such settings are exacerbated in low data regimes
where over-fitting stifles generalization and compounding errors hurt accuracy. In this work, we explore the use of an
often unused source of auxiliary supervision: language. Inspired by recent advances in transformer-based models, we
train agents with an instruction prediction loss that encourages learning temporally extended representations that operate at a high level of abstraction. Concretely, we demonstrate that instruction modeling significantly improves performance in planning environments when training with a limited
number of demonstrations on the BabyAI and Crafter benchmarks. In further analysis we find that instruction modeling
is most important for tasks that require complex reasoning,
while understandably offering smaller gains in environments
that require simple plans. More details and code can be found
at https://github.com/jhejna/instruction-prediction.

Introduction
Intelligent agents ought to be able to complete complex,
long horizon tasks and generalize to new scenarios. Unfortunately, policies learned by modern deep-learning techniques
often struggle to acquire either of these abilities. This is particularly true in planning regimes where multiple, complex,
steps must be completed correctly in sequence to complete a
task. Realistic constraints, such as partial observability, the
underspecification of goals, or the sparse reward nature of
many planning problems make learning even harder. Reinforcement learning approaches often struggle to effectively
learn policies and require billions of environment interactions to produce effective solutions (Wijmans et al. 2019;
Parisotto et al. 2020). Imitation learning is an alternative approach based on learning from expert data, but can still require millions of demonstrations to learn effective planners
(Chevalier-Boisvert et al. 2019). Such high data constraints
make learning difficult and expensive.
Unfortunately the aforementioned issues with behavior
learning are only exacerbated in the low data regime. First,
with limited training data agents are less likely to act perfectly at each environment step, leading to small errors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7857

