The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Bidirectional Domain Mixup for Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation
Daehan Kim* 1 , Minseok Seo* 2 , Kwanyong Park3 , Inkyu Shin3 , Sanghyun Woo3 , In-So Kweon3 ,
Dong-Geol Choi†1
1

Hanbat National University, Korea
2
SI Analytics, Korea
3
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Korea
daehan.kim@edu.hanbat.ac.kr, minseok.seo@si-analytics.ai, {pkyong7, dlsrbgg33, shwoo93, iskweon77}@kaist.ac.kr
dgchoi@hanbat.ac.kr
Abstract

and self-training (Zou et al. 2018b; Mei et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2021).
Among them, cross-domain data mixing based approaches (Chen et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2022a; Tranheden
et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2021) recently show state-of-theart performances. These methods composite the images of
both domains and corresponding (pseudo) labels to generate
domain-mixed training samples. Early works (Chen et al.
2021) are largely inspired by a popular data augmentation
method, CutMix (Yun et al. 2019), and borrow some rectangular patches from one domain to fill-in the random hole
of other domain of image. Many variants improve data mixing strategy with mixing the region of randomly sampled
classes (Tranheden et al. 2021), heuristics on relationship
between classes (Zhou et al. 2022a), and image-level soft
mixup (Gao et al. 2021).
Motivated by the progress, we further delve into domain mixing approaches and propose Bidirectional Domain
Mixup (BDM) framework. Beyond the previous unidirectional sample mixing (Chen et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2022a;
Tranheden et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2021), the framework mix
the samples in both direction, mix the source patches on the
target sample (i.e.source-to-target) and vice versa (i.e.targetto-source). Under the framework, we systematically study
what makes good domain mixed samples to learn the transferable and generalized features for the target domain performance. Specifically, we mainly investigate two core steps
of data mixing approach: 1) Cut: how can we identify uninformative patches and 2) Paste: which patches from other
domains bring better supervision signals.
First, we promote to learn domain transferable and generalized features by cutting out the source-specific and nosily
predicted region for source and target data, respectively. We
found that the regions with low-confident model predictions
is highly related to it, and cutting out such regions. To supplement scarce supervisory signal due to the cut process, we
design the paste step to fulfill the three key functionalities: 1)
As semantic segmentation network heavily rely on the context (Choi, Kim, and Choo 2020; Chen et al. 2017; Zheng
et al. 2021; Yi et al. 2022), it is important to maintain intrinsic spatial structure of images. Thus we leverage spatial continuity to pick a patch that will be pasted on given the
hole region. 2) Previous data mixing approaches (Zhou et al.
2022a; Tranheden et al. 2021) usually paste the randomly se-

Mixup provides interpolated training samples and allows the
model to obtain smoother decision boundaries for better generalization. The idea can be naturally applied to the domain
adaptation task, where we can mix the source and target samples to obtain domain-mixed samples for better adaptation.
However, the extension of the idea from classification to segmentation (i.e., structured output) is nontrivial. This paper
systematically studies the impact of mixup under the domain adaptive semantic segmentation task and presents a simple yet effective mixup strategy called Bidirectional Domain
Mixup (BDM). In specific, we achieve domain mixup in twostep: cut and paste. Given the warm-up model trained from
any adaptation techniques, we forward the source and target
samples and perform a simple threshold-based cut out of the
unconfident regions (cut). After then, we fill-in the dropped
regions with the other domain region patches (paste). In doing so, we jointly consider class distribution, spatial structure,
and pseudo label confidence. Based on our analysis, we found
that BDM leaves domain transferable regions by cutting, balances the dataset-level class distribution while preserving natural scene context by pasting. We coupled our proposal with
various state-of-the-art adaptation models and observe significant improvement consistently. We also provide extensive
ablation experiments to empirically verify our main components of the framework. Visit our project page with the code at
https://sites.google.com/view/bidirectional-domain-mixup.

Introduction
To reduce the annotation budget in semantic segmentation
that require pixel level annotation, there have been many domain adaptation (DA) approaches using relatively inexpensive source (e.g. simulator-based) data (Richter et al. 2016;
Ros et al. 2016) and unlabeled target (e.g. real) data. However, deep neural networks show poor generalization performance in real data because they are sensitive to domain misalignments such as layout (Li et al. 2020), texture (Yang
and Soatto 2020), structure (Tsai et al. 2018), and class
distribution (Zou et al. 2018b). To deal with it, many approaches have been proposed, including adversarial training (Tsai et al. 2018), entropy minimization (Vu et al. 2019),
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors: Dong-Geol Choi.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1114

