The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Noise-tolerant Differentiable Learning Approach for Single Occurrence Regular
Expression with Interleaving
Rongzhen Ye1 , Tianqu Zhuang1 , Hai Wan1* , Jianfeng Du2 * , Weilin Luo1 , Pingjia Liang1
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Multilingual Intelligent Processing, Guangdong University of Foreign Studies
yerzh@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zhangzhq58@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wanhai@mail.sysu.edu.cn, jfdu@gdufs.edu.cn,
luowlin3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, liangpj3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract

is still challenging to learn SOIREs. On one hand, learning SOIREs is a search problem requiring heavy computation. On the other hand, real-life text strings usually contain noise (Kearns and Li 1988; Galassi and Giordana 2005;
Bex et al. 2006). For example, in XML schema inference,
the XML data may contain incorrect symbols (Bex et al.
2006). The presence of noise makes the problem of learning SOIREs more challenging.
There have been a number of proposals for learning either
the full class or its subclasses of SOIRE, from a set of text
strings (Freydenberger and Kötzing 2015; Zhang et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2019a, 2020b). However, they are hard to guarantee
that the learnt REs reach the full declared expressive power.
For example, Li et al. (2019a) claimed to learn SOIREs, but
Wang and Zhang (2021) showed that they just learn special
cases of SOIRE. Besides, existing approaches are not robust
on noisy data because any modification to given strings will
alter the patterns in learnt REs. As far as we know, there is
no approach to learning SOIREs that works well with both
noise-free data and noisy data.
In this paper, we propose a noise-tolerant differentiable
learning approach SOIREDL for SOIREs. Specifically, we
design a neural network to simulate SOIRE matching for
text strings. Since existing work for SOIRE matching (Wang
2021b, 2022) is not suitable for differentiable learning, we
propose a new SOIRE matching algorithm SOIRETM based
on the syntax tree of SOIRE, and accordingly, an algorithm
for converting SOIRETM to a neural network. We theoretically prove that certain assignments of the set of parameters
learnt by the neural network, called faithful encodings, oneto-one correspond to SOIREs for a bounded size. This correspondence allows us to interpret the target SOIRE from
an assignment of the set of learnt parameters of the neural
network by exploring the nearest faithful encodings.
To evaluate the performance of SOIREDL on noisy data,
we extract 30 SOIREs from the RE database built by Li
et al. (2018) to make a group of datasets covering five domains with different noise levels. Experimental results show
that at all noise levels, the average accuracy of SOIREDL
is higher than state-of-the-art (SOTA) approaches and the
faithfulness of SOIREDL is always beyond 80%. In particular, the average accuracy of SOIREDL only decreases
slightly with increasing noise levels, which suggests that
SOIREDL is robust on noisy data.

We study the problem of learning a single occurrence regular expression with interleaving (SOIRE) from a set of text
strings possibly with noise. SOIRE fully supports interleaving and covers a large portion of regular expressions used in
practice. Learning SOIREs is challenging because it requires
heavy computation and text strings usually contain noise in
practice. Most of the previous studies only learn restricted
SOIREs and are not robust on noisy data. To tackle these issues, we propose a noise-tolerant differentiable learning approach SOIREDL for SOIRE. We design a neural network
to simulate SOIRE matching and theoretically prove that certain assignments of the set of parameters learnt by the neural network, called faithful encodings, are one-to-one corresponding to SOIREs for a bounded size. Based on this correspondence, we interpret the target SOIRE from an assignment of the set of parameters of the neural network by exploring the nearest faithful encodings. Experimental results show
that SOIREDL outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches,
especially on noisy data.

Introduction
Learning regular expressions (REs) is a fundamental task
in Machine Learning. For example, REs are the target in
EXtensible Markup Language (XML) schema inference, for
covering a set of text strings about an XML element. The
regular expression with interleaving, denoted as RE(&), is
an extension of regular expressions, where the operator interleaving (&) is added to interleave two strings. RE(&)
has been widely used in various areas, ranging from XML
database system (Makoto and Clark 2003; Colazzo et al.
2013; Martens et al. 2017) to system verification (Gischer
1981; Bojanczyk et al. 2006) and natural language processing (Kuhlmann and Satta 2009; Nivre 2009), etc.
We focus on a subclass of RE(&), single occurrence regular expression with interleaving (SOIRE), where each symbol occurs at most once in a SOIRE. Learning SOIREs is
still meaningful, as SOIREs have the second highest coverage rate of REs on the schema database Relax NG among
all well-known subclasses (Li et al. 2019b). Although a
subclass is generally easier to learn than the full class, it
* Both Hai Wan and Jianfeng Du are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4809

