The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Bootstrapping Multi-View Representations for Fake News Detection
Qichao Ying1 , Xiaoxiao Hu1 , Yangming Zhou1 , Zhenxing Qian1 * , Dan Zeng2 , Shiming Ge3
1

Fudan University
Shanghai University
3
Chinese Academy of Sciences
{qcying20@,xxhu21@m.,ymzhou21@m.,zxqian@}fudan.edu.cn, dzeng@shu.edu.cn, geshiming@iie.ac.cn
2

Abstract

networks are in the multimodal style. Hence, the detection
based on unimodal features is far from enough, and accordingly, we focus on multimodal fake news detection.
Many existing multimodal FND schemes use the textual
and visual features as integrated representations (Khattar
et al. 2019; Singhal et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2019; Allein,
Moens, and Perrotta 2021). Nevertheless, the disentanglement of features from different views has not been thoroughly investigated. In many cases, the models are at a
black-box level, in which the network designs cannot explicitly highlight the most contributive components (Wang
et al. 2018; Singhal et al. 2020). Besides, many recent works
solely rely on cross-modal correlation, i.e., how semantic
meaning of the image aligns with the text, to generate fused
features (Wei et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022), but we argue
that cross-modal correlation not necessarily play a critical
role. Fig. 1 provides four examples respectively from the
well-known English GossipCop (Singhal et al. 2020) and
the Chinese Weibo (Jin et al. 2017) dataset, where both fake
and real news more or less contain cross-modal correlations.
Therefore, clarifying the roles of both unimodal and crossmodal features is vital for improving FND.
Aiming at addressing these issues, we propose an effective scheme that Bootstraps Multi-view Representations
(BMR) for fake news detection. Given a multi-modal news,
we extract representations respectively from the views of the
text, the image pattern and the image semantics. Improved
Multi-gate Mixture-of-Expert networks (MMoE) (Ma et al.
2018), denoted as iMMoE, are proposed for feature refinement and fusion. Representations from each view are separately used to coarsely predict the fidelity of the whole
news, where the prediction scores are used for adaptive feature reweighting. Cross-modal consistency learning further
implicitly guides multimodal representation refinement, and
we explicitly disentangle correlation from other cross-modal
information by introducing an independent representation.
Finally, we bootstrap multi-view features for refined fake
news detection. In the examples shown in Fig. 1, BMR not
only predicts the fidelity of the news, but also gives confidence scores based on each view, which provides a new way
of understanding how different roles act in multimodal FND.
The contributions of this paper are three-folded:

Previous researches on multimedia fake news detection include a series of complex feature extraction and fusion networks to gather useful information from the news. However, how cross-modal consistency relates to the fidelity of
news and how features from different modalities affect the
decision-making are still open questions. This paper presents
a novel scheme of Bootstrapping Multi-view Representations (BMR) for fake news detection. Given a multi-modal
news, we extract representations respectively from the views
of the text, the image pattern and the image semantics. Improved Multi-gate Mixture-of-Expert networks (iMMoE) are
proposed for feature refinement and fusion. Representations
from each view are separately used to coarsely predict the fidelity of the whole news, and the multimodal representations
are able to predict the cross-modal consistency. With the prediction scores, we reweigh each view of the representations
and bootstrap them for fake news detection. Extensive experiments conducted on typical fake news detection datasets
prove that BMR outperforms state-of-the-art schemes.

Introduction
Fake news are specified as the news that are intentionally
fabricated and can be verified as false. In many cases, it
is difficult for people to identify fake news. Manually removing false news one by one is laborious and expensive.
Automatic Fake News Detection (FND) has become a hot
research topic (Allein, Moens, and Perrotta 2021; Shu et al.
2020a; Xue et al. 2021). The FND techniques can effectively
help analyze the probability of misconducting information.
The general paradigm of machine-learning-based fake
news detection is to transform the news into a multidimensional latent representation, and identify the fidelity of the
news using binary classification. Existing methods can be
classified into three categories, namely, unimodal fake news
detection (Bhattarai, Granmo, and Jiao 2021; Shu et al.
2020b), multimodal fake news detection (Khattar et al. 2019;
Xue et al. 2021) and dynamic fake news detection, i.e, utilizing propagation graph (Qian et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2022)
or knowledge graph (Abdelnabi, Hasan, and Fritz 2022;
Sun et al. 2022). However, most posts in the online social
* Corresponding author: Zhenxing Qian.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a novel fake news detection scheme of generating multi-view representations, understanding their in5384

