The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Disentangled-Attention Based Framework
with Persona-Aware Prompt Learning for Dialogue Generation
Pingsheng Liu1 * , Zhengjie Huang1 * , Xiechi Zhang1 * , Linlin Wang1 * †
Gerard de Melo2 , Xin Lin1 , Liang Pang3 , Liang He1
1
East China Normal University
Hasso Plattner Institute, University of Potsdam
3
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
{51205901014, 51215901069, 51255901060}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn
{llwang, xlin, lhe}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, gdm@demelo.org, pangliang@ict.ac.cn
2

Chatbot Persona Collection

Abstract

I love country music.
I like skating and healthy lifestyle.
My favorite season is winter.
I am a vegan.

Endowing dialogue agents with personas is the key to delivering more human-like conversations. However, existing
persona-grounded dialogue systems still lack informative details of human conversations and tend to reply with inconsistent and generic responses. One of the main underlying causes is that pre-defined persona sentences are generally short and merely superficial descriptions of personal
attributes, making appropriate persona selection and understanding non-trivial. Another challenge is that it is crucial
to consider the context and the conversation flow to dynamically determine when to invoke different types of persona signals. To address these problems, we propose a disentangledattention based pre-training architecture, which incorporates
persona-aware prompt learning to bridge the connection between the selected persona and response generation. Our
model first exploits the conversation flow to select contextrelevant personas, and subsequently enriches the superficial
persona descriptions with extra personality traits through
persona-aware prompting. Finally, the decoder leverages a
disentangled-attention mechanism to flexibly control the reliance on personas and dialogue contexts, and incorporates
A*-like keyword-based heuristic estimates for controllable
generation. Extensive experiments show that our approach
can outperform strong baselines and deliver more consistent
and engaging responses on the PERSONA-CHAT dataset.

Selected Persona

I like skating and healthy P
2
lifestyle.
I am a vegan.

Wanna come over tonight?

P4
U1

I do not have a car, only a skateboard.

U2

You can skateboard over. I have cookies to share.

U3

No thanks, I do not eat any animal products.

U4

Never mind, just cookies rather than meat or eggs.

U5

Ground-truth I won’t go there, since most cookies have some form
Response of dairy. As a strict vegetarian, I can not have that.

R

Figure 1: Example of Persona-grounded Dialogue. Different
generated words result from multiple information sources,
which are marked in red, blue, and underlined, respectively.
benchmark that provides human-annotated persona descriptions (Zhang et al. 2018). An excerpt of personalized dialogue from PERSONA-CHAT is in Fig. 1, where predefined
personas of an interlocutor are given by several sentences.
However, existing models tend to reply with generic responses that still lack consistency and informative details
(Song et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2020; Majumder et al. 2021;
Xu et al. 2020). One of the main underlying causes is inappropriate persona selection, since conventional approaches
often neglect the inherent persona transitions that exist in the
conversation flow. As illustrated in Fig. 1, a number of complementary cues suggest the relevance of the persona trait P4
concerning “vegan”, which include the most semantically
related dialogue contexts (e.g., “do not eat any animal products”), the semantic transition from another persona trait P2 ,
and the topic flow of the multi-turn conversation (e.g., “come
over tonight” → “have cookies to share”). However, existing
models merely exploit the semantic relevance between predefined persona candidates and dialogue contexts (Lian et al.
2019; Majumder et al. 2020), and rarely leverage the above
conversation flow to track such transitions. Hence, most previous work struggles to select the most context-relevant per-

Introduction
The massive proliferation of personal assistants, such as Apple’s Siri and Microsoft’s Cortana, has led to increased interest in enabling personalized dialogue systems with more
engaging and realistic conversations (Mazaré et al. 2018;
Gu et al. 2019). In the task of persona-grounded dialogue
generation, chatbots are endowed with latent persona variables or predefined personal facts to enable more humanlike responses with high personality consistency (Zhang
et al. 2018; Song et al. 2021). One notable line of work
on incorporating personas draws on PERSONA-CHAT, a
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13255

