The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ScatterFormer: Locally-Invariant Scattering Transformer for
Patient-Independent Multispectral Detection of Epileptiform Discharges
Ruizhe Zheng* 1,2,3,4,5,6 , Jun Li* 1,6 , Yi Wang†7 , Tian Luo7 , Yuguo Yu‡1,2,3,4,5,6
1

Research Institute of Intelligent and Complex Systems, Fudan University
2
State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Fudan University
3
MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Fudan University
4
Institutes of Brain Science, Fudan University
5
Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University
6
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
7
Department of Neurology, Children’s Hospital of Fudan University
rzzheng@fudan.edu.cn, jun li@fudan.edu.cn, yiwang@shmu.edu.cn, luotian@fudan.edu.cn, yuyuguo@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

tector. However, pitfalls for correct identification of epileptiform discharges include misreading, misinterpretation and
overinterpretation of individual EEG signature due to inherent subjectivity, can lead to misdiagnosis of people who do
not have epilepsy (Tatum 2012; Shorvon and Schmidt 2016;
Tatum and Shellhaas 2020). Therefore, cost-effective, crosssubject algorithms are urgently in need.
So far, a plethora of deep learning-based algorithms based
on visual spectral displays of EEG have been developed
(Tatum et al. 2018; Rasheed et al. 2020; Saminu et al. 2021).
Still, major concerns on the failure in clinical practice remain present due to limited generalizability of deep learning
models on out-of-distribution data when conducting patientindependent predictions (Achilles et al. 2018; Li et al. 2020),
which requires precise identification of fine-grained features
(Jeong et al. 2021) that is clinically interpretable for electroencephalographers with reasonable sensitivity and specificity. However, traditional learning schemes heavily depend on labor-intensive feature selection with regard to timefrequency subbands and electrodes, as well as often inconsistent preprocessing of raw data, which collectively limit
the potential to discover a latent, informative representation
of signals. Moreover, manual removal of intra- and intersubject noises and artefacts could potentially eliminate features crucial for a fine-grained analysis of seizure occurrence.
Seizure dynamics is characterized by high-frequency outbursts of epileptiform abnormalities. Recent advances in
attention-based deep neural networks, especially Transformers, have prompted augmented representational learning for
EEG classification tasks (Bagchi and Bathula 2022; Siddhad
et al. 2022; Tao et al. 2021; Sun, Xie, and Zhou 2021). However, the problem of loss of relevant clinical biomarkers of
irregularly altered EEG signals has not been explicitly addressed. Invariant scattering transform is a non-linear transform based on a cascade of wavelet transforms and modulus non-linearity. Invariant scattering convolution has energy
preservation nature and eliminates translation and rotation
variability algorithmically due to its Lipschitz-continuity
(Mallat 2012). Therefore, scattering coefficients are sensi-

Patient-independent detection of epileptic activities based on
visual spectral representation of continuous EEG (cEEG) has
been widely used for diagnosing epilepsy. However, precise detection remains a considerable challenge due to subtle
variabilities across subjects, channels and time points. Thus,
capturing fine-grained, discriminative features of EEG patterns, which is associated with high-frequency textural information, is yet to be resolved. In this work, we propose
Scattering Transformer (ScatterFormer), an invariant scattering transform-based hierarchical Transformer that specifically pays attention to subtle features. In particular, the disentangled frequency-aware attention (FAA) enables the Transformer to capture clinically informative high-frequency components, offering a novel clinical explainability based on
visual encoding of multichannel EEG signals. Evaluations
on two distinct tasks of epileptiform detection demonstrate
the effectiveness our method. Our proposed model achieves
median AUCROC and accuracy of 98.14%, 96.39% in patients with Rolandic epilepsy. On a neonatal seizure detection
benchmark, it outperforms the state-of-the-art by 9% in terms
of average AUCROC.

Introduction
Continuous electroencephalography (cEEG) plays an important role in monitoring and diagnosis of epilepsy. Automatic detection of epileptiform discharges and distinguishing these activities from nonepileptiform abnormalities
(Yum and Shvarts 2019; Shi et al. 2020) and normal/benign
EEG activities (Li et al. 2020) are of great importance in
the biomedical field, because that experts with various levels of diagnostic experience usually report discrepant opinions on the EEG records (Xiang et al. 2015). In particular,
patient-independent epileptiform detection aims at identifying seizures within an EEG recording without separate finetuning efforts on new data to establish a subject-specific de* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

148

