The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Framework to Design Approximation Algorithms for Finding Diverse Solutions
in Combinatorial Problems
Tesshu Hanaka1 , Masashi Kiyomi2 , Yasuaki Kobayashi3 , Yusuke Kobayashi4 , Kazuhiro Kurita5 ,
Yota Otachi5
1
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan
Seikei University, Musashino-shi, Tokyo, Japan
3
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan
4
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
5
Natoya University, Nagoya, Japan
hanaka@inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp, kiyomi@st.seikei.ac.jp, koba@ist.hokudai.ac.jp, yusuke@kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp,
kurita@i.nagoya-u.ac.jp, otachi@nagoya-u.jp
2

Abstract

As a way to resolve this issue, algorithms are expected
to find “diverse” solutions, and then finding “diverse” solutions has received considerable attention in several fields
such as Artificial Intelligence [Ingmar et al. 2020; Nadel
2011], Data Mining [Wang, Cheng, and Fu 2013; Yuan et al.
2016], and Operations Research [Danna and Woodruff 2009;
Petit and Trapp 2019]. The problem of finding diverse solutions can be modeled as a multi-objective optimization problem, which optimizes some diversity measure and the quality of solutions simultaneously. To solve this multi-objective
optimization problem, there are several approaches, such as
mathematical programming [Danna et al. 2007; Danna and
Woodruff 2009; Petit and Trapp 2019], constraint programming [Hebrard et al. 2005; Petit and Trapp 2015], heuristics [Danna et al. 2007; Drosou and Pitoura 2010; Hentenryck, Coffrin, and Gutkovich 2009; Vieira et al. 2011], and
so forth. See Table 1 in [Petit and Trapp 2019], which summarizes various approaches to find diverse solutions in the
literature. These approaches are not only practical but also
versatile, enabling us to formulate various combinatorial
problems in these approaches. However, theoretical guarantees on the running time of algorithms and/or the quality
of solutions would be difficult to obtain as some (general
purpose) mathematical/constraint solvers or heuristic objectives/algorithms are key components of these algorithms.
Recently, theoretical aspects of the problem of finding diverse solutions in combinatorial problems are investigated.
This research direction would be made by Fellows and Rosamond who proposed the diverse X paradigm in Dagstuhl
Seminar 18421 [Fernau et al. 2019]. In this paradigm, “X”
is a placeholder that represents solutions we are looking for,
and they asked for theoretical investigations of finding diverse solutions. Since the problem of finding diverse solutions is much harder than that of finding a single solution for some “X”, it would be reasonable to consider the
problem from the perspective of fixed-parameter tractability1 . From this proposition, several fixed-parameter tractable
(FPT) algorithms are developed so far. Baste et al. gave

Finding a single best solution is the most common objective
in combinatorial optimization problems. However, such a single solution may not be applicable to real-world problems as
objective functions and constraints are only “approximately”
formulated for original real-world problems. To solve this issue, finding multiple solutions is a natural direction, and diversity of solutions is an important concept in this context.
Unfortunately, finding diverse solutions is much harder than
finding a single solution. To cope with the difficulty, we investigate the approximability of finding diverse solutions. As
a main result, we propose a framework to design approximation algorithms for finding diverse solutions, which yields
several outcomes including constant-factor approximation algorithms for finding diverse matchings in graphs and diverse
common bases in two matroids and PTASes for finding diverse minimum cuts and interval schedulings.

Introduction
One way to solve a real-world problem is to formulate the
problem as a mathematical optimization problem and find
a solution with an optimization algorithm. However, it is
not always easy to formulate an appropriate optimization
problem as real-world problems often include intricate constraints and implicit preferences, which are usually simplified in order to solve optimization problems. Hence, an optimal solution obtained in this way is not guaranteed to be a
“good solution” to the original real-world problem. To cope
with this underlying inconsistency, the following two-stage
approach would be promising: algorithms find multiple solutions and then users find what they like from these solutions. One may think that top-k enumeration algorithms
(see [Eppstein 2008] for a survey) can be used for this purpose. However, this is not always the case since top-k enumeration algorithms may output solutions similar to one another. (See [Wang, Cheng, and Fu 2013; Yuan et al. 2016;
Hao, Pei, and Yang 2020], for example). Such a set of solutions are not useful as a “catalog” of solutions provided to
users.

1

Roughly speaking, the goal is to develop algorithms that run in
time f (k)poly(n), where n is the input size and k is a parameter
defined on a specific problem.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3968

