The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Curriculum Multi-Negative Augmentation for Debiased Video Grounding
Xiaohan Lan1 , Yitian Yuan2 , Hong Chen1 , Xin Wang1 * , Zequn Jie2 , Lin Ma2 , Zhi Wang1 ,
Wenwu Zhu1 *
1

Tsinghua University
2
Meituan Inc.
{lanxh20,h-chen20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yuanyitian@foxmail.com, {xin wang,wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn,
{zequn.nus,forest.linma}@gmail.com, wangzhi@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
YLGHR

Video Grounding (VG) aims to locate the desired segment
from a video given a sentence query. Recent studies have
found that current VG models are prone to over-rely the
groundtruth moment annotation distribution biases in the
training set. To discourage the standard VG model’s behavior of exploiting such temporal annotation biases and improve the model generalization ability, we propose multiple negative augmentations in a hierarchical way, including
cross-video augmentations from clip-/video-level, and selfshuffled augmentations with masks. These augmentations can
effectively diversify the data distribution so that the model
can make more reasonable predictions instead of merely fitting the temporal biases. However, directly adopting such
data augmentation strategy may inevitably carry some noise
shown in our cases, since not all of the handcrafted augmentations are semantically irrelevant to the groundtruth video.
To further denoise and improve the grounding accuracy, we
design a multi-stage curriculum strategy to adaptively train
the standard VG model from easy to hard negative augmentations. Experiments on newly collected Charades-CD and
ActivityNet-CD datasets demonstrate our proposed strategy
can improve the performance of the base model on both i.i.d
and o.o.d scenarios.



TXHU\
WLPH





$SHUVRQSLFNVXSDFDWRIIRIDFKDLU
V

V

V

V

D

1.0

1.0

0.0
0.0

HQGWLPH

HQGWLPH

pos

2ULJLQDO
'LVWULEXWLRQ

VWDUWWLPH

1.0
E

0.0

'LVWULEXWLRQ
DIWHUDGRSWLQJ
1HJDWLYH
$XJPHQWDWLRQ
pos
neg
0.0

VWDUWWLPH

1.0

Figure 1: (a): VG task definition. Given a sentence, a semantically corresponding video segment should be temporally located in the video. (b): Conceptual illustration of our
data augmentation-based debiasing strategy for VG. Our designed negative samples (shown in red dots) are able to balance the biased moment annotation distribution of positive
samples (shown in black dots) with fair negative treatment
to moment candidates at more diverse locations.

Introduction
Video grounding (VG), one of the video-and-language tasks
that seeks to determine the start and end timestamps of a
natural language-described segment (also named moment)
from an untrimmed video, has attracted increasing interests
of the multimedia community over the past few years (Gao
et al. 2017; Lan et al. 2021). As shown in Figure 1(a),
taking a video and a descriptive sentence as inputs, a VG
model needs to return the temporal locations of the target moment referring to the sentence query. Compared to
other natural language-based video understanding tasks like
video question answering and video captioning, the grounding accuracy in VG is a more intuitive metric to evaluate
the video-sentence matching from the level of semantics.
Therefore, VG has been widely investigated these years and
achieved promising grounding results by various state-ofthe-art (SOTA) deep models.

However, recent studies (Otani et al. 2020; Yuan et al.
2021) start to doubt whether the performance gains of SOTA
VG models come from more powerful cross-modal semantic
matching ability rather than exploiting some kind of shortcuts, e.g., the temporal annotation distribution biases in the
training set. Except some early two-stage VG models (Gao
et al. 2017; Hendricks et al. 2017) that individually match
the pre-cut video moment candidates with the query, the majority of advanced VG methods (Chen et al. 2018; Yuan et al.
2019; Zhang et al. 2020) resort to modeling the temporal relations within the video by encoding the video units (clips or
moments) in the whole video context/sequence, which will
embed the temporal location information in the video clip/moment features and these temporal location clues will inevitably influence the model learning procedure. When the
model gets no clues on cross-modal matching, or only understands one side of these two modalities, it may leverage

* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1213

