The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning to Count Isomorphisms with Graph Neural Networks
Xingtong Yu1 * , Zemin Liu2 * , Yuan Fang3† , Xinming Zhang1†
1

University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
Singapore Management University, Singapore
yxt95@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zeminliu@nus.edu.sg, yfang@smu.edu.sg, xinming@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

graph, which expresses certain semantics such as the hydroxy groups or families. These subgraph patterns are also
known as network motifs on homogeneous graphs (Milo
et al. 2002) or meta-structures on heterogeneous graphs (Sun
et al. 2011; Fang et al. 2016). To leverage their expressiveness, more sophisticated graph models (Monti, Otness, and
Bronstein 2018; Liu et al. 2018; Sankar, Zhang, and Chang
2019; Wang et al. 2019) have also been designed to incorporate motifs or meta-structures.
The need for subgraph patterns in graph-based tasks and
models leads to a high demand of subgraph isomorphism
counting (Liu et al. 2020). Classical methods usually employ search-based algorithms such as backtracking (Ullmann 1976; Cordella et al. 2004; He and Singh 2008) to
exhaustively detect the isomorphisms and return an exact
count. However, their computational costs are often excessive given that the detection problem is NP-complete and the
counting form is #P-complete (Cordella et al. 2004). With
the rise of graph neural networks (GNNs) (Wu et al. 2020),
some recent approaches for subgraph isomorphism counting
also leverage on the powerful graph representations from
GNNs (Liu et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020; Xia, Li, and Li
2022). They generally employ GNNs to embed the queries
and input graphs into low-dimensional vectors, which are
further fed into a counter module to predict the approximate
number of isomorphisms on the input graph. Compared to
classical approaches, they can significantly save computational resources at the expense of approximation, providing
a useful trade-off between accuracy and cost since many applications do not necessarily need an exact count.
However, previous GNN-based isomorphism counting
models adopt a node-centric message-passing scheme,
which propagates and aggregates messages on nodes. While
this scheme is effective for node-oriented tasks, it falls short
of matching complex structures for isomorphism counting.
In particular, they rely on message aggregation to generate representations centering on nodes, failing to explicitly
and fundamentally capture the complex interactions among
nodes. Thus, as the first challenge, how do we capture finegrained structural information beyond node-centric GNNs?
Moreover, on an input graph, the space of possible query
graphs is enormous. Different queries are often characterized by distinct structures that match with different parts of
the input graph. A fixed graph representation to match with

Subgraph isomorphism counting is an important problem on
graphs, as many graph-based tasks exploit recurring subgraph patterns. Classical methods usually boil down to a
backtracking framework that needs to navigate a huge search
space with prohibitive computational costs. Some recent studies resort to graph neural networks (GNNs) to learn a lowdimensional representation for both the query and input
graphs, in order to predict the number of subgraph isomorphisms on the input graph. However, typical GNNs employ
a node-centric message passing scheme that receives and aggregates messages on nodes, which is inadequate in complex
structure matching for isomorphism counting. Moreover, on
an input graph, the space of possible query graphs is enormous, and different parts of the input graph will be triggered to match different queries. Thus, expecting a fixed representation of the input graph to match diversely structured
query graphs is unrealistic. In this paper, we propose a novel
GNN called Count-GNN for subgraph isomorphism counting, to deal with the above challenges. At the edge level, given
that an edge is an atomic unit of encoding graph structures,
we propose an edge-centric message passing scheme, where
messages on edges are propagated and aggregated based on
the edge adjacency to preserve fine-grained structural information. At the graph level, we modulate the input graph representation conditioned on the query, so that the input graph
can be adapted to each query individually to improve their
matching. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on a
number of benchmark datasets to demonstrate the superior
performance of Count-GNN.

1

Introduction

Research in network science and graph mining often finds
and exploits recurring subgraph patterns on an input graph.
For example, on a protein network, we could query for the
hydroxy groups which consist of one oxygen atom covalently bonded to one hydrogen atom; on a social network,
we could query for potential families in which several users
form a clique and two of them are working and the rest are
studying. These queries essentially describe a subgraph pattern that repeatedly occurs on different parts of an input
* Co-first authors with equal contribution. Part of the work was

done while at Singapore Management University.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4845

