The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Materialisation-Based Reasoning in DatalogMTL with Bounded Intervals
Przemysław A. Wał˛ega, Michał Zawidzki, Dingmin Wang, Bernardo Cuenca Grau
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
{przemyslaw.walega, michal.zawidzki, dingmin.wang, bernardo.cuenca.grau}@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

(Brandt et al. 2018) and PSpace-complete in data complexity
(Wał˛ega et al. 2019). Decision procedures are based on the
observation that, although the timeline is densely ordered,
the canonical model of a program and a dataset can be partitioned according to discrete sequences of intervals, inside
which all time points satisfy the same facts. This enables the
reduction (with exponential blow-up) of fact entailment in
DatalogMTL to satisfiability of linear temporal logic (LTL)
formulas (Brandt et al. 2018) or to non-emptiness of Büchi
automata (Wał˛ega et al. 2019). As a result, canonical models have a periodic structure, with periods of bounded length
(Artale et al. 2021a). Although these techniques are useful
for providing complexity upper bounds for reasoning, they
are based on exponential reductions and were not designed
for efficient implementation.
The most common technique of choice in scalable Datalog reasoners is materialisation (a.k.a. forward chaining),
where facts entailed by a program and dataset are derived
in successive rounds of rule applications until a fixpoint is
reached (Bry et al. 2007; Motik et al. 2014; Carral et al.
2019; Bellomarini, Sallinger, and Gottlob 2018).1 Once the
materialisation has been computed, queries can be answered
directly and rules are not further considered. In contrast
to Datalog where materialisation naturally terminates, in
DatalogMTL a fixpoint may only be reachable after infinitely many rounds of rule applications. To circumvent this
challenge, the MeTeoR reasoner (Wang et al. 2022) combines materialisation and automata-based reasoning, where
automata construction ensures completeness where materialisation does not terminate; experiments, however, show a
significant performance reduction in such cases (Wang et al.
2022). An alternative approach is to focus on DatalogMTL
fragments for which materialisation is guaranteed to terminate (Wał˛ega, Zawidzki, and Cuenca Grau 2021); such fragments, however, impose significant restrictions effectively
disallowing ‘recursion through time’.
In this paper, we investigate the design of reasoning algorithms for DatalogMTL that rely solely on materialisation, dispense with automata construction altogether, and do
not limit recursion. We focus on bounded DatalogMTL programs and datasets, where ∞ is not mentioned as an end-

DatalogMTL is a powerful extension of Datalog with operators from metric temporal logic (MTL) which has received
significant attention in recent years. In this paper, we investigate materialisation-based reasoning (a.k.a. forward chaining) in the context of DatalogMTL programs and datasets
with bounded intervals, where partial representations of the
canonical model are obtained through successive rounds of
rule applications. Although materialisation does not naturally
terminate in this setting, it is known that the structure of
canonical models is ultimately periodic. Our first contribution
in this paper is a detailed analysis of the periodic structure of
canonical models; in particular, we formulate saturation conditions whose satisfaction by a partial materialisation implies
the ability to recover the full canonical model via unfolding;
this allows us to compute the actual periods describing the
repeating parts of the canonical model as well as to establish concrete bounds on the number of rounds of rule applications required to achieve saturation. Based on these theoretical results, we propose a practical reasoning algorithm
where saturation can be efficiently detected as materialisation progresses, and where the relevant periods used to evaluate entailment of queries via unfolding are efficiently computed. We have implemented our algorithm and our experiments suggest that our approach is both scalable and robust.

Introduction
DatalogMTL is a powerful rule-based language for representing temporal knowledge that has found applications in
ontology-based data access (Brandt et al. 2018; Kikot et al.
2018; Kalaycı et al. 2018; Koopmann 2019) and stream
reasoning (Wał˛ega, Kaminski, and Cuenca Grau 2019). It
extends Datalog (Ceri, Gottlob, and Tanca 1989) with operators from metric temporal logic (Koymans 1990) interpreted over the rational timeline. For example, the following
DatalogMTL rule states that a person can travel if they had a
negative COVID test at some point in the last 2 days (x[0,2] )
and have been double-vaccinated for 14 days (⊟[0,14] ):
CanTravel (x) ← x[0,2] NegTest(x) ∧ ⊟[0,14] DblVacc(x).
Reasoning in DatalogMTL is of high complexity, which
makes its adoption in applications problematic. In particular, satisfiability and fact entailment are ExpSpace-complete

1
In this setting, both the reasoning process and its output are
often referred to as materialisation.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6566

