The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SimFair: A Unified Framework for Fairness-Aware Multi-Label Classification
Tianci Liu, Haoyu Wang, Yaqing Wang, Xiaoqian Wang, Lu Su, Jing Gao*
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA, 47907
{liu3351, wang5346, wang5075, joywang, lusu, jinggao}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed increasing concerns towards unfair decisions made by machine learning algorithms. To improve fairness in model decisions, various fairness notions
have been proposed and many fairness-aware methods are
developed. However, most of existing definitions and methods
focus only on single-label classification. Fairness for multilabel classification, where each instance is associated with
more than one labels, is still yet to establish. To fill this gap,
we study fairness-aware multi-label classification in this paper.
We start by extending Demographic Parity (DP) and Equalized
Opportunity (EOp), two popular fairness notions, to multilabel classification scenarios. Through a systematic study, we
show that on multi-label data, because of unevenly distributed
labels, EOp usually fails to construct a reliable estimate on
labels with few instances. We then propose a new framework
named Similarity s-induced Fairness (sγ -SimFair). This new
framework utilizes data that have similar labels when estimating fairness on a particular label group for better stability,
and can unify DP and EOp. Theoretical analysis and experimental results on real-world datasets together demonstrate the
advantage of sγ -SimFair over existing methods on multi-label
classification tasks.

Introduction
Nowadays, machine learning algorithms play increasingly
more important roles in decision-making for a broad spectrum of applications, such as applicant screening in job markets, credit risk analysis, and recommendation systems. However, recent studies (Barocas and Selbst 2016; Buolamwini
and Gebru 2018; Dressel and Farid 2018) have discovered
that machine learning algorithms tend to make discriminatory decisions. For example, a dataset may contain records
of physicians most of whom are male. As a result, a job
screening algorithm trained on this dataset may unfairly predict if a person is suitable for a physician position based on
their gender, instead of education background or professional
experience. Obviously, such favorable prediction for male
applicants is unfair to female applicants.
Formally, the algorithmic fairness issue refers to the phenomenon that machine learning algorithms make discriminatory decisions across different demographic subgroups
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14338

and give favorable predictions for some particular subgroups.
Intuitively, discriminatory decisions are associated with some
demographic features contained in the data, such as age, gender, and race. These features are referred to as sensitive features. Ideally, a fair model should be able to make decisions
independent of sensitive features. Towards this end, different fairness notions (Pedreshi, Ruggieri, and Turini 2008;
Dwork et al. 2011; Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016; Chouldechova and Roth 2020) have been proposed. Among them,
Demographic Parity (DP) (Pedreshi, Ruggieri, and Turini
2008) and Equalized Opportunity (EOp) (Hardt, Price, and
Srebro 2016) are two of the most widely-used definitions. DP
requires a model’s decision to be independent of sensitive
features, achieving a population-level fairness (Edwards and
Storkey 2015; Madras et al. 2018; Creager et al. 2019). However, Dwork et al. (2011) showed that such population level
fairness does not necessarily guarantee fairness in all label
groups. To address this limitation, Hardt, Price, and Srebro
(2016) proposed to take label information into consideration
and defined EOp and its stronger version Equalized Odds
(EO). Specifically, EOp requires the decision to be independent of sensitive features conditionally in the label group
receiving an favorable outcome (Hardt, Price, and Srebro
2016). Examples of favorable outcomes include “being admitted to a position” in job screening, and “approval of credit
card application”. For brevity, we refer to the label group
in which each individual receives the favorable outcome as
the advantaged group. With a more restrictive fairness definition, EO further requires that the decision is independent
of sensitive features in each label group, including not only
the advantaged group but also the groups receiving other
outcomes.
Some methods have been proposed based on the aforementioned fairness definitions. However, they are focused only
on scenarios where each instance is associated with a single
target label (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016; Woodworth et al.
2017; Zafar et al. 2017). In many real-world applications,
multiple labels need to be predicted for an instance. For example, in job screening, an applicant may apply for multiple
positions, and the admission decision of each position is a target label of the applicant. Similarly, undergraduates usually
submit applications to multiple programs when applying to
graduate schools, and thus associate themselves with multiple target labels of admission. Scenarios where each instance

