The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Planning and Learning with Adaptive Lookahead
Aviv Rosenberg1 * , Assaf Hallak2 , Shie Mannor2,3 , Gal Chechik2,4 , Gal Dalal2
1

Amazon Science,
Nvidia Research,
3
Technion,
4
Bar-Ilan University
avivros@amazon.com
2

Algorithm
PI (Scherrer 2016)
H-PI
(Efroni et al. 2018)
TLPI (this paper)

Abstract
Some of the most powerful reinforcement learning frameworks use planning for action selection. Interestingly, their
planning horizon is either fixed or determined arbitrarily by
the state visitation history. Here, we expand beyond the naive
fixed horizon and propose a theoretically justified strategy for
adaptive selection of the planning horizon as a function of the
state-dependent value estimate. We propose two variants for
lookahead selection and analyze the trade-off between iteration count and computational complexity per iteration. We
then devise a corresponding deep Q-network algorithm with
an adaptive tree search horizon. We separate the value estimation per depth to compensate for the off-policy discrepancy
between depths. Lastly, we demonstrate the efficacy of our
adaptive lookahead method in a maze environment and Atari.

1

QLPI (this paper)

#Iterations
1
1
H
1
h(κ)
log γ
log κ


1

≤ h(κ)

Iteration complexity
c(1)
c(H)
c(1)
+ θ(κ) c(h(κ))
P
H
O
h=1 θh c(h)

Table 1: Algorithm comparison summary. The iterations
count (number of iterations) is divided by S(A−1) log(1−γ)
log γ .
The iteration complexity (computational complexity per iteration) is divided by S. c(k) is the computational complexity of k-step planning. h(κ) is the smallest integer h
(κ)
s.t. γ h
≤ κ. θ(κ) is the fraction of κ-contracting states.
θ1 , . . . , θH are the contraction quantiles sizes.

Introduction

The celebrated Policy Iteration (PI) and Value Iteration
(VI) (Sutton and Barto 2018) algorithms are the basis
for most state-of-the-art reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. Since both PI and VI are based on a one-step greedy
approach for policy improvement, so are the most commonly used policy-gradient (Schulman et al. 2017; Haarnoja
et al. 2018) and Q-learning (Mnih et al. 2013; Hessel et al.
2018) based approaches. In each iteration, they perform an
improvement of their current policy by looking one step
forward and acting greedily. While this is the simplest and
most common paradigm, stronger performance was recently
achieved using multi-step lookahead. Notably, in AlphaGo
(Silver et al. 2018) and MuZero (Schrittwieser et al. 2020),
the multi-step lookahead is implemented via Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS) (Browne et al. 2012). In MCTS, the
search depth is not chosen adaptively but gradually increases
with the aggregation of state visitations.
Several recent works rigorously analyzed the properties of
multi-step lookahead in common RL schemes (Efroni et al.
2018; Moerland et al. 2020; Hallak et al. 2021; Sikchi, Zhou,
and Held 2022). These and other related literature studied a
fixed planning horizon chosen in advance. However, both
in simulated and real-world environments, a large variety of

states benefit differently from various lookahead horizons. A
grasping robot far from its target will learn very little from
looking a few steps into the future, but if the target is within
reach, much more precision and planning are required to
grasp the object correctly. Similarly, at the beginning of a
chess game, lookahead grants little information about which
move is better, while agents in mid-game intricate situations
benefit immensely from considering all future possibilities
for the next few moves. Indeed, in this work, we devise a
methodology for adaptive selection of the planning horizons
in each state and show it achieves a significant speed-up of
the learning process.
We propose two complementing approaches to determine
the suitable horizon per state in each PI iteration. To do so,
we keep track of the room for improvement for the value
function. Our first algorithm, Threshold-based Lookahead
PI (TLPI), ensures the desired convergence rate and minimizes the computational complexity for each iteration. Alternatively, our second algorithm, Quantile-based Lookahead PI (QLPI), takes the per-iteration computational complexity as a given budget and aims for the best possible convergence rate. We prove that both TLPI and QLPI converge
to the optimum and achieve a significantly lower computational cost than their fixed-horizon alternative (see Table 1).
Next, we devise QL-DQN: a DQN (Mnih et al. 2013) variant of QLPI, where the policy chooses an action by employ-

* Research conducted while the author was an intern at Nvidia
Research.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9606

