The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CP-Rec: Contextual Prompting for Conversational Recommender Systems
Keyu Chen, Shiliang Sun*
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
51205901068@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, slsun@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
The conversational recommender system (CRS) aims to provide high-quality recommendations through interactive dialogues. However, previous CRS models have no effective
mechanisms for task planning and topic elaboration, and thus
they hardly maintain coherence in multi-task recommendation dialogues. Inspired by recent advances in prompt-based
learning, we propose a novel contextual prompting framework for dialogue management, which optimizes prompts
based on context, topics, and user profiles. Specifically, we
develop a topic controller to sequentially plan the subtasks,
and a prompt search module to construct context-aware
prompts. We further adopt external knowledge to enrich user
profiles and make knowledge-aware recommendations. Incorporating these techniques, we propose a conversational
recommender system with contextual prompting, namely CPRec. Experimental results demonstrate that it achieves stateof-the-art recommendation accuracy and generates more coherent and informative conversations.

Introduction
With the widespread applications of conversational assistants, such as Google Assistant, Apple Siri, Amazon Alexa,
and Microsoft Cortana, the conversational recommender
system (CRS) has received immense interest in recent years
(Li et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2020a,b).
CRS integrates recommendation techniques into the conversational system, which can help users find desired information through interactive conversations.
In real-life scenarios, the recommendation dialogue is
open-ended, where the users and the CRS interact around
recommendations using free-form natural language. The
users will start the conversation casually, and direct the dialogue topics to discover what they need. The dialogue may
involve many phases, such as greeting, explaining, and recommending. Each phase has a certain subtask. As illustrated
in Figure 1, a recommendation dialogue could be multi-task,
where the system starts with chit-chat, and then seeks the
user preference and makes final recommendations. Therefore, the CRS has to respond accordingly to meet users’
needs and lead dialogues towards the recommendation goal.

Figure 1: An illustrative example. In the recommendation
dialogue, the CRS identifies the topic (①) and responds
accordingly to complete each subtask (②). Task planning
maintains the conversation with well-connected topics, and
topic elaboration ensures that each topic can be expressed by
contextual and informative sentences. Reasonable planning
and proper elaboration can improve conversation coherence.

Although previous CRS methods have achieved promising results, they can hardly match the user preference while
maintaining the conversation coherency. A recent study
(Jannach and Manzoor 2020) on two CRS baselines, i.e., ReDial (Li et al. 2018) and KBRD (Chen et al. 2019), shows
that about one-third of utterances generated by these two
models are considered meaningless in the given context, and
more than one-third of recommendations do not suit the assumed user preferences. It indicates that many CRS models can hardly maintain coherent conversations and accurate
recommendations, especially in long, multi-task dialogues.
This can be explained to some extent by their lack of mecha-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12635

