The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Dynamic Ensemble of Low-Fidelity Experts: Mitigating NAS “Cold-Start”
Junbo Zhao* 1,3 , Xuefei Ning* †1 , Enshu Liu1 , Binxin Ru4 , Zixuan Zhou1 ,
Tianchen Zhao1 , Chen Chen2 , Jiajin Zhang2 , Qingmin Liao3 , Yu Wang†1
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
3
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School
4
SailYond Technology & Research Institute of Tsinghua University in Shenzhen
†
foxdoraame@gmail.com, † yu-wang@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

2019) have achieved state-of-the-art performance on various tasks (Zoph and Le 2016; Liu, Simonyan, and Yang
2018; Chen et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020). Accurate and
efficient architecture performance estimation strategy is one
of the key components of NAS (Elsken, Metzen, and Hutter
2019), which can be broadly divided into parameter-sharingbased (Pham et al. 2018) and predictor-based methods (Luo
et al. 2018; Ning et al. 2020; White et al. 2021). The former evaluates with weights shared in an over-parametrized
super network, while the latter learns a predictor to predict
the performance of candidate architectures.

Predictor-based Neural Architecture Search (NAS) employs
an architecture performance predictor to improve the sample efficiency. However, predictor-based NAS suffers from
the severe “cold-start” problem, since a large amount of
architecture-performance data is required to get a working
predictor. In this paper, we focus on exploiting information in
cheaper-to-obtain performance estimations (i.e., low-fidelity
information) to mitigate the large data requirements of predictor training. Despite the intuitiveness of this idea, we observe that using inappropriate low-fidelity information even
damages the prediction ability and different search spaces
have different preferences for low-fidelity information types.
To solve the problem and better fuse beneficial information provided by different types of low-fidelity information,
we propose a novel dynamic ensemble predictor framework
that comprises two steps. In the first step, we train different sub-predictors on different types of available low-fidelity
information to extract beneficial knowledge as low-fidelity
experts. In the second step, we learn a gating network to
dynamically output a set of weighting coefficients conditioned on each input neural architecture, which will be used
to combine the predictions of different low-fidelity experts
in a weighted sum. The overall predictor is optimized on a
small set of actual architecture-performance data to fuse the
knowledge from different low-fidelity experts to make the
final prediction. We conduct extensive experiments across
five search spaces with different architecture encoders under various experimental settings. For example, our methods can improve the Kendall’s Tau correlation coefficient between actual performance and predicted scores from 0.2549
to 0.7064 with only 25 actual architecture-performance data
on NDS-ResNet. Our method can easily be incorporated into
existing predictor-based NAS frameworks to discover better architectures. Our method will be implemented in Mindspore (Huawei 2020), and the example code is published at
https://github.com/A-LinCui/DELE.

Predictor-based NAS trains an approximate performance
predictor and utilizes it to rank unseen architectures without
actually training them. Therefore, once we have a predictor
that can reliably rank the performance of unseen architectures, the architecture exploration can be significantly accelerated. However, predictor-based NAS suffers from the
severe “cold-start” problem: It usually takes quite a considerable cost to acquire the architecture-performance data
needed for training a working predictor from scratch.
Recognizing the high cost of getting actual architectureperformance data as the major challenge for predictor-based
NAS, existing efforts seek to learn the predictor in a more
data-efficient way. Researchers have designed specialized
predictor architectures (Ning et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2019;
Tang et al. 2020; Yan et al. 2021; Ning et al. 2022), training
losses (Luo et al. 2018; Ning et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2021; Tang
et al. 2020; Yan et al. 2020, 2021), to exploit information in
the limited data more efficiently. In contrast, our work focuses on exploiting more information in other cheaperto-obtain performance estimations (i.e., low-fidelity information) to mitigate the data requirements of predictor training. Actually, it is intuitive that utilizing other lowfidelity information (e.g., grasp (Wang, Zhang, and Grosse
2020) and plain (Mozer and Smolensky 1988)) for predictor training can help mitigate the cold-start problem. One
can anticipate that training with this information might bring
potential improvements in two aspects. On the one hand, the
ranking information included in some indicators (e.g., oneshot (Pham et al. 2018), zero-shot (Abdelfattah et al. 2021a;
Lin et al. 2021) estimations) might help the predictor acquire
a better ranking quality. On the other hand, learning to fit
other low-fidelity information could encourage the predictor

Introduction
In recent years, architectures automatically designed by neural architecture search (NAS) (Elsken, Metzen, and Hutter
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11316

