The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Opinion Optimization in Directed Social Networks
Haoxin Sun, Zhongzhi Zhang
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
21210240097@m.fudan.edu.cn, zhangzz@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

adapted to capture and reproduce the complex dynamics behind the Paris Agreement negotiation process, which explains why consensus was achieved in these multilateral international negotiations (Bernardo et al. 2021).
A fundamental quantity for opinion dynamics is the overall opinion or average opinion, which reflects the public
opinions about certain topics of interest. In the past years,
the subject of modifying opinions in a graph has attracted
considerable attention in the scientific community (Gionis,
Terzi, and Tsaparas 2013; Abebe et al. 2018; Chan, Liang,
and Sozio 2019; Xu et al. 2020), since it has important implications in diverse realistic situations, such as commercial marketing, political election, and public health campaigns. For example, previous work has formulated and
studied the problem of optimizing the overall or average
opinion for the FJ model in undirected graphs by changing a certain attribute of some chosen nodes, including internal opinion (Xu et al. 2020), external opinion (Gionis, Terzi,
and Tsaparas 2013), and susceptibility to persuasion (Abebe
et al. 2018; Chan, Liang, and Sozio 2019), and so on. Thus
far, most existing studies about modifying opinions focused
on undirected graphs. In this paper, we study the problem of minimizing or maximizing average opinion in directed graphs (digraph), since they can better mimic realistic networks. Moreover, because previous algorithms for
unweighted graphs do not carry over to digraphs, we will
propose an efficient linear-time approximation algorithm to
solve the problem.
We adopt the discrete-time FJ model in a social network
modeled by a digraph G = (V, E) with n nodes and m arcs.
In the model, each node i ∈ V is endowed with an internal/innate opinion si in the interval [0, 1], where 0 and 1 are
two polar opposing opinions regarding a certain topic. Moreover, each node i ∈ V has an expressed opinion zi (t) at time
t. During the opinion evolution process, the internal opinions of all nodes never change, while the expressed opinion
zi (t + 1) of any node i at time t + 1 evolves as a weighted
average of si and the expressed opinions of i’s neighbors at
time t. For sufficiently large t, the expressed opinion zi (t)
of every node i converges to an equilibrium opinion zi . We
address the following optimization problem O PINION M IN
(or O PINION M AX): Given a digraph G = (V, E) and a positive integer k  n, how to choose k nodes and change
their internal opinions to 0 (or 1), so that the average overall

Shifting social opinions has far-reaching implications in various aspects, such as public health campaigns, product marketing, and political candidates. In this paper, we study a problem of opinion optimization based on the popular FriedkinJohnsen (FJ) model for opinion dynamics in an unweighted
directed social network with n nodes and m edges. In the FJ
model, the internal opinion of every node lies in the closed
interval [0, 1], with 0 and 1 being polar opposites of opinions
about a certain issue. Concretely, we focus on the problem of
selecting a small number of k  n nodes and changing their
internal opinions to 0, in order to minimize the average opinion at equilibrium. We then design an algorithm that returns
the optimal solution to the problem in O(n3 ) time. To speed
up the computation, we further develop a fast algorithm by
sampling spanning forests, the time complexity of which is
O(ln), with l being the number of samplings. Finally, we execute extensive experiments on various real directed networks,
which show that the effectiveness of our two algorithms is
similar to each other, both of which outperform several baseline strategies of node selection. Moreover, our fast algorithm
is more efficient than the first one, which is scalable to massive graphs with more than twenty million nodes.

1

Introduction

As an important part of our lives, online social networks
and social media have dramatically changed the way people propagate, exchange, and formulate opinions (Ledford
2020). Increasing evidence indicates that in contrast to traditional communications and interaction, in the current digital age online communications and discussions have significantly influenced human activity in an unprecedented way,
leading to universality, criticality and complexity of information propagation (Notarmuzi et al. 2022). In order to understand mechanisms for opinion propagation and shaping, a
variety of mathematical models for opinion dynamics have
been established (Jia et al. 2015; Proskurnikov and Tempo
2017; Dong et al. 2018; Anderson and Ye 2019). Among
different models, the Friedkin-Johnsen (FJ) model (Friedkin
and Johnsen 1990) is a popular one, which has been applied
to many aspects (Bernardo et al. 2021; Friedkin et al. 2016).
For example, the concatenated FJ model has been recently
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4623

