The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Utilizing Prior Solutions for Reward Shaping and Composition in
Entropy-Regularized Reinforcement Learning
Jacob Adamczyk1 , Argenis Arriojas1 , Stas Tiomkin2 , Rahul V. Kulkarni1
1

Department of Physics, University of Massachusetts Boston
Department of Computer Engineering, San José State University
jacob.adamczyk001@umb.edu, arriojasmaldonado001@umb.edu, stas.tiomkin@sjsu.edu, rahul.kulkarni@umb.edu
2

Abstract

solutions for new tasks. The ability to combine primitive
skills to learn more complex behaviors can lead to an exponential increase in the number of new problems that an
agent is able to solve (Nangue Tasse, James, and Rosman
2020; Tasse, James, and Rosman 2021). Correspondingly,
there is significant interest in this idea of compositionality of tasks in RL. The observation that entropy-regularized
RL provides robust solutions (Eysenbach and Levine 2022)
and simple approaches for composing previous solutions
(Haarnoja et al. 2018a; Van Niekerk et al. 2019; Peng et al.
2019) in specific situations has led to increased interest
in this topic. Several exact results for compositionality in
entropy-regularized RL have been obtained, however these
are based on highly limiting assumptions on the differences
between the primitive tasks. The development of more general approaches to compositionality in entropy-regularized
RL is currently an important challenge in the field.
Another challenge often encountered by RL agents solving new tasks is the problem of sparse reward signals. For
example, if an agent only gains a reward at the end of a long
and otherwise non-rewarding trajectory, it may be difficult
to learn the optimal policy in this case since the agent must
be sufficiently “far-sighted”. The field of reward shaping;
wherein rewards are changed in a way that leaves the optimal policy invariant, has been used to address this issue
(Ng, Harada, and Russell 1999). These efforts have primarily focused on the standard RL framework; to the best of our
knowledge, the corresponding results for reward shaping in
entropy-regularized RL have not yet been derived. Another
related open question that motivates this work is understanding how we can utilize previously obtained solutions to implement reward shaping in entropy-regularized RL.
To address these issues, we focus on the core problem of
deriving relations between optimal value functions for two
tasks in entropy-regularized RL. Considering the first task
as solved and the second as a new unsolved task, the derived relation defines a third task whose optimal value function allows us to solve the new task while leveraging prior
knowledge. We show that the optimal policy for the task
of interest is the same as the third task’s. This observation
leads to the derivation of a general result for reward shaping in entropy-regularized RL. Based on these observations
connecting the optimal value functions of two tasks, we derive principled methods of approaching both task composi-

In reinforcement learning (RL), the ability to utilize prior
knowledge from previously solved tasks can allow agents to
quickly solve new problems. In some cases, these new problems may be approximately solved by composing the solutions of previously solved primitive tasks (task composition).
Otherwise, prior knowledge can be used to adjust the reward
function for a new problem, in a way that leaves the optimal policy unchanged but enables quicker learning (reward
shaping). In this work, we develop a general framework for
reward shaping and task composition in entropy-regularized
RL. To do so, we derive an exact relation connecting the optimal soft value functions for two entropy-regularized RL problems with different reward functions and dynamics. We show
how the derived relation leads to a general result for reward
shaping in entropy-regularized RL. We then generalize this
approach to derive an exact relation connecting optimal value
functions for the composition of multiple tasks in entropyregularized RL. We validate these theoretical contributions
with experiments showing that reward shaping and task composition lead to faster learning in various settings.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a widely-used approach
for training artificial agents to acquire complex behaviors
and to engage in long-term decision making (Sutton and
Barto 2018). Despite its great successes for goal-oriented
tasks (e.g. board games such as chess and Go (Silver et al.
2018)), RL approaches do not fare as well when the tasks
change and become more complex. The underlying problem is that RL algorithms are often incapable of effectively
reusing previously-acquired knowledge; as a consequence
RL agents typically start from scratch when faced with new
tasks and require vast amounts of training experience to
learn new solutions. Therefore, a key challenge in the field is
the development of RL approaches and algorithms which are
able to leverage the solutions of previous tasks for quickly
solving a wide variety of new tasks. Developing approaches
that enable such “transfer learning” is one of the problems
we wish to address in the current work, in the context of
entropy-regularized reinforcement learning (Ziebart 2010).
A promising approach for transfer learning is based on
composing solutions for previously solved tasks to obtain
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6658

