The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Painterly Image Harmonization in Dual Domains
Junyan Cao, Yan Hong, Li Niu*
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{joy c1, ustcnewly}@sjtu.edu.cn, yanhong.sjtu@gmail.com

Abstract
Image harmonization aims to produce visually harmonious
composite images by adjusting the foreground appearance to
be compatible with the background. When the composite image has photographic foreground and painterly background,
the task is called painterly image harmonization. There are
only few works on this task, which are either time-consuming
or weak in generating well-harmonized results. In this work,
we propose a novel painterly harmonization network consisting of a dual-domain generator and a dual-domain discriminator, which harmonizes the composite image in both spatial domain and frequency domain. The dual-domain generator performs harmonization by using AdaIN modules in the
spatial domain and our proposed ResFFT modules in the frequency domain. The dual-domain discriminator attempts to
distinguish the inharmonious patches based on the spatial feature and frequency feature of each patch, which can enhance
the ability of generator in an adversarial manner. Extensive
experiments on the benchmark dataset show the effectiveness
of our method. Our code and model are available at https://
github.com/bcmi/PHDNet-Painterly-Image-Harmonization.

1

Figure 1: Example of painterly image harmonization. From
left to right are foreground object, background painting image, composite image, and harmonized image.

image to produce a harmonious image. Figure 1 shows an
example of painterly image harmonization.
Existing painterly image harmonization methods can be
divided into optimization-based methods (Luan et al. 2018;
Zhang, Wen, and Shi 2020) and feed-forward methods
(Peng, Wang, and Wang 2019). Optimization-based methods directly optimize the composite image to minimize the
designed objective function. Specifically, the optimizationbased methods (Luan et al. 2018; Zhang, Wen, and Shi 2020)
employ a set of losses (e.g., content loss (Gatys, Ecker,
and Bethge 2016), style loss (Huang and Belongie 2017),
smoothness loss (Mahendran and Vedaldi 2015)) as the objective function. Then for each input composite image, they
iteratively update its pixels and output the harmonized result, which does not rely on any training data. However, the
optimization-based methods (Peng, Wang, and Wang 2019)
are very time-consuming, which could not achieve real-time
harmonization. Feed-forward methods pass the composite
image through the network to produce a harmonized image.
In particular, they train the network on the training set with
a set of losses. However, the foregrounds are often not sufficiently stylized or not naturally blended into the background.
Considering the demand of real-time application, we follow
the research line of feed-forward method, which is also dominant in artistic style transfer (Huang and Belongie 2017;
Park and Lee 2019; Liu et al. 2021).
In this work, we perform painterly image harmonization
in two domains: spatial domain and frequency domain. Unlike previous works which only consider spatial domain
(Luan et al. 2018; Zhang, Wen, and Shi 2020; Peng, Wang,
and Wang 2019), we additionally explore frequency domain
due to the following two concerns. Firstly, the convolution

Introduction

Image composition refers to cutting the foreground from one
image and pasting it on another background image, producing a composite image. However, the foreground and background may have inconsistent color and illumination statistic, making the whole composite image inharmonious and
unrealistic. Image harmonization (Lalonde and Efros 2007;
Tsai et al. 2017; Cong et al. 2020) aims to adjust the foreground appearance to make it compatible with the background. In recent years, image harmonization has attracted
growing research interest (Cong et al. 2021; Guo et al.
2021a; Hang et al. 2022). Besides combining foreground
and background from photos, users may insert an object into
a painting for creative painterly editing. This task is called
painterly image harmonization, which has only received limited attention (Luan et al. 2018; Zhang, Wen, and Shi 2020;
Peng, Wang, and Wang 2019). In particular, when a composite image is composed of photographic foreground object
and painterly background image, painterly image harmonization aims to adjust the foreground style in the composite
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

268

