The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Deep Hierarchical Features with Spatial Regularization
for One-Class Facial Expression Recognition
Bingjun Luo1 , Junjie Zhu1 , Tianyu Yang1 , Sicheng Zhao2 , Chao Hu3 * , Xibin Zhao1 , Yue Gao1
1

BNRist, KLISS, School of Software, Tsinghua University
2
BNRist, Tsinghua University
3
Central South University
luobingjun@gmail.com, zhujj18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, goatskyfish@gmail.com, schzhao@gmail.com,
huchao@csu.edu.cn, {zxb, gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Existing methods on facial expression recognition (FER) are
mainly trained in the setting when multi-class data is available. However, to detect the alien expressions that are absent during training, this type of methods cannot work. To
address this problem, we develop a Hierarchical Spatial One
Class Facial Expression Recognition Network (HS-OCFER)
which can construct the decision boundary of a given expression class (called normal class) by training on only one-class
data. Specifically, HS-OCFER consists of three novel components. First, hierarchical bottleneck modules are proposed to
enrich the representation power of the model and extract detailed feature hierarchy from different levels. Second, multiscale spatial regularization with facial geometric information
is employed to guide the feature extraction towards emotional
facial representations and prevent the model from overfitting extraneous disturbing factors. Third, compact intra-class
variation is adopted to separate the normal class from alien
classes in the decision space. Extensive evaluations on 4 typical FER datasets from both laboratory and wild scenarios
show that our method consistently outperforms state-of-theart One-Class Classification (OCC) approaches.

Figure 1: When multi-class expression data is available during training, ordinary FER methods can operate well. But
in real applications, multi-class data is not always available.
Under such a case, the FER system cannot be trained in the
ordinary fashion. Therefore, one-class classification methods are needed to draw a precise decision boundary of the
normal expression class so that the alien expression beyond
the boundary can be easily detected during inference.

Introduction
As more and more intelligent devices step into our daily
life, ubiquitous computing environments are gradually coming into reality (Xi et al. 2022a). However, most existing
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) works are designed to
understand and handle the explicit instructions of users,
while ignoring their internal psychological and emotional
states (Zeng et al. 2009). Such kinds of interactions lack
emotional intelligence and present great challenges for
building user-friendly HCI systems. This problem prompts
researchers to turn their attention to a powerful emotional
indicator, facial expression (FE), which makes it possible for
HCI to uncover the subtleties of the users’ affective behavior
and deal with their emotional changes. With the help of facial expression recognition (FER), HCI systems can gain the
ability to provide more warm and humanized service (Wen
et al. 2016; Xi et al. 2022b).

Generally, the objective of FER is to extract and interpret subtle FE-related representation from the input image
(Zhang and Tjondronegoro 2011). As shown in Fig. 1, FER
is often modeled as a multi-class classification task with adequate multi-class training data in most of the recent works.
However, in some real application scenarios with a lack of
multi-class data, these FER methods do not always work.
This situation is quite common in the open world due to the
great costs and difficulties of the collection and annotation of
FE data. For example, panic disorder is an anxiety disorder
characterized by reoccurring unexpected intense fear. Psy-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6065

