The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Deepfake Video Detection via Facial Action Dependencies Estimation
Lingfeng Tan1 , Yunhong Wang1 , Junfu Wang1 , Liang Yang2 , Xunxun Chen3 , Yuanfang Guo1 4 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology, China
3
CNCERT/CC, Beijing, China
4
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
{tanlf, yhwang, junfuwang, andyguo}@buaa.edu.cn, yangliang@vip.qq.com, cxx@cert.org.cn
2

Ft

Abstract
Deepfake video detection has drawn significant attention
from researchers due to the security issues induced by deepfake videos. Unfortunately, most of the existing deepfake detection approaches have not competently modeled the natural structures and movements of human faces. In this paper, we formulate the deepfake video detection problem into
a graph classification task, and propose a novel paradigm
named Facial Action Dependency Estimation (FADE) for
deepfake video detection. We propose a Multi-Dependency
Graph Module (MDGM) to capture abundant dependencies
among facial action units, and extracts subtle clues in these
dependencies. MDGM can be easily integrated into the existing frame-level detection schemes to provide significant performance gains. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our method against the state-of-the-art methods.

Ft+1

...
w1

w2

wi wN

Ft+2

N

  wi 
i 1

wj

aggregate

update

Figure 1: There exists various dependencies between the Facial Action Units on a face. The red edges represent the
temporal action dependencies between the left eye and connected action units on a serious face. According to these dependencies, the left eye can exchange information with other
action units and update its feature from a more comprehensive perspective.

Introduction
With the advance in deep learning techniques, various deep
neural network (DNN) based face manipulation techniques/softwares, such as FakeApp, ZAO, Deepfake (Deepfakes
2019), DeepFaceLab(Perov et al. 2020), have led to the proliferation of deepfake images/videos on the internet. These
deepfake techniques can generate indistinguishable videos,
and they may induce various security problems, including
fake news, infringement of personal privacy, etc. Therefore,
researches on deepfake image/video detection, especially
the deepfake facial image/video detection, have become an
important topic in the field of image/video forensics.
There exist two major types of deepfake video detection
mechanisms, i.e., frame-level detection and video-level detection. Frame-level detection methods usually seek for subtle clues in a single frame, e.g. jitters, blurs, and strange artifacts (Zi et al. 2020). With extensive efforts devoted to facilitating the detection, schemes, such as exposing blending
boundaries (Li et al. 2020a), detecting via frequency domain
features (Qian et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021), and leveraging
multiple attentions on different regions (Zhao et al. 2021),
etc., achieve superior performances. Unfortunately, the accuracy of these methods may not be quite satisfactory when

serving for deepfake video detection, due to the ignorance
of temporal dependencies.
In video-level detection methods, a portion of them focuses on modeling the temporal inconsistencies among the
adjacent frames, including color jitters (Gu et al. 2021), offsets of facial landmarks (Sun et al. 2021), etc. Meanwhile,
other detection methods model the bio-signatures, e.g., heart
rate, eye-blinking (Ciftci, Demir, and Yin 2020a,b). These
methods tend to assign more emphasis on the relationships
between adjacent frames, while the intra-correlations within
each single frame are utilized incompetently.
Although the existing methods show decent performances
in deepfake video detection, they have not properly considered the facial movements and the structural properties of
the human faces, which is a limitation of the existing methods. The natural facial actions are generally accomplished
by several facial action units, which function together according to certain structural correlations. Meanwhile, sev-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5276

