The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Boundary Graph Neural Networks for 3D Simulations
Andreas Mayr1,† , Sebastian Lehner1 , Arno Mayrhofer2 , Christoph Kloss2 ,
Sepp Hochreiter1,3 , Johannes Brandstetter1,‡,*
1

ELLIS Unit Linz & LIT AI Lab, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Linz, Austria
2
DCS Computing GmbH, Linz, Austria
3
Institute of Advanced Research in Artificial Intelligence (IARAI), Vienna, Austria
†
mayr@ml.jku.at, ‡ brandstetter@ml.jku.at
Abstract

nature and consequently in industrial processes. The accurate simulations of such versatile granular flows forms the
backbone of designing and improving industrial machinery.
Complex boundaries are present in every-day’s machinery
such as rotating drums, mixers or hoppers. In engineering,
these complex boundaries are typically modelled by triangularizations, which are mathematical well founded and for
which efficient construction and simulation tools are available. Therefore, triangular meshes are standard for representing and modelling industrial machinery.

The abundance of data has given machine learning considerable momentum in natural sciences and engineering, though
modeling of physical processes is often difficult. A particularly tough problem is the efficient representation of geometric boundaries. Triangularized geometric boundaries are well
understood and ubiquitous in engineering applications. However, it is notoriously difficult to integrate them into machine
learning approaches due to their heterogeneity with respect to
size and orientation. In this work, we introduce an effective
theory to model particle-boundary interactions, which leads
to our new Boundary Graph Neural Networks (BGNNs) that
dynamically modify graph structures to obey boundary conditions. The new BGNNs are tested on complex 3D granular
flow processes of hoppers, rotating drums and mixers, which
are all standard components of modern industrial machinery
but still have complicated geometry. BGNNs are evaluated in
terms of computational efficiency as well as prediction accuracy of particle flows and mixing entropies. BGNNs are
able to accurately reproduce 3D granular flows within simulation uncertainties over hundreds of thousands of simulation
timesteps. Most notably, in our experiments, particles stay
within the geometric objects without using handcrafted conditions or restrictions.

1

Effective theory. In this work, we introduce an effective
theory to model particle-boundary interactions, from which
we derive a new approach to accurately and effectively
model granular flow processes within triangularized boundary surfaces. In physics, effective theories allow the description of phenomena within much simpler frameworks without
a significant loss of precision. The basic idea is to approximate a physical system by factoring out the degrees of freedom that are not relevant in the given setting and problem
to solve (e.g. using Newton’s equations instead of the much
more complicated Einstein’s equations, or, using simple algebraic equations instead of numerically solving differential
equations for particle-particle interactions). Other examples
are in the fields of gravitational wave theory (Goldberger
and Rothstein 2006), particle physics (Leutwyler 1994), hydrodynamics (Endlich et al. 2013), and, even in deep learning theory (Roberts, Yaida, and Hanin 2022). Figure 1 illustrates the effective theory of gravitational forces for planetary movement modeling, which motivates the introduction
of effective particle-boundary interactions in this work.
We introduce Boundary Graph Neural Networks
(BGNNs) as an effective model for complex 3D granular
flows. We test the effectiveness of BGNNs on flow simulations within different triangularized geometries. The data
for BGNN training is obtained by precise but potentially
time-consuming simulations. BGNNs are able to generalize
granular flow dynamics over thousands of timesteps while
potentially being considerably faster than state-of-the-art
simulation methods. The contributions of this paper are:
• We describe particle-surface interactions as an effective
theory and introduce Boundary Graph Neural Networks
(BGNNs) which enable dynamic modifications of graph
structures.

Introduction

The deep learning revolution (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012) has dramatically changed scientific fields such
as computer vision, natural language processing, or medical
sciences. More recently, deep learning research has been expanded towards physical simulations such as fluid dynamics,
deformable materials, or aerodynamics (Li et al. 2019; Ummenhofer et al. 2020; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. 2020; Pfaff
et al. 2021). Currently, the progress of deep learning for
physical simulations is driven by Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) (Scarselli et al. 2009; Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Kipf and Welling 2017). GNNs are very
effective when modeling interactions between many entities
via forward dynamics (Battaglia et al. 2018), and as such are
a strong building block when it comes to the replacement of
slower numerical simulations in various engineering disciplines. We focus on granular flows, which are ubiquitous in
* now at Microsoft Research AI4Science
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9099

