The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Astromorphic Self-Repair of Neuromorphic Hardware Systems
Zhuangyu Han, A N M Nafiul Islam, Abhronil Sengupta
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Penn State University
University Park, PA 16802
zfh5141@psu.edu, nafiul@psu.edu, sengupta@psu.edu

Abstract

of neighboring astrocytes, which later regulates the strength
of the synapses surrounded by these astrocytes (CornellBell et al. 1990; Perea and Araque 2007). Previous works
have considered the regulation mechanism of the astrocytes
as a self-repair capability of artificial spiking neural networks (Wade et al. 2012; Liu et al. 2017, 2018; Rastogi
et al. 2021) with synaptic faults. This is especially timely
given the significant advancements in Artificial Intelligence
(AI) memristive hardware over the past few years enabled
by devices where the core physics serve as a natural hardware substrate for designing compact, energy-efficient neuromorphic hardware accelerators (Sung, Hwang, and Yoo
2018; Park et al. 2022). However, such devices often suffer from non-idealities and faults (Liu et al. 2014; Radetzki
et al. 2013) and therefore mitigation of such issues is critical to ensure minimal accuracy degradation in AI hardware
platforms. While astrocytic regulation of synaptic transmission probability offers motivation toward autonomous selfrepair of faulty neuromorphic hardware, current work significantly falls short of this goal due to a lack of hardware
insights. The neuroscience inspired algorithm frameworks
are often loosely bio-inspired and depend on global network
level parameters like synaptic weight percentiles (Rastogi
et al. 2021) which are not practical to calculate in real-time
under energy and resource constraints in edge AI systems.
This work forges stronger connections with neuroscience
computational models of astrocytes to develop self-repair
algorithmic frameworks driven by a software-hardware codesign perspective. The key distinguishing factors of our
work against prior proposals are:
(i) Neuroscience Inspired Self-Repair Learning Algorithm Formulation: Based on the bio-inspiration premise
that self-repair learning algorithm formulations need to have
stronger neuroscience correlation in order to be hardware
efficient and compatible, we design a self-repair rule by
theoretically analyzing the dynamic temporal behavior of
the self-repair process enabled by astrocytes. We develop a
macro-model of the self-repair process by benchmarking it
to astrocyte computational neuroscience models. As shown
in the paper, the bio-inspiration route enables us to construct self-repair-based synaptic learning rules that capture
the dynamic temporal repair process while simultaneously
depending on local network level parameters that make it
hardware compatible. Performance evaluation of the pro-

While neuromorphic computing architectures based on Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are increasingly gaining interest as a pathway toward bio-plausible machine learning, attention is still focused on computational units like the neuron and synapse. Shifting from this neuro-synaptic perspective, this paper attempts to explore the self-repair role of glial
cells, in particular, astrocytes. The work investigates stronger
correlations with astrocyte computational neuroscience models to develop macro-models with a higher degree of biofidelity that accurately captures the dynamic behavior of
the self-repair process. Hardware-software co-design analysis reveals that bio-morphic astrocytic regulation has the potential to self-repair hardware realistic faults in neuromorphic hardware systems with significantly better accuracy and
repair convergence for unsupervised learning tasks on the
MNIST and F-MNIST datasets. Our implementation source
code and trained models are available at https://github.com/
NeuroCompLab-psu/Astromorphic Self Repair.

Introduction
As a pathway to enable next-generation neuromorphic intelligence, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are emerging as a
disruptive computing paradigm where the information transmitted and processed in the artificial neurons of the computing system is embodied in a temporal series of binary spikes
which mimic the action potentials propagating between neurons in the mammalian brain. SNNs have demonstrated significant advantages in comparison to traditional non-spiking
computational architectures in several aspects, such as low
latency and low energy consumption (Davies et al. 2018;
Merolla et al. 2014; Sengupta and Roy 2017; Diehl and
Cook 2015; Lu and Sengupta 2020; Neftci, Mostafa, and
Zenke 2019).
Recent research in neuromorphic computing has started
focusing on other cellular components in the brain that might
contribute to cognition in addition to neuronal spiking behavior and synaptic plasticity. Specifically, this work explores the contribution of one such component - glial cells,
in particular, the astrocytes (Oberheim et al. 2006). It has
been observed that neurotransmitters released from a neuron can trigger diffusing Ca2+ waves inside the cytoplasm
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7821

