The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Zero-Shot Rumor Detection with Propagation Structure via Prompt Learning
1

2

1†

3†

Hongzhan Lin * , Pengyao Yi * , Jing Ma , Haiyun Jiang ,
1
4
2
Ziyang Luo , Shuming Shi , Ruifang Liu
1

Hong Kong Baptist University
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Fudan University
4
Tsinghua University
{cshzlin, majing, cszyluo}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, jianglu@fudan.edu.cn, {yi.py, lrf}@bupt.edu.cn, ssm01@hotmail.com
2

Abstract

develop automatic approaches for rumor detection spread in
different languages amid unforeseen breaking events.

The spread of rumors along with breaking events seriously
hinders the truth in the era of social media. Previous studies reveal that due to the lack of annotated resources, rumors
presented in minority languages are hard to be detected. Furthermore, the unforeseen breaking events not involved in yesterday’s news exacerbate the scarcity of data resources. In
this work, we propose a novel zero-shot framework based
on prompt learning to detect rumors falling in different domains or presented in different languages. More specifically,
we firstly represent rumor circulated on social media as diverse propagation threads, then design a hierarchical prompt
encoding mechanism to learn language-agnostic contextual
representations for both prompts and rumor data. To further
enhance domain adaptation, we model the domain-invariant
structural features from the propagation threads, to incorporate structural position representations of influential community response. In addition, a new virtual response augmentation method is used to improve model training. Extensive
experiments conducted on three real-world datasets demonstrate that our proposed model achieves much better performance than state-of-the-art methods and exhibits a superior
capacity for detecting rumors at early stages.

1

Social psychology literature defines a rumor as a story or
a statement whose truth value is unverified or deliberately
false (Allport and Postman 1945). In this study, we focus
on detecting rumors on social media, instead of “fake news”
strictly defined as a news article published by a news outlet that is verifiably false (Yang et al. 2022). State-of-the-art
techniques using deep neural networks (DNNs) (Bian et al.
2020; Lin et al. 2021a; Rao et al. 2021) have promoted the
development of rumor detection, but they are all data-driven
models that require extensive annotated data for model training. Most corpora are open-domain and presented in English, which makes them not scalable to emerging events
in new languages where only few/no labeled data is available. Zero-shot rumor detection task (ZRD) aims to adapt
knowledge learned in the source rumor data to the target
data without labeled training samples in the target language
and domain, as shown in Figure 1. Previous related studies (Du et al. 2021; Tian, Zhang, and Lau 2021) directly
utilize pre-trained language models (PLMs) (Devlin et al.
2019) to fine-tune on ZRD task. However, they just formulated the zero-shot rumor detection as a cross-lingual text
classification problem and detected the single claim post
with a heavy task-specific fine-tuning stage, which makes
it deviate from the pre-training target on masked language
modeling, even ignoring the domain-invariant interaction of
user opinions during the diffusion of rumors. More recently,
Lin et al. (2022) propose a contrastive learning framework to
detect rumors from different languages and domains, where
a small number of target annotation is required. However, it
is prone to be poor at emerging events propagated in minority languages without any expertise annotation, especially in
some underdeveloped countries and regions. For breaking
events with scarce annotated data in different languages, the
study on the zero-shot regimes is more urgent and practical
for rumor detection on social media.

Introduction

The spread of rumors emerging along with breaking news
is a global phenomenon, which can cause critical consequences for social network users in different lingual contexts. For example, during the unprecedented COVID-19
pandemic, a false rumor claiming that “the vaccine has a
1
chip in it which will control your mind” released by a Muslim cleric, went viral on Facebook and Twitter in different
languages. Such misleading claims about vaccines are being
shared widely in many countries, which confuse the public
and undermine their enthusiasm for vaccination. Due to the
barriers of domain and language, even human fact-checkers
are poor judges of such rumors. Therefore, it’s imperative to

In this paper, we focus on exploring efficient prompting
with language and domain transfer for zero-shot rumor detection. We assume there are no accessible annotations in
the target language and domain, so prompt learning mechanisms (Zhao and Schütze 2021) based on existing multi-

*

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.bbc.com/news/55768656
†

5213

