The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

GLT-T: Global-Local Transformer Voting for 3D Single Object Tracking
in Point Clouds
Jiahao Nie1 , Zhiwei He1 * , Yuxiang Yang1 , Mingyu Gao1 , Jing Zhang2
1

School of Electronics and Information, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
2
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Australia
{jhnie, zwhe, yyx, mackgao}@hdu.edu.cn, jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Template

Current 3D single object tracking methods are typically based
on VoteNet, a 3D region proposal network. Despite the success, using a single seed point feature as the cue for offset learning in VoteNet prevents high-quality 3D proposals
from being generated. Moreover, seed points with different
importance are treated equally in the voting process, aggravating this defect. To address these issues, we propose
a novel global-local transformer voting scheme to provide
more informative cues and guide the model pay more attention on potential seed points, promoting the generation of
high-quality 3D proposals. Technically, a global-local transformer (GLT) module is employed to integrate object- and
patch-aware prior into seed point features to effectively form
strong feature representation for geometric positions of the
seed points, thus providing more robust and accurate cues
for offset learning. Subsequently, a simple yet effective training strategy is designed to train the GLT module. We develop an importance prediction branch to learn the potential
importance of the seed points and treat the output weights
vector as a training constraint term. By incorporating the
above components together, we exhibit a superior tracking
method GLT-T. Extensive experiments on challenging KITTI
and NuScenes benchmarks demonstrate that GLT-T achieves
state-of-the-art performance in the 3D single object tracking
task. Besides, further ablation studies show the advantages
of the proposed global-local transformer voting scheme over
the original VoteNet. Code and models will be available at
https://github.com/haooozi/GLT-T.

Search
Region

Feature Augmentation

3D Proposal and Verification

Feature
Extraction

Feature
Correlation

Global-Local
Transformer

Prediction
Head

Sample Points

Seed Points

Proposals

3D BBox

Figure 1: Schematic illustration to show how GTL-T works.
Compared with the existing 3D Siamese tracking methods,
we present a global-local transformer voting scheme to generate 3D proposals.
candidate 3D BBoxes in current frame, and selects the BBox
with the highest similarity to the template as predicted result. However, SC3D is not end-to-end trainable and consumes much computational overhead for matching exhaustive 3D candidate BBoxes. To solve these issues, an endto-end framework P2B (Qi et al. 2020) is proposed. It introduces a 3D region proposal network (RPN), i.e., VoteNet
(Qi et al. 2019) to generate 3D proposals and predict the
best one as tracking BBox. Benefiting from the VoteNet,
P2B obtains excellent performance in terms of both accuracy and efficiency. Nevertheless, some inherent defects in
VoteNet prevent high-quality proposals from being generated, thereby limiting the tracking performance. Different
from the follow-up works (Shan et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2021b) that have rarely investigated the voting scheme of
VoteNet, we point out its two defects as follows:

Introduction

• The voting scheme uses only a single point feature as the
cue to infer the offsets of seed points to the target centers,
making it difficult to generate high-quality proposals due
to the limited representation ability of point feature.
• Seed points located at different geometric positions in the
target objects contribute differently to learning the offsets. However, existing methods treat them equally in the
voting scheme, greatly distracting the model in training
and leading to sub-optimal proposals.

3D single object tracking (SOT) in point clouds is a fundamental computer vision task and provides an essential component in various practical applications, such as autonomous
driving and mobile robotics (Zhang and Tao 2020; Nie et al.
2022b). Given a 3D bounding box (BBox) in the first frame
as the target template, the SOT task aims to keep track this
target in a sequence of continuous frames (Kristan et al.
2021).
Recently, Siamese architecture has achieved great success
in 3D SOT. As the pioneer, SC3D (Giancola, Zarzar, and
Ghanem 2019) uses a Kalman filter to generate a series of

In this paper, we propose a novel global-local transformer
voting scheme for tracking (GLT-T) to address the above
challenges. A schematic illustration of GLT-T is shown in
Fig. 1. To provide more informative cues for offset learning, we revisit the feature representation requirement in vot-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1957

