The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Decoupling and Ensemble Distillation for Efficient Segmentation
Yuang Liu, Wei Zhang* , Jun Wang*
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
{frankliu624, zhangwei.thu2011, wongjun}@gmail.com

Abstract

et al. 2017), dilated convolution (Chen et al. 2017a), selfattention (Fu et al. 2019). However, these complex and
strong architectures usually have heavy parameters and require overwhelmed computation, which limit the deployment of segmentation networks on resource-constrained mobile devices. In contrast, designing efficient segmentation
networks has attracted increasing attentions due to their balance between performance and cost, e.g., ENet (Paszke et al.
2016), ERFNet (Romera et al. 2017), ESNet (Lyu et al.
2019). Compared with hand-crafted lightweight model design, knowledge distillation (KD) is a more popular and general solution to model compression and stimulating the potential small models.

Knowledge distillation (KD) is a promising teacher-student
learning paradigm that transfers information from a cumbersome teacher to a student network. To avoid the training
cost of a large teacher network, the recent studies propose
to distill knowledge from the student itself, called Self-KD.
However, due to the limitations of the performance and capacity of the student, the soft-labels or features distilled by
the student barely provide reliable guidance. Moreover, most
of the Self-KD algorithms are specific to classification tasks
based on soft-labels, and not suitable for semantic segmentation. To alleviate these contradictions, we revisit the label
and feature distillation problem in segmentation, and propose Self-Decoupling and Ensemble Distillation for Efficient
Segmentation (SDES). Specifically, we design a decoupled
prediction ensemble distillation (DPED) algorithm that generates reliable soft-labels with multiple expert decoders, and a
decoupled feature ensemble distillation (DFED) mechanism
to utilize more important channel-wise feature maps for encoder learning. The extensive experiments on three public
segmentation datasets demonstrate the superiority of our approach and the efficacy of each component in the framework
through the ablation study.

Currently, most of the KD methods (Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2017; Peng et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019; Shu et al.
2021; Liu, Zhang, and Wang 2022) are with teacher-student
learning architectures (abbreviated as T-S KD), as shown
in Figure 1(a), in which the compact student network is
trained with the supervision of the soft-labels or intermediate features from the well-trained teacher. T-S KD terribly
suffers from a two-stage training scheme and tremendous
computation and memory cost of the cumbersome teacher.
And this issue is further amplified in complex tasks like
SS. To alleviate this issue, some researchers (Zhang et al.
2019; Yuan et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021a;
Hou et al. 2019; Ji et al. 2021) investigate to distill information from the student network itself, which is called
Self-KD, as shown in Figure 1(b). However, most of the
Self-KD methods are specific to classification models and
depend on image-level soft-labels or cross-layer features.
The soft-labels, constructed manually (Szegedy et al. 2016;
Yuan et al. 2020) or obtained from the multi-exit architecture (Zhang et al. 2019, 2021a), often contain uncertain information and cannot substitute the output by strong teachers. In fact, the label-based Self-KD methods are usually regarded as a specific label smoothing regularization (LSR)
in some researches (Mobahi, Farajtabar, and Bartlett 2020;
Kim et al. 2021; Zhang and Sabuncu 2020). But this mechanism is not suitable for SS, which is a pixel-level classification task and depends on context information instead of
independent image labels. Zhang et al. (Zhang et al. 2021a)
extended the multi-exit Self-KD architecture to SS networks
but bring limited improvements. In contrast to label-based
Self-KD, some works (Hou et al. 2019; Ji et al. 2021) fo-

Introduction
Semantic segmentation (SS) has been a longstanding challenge in computer vision, which is the foundation of numerous advanced intelligent applications, such as image editing (Zhu et al. 2020), scene understanding (Zheng et al.
2021) and automatic pilot (Levinson et al. 2011; Huang
et al. 2018). As a dense prediction task, it aims to assign
a semantic label for each pixel in an image. Thanks to
the renaissance of deep learning, the approaches based on
fully convolutional networks (FCN) (Long, Shelhamer, and
Darrell 2015) have been the mainstream of semantic segmentation and achieved remarkable performance. In addition to utilizing deeper backbone networks (Simonyan and
Zisserman 2015; He et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2017; Xie
et al. 2017), most of the works focus on preserving the
global information with context aggregation, and introduce
some efficient modules, e.g., pyramid pooling module (Zhao
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1772

