The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

RAFaRe: Learning Robust and Accurate Non-parametric 3D Face Reconstruction
from Pseudo 2D&3D Pairs
Longwei Guo1 , Hao Zhu1 * , Yuanxun Lu1 , Menghua Wu1 , Xun Cao1
1

Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{guolongwei, luyuanxun, menghuawu}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {zhuhaoese, caoxun}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

proven to be more effective in regressing the 3DMM parameters, which can be trained on large-scale fitted or synthetic
datasets.
Despite the recent advances, achieving robust and accurate single-view 3D face reconstruction remains an open
challenge. The difficulty is two-fold, lying in both face representations and training data. On the one hand, the representation ability of 3DMMs or other parametric models is
limited to the fixed sub-linear space of the face database,
which makes it hard to recover the fine-scale facial details and out-of-domain face attribute distributions. On the
other hand, inaccurate and limited training databases restrict
the reconstruction performance of both generalization and
precision. Concretely, though accurate but limited studiocaptured data is available (Yang et al. 2020; Dai et al. 2019),
it is almost infeasible to obtain large-scale in-the-wild data
at the same accuracy, which constrains the model generalization ability to a great extent. Previous approaches (Feng
et al. 2018) tend to adopt in-the-wild image datasets with fitted 3DMM models as training data (Zhu et al. 2016), failing
to reconstruct middle-scale 3D geometry.
In this paper, we create pseudo 2D&3D datasets from
publicly available datasets to address these challenges.
Specifically, we propose 1) a novel pipeline for large-scale
in-the-wild 2D&3D facial data generation, and 2) a nonparametric method tailored to recover the facial geometry
from a single image. Our reconstruction approach obviates
the dependence on prior parametric models and allows for
good generalization on poses, expressions, scenes, and illumination. The pipeline is designed to exploit the data augmentation insights and make the most effective use of existing large-scale in-the-wild facial image datasets and limited
lab-environmental precise 3D facial shape datasets. Going
a step further, we develop a non-parametric method to reconstruct facial geometry from monocular images directly,
breaking the limitations of parametric models. The most notable improvement is the hierarchical signed distance function to recover detailed facial geometry at different levels.
The non-parametric model is trained on the proposed largescale faithful dataset and shows effective and superior performance over previous state-of-the-art approaches. In summary, we highlight the following contributions:

We propose a robust and accurate non-parametric method for
single-view 3D face reconstruction (SVFR). While tremendous efforts have been devoted to parametric SVFR, a visible gap still lies between the result 3D shape and the ground
truth. We believe there are two major obstacles: 1) the representation of the parametric model is limited to a certain face
database; 2) 2D images and 3D shapes in the fitted datasets
are distinctly misaligned. To resolve these issues, a largescale pseudo 2D&3D dataset is created by first rendering the
detailed 3D faces, then swapping the face in the wild images with the rendered face. These pseudo 2D&3D pairs are
created from publicly available datasets which eliminate the
gaps between 2D and 3D data while covering diverse appearances, poses, scenes, and illumination. We further propose
a non-parametric scheme to learn a well-generalized SVFR
model from the created dataset, and the proposed hierarchical signed distance function turns out to be effective in predicting middle-scale and small-scale 3D facial geometry. Our
model outperforms previous methods on FaceScape-wild/lab
and MICC benchmarks and is well generalized to various appearances, poses, expressions, and in-the-wild environments.
The code is released at https://github.com/zhuhao-nju/rafare.

Introduction
Reconstructing a 3D face shape from an arbitrary single image is a long-standing problem in the computer vision and
computer graphics community. It attracts much more attention in recent years for its fundamental impact on comprehensive downstream applications, e.g., facial editing, visual effects, facial animation, virtual make-up, and VR/AR
character creation. About two decades ago, Blanz et al.
(Blanz, Vetter et al. 1999) pioneered the 3D morphable
model (3DMM) to tackle this problem, which further developed into a classic paradigm to alleviate the ambiguity
of the problem. Many researchers employ a prior parametric
model (Cao et al. 2013b; Li et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2020)
as a coarse 3D model and optimize the parameters by minimizing semantic energy functions (Cao et al. 2013a; Thies
et al. 2016). In recent years, the rapid development of deep
learning pushes the field forward. Deep neural networks are
* Hao Zhu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We introduce a novel pipeline to generate a large-scale,
strictly-aligned, and in-the-wild facial dataset with cor719

