The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Preserving Structural Consistency in Arbitrary Artist and Artwork Style Transfer
Jingyu Wu1 , Lefan Hou1 , Zejian Li2,1 * , Jun Liao3 , Li Liu3 , Lingyun Sun1,4
1

Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo 315048, China
3
School of Big Data & Software Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China
4
Zhejiang-Singapore Innovation and AI Joint Research Lab, Hangzhou 310027, China
{wujingyu, houlefan, zejianlee, sunly, idi}@zju.edu.cn
{liaojun, dcsliuli}@cqu.edu.cn
Abstract

Deep generative models are effective in style transfer. Previous methods learn one or several specific artist-style from
a collection of artworks. These methods not only homogenize the artist-style of different artworks of the same artist
but also lack generalization for the unseen artists. To solve
these challenges, we propose a double-style transferring module (DSTM). It extracts different artist-style and artwork-style
from different artworks (even untrained) and preserves the intrinsic diversity between different artworks of the same artist.
DSTM swaps the two styles in the adversarial training and encourages realistic image generation given arbitrary style combinations. However, learning style from single artwork can
often cause over-adaption to it, resulting in the introduction of
structural features of style image. We further propose an edge
enhancing module (EEM) which derives edge information
from multi-scale and multi-level features to enhance structural consistency. We broadly evaluate our method across six
large-scale benchmark datasets. Empirical results show that
our method achieves arbitrary artist-style and artwork-style
extraction from a single artwork, and effectively avoids introducing the style image’s structural features. Our method
improves the state-of-the-art deception rate from 58.9% to
67.2% and the average FID from 48.74 to 42.83.

Content

Style

SwapAE

Ours

Figure 1: Style transfer results of SwapAE (Park et al. 2020)
and ours. From left column to right: we show the content
images, style images, generated images using SwapAE, and
ours. As shown in the third column, SwapAE mixes the
structure of the content image and the style image.

Introduction
Style transfer aims to transfer style from one image to another and preserve structure of target image. Existing methods learn the style from two perspectives. The first perspective is to learn holistic style from a collection of artworks (Liu et al. 2022), but can only produce one kind of
stylization, homogenizing the artist-style of different artworks of the same artist (Kotovenko et al. 2019b; Svoboda et al. 2020) and lacking generalization for unseen
artists (Chen et al. 2021). While the other is to learn specific
style from a single artwork (Wang et al. 2020; Park et al.
2020; Deng et al. 2022; Jing et al. 2022), but might not represent the full scope of an artistic style (Sanakoyeu et al.
2018) and over-adapt to the style image (Cai et al. 2021).
Recently, Chen et al. (2021) propose DualAST that learns
both holistic artist-style from a collection of artworks and
specific artwork-style from a single artwork.

Though DualAST combines two perspectives, it lacks
generalization and flexibility. It can only learn one artiststyle from a collection of artworks in one network and needs
to retrain a new network for another artist (Chen et al. 2021).
To extract both artist-style and artwork-style more effectively from a single artwork, and realize arbitrary artist-style
extraction sharing the same network instead of training a
new one, we propose a double-style transferring module
(DSTM). Our key idea is to decouple the artist-style and
artwork-style from the features of an artwork, swap them
with those from other images and encourage realistic transferred image generation given arbitrary style combinations.
Additionally, we use a classification network to classify latent code of artist-style to avoid trivial solutions and encourage each artist-style to have spatial diversity distance from
both holistic and specific perspectives.

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2830

