The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SigMaNet: One Laplacian to Rule Them All
Stefano Fiorini1 , Stefano Coniglio2 , Michele Ciavotta1 , Enza Messina1
1

University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy,
2
University of Bergamo, Bergamo, Italy
stefano.fiorini@unimib.it, stefano.coniglio@unibg.it, michele.ciavotta@unimib.it, enza.messina@unimib.it

Abstract

tion operator (Wang et al. 2019) (although, rigorously speaking, such an operator may not always be called a convolution
operator from a mathematical perspective). Differently, spectral GCNs define the convolution operator (a rigorous one
in this case) as a function of the eigenvalue decomposition
of the Laplacian matrix associated with the graph (Kipf and
Welling 2017). In their basic definition, both methods assume
the graph to be undirected and to feature nonnegative weights.
For a comprehensive review, we refer the reader to (Zhang
et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2020; He et al. 2022c).
Many real-world processes and phenomena can be modeled as directed graphs. While spatial GCNs have a natural
extension to directed graphs, most spectral methods require
the graph to be undirected and to feature nonnegative weights
for their convolution operator to be well-defined. Indeed, due
to being based on graph signal processing (Sandryhaila and
Moura 2013; Chen et al. 2015), spectral GCNs require three
fundamental properties to be satisfied which fail to hold when
the graph is directed and/or features negative weights: a) the
Laplacian matrix must be diagonalizable, i.e., it must admit
an eigenvalue decomposition, b) the Laplacian matrix must
be positive semidefinite, and c) the spectrum of the normalized Laplacian matrix must be upper-bounded by 2 (Kipf and
Welling 2017; Wu et al. 2020).
In recent years, several extensions of the definition of
Laplacian matrix have been proposed to overcome the first
limitation, i.e., to handle directed graphs (see, e.g., the Magnetic Laplacian (Zhang et al. 2021b,a) and the Approximate Digraph Laplacian constructed via the PageRank matrix (Tong et al. 2020a)). Differently, no spectral techniques
have been introduced so far to overcome the second limitation, i.e., to handle graphs with edge weights unrestricted
in sign, which arise in many relevant applications (such as,
e.g., those where the graph models credit/debit transactions
between customers, like/dislike evaluations among users, or
positive/negative user opinions). This paper aims at overcoming such a major limitation.

This paper introduces SigMaNet, a generalized Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) capable of handling both undirected
and directed graphs with weights not restricted in sign nor magnitude. The cornerstone of SigMaNet is the Sign-Magnetic
Laplacian (Lσ ), a new Laplacian matrix that we introduce
ex novo in this work. Lσ allows us to bridge a gap in the
current literature by extending the theory of spectral GCNs
to (directed) graphs with both positive and negative weights.
Lσ exhibits several desirable properties not enjoyed by other
Laplacian matrices on which several state-of-the-art architectures are based, among which encoding the edge direction and
weight in a clear and natural way that is not negatively affected
by the weight magnitude. Lσ is also completely parameterfree, which is not the case of other Laplacian operators such
as, e.g., the Magnetic Laplacian. The versatility and the performance of our proposed approach is amply demonstrated
via computational experiments. Indeed, our results show that,
for at least a metric, SigMaNet achieves the best performance
in 15 out of 21 cases and either the first- or second-best performance in 21 cases out of 21, even when compared to architectures that are either more complex or that, due to being
designed for a narrower class of graphs, should—but do not—
achieve a better performance.

Introduction
The dramatic advancements of neural networks and deeplearning have provided researchers and practitioners with
extremely powerful analytics tools. Increasingly complex
phenomena and processes which can often be modeled as
graphs or networks, such as, e.g., social networks (Backstrom
and Leskovec 2011), knowledge graphs (Zou 2020), protein
interaction networks (Kashyap et al. 2018), or the World
Wide Web (only to mention a few) can now be successfully
addressed via Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs). Compared with other approaches, GCNs effectively manage to
represent the data and its interrelationships by explicitly capturing the topology of the underlying graph within a suitablydesigned convolution operator.
In the literature, GCNs mostly belong to two categories:
spectral based and spatial based (Wu et al. 2020). Spatial
GCNs define the convolution operator as a localized aggrega-

Main Contributions and Novelty of the Work
• We extend the theory of spectral-based GCNs by introducing SigMaNet, the first spectral GCN capable of handling
both directed and undirected graphs with weights unrestricted in sign and of arbitrary magnitude.
• We introduce the Sign-Magnetic Laplacian matrix Lσ , a

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7568

