The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CCQ: Cross-Class Query Network for Partially Labeled Organ Segmentation
Xuyang Liu1 * , Bingbing Wen2 * , Sibei Yang1,3†
1

School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
2
Information School, University of Washington
3
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
liuxy15@shanghaitech.edu.cn, bingbw@uw.edu, yangsb@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning multi-organ segmentation from multiple partiallylabeled datasets attracts increasing attention. It can be a
promising solution for the scarcity of large-scale, fully labeled 3D medical image segmentation datasets. However, existing algorithms of multi-organ segmentation on partiallylabeled datasets neglect the semantic relations and anatomical
priors between different categories of organs, which is crucial for partially-labeled multi-organ segmentation. In this paper, we tackle the limitations above by proposing the CrossClass Query Network (CCQ). CCQ consists of an image encoder, a cross-class query learning module, and an attentive
refinement segmentation module. More specifically, the image encoder captures the long-range dependency of a single
image via the transformer encoder. Cross-class query learning module first generates query vectors that represent semantic concepts of different categories and then utilizes these
query vectors to find the class-relevant features of image representation for segmentation. The attentive refinement segmentation module with an attentive skip connection incorporates the high-resolution image details and eliminates the
class-irrelevant noise. Extensive experiment results demonstrate that CCQ outperforms all the state-of-the-art models
on the MOTS dataset, which consists of seven organ and tumor segmentation tasks. Code is available at https://github.
com/Yang-007/CCQ.git

Figure 1: Illustration of partially labeled multi-organ and tumor segmentation.

are available, e.g., LiTS (Bilic et al. 2019) with liver organ and tumor, KiTS (Heller et al. 2019) with kidney organ
and tumor, Colon (Simpson et al. 2019) with colon tumor,
Lung (Simpson et al. 2019) with lung tumor, Spleen (Simpson et al. 2019) with spleen organ, Pancreas (Simpson et al.
2019) with pancreas organ and tumor, and Hepatic Vessel (Simpson et al. 2019) with hepatic vessel organ and
tumor. Therefore, learning multi-organ segmentation from
multiple partially-labeled datasets becomes a promising solution and attracts increasing attention. An illustration of
partially-labeled datasets is shown in Figure 1.
Existing approaches of multi-organ segmentation over
partially-labeled datasets can be roughly divided into two
types based on their designing principles: multiple separate models for different organs (Ledig et al. 2015; Wang
et al. 2021; Kushnure and Talbar 2021; Wardhana et al.
2021) and a single model for multiple organs (Chen, Ma,
and Zheng 2019; Fang and Yan 2020; Shi et al. 2021; Zhou
et al. 2019; Liu, Xiao, and Zhou 2021; Dmitriev, Kaufman
et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2021). The former is not only
time-consuming and memory-intensive but neglects anatomical priors (Zhou et al. 2019) which are crucial for accurate segmentation. In this paper, we focus on the latter.
Specifically, it is challenging to learn a single multi-organ
segmentation model based on the combination of several
partially-labeled datasets due to significant differences between diverse datasets and organs. To alleviate such differences and inconsistencies, we further explore the single
model approach for multiple organs and find two main directions: first is class-relevant representation learning methods (Dmitriev, Kaufman et al. 2019; Chen, Xu, and Koltun
2017) and second is non-class-relevant representation learn-

Introduction
Medical image segmentation is often an essential first step
of computer-aided detection (Litjens et al. 2017). Automated
segmentation of multiple abdominal organs on computed tomography (CT) is of great help to clinical applications such
as surgery and radiotherapy. Algorithms of multi-class segmentation of abdominal organs (Gibson et al. 2018; Xie
et al. 2021) rely on fully-labeled datasets with human annotations for several organs. However, the full annotation of
medical images is extremely expensive and time-consuming
since it needs to be created and checked by professional radiologists, which leads to the scarcity of large-scale, fullylabeled datasets, especially for 3D medical image segmentation of abdominal organs. Several partially-labeled datasets
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1755

