The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Nested Named Entity Recognition as Building Local Hypergraphs
Yukun Yan,1,2 Bingling Cai,1,2 Sen Song1,2 *
1

Biomedical Department, Tsinghua University
Laboratory of Brain and Intelligence, Tsinghua University
{yanyk13, caibl13}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, songsen@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Named entity recognition is a fundamental task in natural language processing. Based on the sequence labeling paradigm
for flat named entity recognition, multiple methods have been
developed to handle the nested structures. However, they either require fixed recognition order or introduce complex hypergraphs. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel model
named Local Hypergraph Builder Network (LHBN) that
builds multiple simpler local hypergraphs to capture named
entities instead of a single complex full-size hypergraph. The
proposed model has three main properties: (1) The named
entities that share boundaries are captured in the same local hypergraph. (2) The boundary information is enhanced by
building local hypergraphs. (3) The hypergraphs can be built
bidirectionally to take advantage of the identification direction preference of different named entities. Experiments illustrate that our model outperforms previous state-of-the-art
methods on four widely used nested named entity recognition
datasets: ACE04, ACE05, GENIA, and KBP17. The code
is available at https://github.com/yanyk13/local-hypergraphbuilding-network.git.

Figure 1: Nested named entities extracted from ACE04 and
1 A named
GENIA. The nested structures are caused by: ⃝
entity as the qualifier of another one. 2
⃝ Different length of
4 Relatives or pronouns.
qualifiers. 3
⃝⃝
Dataset
ACE04
ACE05
GENIA
KBP17

Left
45.67
30.05
75.03
32.61

Nested Entity Pairs (%)
Right
Total
19.77
65.44
28.77
58.82
14.62
89.65
30.53
63.14

Table 1: The proportion of nested entity pairs that share a
boundary. The second and third columns separately indicate
the pairs that share left and right boundaries.

a certain order, like inner to outer. Other approaches (Lu and
Roth 2015; Muis and Lu 2017; Katiyar and Cardie 2018;
Iwakura, Takamura, and Okumura 2011) attempt to capture
named entities by building special structures.
To address the nested structure, we take a closer look at
the overlapping entities and propose a novel paradigm that
use the sequence labeling method to form a local hypergraph
structure. Normally, a named entity consists of a headword
and its qualifiers. There are two kinds of nested structures:
(1) An entity is a qualifier of another one, like ‘EBNA2’ and
‘EBNA2-dependent enhancer’, and (2) The headword forms
multiple named entities with qualifiers of different lengths,
like ‘human T cell’ and ‘T cell’. They are likely to share one
side of the boundary, as shown in Table 1. In some datasets
like ACE04 and ACE05, due to the requirement of downstream applications, such as event extraction and coreference resolution, some pronouns and the relatives in attributive clauses are also annotated as named entities. This leads
to the third kind of nested structure, like ‘those who worked
for her’ and ‘who’. As for the first two kinds of structures,
it requires a sequence labeling model to not only recognize
a named entity but also estimate the possibility of extending
its boundary to form a new one. On the other hand, the identification of the inner entities of the last kind can be regarded

Introduction
Named Entity Recognition (NER) plays an important role
in natural language processing. It provides information for
many downstream applications like coreference resolution,
entity linking, and event extraction. Previous tagging methods have achieved significant successes in flat named entity
recognition by formulating it as assigning a tag to each token. However, such a paradigm fails to handle overlapping
named entities, as shown in Figure 1, which are very common in many fields.
In recent years, researchers have proposed multiple new
methods to tackle the nested structure. The span-based approaches (Sohrab and Miwa 2018; Tan et al. 2020) follow
a two-stage strategy. They first propose a certain number of
spans, where nesting is allowed, and then predict the category for each candidate. Latest sequence labeling methods
(Alex, Haddow, and Grover 2007; Ju, Miwa, and Ananiadou
2018; Wang et al. 2020) leverage multiple decoding layers
to separately predict entities with different lengths following
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13878

