The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Topology-Specific Experts for Molecular Property Prediction
Suyeon Kim1 , Dongha Lee2 , SeongKu Kang1 , Seonghyeon Lee1 , Hwanjo Yu1 *
1

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
2
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), United States
{kimsu, seongku, sh0416, hwanjoyu}@postech.ac.kr, donghal@illinois.edu

Abstract
Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) have been successfully applied to predicting molecular properties, which is
one of the most classical cheminformatics tasks with various applications. Despite their effectiveness, we empirically observe that training a single GNN model for diverse
molecules with distinct structural patterns limits its prediction performance. In this paper, motivated by this observation, we propose TopExpert to leverage topology-specific prediction models (referred to as experts), each of which is responsible for each molecular group sharing similar topological semantics. That is, each expert learns topology-specific
discriminative features while being trained with its corresponding topological group. To tackle the key challenge of
grouping molecules by their topological patterns, we introduce a clustering-based gating module that assigns an input
molecule into one of the clusters and further optimizes the
gating module with two different types of self-supervision:
topological semantics induced by GNNs and molecular scaffolds, respectively. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
TopExpert has boosted the performance for molecular property prediction and also achieved better generalization for
new molecules with unseen scaffolds than baselines. The
code is available at https://github.com/kimsu55/ToxExpert.

Figure 1: The t-SNE visualization of molecular representations produced by randomly-initialized GIN (Xu et al.
2019).

Recently, Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been successfully applied to predicting molecular properties (Yang
et al. 2019, 2020; Yu and Gao 2022). Specifically, regarding molecules as graphs, GNNs extract localized spatial features by aggregating information at neighbor nodes and iteratively combining them to construct high-level representations, which effectively encodes the molecular topology
(Figure 1). Several attempts have been made to help GNNs
further capture topology information. One approach is to
leverage frequently-occurred subgraphs, known as motifs,
which are considered as basic meaning blocks with particular functions (Fey, Yuen, and Weichert 2020; Peng et al.
2020). Another approach is to preserve structural information in the process of aggregating node representations into a
graph level (Baek, Kang, and Hwang 2021; Lee et al. 2021).
Despite their effectiveness, we observe that training a
single GNN model to learn molecules with distinct structural patterns can hinder the model from capturing topologyspecific features and eventually limits its performance. In
Figure 2, for the property prediction of aromatic molecules,
one GNN model trained on both aromatic and acyclic compounds (i.e., molecules having distinct topology) performs
worse than another GNN model trained on aromatic compounds only despite its larger number of training data. In this
sense, we argue that there is much room for improvement
in case of utilizing topology-specialized models (called ex-

Introduction
Molecular property prediction is one of the most classical cheminformatics tasks with applications in various
areas such as quantum chemistry (Gilmer et al. 2017;
Brockschmidt 2020) and biology (Jumper et al. 2021; Liu
et al. 2020). It aims to clarify the correspondence between
a molecule and its properties, including toxicity, barrier permeability, and adverse drug reactions. Molecular topology,
which refers to the pattern of interconnections among atoms
and thus determines the ultimate structure of a molecule
(Rouvray 1986), has played an essential role in predicting
the properties. It is well known that molecules with similar structural patterns are likely to have similar properties
(Lo and Torres 2016), and accordingly, such topological
information has been widely exploited for drug discovery
and further modifications to improve target properties (Hu,
Stumpfe, and Bajorath 2016; Naveja et al. 2019).
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8291

