The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Overcoming Concept Shift in Domain-Aware Settings through Consolidated
Internal Distributions
Mohammad Rostami and Aram Galstyan
Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California
{mrostami, galstyan}@isi.edu

Abstract

the output of a shared deep encoder. The encoder network
is trained such that the source and the target domains share
a similar distribution in its output. This training procedure
has been implemented using either adversarial learning (He
et al. 2016; Sankaranarayanan et al. 2018; Pei et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2019; Long et al. 2018) or by directly minimizing the distance between the two distributions in the
embedding (Long et al. 2015; Ganin and Lempitsky 2015;
Long et al. 2017; Kang et al. 2019; Rostami et al. 2019).

We develop an algorithm to improve the performance of a
pre-trained model under concept shift without retraining the
model from scratch when only unannotated samples of initial
concepts are accessible. We model this problem as a domain
adaptation problem, where the source domain data is inaccessible during model adaptation. The core idea is based on
consolidating the intermediate internal distribution, learned
to represent the source domain data, after adapting the model.
We provide theoretical analysis and conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate that the proposed method is effective.

Most existing unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) algorithms consider a joint learning setting, where the model is
trained jointly on both the target domain unlabeled data and
the source domain labeled data. As a result, these algorithms
cannot be used for sequential model adaptation. Note that although a few source-free domain adaptation algorithms have
been developed recently (Kundu et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020b;
Liu, Zhang, and Wang 2021), these methods use adversarial
learning to memorize the source domain to generate source
domain pseudo-data points for model retraining which necessitates using additional networks, rather directly adapting
the base classifier network, which makes the model and the
optimization problem more complex . Our goal is to adapt the
classifier model to generalize well in the target domain using
solely the target domain unlabeled data to tackle domain shift.
This setting can be considered as an improvement over using
an off-the-shelf pre-trained model when unlabeled data in
a source domain is available. Our approach also relaxes the
necessity of sharing training data between the two domains.

Introduction
When a trained neural network is used for prediction, the
assumption is that the testing samples are drawn from the
training distribution. However, concept shift is a natural phenomenon when a model is used in different domains (Vorburger and Bernstein 2006). Similar to other machine learning techniques, deep learning is vulnerable with respect to
these distributional shifts during the model execution time.
Distributional shifts would lead to mode performance degradation which makes model retraining, i.e, model adaptation,
inevitable in order to make the model generalizable again in
new domains. Adapting deep neural networks is conditioned
on availability of massive labeled datasets which may not
always be feasible due to prohibitive costs of manual data annotation. Finetuning is a common strategy to improve model
generalization in the presence of domain shift. Despite being
effective in reducing the effect of domain shift, finetuning
still requires annotated data in the target domain.
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is a similar learning setting in which only unlabeled data is accessible in the
target domain (Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011) along with
labeled data in the source domain.The goal in UDA is to leverage from the source domain data to adapt the deep neural
network to generalize well in the target domain. An effective
approach for UDA is to align distributions of both domains by
mapping data into a latent domain-invariant space (Daumé III
2007). As a result, a classifier that is trained using the source
labeled data features in this space will generalize well in
the target domain. UDA methods model this latent space as

Contributions: we develop a sequential model adaptation
algorithm which is based on learning a parametric internal
distribution for the source domain distribution in a shared
embedding space. This internally learned distribution is used
to align the source and the target distributions. In order to
adapt the model to work well the target domain, we draw
samples from the estimated internal distribution and enforce
the target domain to share the same distribution in the embedding space by minimizing the distance between the two
distributions. We provide a theoretical justification for the
proposed algorithm, by establishing an upperbound for the
expected risk in the target domain, and demonstrating that
our algorithm minimizes this upperbound. We conduct experiments on five benchmarks and observe that our algorithm
compares favorably against SOTA UDA methods.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9623

