The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Voice Reconstruction from EEG during Imagined Speech
Young-Eun Lee1 * , Seo-Hyun Lee1 * , Sang-Ho Kim2 , Seong-Whan Lee2†
1

Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
{ye lee, seohyunlee, sh k, sw.lee}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract

ing to synthesize the user’s own voice from imagined speech
brain signals.
As the potential of reconstructing speech from brain signals of spoken speech has been demonstrated, we expect that
there must be relevant brain activation patterns that encode
significant features of the speech. Imagined speech is known
to resemble the neural patterns of spoken speech, which is
mainly located on the ventral sensorimotor cortex (Watanabe et al. 2020; Si et al. 2021; Cooney, Folli, and Coyle
2018; Lee, Lee, and Lee 2019). If imagined speech has similar features to spoken speech, it may be feasible to establish
a correlation between the brain signals of spoken speech, the
audio of spoken speech, and the brain signals of imagined
speech. Furthermore, if we could train and infer phonemes
from imagined speech, several unseen words composed of
already trained phonemes could also be reconstructed from
the trained word sets.
In this study, we proposed a NeuroTalk framework
that can correlate imagined speech electroencephalography
(EEG) with spoken speech EEG and its corresponding audio, to reconstruct voice from imagined speech. The imagined utterances were decoded from the EEG signals to reconstruct the voice at the word level. Moreover, we estimated the possibility of reconstructing unseen words using
the pre-trained model trained with only a few words, to potentially increase the degree of freedom using the model
trained with a minimum number of words, including various phonemes. Based on our results, we aim to find the potential of speech reconstruction from imagined speech brain
signals to the user’s own voice. The main contributions are
as follows:

Translating imagined speech from human brain activity into
voice is a challenging and absorbing research issue that
can provide new means of human communication via brain
signals. Efforts to reconstruct speech from brain activity
have shown their potential using invasive measures of spoken speech data, but have faced challenges in reconstructing
imagined speech. In this paper, we propose NeuroTalk, which
converts non-invasive brain signals of imagined speech into
the user’s own voice. Our model was trained with spoken
speech EEG which was generalized to adapt to the domain of
imagined speech, thus allowing natural correspondence between the imagined speech and the voice as a ground truth.
In our framework, an automatic speech recognition decoder
contributed to decomposing the phonemes of the generated
speech, demonstrating the potential of voice reconstruction
from unseen words. Our results imply the potential of speech
synthesis from human EEG signals, not only from spoken
speech but also from the brain signals of imagined speech.

Introduction
Brain signals contain various information related to human action or imagery, making them valuable materials
for understanding human intentions. Brain-computer interface (BCI) is a technology that analyzes users’ brain activity to derive external commands to control the environment through brain signals, therefore, can benefit paralyzed
or locked-in patients (Chaudhary, Birbaumer, and RamosMurguialday 2016). Brain-to-speech (BTS) is a novel research stream in the field of BCI, which aims to directly
synthesize audible speech from brain signals (Lee, Lee, and
Lee 2022, 2020). While current studies on decoding human
brain signals related to speech mainly focus on using spoken
speech brain signals measured with invasive methods (Anumanchipalli, Chartier, and Chang 2019; Angrick et al. 2019;
Herff et al. 2019), reconstructing imagined speech using
non-invasive modalities is an intriguing topic that enables
practical and silent communication via brain signals. However, due to the fundamental constraint of the imagined
speech lacking the ground truth (GT) voice, it is challeng-

Main Contribution
• We propose a generative model based on multi-receptive
residual modules with recurrent neural networks that can
extract frequency characteristics and sequential information from neural signals, to generate speech from noninvasive brain signals.
• The fundamental constraint of the imagined speechbased BTS system, which lacks the GT voice, has been
addressed by the domain adaptation approach to link the
imagined speech EEG, the spoken speech EEG, and the
spoken speech audio.
• Unseen words have shown the potential to be recon-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6030

