The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AudioEar: Single-View Ear Reconstruction for Personalized Spatial Audio
Xiaoyang Huang1 , Yanjun Wang1 , Yang Liu2 , Bingbing Ni1 * ,
Wenjun Zhang1 , Jinxian Liu1 , Teng Li3∗
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China,
2
FocusMedia,
3
Anhui University
{huangxiaoyang, nibingbing}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

approximated by acoustic simulation (Pierce) given a complete 3D human body structure, it is laborious to model human bodies using 3D scanners. Single-view reconstruction
is an alternative solution. It is well studied to reconstruct
personalized human heads and torsos within single-view images. However, without the modeling of ear structure, which
is the central organ in the human hearing system, the simulated HRTF is still biased. In this work, we propose to obtain
personalized HRTF by reconstructing the 3D mesh (Huang
et al.) of human ears within a single-view image. 1
To benchmark the task of ear reconstruction, we collect
a high-quality 3D ear dataset with an advanced structuredlight 3D scanner, named AudioEar3D. Compared to prior
evaluation protocol that uses 2D ear landmark re-projection
error as the metric, a 3D benchmark is more precise. AudioEar3D includes 112 ear point cloud scans with RGB
images from 56 individuals, each scan with 100, 000 to
250, 000 points, which capture high-resolution shape characteristics of ears. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the largest and most accurate 3D ear dataset that is publicly available, as analyzed in Section . We believe that except for spatial audio, this dataset could also contribute to
other applications, including digital humans (Kappel et al.),
morphology (Krishan, Kanchan, and Thakur) and medical
surgery research (Varman et al.).
Prior reconstruction methods for other parts of human
body train on large-scale 2D datasets self-supervisedly
(Zhang et al.; Chen et al.). However, existing 2D ear datasets
either lack semantic annotations or suffer from a small scale.
This situation greatly limits the extension of CV studies on
human ears. To this end, we build a large-scale 2D ear images dataset, including 2, 000 high-resolution ear images.
They are selected from the FFHQ human face dataset, each
of which accompanies manual annotations of occlusion and
55 ear landmarks. The landmarks annotations greatly enrich
the semantics of the ear images, enabling their usage in extensive applications.
Based on the self-supervised reconstruction pipeline,
we proposed AudioEarM, a depth-guided reconstruction
method tailored for ears. Due to the lack of public ear tex-

Spatial audio, which focuses on immersive 3D sound rendering, is widely applied in the acoustic industry. One of
the key problems of current spatial audio rendering methods
is the lack of personalization based on different anatomies
of individuals, which is essential to produce accurate sound
source positions. In this work, we address this problem
from an interdisciplinary perspective. The rendering of spatial audio is strongly correlated with the 3D shape of human bodies, particularly ears. To this end, we propose to
achieve personalized spatial audio by reconstructing 3D human ears with single-view images. First, to benchmark the
ear reconstruction task, we introduce AudioEar3D, a highquality 3D ear dataset consisting of 112 point cloud ear scans
with RGB images. To self-supervisedly train a reconstruction model, we further collect a 2D ear dataset composed
of 2,000 images, each one with manual annotation of occlusion and 55 landmarks, named AudioEar2D. To our knowledge, both datasets have the largest scale and best quality of their kinds for public use. Further, we propose AudioEarM, a reconstruction method guided by a depth estimation network that is trained on synthetic data, with two
loss functions tailored for ear data. Lastly, to fill the gap
between the vision and acoustics community, we develop a
pipeline to integrate the reconstructed ear mesh with an offthe-shelf 3D human body and simulate a personalized HeadRelated Transfer Function (HRTF), which is the core of spatial audio rendering. Code and data are publicly available in
https://github.com/seanywang0408/AudioEar.

Introduction
Spatial audio is widely applied in virtual reality, gaming,
and movie production (Begault and Trejo), for distinguishing sound source positions and generating immersive 3D
sound. Without it, people would lose the spatial sense of
sound. The rendering of spatial audio depends on the HeadRelated Transfer Function (HRTF) (Elliott, Jung, and Cheer;
Blauert, Allen, and Press). HRTF is adopted in mid-to-highend audio equipment, such as stereos, headphones, Hi-Fi,
and so on. HRTF varies from one person to another since
it depends on the 3D structure of human bodies including
ears, head, and torso. While a personalized HRTF could be

1
Strictly speaking, the ear structure include outer ear, middle
ear, and inner ear. Our work only focuses on the visible structure
(pinna) in the outer ear. Yet we still use the more understandable
name ear in the paper, following prior works (Jin et al.).

* Corresponding Author: Teng Li, Bingbing Ni

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

944

