The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Auditing and Robustifying COVID-19 Misinformation Datasets via Anticontent
Sampling
Clay H. Yoo1 , Ashiqur R. Khudabukhsh2
1

Carnegie Mellon University
Rochester Institute of Technology
hyungony@andrew.cmu.edu, axkvse@rit.edu
2

Abstract

classification methods may get completely blindsided when
presented with adversarial examples (Sarkar and KhudaBukhsh 2021).
A limiting factor to conducting large-scale in-the-wild audit is the lack of ground truth. In this paper, we present a
framework to conduct in-the-wild audit of COVID-19 misinformation datasets. Our framework does not require annotated examples. The heart of the framework lies in a simple yet powerful observation: before COVID-19, practically
no COVID-19 misinformation can exist. We show that classifiers trained on a broad range of heavily cited COVID-19
misinformation datasets often predict an alarming fraction of
social media posts from the pre-COVID-19 era as COVID19 misinformation, casting serious doubt on how useful they
can be when deployed in the wild. Our experiments indicate
that testing in the pre-COVID-19 era can present an elegant
solution to estimating in-the-wild performance and evaluating real-world deployability.

This paper makes two key contributions. First, it argues that
highly specialized rare content classifiers trained on small
data typically have limited exposure to the richness and topical diversity of the negative class (dubbed anticontent) as
observed in the wild. As a result, these classifiers’ strong
performance observed on the test set may not translate into
real-world settings. In the context of COVID-19 misinformation detection, we conduct an in-the-wild audit of multiple datasets and demonstrate that models trained with several
prominently cited recent datasets are vulnerable to anticontent when evaluated in the wild. Second, we present a novel
active learning pipeline that requires zero manual annotation
and iteratively augments the training data with challenging
anticontent, robustifying these classifiers.

Introduction
During the early phase of COVID-19 pandemic, the scientific community shared several COVID-19 misinformation
datasets (see, e.g., (Micallef et al. 2020; Memon and Carley 2020; Alam et al. 2020; Cheng et al. 2021; Cui and
Lee 2020)) to tackle the infodemic (Cinelli et al. 2020)
within a short turnaround time. While these datasets provided great value in jump-starting the battle against COVID19 misinformation, follow-on behavioral science studies
have started appearing that rely on models trained on these
datasets (Verma et al. 2022). A precise understanding of
these datasets’ effectiveness is thus necessary to trust the
broad societal conclusions that depend on the reliability of
these models.

Anticontent
A realistic assumption in any social web platform with broad
participation is that much of the user-generated content will
possibly be non-misinformation. Hence, even though discussions related to COVID-19 took the center stage during the
pandemic, from the kneeling-down controversy of the NFL
players to Ruth Bader Ginsburg’s failing health; from Novak Djokovic’s unfortunate expulsion from the US open to
the former president’s misspelled Tweet, the diverse set of
discussions that are not misfinformation, is what we call anticontent. This anticontent is far too topically diverse to be
effectively captured in a small labeled data scenario.
What makes anticontent challenging? Anticontent can pose
a challenge to in-the-wild COVID-19 misinformation classification in two possible ways. The first one is caused by
shortcut learning (Geirhos et al. 2020). A classifier trained
on a small dataset may pick up certain quirks of the dataset
and incorrectly generalize. For instance, a model trained
on a COVID-19 misinformation dataset where the keyword
hoax is always associated with positives, will have a hard
time when it encounters a linguistic black swan in the form
of this impeachment is a hoax. A classic example of such
shortcut learning happened when hate speech classifiers mistook harmless chess discussions as racist because almost
all examples in the train set had black, white, kill,

How do we conduct external audits of these misinformation datasets to estimate how well models trained on these
datasets perform in the wild? In the responsible AI literature, internal audits of datasets presenting guidelines for
data dissemination (Gebru et al. 2021b) and resource reproducibility practices (Gebru et al. 2021a) have positively
contributed to robust AI efforts. For other rare class classification tasks such as hate speech detection, cross-dataset
generalization has been studied before (Arango, Pérez, and
Poblete 2019). In-the-wild robustness audits of datasets is an
under-explored area. However, instances exist that rare-class
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15260

