The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Function Approximation for Solving Stackelberg Equilibrium in Large Perfect
Information Games
Chun Kai Ling, J. Zico Kolter, Fei Fang
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
chunkail@cs.cmu.edu, zkolter@cs.cmu.edu, feif@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

on methods such as exact backward induction (Bosanský
et al. 2015; Bošanskỳ et al. 2017), incremental strategy generation (Černỳ, Bošanskỳ, and Kiekintveld 2018; Cermak
et al. 2016; Karwowski and Mańdziuk 2020), and mathematical programming (Bosansky and Cermak 2015).1 While
exact, these methods rarely scale to large game trees, especially those too large to traverse, severely limiting our ability to tackle general-sum games that are of practical interest, such as those in security domains like wildlife poaching
prevention (Fang et al. 2017) and airport patrols (Pita et al.
2008). For non-Nash equilibrium in general-sum games, the
value of a state often cannot be summarized as a scalar (or
fixed sized vector), rendering the direct application of FAbased zero-sum solvers like (Silver et al. 2018) infeasible.
In this paper, we propose applying FA to model the Enforceable Payoff Frontier (EPF) for each state and using it to
solve for the Stackelberg extensive-form correlated equilibrium (SEFCE) in two-player games of perfect information.
Introduced in (Bošanskỳ et al. 2017; Bosanský et al. 2015;
Letchford and Conitzer 2010), EPFs capture the tradeoff between player payoffs and is analogous to the state value in
zero-sum games.2 Specifically, we (i) study the pitfalls that
can occur with using FA in general-sum games, (ii) propose a method for solving SEFCEs by modeling EPFs using
neural networks and minimizing an appropriately designed
Bellman-like loss, and (iii) provide guarantees on incentive
compatibility and performance of our method. Our approach
is the first application of FA in Stackelberg settings without relying on best-response oracles for performance guarantees. Experimental results show that our method can (a)
approximate solutions in games too large to explicitly traverse, and (b) generalize learned EPFs over states in a repeated setting where game payoffs vary based on features.

Function approximation (FA) has been a critical component
in solving large zero-sum games. Yet, little attention has
been given towards FA in solving general-sum extensiveform games, despite them being widely regarded as being
computationally more challenging than their fully competitive or cooperative counterparts. A key challenge is that for
many equilibria in general-sum games, no simple analogue to
the state value function used in Markov Decision Processes
and zero-sum games exists. In this paper, we propose learning the Enforceable Payoff Frontier (EPF)—a generalization
of the state value function for general-sum games. We approximate the optimal Stackelberg extensive-form correlated
equilibrium by representing EPFs with neural networks and
training them by using appropriate backup operations and
loss functions. This is the first method that applies FA to the
Stackelberg setting, allowing us to scale to much larger games
while still enjoying performance guarantees based on FA error. Additionally, our proposed method guarantees incentive
compatibility and is easy to evaluate without having to depend on self-play or approximate best-response oracles.

1

Introduction

A central challenge in modern game solving is to handle
large game trees, particularly those too large to traverse or
even specify. These include board games like Chess, Poker
(Silver et al. 2018, 2016; Brown and Sandholm 2017, 2019;
Moravčı́k et al. 2017; Bakhtin et al. 2021; Gray et al. 2021)
and modern video games with large state and action spaces
(Vinyals et al. 2019). Today, scalable game solving is frequently achieved via function approximation (FA), typically
by using neural networks to model state values and harnessing the network’s ability to generalize its evaluation to states
never encountered before (Silver et al. 2016, 2018; Moravčı́k
et al. 2017; Schmid et al. 2021). Methods employing FA
have achieved not only state-of-the-art performance, but also
exhibit more human-like behavior (Kasparov 2018).
Surprisingly, FA is rarely applied to solution concepts
used in general-sum games such as Stackelberg equilibrium, which are generally regarded as being more difficult to
solve than the perfectly cooperative/competitive Nash equilibrium. Indeed, the bulk of existing literature centers around

2

Preliminaries and Notation

A 2-player perfect information game G is represented by a
finite game tree with game states s ∈ S given by vertices and
action space A(s) given by directed edges starting from s.
1
Meta-game solving (Lanctot et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2019) is
used in zero-sum games, but not general-sum Stackelberg games.
2
The idea of an EPF was initially used by (Letchford and
Conitzer 2010) to give a polynomial time solution for SSEs. However, they (as well as other work) do not propose any naming.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5764

