The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Collusion-Proof and Sybil-Proof Reward Mechanisms for Query Incentive
Networks
Youjia Zhang, Pingzhong Tang
IIIS, Tsinghua University
zhangyou19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, kenshinping@gmail.com

Abstract

et al. 2020), and marketing (Drucker and Fleischer 2012)
and task collaboration (Shapley 1952).
In this paper, we mainly focus on reward mechanisms for
the answer querying system, in which only one agent is chosen to solve the problem. When implementing such reward
mechanisms, it is critical to understand how to motivate
agents to spread the information successfully and answer
the question honestly. In addition, the total reward should
not exceed the budget of the task owner (questioner). Apart
from these basic requirements, there are two other significant challenges to be overcome.
The first challenge is Sybil-proof, avoiding agents manipulating multiple false identities to improve the overall reward. For example, an agent who knows the solution can
create multiple accounts, and his other accounts can invite
him to do so. As the task owner does not know the information of each participant, all these accounts are rewarded.
Moreover, Sybil attacks not only increase the monetary costs
of the questioner but also delay the time it takes to get a solution. This issue has been discussed in various literature,
including (Babaioff et al. 2012; Drucker and Fleischer 2012;
Chen et al. 2013; Lv and Moscibroda 2016; Zhang, Zhang,
and Zhao 2021).
The second challenge is collusion-proof, preventing
agents from colluding with each other to gain more rewards.
For instance, an agent who knows the solution could report
it to his parents rather than solve it directly, as such action
may increase the overall reward. Additionally, his parents
can also take the same action. In consequence, the questioner spends more time solving the problem. A question
of this nature is not well studied in the query incentive network (Nath et al. 2012; Zhang, Zhang, and Zhao 2021), but
has been extensively discussed in other fields, for example,
auction design (Laffont and Martimort 1997; Che and Kim
2006; Marshall and Marx 2007).
However, it is impossible for a reward mechanism to simultaneously achieve both Sybil-proof (SP) and collusionproof (CP) along with a set of other desirable properties (as
illustrated in Section ). Hence, we not only formally define these properties but also provide approximate versions
of SP and CP. In this paper, we propose two novel families of reward mechanisms that are implementable in dominant strategies. The first mechanism is inspired by a geometric mechanism (Emek et al. 2011). In addition to the basic

This paper explores reward mechanisms for a query incentive
network in which agents seek information from social networks. In a query tree issued by the task owner, each agent
is rewarded by the owner for contributing to the solution,
for instance, solving the task or inviting others to solve it.
The reward mechanism determines the reward for each agent
and motivates all agents to propagate and report their information truthfully. In particular, the reward cannot exceed
the budget set by the task owner. However, our impossibility results demonstrate that a reward mechanism cannot simultaneously achieve Sybil-proof (agents benefit from manipulating multiple fake identities), collusion-proof (multiple
agents pretend as a single agent to improve the reward), and
other essential properties. In order to address these issues,
we propose two novel reward mechanisms. The first mechanism achieves Sybil-proof and collusion-proof, respectively;
the second mechanism sacrifices Sybil-proof to achieve the
approximate versions of Sybil-proof and collusion-proof. Additionally, we show experimentally that our second reward
mechanism outperforms the existing ones.

Introduction
There is an old proverb that states, ”Many hands make light
work.” In other words, the more people involved in a task,
the quicker and easier it will be completed. With the growing popularity of social media, many online platforms (e.g.,
Quora and Stack Overflow) provide the opportunity for people to ask a question online. As opposed to traditional search
engines (e.g., Google and Bing), Q&A platforms allow users
to post questions and have them answered by other users
rather than a central system that provides several related solutions. A major advantage of online Q&A platforms is that
the task is handled by humans, who are capable of solving
more rare questions. Additionally, it is unnecessary for the
questioner to simplify the question in order to make it understandable by a machine.
An important open question in such query models is developing a reward mechanism that ensures the query is propagated successfully and the solution is provided if one exists. Many researchers have discussed and applied such a reward mechanism in various fields, such as peer-to-peer filesharing systems (Golle et al. 2001), blockchains (Brünjes
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5892

