The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Layout-Aware Dreamer for Embodied Referring Expression Grounding
Mingxiao Li* 1 , Zehao Wang* 2 , Tinne Tuytelaars2 , Marie-Francine Moens1
1

2

Computer Science Department of KU Leuven
Electrical Engineering Department (ESAT-PSI) of KU Leuven
mingxiao.li@cs.kuleuven.be
zehao.wang@esat.kuleuven.be
tinne.tuytelaars@esat.kuleuven.be
sien.moens@cs.kuleuven.be

Abstract
In this work, we study the problem of Embodied Referring
Expression Grounding, where an agent needs to navigate in a
previously unseen environment and to localize a remote object described by a concise high-level natural language instruction. When facing such a situation, a human tends to
imagine what the destination may look like and to explore
the environment based on prior knowledge of the environmental layout, such as the fact that a bathroom is more likely
to be found near a bedroom than a kitchen. We have designed an autonomous agent called Layout-aware Dreamer
(LAD), including two novel modules, that is, the Layout
Learner and the Goal Dreamer to mimic this cognitive decision process. The Layout Learner learns to infer the room
category distribution of neighboring unexplored areas along
the path for coarse layout estimation, which effectively introduces layout common sense of room-to-room transitions
to our agent. To learn an effective exploration of the environment, the Goal Dreamer imagines the destination beforehand. Our agent achieves new state-of-the-art performance on
the public leaderboard of the REVERIE dataset in challenging unseen test environments with improvement in navigation
success (SR) by 4.02% and remote grounding success (RGS)
by 3.43% compared to the previous state-of-the-art. The code
is released at https://github.com/zehao-wang/LAD

Figure 1: The agent is required to navigate and find the mentioned object in the environment. Based on acquired commonsense knowledge, the agent correctly identifies the current and surrounding room types. Based on the imagination
of the destination, it correctly chooses the unexplored right
yellow dot as the next step to go.

In this paper, we target such high-level instruction-guided
tasks. Specifically, we focus on the Embodied Referring Expression Grounding task (Qi et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2021). In
this task, an agent receives a high-level instruction referring
to a remote object, and it needs to explore the environment
and localize the target object. When given a high-level instruction, we humans tend to imagine what the scene of the
destination looks like. Moreover, we can efficiently navigate
to the target room, even in previously unseen environments,
by exploiting commonsense knowledge about the layout of
the environment. However, for an autonomous agent, generalization to unseen environments still remains challenging.
Inspired by how humans make decisions when receiving
high-level instructions in unseen environments, as shown in
Fig. 1, we design an agent that can identify the room type
of current and neighboring navigable areas based on a room
type codebook and previous states. On top of that, it learns
to combine this information with goal imagination to jointly
infer the most probable moving direction. Thus, we propose
two modules named Layout Learner and Goal Dreamer to
achieve this goal. In our model, the agent stores trajectory
information by building a real-time topological map, where
nodes represent either visited or unexplored but partially visible areas. The constructed topological map can be seen as

Introduction
In recent years, embodied AI has matured. In particular, a
lot of works (Chen et al. 2022; Hao et al. 2020; Majumdar et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2019; Song et al. 2022; Chen
et al. 2021a; Georgakis et al. 2022) have shown promising
results in Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) (Anderson et al. 2018c; Krantz et al. 2020). In VLN, an agent is
required to reach a destination following a fine-grained natural language instruction that provides detailed step-by-step
information along the path, for example “Walk forward and
take a right turn. Enter the bedroom and stop at the bedside table”. However, in real-world applications and humanmachine interactions, it is tedious for people to give such
detailed step-by-step instructions. Instead, a high-level instruction only describing the destination, such as “Go to the
bedroom and clean the picture on the wall.”, is more usual.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1386

