The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Game Implementation: What Are the Obstructions?
Jiehua Chen, Seyedeh Negar Layegh Khavidaki,
Sebastian Vincent Haydn, Sofia Simola, Manuel Sorge
TU Wien, Austria
{jiehua.chen, seyedehngar.khavidaki, sofia.simola, manuel.sorge}@tuwien.ac.at,
e51832021@student.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

block rewards in Bitcoin) or penalizes unintended behavior (e.g., by slashing the stake of validators that deviate
from a consensus in the recent upgrade of Ethereum). The
latter is a form of enforcing the existence of a Schelling
point via incentives. Second, there are now base-layer systems like Ethereum in place that allow world-wide consistent general-purpose computations and thus the straightforward creation of new moneys (called tokens) that can be
made to behave in new ways: generated, burned, exchanged,
locked, etc. Thus an immense design space for incentivebased protocols was opened up and we witness its continued exploration. There are for example stablecoins, which
are tokens that use incentive-based mechanisms to try and
reflect the value of some underlying security (Maker DAI,
Terra USD, FRAX Shares, and many more)1 . Another direction are incentive-based consensus mechanisms for adjudication, moderation, and transferring real-world information
onto blockchains (such as Kleros, UMA, Chainlink oracles,
and again many more)2 .
In all of the above design problems, there are independent
actors that we want to incentivize to behave in a certain
desired way. A fundamental underlying problem herein
is G AME I MPLEMENTATION (Monderer and Tennenholtz
2004), stated as follows: We are given a game in standard
form (a set of players, strategies for each player, and their
utility) and for each player a set of desired strategies. We
want to specify a set of payment promises that define
additional utilities that we give to players for playing certain
strategies. These payment promises shall implement our
desired sets of strategies, that is, when taking the payments
into account, no player wants to play an undesired strategy.
In technical terms, each strategy that is not dominated by
any other strategy is desired (see Section 2 for the formal
definitions).3 Furthermore, we want to minimize the cost

In many applications, we want to influence the decisions of
independent agents by designing incentives for their actions.
We revisit a fundamental problem in this area, called G AME
I MPLEMENTATION: Given a game in standard form and a set
of desired strategies, can we design a set of payment promises
such that if the players take the payment promises into account, then all undominated strategies are desired? Furthermore, we aim to minimize the cost, that is, the worst-case
amount of payments.
We study the tractability of computing such payment
promises and determine more closely what obstructions we
may have to overcome in doing so. We show that G AME I M PLEMENTATION is NP-hard even for two players, solving in
particular a long-standing open question and suggesting more
restrictions are necessary to obtain tractability results. We
thus study the regime in which players have only a small constant number of strategies and obtain the following. First, this
case remains NP-hard even if each player’s utility depends
only on three others. Second, we repair a flawed efficient algorithm for the case of both small number of strategies and
small number of players. Among further results, we characterize sets of desired strategies that can be implemented at
zero cost as a generalization of Nash equilibria.

1

Introduction

Nudge theory (Thaler and Sunstein 2008), gamification (Hamari 2019), and the design of blockchain systems (Buterin et al. 2020) are just a few areas in which we
apply incentives in order to coax agents towards behaving
in a desirable way. In these general settings, agents select
strategies on their own volition, but we may add incentives
(or incur penalties) that increase (resp. decrease) the salience
or utility of particular strategies in situations of our choice.
The goal is to implement a desired set of strategies or strategy profiles, that is, to ensure that undesired strategies entail
smaller utility than desired ones.
With the advent of blockchain systems, we feel that this
topic has gained renewed relevance. First, the design of a
blockchain system itself, such as Bitcoin or Ethereum, involves the design of a protocol that rewards intended behavior (e.g., validating transactions by mining blocks for

1

See
https://makerdao.com/en/whitepaper/,
https:
//terra.money/Terra White paper.pdf,
and
https://docs.frax.
finance/overview.
2
See https://kleros.gitbook.io/docs/, https://docs.umaproject.
org/, and https://chain.link/whitepaper.
3
We focus here only on pure strategies. Furthermore, G AME
I MPLEMENTATION implements a set of strategy profiles rather than
a set of strategies for each player. Implementing sets of strategies
corresponds to implementing so-called rectangular strategy profiles, see the formal definitions in Section 2.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5557

