The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Layer-Wise Adaptive Model Aggregation for Scalable Federated Learning
Sunwoo Lee1,2 , Tuo Zhang1 , and Salman Avestimehr1
1

University of Southern California, USA
2
Inha University, South Korea
{sunwool,tuozhang,avestime}@usc.edu

Abstract

et al. 2018), FedNova (Wang et al. 2020), and SCAFFOLD
(Karimireddy et al. 2020), periodically average the full local solutions across all the clients. Many communicationefficient FL strategies, such as gradient (model) sparsification (Wangni et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018; Alistarh et al.
2018), low-rank approximation (Vogels, Karimireddy, and
Jaggi 2020; Wang, Agarwal, and Papailiopoulos 2021), and
quantization (Alistarh et al. 2017; Wen et al. 2017; Albasyoni et al. 2020; Reisizadeh et al. 2020) techniques, also periodically aggregate the compressed form of the full local solutions. Adaptive model aggregation techniques (Wang and
Joshi 2018a; Haddadpour et al. 2019) adjust the aggregation
interval at run-time to reduce the total number of communications, however, they still aggregate the full local models
at once. Because all the above FL strategies are based on
the periodic full model aggregation scheme which ignores
the layer-wise data characteristics, they can rapidly lose the
accuracy as the aggregation interval increases.
In this paper, we propose FedLAMA, a Layer-wise Adaptive Model Aggregation scheme for FL. Our study breaks
the convention of periodic full aggregation and introduces a
novel and efficient model aggregation framework for scalable FL. FedLAMA first prioritizes all the layers based
on their contributions to the total model discrepancy. We
present a useful metric for estimating the layer-wise degree
of model discrepancy at run-time. Then, the aggregation intervals are adjusted based on the assigned priorities such that
the low priority layers are less frequently aggregated than the
other layers. The layers are prioritized again after all the layers are aggregated at least once. Figure 1 shows schematic
illustrations of the periodic full aggregation and FedLAMA.
As the degree of model discrepancy at each layer increases,
its color turns to red. We see that all the layers have a difference pace of the color change. Rather than having a uniform
aggregation interval at all the layers, FedLAMA assigns a
longer interval to the slower layers than the other layers, and
it results in suppressing the total model discrepancy at the
minimal communication cost.
Our study provides essential insights into how to better
utilize the network bandwidth in FL. FedLAMA finds the
layer-wise model aggregation interval settings, jointly considering the communication efficiency and the federated optimization efficiency. The fine-grained model aggregation
strategy allows to spend more network bandwidth for the

In Federated Learning (FL), a common approach for aggregating local solutions across clients is periodic full model averaging. It is, however, known that different layers of neural networks can have a different degree of model discrepancy across the clients. The conventional full aggregation
scheme does not consider such a difference and synchronizes
the whole model parameters at once, resulting in inefficient
network bandwidth consumption. Aggregating the parameters that are similar across the clients does not make meaningful training progress while increasing the communication
cost. We propose FedLAMA, a layer-wise adaptive model aggregation scheme for scalable FL. FedLAMA adjusts the aggregation interval in a layer-wise manner, jointly considering
the model discrepancy and the communication cost. This finegrained aggregation strategy enables to reduce the communication cost without significantly harming the model accuracy.
Our extensive empirical study shows that, as the aggregation
interval increases, FedLAMA shows a remarkably smaller accuracy drop than the periodic full aggregation, while achieving comparable communication efficiency.

Introduction
In Federated Learning (FL), periodic full model averaging is
the most common approach for aggregating local solutions.
As the aggregation interval increases, however, the periodic
full aggregations cause a high degree of model discrepancy
across clients, and it results in a slower convergence. It has
recently been observed that the magnitude of gradients can
be largely different across neural network layers (You et al.
2019). That is, all the layers can diverge across the clients
in a difference pace. The conventional periodic full aggregation scheme does not consider such a difference and always
synchronizes the full model at once. Averaging the parameters that are similar across all the clients does not make
meaningful training progress while consuming the network
bandwidth. Considering the limited network bandwidth in
usual FL environments, such inefficient model aggregations
can crucially harm the scalability of FL applications.
Most of the FL strategies assume the underlying periodic full model averaging. A variety of federated optimizers, such as FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017), FedProx (Li
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8491

