The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Compact Features via In-Training Representation Alignment
Xin Li, Xiangrui Li, Deng Pan, Yao Qiang, Dongxiao Zhu
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University
Detroit, Michigan 48202, USA
{xinlee, xiangruili, pan.deng, yao, dzhu}@wayne.edu

Abstract
n
m
1X
1 X
∇θ L(xi , θ) ≈
∇θ L(xi , θ),
n i=1
m i=1

Deep neural networks (DNNs) for supervised learning can be
viewed as a pipeline of the feature extractor (i.e., last hidden
layer) and a linear classifier (i.e., output layer) that are trained
jointly with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) on the loss
function (e.g., cross-entropy). In each epoch, the true gradient
of the loss function is estimated using a mini-batch sampled
from the training set and model parameters are then updated
with the mini-batch gradients. Although the latter provides an
unbiased estimation of the former, they are subject to substantial variances derived from the size and number of sampled
mini-batches, leading to noisy and jumpy updates. To stabilize
such undesirable variance in estimating the true gradients, we
propose In-Training Representation Alignment (ITRA) that
explicitly aligns feature distributions of two different minibatches with a matching loss in the SGD training process. We
also provide a rigorous analysis of the desirable effects of the
matching loss on feature representation learning: (1) extracting
compact feature representation; (2) reducing over-adaption on
mini-batches via an adaptive weighting mechanism; and (3)
accommodating to multi-modalities. Finally, we conduct largescale experiments on both image and text classifications to
demonstrate its superior performance to the strong baselines.

m

(1)

1 X
θ ←θ−α·
∇θ L(xi , θ).
m i=1
This update in Eq.(1) can be interpreted from two perspectives. First, from the conventional approximation perspective,
the true gradient of the loss function (i.e., gradient on the entire training data) is approximated by the mini-batch gradient.
As each mini-batch gradients are unbiased estimators of the
true gradient of the loss function and the computation is inexpensive, large DNNs can be efficiently and effectively trained
with modern computing infrastructures. Second, Eq. (1) can
also be interpreted as an exact gradient descent update on the
mini-batch. In other words, SGD updates network parameters
θ to achieve maximum improvement in fitting the mini-batch.
As each mini-batch is often uniformly sampled from each
class of the training data, such exact update inevitably introduces the undesirable variance in gradients calculation
via backpropagation, resulting in the over-adaption of model
parameters to that mini-batch.
A natural question then to ask is, “can we reduce the
over-adaption to mini-batches?”, to reduce the mini-batch
dependence on SGD update in Eq. (1). In this paper, we propose In-Training Representation Alignment (ITRA) that aims
at reducing the mini-batch over-adaption by aligning feature
representation of different mini-batches that is learned by the
feature extractor in SGD. Our motivation for feature alignment is: if the SGD update using one mini-batch A is helpful
for DNNs learning good feature representations with respect
to the entire data, then for another mini-batch B, their feature
representation should align well with each other. In this way,
we can reduce mini-batch over-adaption by forcing accommodation of SGD update to B and reducing dependence of
the parameter update on A. Ideally, if the distribution P (h)
of latent feature h is known as a prior, we could explicitly
match the mini-batch feature hmb with P (h) via maximum
likelihood. However, in practice, P (h) is not known or does
not even have an analytic form. To achieve this, we utilize the
maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton et al. 2012)
from statistical hypothesis testing for the two-sample problem. MMD is differentiable that can be trained via back prop-

Introduction
Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable performance improvements in a wide range of challenging tasks in computer vision (He et al. 2016; Huang
et al. 2019; Pan, Li, and Zhu 2021; Qiang et al. 2022a), natural language processing (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014;
Chorowski et al. 2015; Qiang et al. 2022b) and healthcare
informatics (Miotto et al. 2018; Li, Zhu, and Levy 2020). For
supervised learning, DNNs can be viewed as a feature extractor followed by a linear classifier on the latent feature space,
which are jointly trained using stochastic gradient descent
(SGD). Specifically, in each iteration of SGD, a mini-batch
of m samples {(xi , yi )}m
i=1 is sampled from the training data
{(xi , yi )}ni=1 (n > m). The gradient of loss function L(x, θ)
is calculated on the mini-batch, and network parameter θ is
updated via one step of gradient descent (learning rate α):
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8675

