The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Revisiting Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Speech Enhancement:
Condition Collapse, Efficiency and Refinement
Wenxin Tai1 , Fan Zhou1 , Goce Trajcevski2 , Ting Zhong1 *
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Iowa State University
amperetai@gmail.com, fan.zhou@uestc.edu.cn, gocet25@iastate.edu, zhongting@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

features that define an object (Geirhos et al. 2020; Phan et al.
2020). In addition, since models are trained on a finite set of
training data, they usually cannot generalize to unseen situations, e.g., different noise types, reverberation, and different
signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) (Welker, Richter, and Gerkmann 2022; Yu et al. 2021).
Conditional generative models have recently shown
promises to overcome many limitations of their discriminative counterparts (Song et al. 2018; Geirhos et al. 2020; Fu
et al. 2019, 2021). This property burgeoned another branch
of SE – instead of learning a direct mapping from noisy to
clean speech, likelihood-based generative SE models prefer to learn the distribution of clean speech and treat SE
as a conditional generation problem. A few generative SE
models have been proposed, such as generative adversarial networks (GANs)-based (Soni, Shah, and Patil 2018;
Zhang et al. 2020; Routray and Mao 2022), variational autoencoders (VAEs)-based (Pariente, Deleforge, and Vincent
2019; Fang et al. 2021), and flow-based models (Maiti and
Mandel 2020; Strauss and Edler 2021). Compared to discriminative approaches, generative models are more robust
to unseen scenarios and are expected to produce more natural speech, as they optimize the predictive performance and
learn the input distribution jointly (Pascual, Bonafonte, and
Serra 2017; Welker, Richter, and Gerkmann 2022).
Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020) have emerged as a class of generative models, demonstrating their capability to achieve significant performance improvements in both image and audio
synthesis. Specifically, in diffusion models, a fixed forward
process gradually perturbs the data in a step-wise fashion towards fully random noise. A parametrized reverse process is
learned to perform iterative denoising and to generate samples from the noise. Compared to other generative models,
DDPMs demonstrate surprisingly high sample quality and
have easier training patterns while having (almost) no restrictions on model architecture (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015).
Recently, some researchers have tried to apply DDPMs to
SE (Zhang, Jayasuriya, and Berisha 2021; Lu, Tsao, and
Watanabe 2021; Lu et al. 2022). Although better generalizations have been made, the performance of DDPM-based
methods is still lower than that of other generative SE models. Therefore, an important question is: what hinders the
performance of DDPM in the field of SE?

Recent literature has shown that denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) can be used to synthesize highfidelity samples with a competitive (or sometimes better)
quality than previous state-of-the-art approaches. However,
few attempts have been made to apply DDPM for the speech
enhancement task. The reported performance of the existing
works is relatively poor and significantly inferior to other
generative methods. In this work, we first reveal the difficulties in applying existing diffusion models to the field of
speech enhancement. Then we introduce DR-DiffuSE, a simple and effective framework for speech enhancement using
conditional diffusion models. We present three strategies (two
in diffusion training and one in reverse sampling) to tackle the
condition collapse and guarantee the sufficient use of condition information. For efficiency, we introduce the fast sampling technique to reduce the sampling process into several
steps and exploit a refinement network to calibrate the defective speech. Our proposed method achieves state-of-the-art
performance to the GAN-based model and shows a significant improvement over existing DDPM-based algorithms.

Introduction
Background interference can contaminate and vastly degrade the speech quality for human listeners. Speech enhancement (SE) aims to improve the hearing comfort by separating human voice and noise signals. Traditional SE methods have been extensively studied for a few decades (Boll
1979; Gerkmann and Hendriks 2011; Hu et al. 2013) and
have achieved significant accomplishments. However, they
often fail when faced with non-stationary scenarios. Recently, this issue has been relatively well alleviated with approaches based on the deep learning (DL) paradigms (Zhao
et al. 2016; Tai et al. 2021a).
Most of the DL-based SEs focus on minimizing the overall difference between the target speech and its denoised
estimate and, usually, Lp -norm distance training objectives
are adopted for network training (Li et al. 2021; Tai et al.
2021b). However, these discriminative models have no notion of what realistic examples typically look like and how
the features used for discrimination are combined with other
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13627

