The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Structure Flow-Guided Network for Real Depth Super-resolution
Jiayi Yuan* , Haobo Jiang* , Xiang Li, Jianjun Qian, Jun Li† , Jian Yang†
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{jiayiyuan, jiang.hao.bo, xiang.li.implus, csjqian, junli, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

main gap between the real and synthetic data largely degrades their DSR precision on the real data.
This domain gap is mainly caused by different generation mechanisms of the LR depth map. The synthetic LR
depth map is usually generated via artificial degradation
(e.g., down-sampling operation), while the real one is from
natural degradation (e.g., noise, blur, and distortion). Different from the synthetic data, there are two challenges of the
real-data DSR as below. The first one is the severe structural
distortion (see Fig. 1 (c)), especially for the low-reflection
glass surface or the infrared-absorbing surface. The second
one is the edge noise even the holes (see Fig. 1 (d)), caused
by the physical limitations or the low processing power of
the depth sensors. Both of the challenges above present
a significant difference between the real and the synthetic
data, which inherently degrades the generalization precision
of the synthetic DSR methods to the real data.
In this paper, we develop a novel structure flow-guided
DSR framework to handle the above challenges. For the
structural distortion, we propose a cross-modality flowguided upsampling network (CFUNet) that learns a structured flow between the depth map and the RGB image to
guide their structure alignment for the recovery of the distorted depth structure. It includes two key components: a
trilateral self-attention module and a cross-modality crossattention module. In detail, the former leverages the geometric and semantic correlations (i.e., coordinate distance,
pixel difference, and feature difference) to guide the relevant
depth-feature aggregation into each depth feature to supplement the missing depth-structure information. The latter
utilizes the enhanced depth feature and the RGB feature as
the input for their sufficient message passing and flow-map
generation. Finally, we combine the flow map with the gridsampling mechanism for the coarse HR depth prediction.
For the edge noise, we present a flow-enhanced pyramid
edge attention network (PEANet) that integrates the learned
structure flow map as the edge attention into a pyramid network to learn the edge-focused guidance feature for the edge
refinement of the coarse HR depth map predicted above.
Considering the structure clue (i.e., edge region tends to
own significant flow-value fluctuations) lying in the learned
flow map, we combine the flow map with the RGB feature to form the flow-enhanced RGB feature for highlighting
the RGB-structure region. Then, we feed the flow-enhanced

Real depth super-resolution (DSR), unlike synthetic settings,
is a challenging task due to the structural distortion and the
edge noise caused by the natural degradation in real-world
low-resolution (LR) depth maps. These defeats result in significant structure inconsistency between the depth map and
the RGB guidance, which potentially confuses the RGBstructure guidance and thereby degrades the DSR quality. In
this paper, we propose a novel structure flow-guided DSR
framework, where a cross-modality flow map is learned to
guide the RGB-structure information transferring for precise depth upsampling. Specifically, our framework consists
of a cross-modality flow-guided upsampling network (CFUNet) and a flow-enhanced pyramid edge attention network
(PEANet). CFUNet contains a trilateral self-attention module combining both the geometric and semantic correlations
for reliable cross-modality flow learning. Then, the learned
flow maps are combined with the grid-sampling mechanism
for coarse high-resolution (HR) depth prediction. PEANet
targets at integrating the learned flow map as the edge attention into a pyramid network to hierarchically learn the
edge-focused guidance feature for depth edge refinement. Extensive experiments on real and synthetic DSR datasets verify that our approach achieves excellent performance compared to state-of-the-art methods. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/Yuanjiayii/DSR SFG.

Introduction
With the fast development of cheap RGB-D sensors, depth
maps have played a much more important role in a variety of computer vision applications, such as object recognition (Blum et al. 2012; Eitel et al. 2015), 3D reconstruction
(Newcombe et al. 2011), and virtual reality (Meuleman et al.
2020)). However, the defects (e.g., low resolution and structural distortion) lying in the cheap RGB-D sensors (e.g., Microsoft Kinect and HuaweiP30Pro), still hinder their more
extensive applications in the real world. Also, although the
popular DSR methods (Song et al. 2020; Kim, Ponce, and
Ham 2021; Sun et al. 2021) have achieved excellent DSR
accuracy on synthetic LR depth maps, the significant do* These authors contributed equally.
†

corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3340

