The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improving Biomedical Entity Linking with Cross-Entity Interaction
Zhenran Xu, Yulin Chen, Baotian Hu*
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China
xuzhenran@stu.hit.edu.cn, 200110528@stu.hit.edu.cn, hubaotian@hit.edu.cn

Mention Context

Abstract

After a few days of feeling emotions,
I will get extreme anxiety.

Biomedical entity linking (EL) is the task of linking mentions in a biomedical document to corresponding entities in
a knowledge base (KB). The challenge in biomedical EL lies
in leveraging mention context to select the most appropriate
entity among possible candidates. Although some EL models achieve competitive results by retrieving candidate entities
and then exploiting context to re-rank them, these re-ranking
models concatenate mention context with one candidate at a
time. They lack fine-grained interaction among candidates,
and potentially cannot handle ambiguous mentions when facing candidates both with high lexical similarity. We cope with
this issue using a re-ranking model based on prompt tuning,
which represents mention context and all candidates at once,
letting candidates in comparison attend to each other. We also
propose a KB-enhanced self-supervised pretraining strategy.
Instead of large-scale pretraining on biomedical EL data in
previous work, we use masked language modeling with synonyms from KB. Our method achieves state-of-the-art results
on 3 biomedical EL datasets: NCBI disease, BC5CDR and
COMETA, showing the effectiveness of cross-entity interaction and KB-enhanced pretraining strategy. Code is available
at https://github.com/HITsz-TMG/Prompt-BioEL.

1

ID:408453002

ID:285854004

• Emotional
• Emotional
(qualifier value)

•
•
•

Gold entity

Emotion
Emotions
Feelings
Prediction of
cross-encoder

Figure 1: An error case of the cross-encoder proposed in
Varma et al. (2021). The cross-encoder tends to confuse candidates both with high lexical similarity, indicating the need
for cross attention among candidates in comparison.
2021), so it is critical to propose EL approaches particularly
for biomedical domain.
There are two main challenges of EL: (1) variety - the
same entity can appear as different words or phrases in different texts; (2) ambiguity - the same word or phrase can refer to different entities. Previous work mainly addresses the
variety challenge. There is a common bi-encoder design for
most of previous models (Sung et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021a):
the bi-encoder represents mention words and entity names
independently and calculates similarity through a dot product between dense vector encodings. Although these models
achieve promising performance gains, they ignore the mention context and cannot solve the ambiguity challenge, i.e.,
they link the same mention to the same entity no matter what
mention context is.
To overcome the ambiguity bottleneck, most recent methods (Angell et al. 2021; Varma et al. 2021) present a twostage linking algorithm: they first retrieve a small set of candidate entities with the bi-encoder above, and then re-rank
the candidates according to mention context with a crossencoder. Although the cross-encoder can capture mentionentity interactions, each entity gets encoded with mention
context independently from all the other candidates, ignor-

Introduction

Biomedical entity linking (EL) refers to linking mentions in
a biomedical document to corresponding entities in a curated
knowledge base (KB) such as UMLS (Bodenreider 2004)
and SNOMED-CT (Donnelly et al. 2006). Considering the
example in Figure 1, given the sentence “After a few days of
feeling emotions, I will get extreme anxiety.”, the mention
feeling emotions should be linked to the entity 408453002 Emotional in SNOMED-CT. Biomedical EL, as a bridge that
connects mentions in unstructured text and entities in structured KBs, serves as a fundamental component for many
downstream tasks, such as biomedical question answering
(Lee et al. 2020), information extraction (Huang, Yang, and
Peng 2020) and automatic diagnosis (Yuan and Yu 2021).
Although EL systems have achieved great success in general domain, they cannot be directly implemented to solve
biomedical EL due to the data scarcity (Yuan, Yuan, and
Yu 2022) and KB format (Chen, Varoquaux, and Suchanek
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13869

