The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Unsupervised Deep Embedded Fusion Representation of Single-Cell
Transcriptomics
Yue Cheng1 * , Yanchi Su1 * , Zhuohan Yu1 , Yanchun Liang2 , Ka-Chun Wong3 , Xiangtao Li1†
1

2

School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, Jilin, China
Zhuhai Laboratory of Key Laboratory of Symbol Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Zhuhai
College of Science and Technology, Zhuhai 519041, China
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR
chengyue22@mails.jlu.edu.cn, suyanchi@gmail.com, zhuohan20@mails.jlu.edu.cn
ycliang@jlu.edu.cn, kc.w@cityu.edu.hk, lixt314@jlu.edu.cn
Abstract
Cell clustering is a critical step in analyzing single-cell RNA
sequencing (scRNA-seq) data that allows characterization of
the cellular heterogeneity after transcriptional profiling at the
single-cell level. Single-cell deep embedded representation
models have gained popularity recently as they can learn feature representation and clustering simultaneously. However,
the models still pose a variety of significant challenges, including the massive amount of data, pervasive dropout events,
and complicated noise patterns in transcriptional profiling.
Here, we propose a Single-Cell Deep Embedding Fusion
Representation (scDEFR) model that produces a deep embedded fusion representation to learn the fused heterogeneous
latent embedding containing both the gene-level transcriptome and cell topology information. We first fuse them layer
by layer to obtain compressed representations of the intercellular relationships and transcriptome information. Then, we
use the zero-inflated negative binomial model (ZINB)-based
decoder to capture the global probabilistic structure of the
data to reconstruct the final gene expression information. Finally, by simultaneously integrating the clustering loss, crossentropy loss, ZINB loss, and cell graph reconstruction loss,
scDEFR can optimize clustering performance and learn the
latent representation from the fused information in a joint
mutual supervised strategy. We conducted comprehensive experiments on 15 single-cell RNA-seq datasets from different sequencing platforms and demonstrated the superiority of
scDEFR over a variety of state-of-the-art methods.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Heatmaps of cell similarity matrices in the latent space of (a) scDEFR, (b) scDEFR with only fusion
cell topology encoder and, (c) scDEFR with only transcriptomics profile-based graph encoder

lar profiles (Svensson et al. 2017). In previous studies, traditional clustering methods such as K-means (MacQueen
1967) and hierarchical clustering (Johnson 1967) were employed for unbiased cell type identification. However, due
to the high heterogeneity of genome coverage and technical limitations, scRNA-seq data is very sparse, with 95% of
measurements being zero (Grün, Kester, and Van Oudenaarden 2014). These problems prevent traditional clustering
methods that rely on similarity metrics from being adequate.
It is necessary to explore new computational approaches to
learn the diverse characteristics in order to better uncover the
specific patterns in scRNA-seq data. Deep embedded clustering algorithms tailored to scRNA-seq data have been developed to identify cell types. These methods usually utilize
an autoencoder to learn the latent representation of the gene
expression matrix and to optimize cluster assignment simultaneously; for instance, scDCC (Tian et al. 2021), scDeepCluster (Tian et al. 2019), scziDesk (Chen et al. 2020a).
However, these methods only focus on learning the gene expression matrix itself and ignore the topology of the cells.
Moreover, the similarity between cells is the crucial point for
guiding clustering, and due to the high sparsity of scRNAseq as mentioned above, higher order cellular structural information could also be investigated to reveal potential similarities in common neighboring cells. Recently, deep graph
embedding clustering algorithms have been advanced to address the clustering problem; for instance, scTAG (Yu et al.
2022), scGNN (Wang et al. 2021), scGAE (Luo et al. 2021)
and GraphSCC (Zeng et al. 2021), which usually use a graph

Introduction
Single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) technology allows analyzing the entire transcriptomes of very large numbers of individual cells, which is essential for characterizing the stochastic heterogeneity within cell populations and
establishing distinct developmental trajectories, for example, immune cells (Papalexi and Satija 2018). Cell clustering is one of the most crucial tasks in the standard scRNAseq pipeline that can group cells according to their gene expression patterns and thereby establish the intrinsic molecu* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5036

