The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Time Series Contrastive Learning with Information-Aware Augmentations
Dongsheng Luo1 , Wei Cheng2 , Yingheng Wang3 , Dongkuan Xu4 Jingchao Ni5 , Wenchao Yu2 ,
Xuchao Zhang6 , Yanchi Liu2 , Yuncong Chen2 , Haifeng Chen2 , Xiang Zhang7
1

Florida International University
2
NEC Lab America
3
Cornell University
4
North Carolina State University
5
AWS AI Labs
6
Microsoft
7
The Pennsylvania State University
dluo@fiu.edu , {weicheng,wyu,yanchi,yuncong,haifeng}@nec-labs.com, yw2349@cornell.edu, dxu27@ncsu.edu,
jingchni@amazon.com, xuchaozhang@microsoft.com, xzz89@psu.edu
Abstract

and generalization capacity. To deal with labeling limitations,
contrastive learning methods have been widely adopted in various domains for their soaring performance on representation
learning, including vision, language, and graph-structured
data (Chen et al. 2020; Xie et al. 2019; You et al. 2020). In
a nutshell, contrastive learning methods typically train an
encoder to map instances to an embedding space where dissimilar (negative) instances are easily distinguishable from
similar (positive) ones and model predictions to be invariant
to small noise applied to either input examples or hidden
states.
Despite being effective and prevalent, contrastive learning has been less explored in the time series domain (Eldele
et al. 2021; Franceschi, Dieuleveut, and Jaggi 2019; Fan,
Zhang, and Gao 2020; Tonekaboni, Eytan, and Goldenberg
2021). Existing contrastive learning approaches often involve
a specific data augmentation strategy that creates novel and
realistic-looking training data without changing its label to
construct positive alternatives for any input sample. Their
success relies on carefully designed rules of thumb guided by
domain expertise. Routinely used data augmentations for contrastive learning are mainly designed for image and language
data, such as color distortion, flip, word replacement, and
back-translation (Chen et al. 2020; Luo et al. 2021). These
augmentation techniques generally do not apply to time series data. Recently, some researchers propose augmentations
for time series to enhance the size and quality of the training data (Wen et al. 2021). For example, TS-TCC (Eldele
et al. 2021) and Self-Time (Fan, Zhang, and Gao 2020) adopt
jittering, scaling, and permutation strategies to generate augmented instances. Franceschi et.al. propose to extract subsequences for data augmentation (Franceschi, Dieuleveut, and
Jaggi 2019). In spite of the current progress, existing methods
have two main limitations. First, unlike images with human
recognizable features, time series data are often associated
with inexplicable underlying patterns. Strong augmentation
such as permutation may ruin such patterns and consequently,
the model will mistake the negative handcrafts for positive
ones. While weak augmentation methods such as jittering
may generate augmented instances that are too similar to the
raw inputs to be informative enough for contrastive learn-

Various contrastive learning approaches have been proposed in
recent years and achieve significant empirical success. While
effective and prevalent, contrastive learning has been less explored for time series data. A key component of contrastive
learning is to select appropriate augmentations imposing some
priors to construct feasible positive samples, such that an
encoder can be trained to learn robust and discriminative representations. Unlike image and language domains where “desired” augmented samples can be generated with the rule of
thumb guided by prefabricated human priors, the ad-hoc manual selection of time series augmentations is hindered by their
diverse and human-unrecognizable temporal structures. How
to find the desired augmentations of time series data that are
meaningful for given contrastive learning tasks and datasets
remains an open question. In this work, we address the problem by encouraging both high fidelity and variety based upon
information theory. A theoretical analysis leads to the criteria
for selecting feasible data augmentations. On top of that, we
propose a new contrastive learning approach with informationaware augmentations, InfoTS, that adaptively selects optimal
augmentations for time series representation learning. Experiments on various datasets show highly competitive performance with up to 12.0% reduction in MSE on forecasting
tasks and up to 3.7% relative improvement in accuracy on
classification tasks over the leading baselines.

Introduction
Time series data in the real world is highly dimensional, unstructured, and complex with unique properties, leading to
challenges for data modeling (Yang and Wu 2006). In addition, without human recognizable patterns, it is much harder
to label time series data than images and languages in realworld applications. These labeling limitations hinder deep
learning methods, which typically require a huge amount
of labeled data for training, being applied on time series
data (Eldele et al. 2021). Representation learning learns a
fixed-dimension embedding from the original time series that
keeps its inherent features. Compared to the raw time series data, these representations are with better transferability
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4534

