The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Motion-Robust Remote Photoplethysmography
through Arbitrary Resolution Videos
Jianwei Li1* , Zitong Yu2 * , Jingang Shi1†
1

School of Software Engineering,Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Great Bay University
3121158008@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, zitong.yu@ieee.org, jingang@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) enables non-contact
heart rate (HR) estimation from facial videos which gives significant convenience compared with traditional contact-based
measurements. In the real-world long-term health monitoring
scenario, the distance of the participants and their head movements usually vary by time, resulting in the inaccurate rPPG
measurement due to the varying face resolution and complex
motion artifacts. Different from the previous rPPG models
designed for a constant distance between camera and participants, in this paper, we propose two plug-and-play blocks
(i.e., physiological signal feature extraction block (PFE) and
temporal face alignment block (TFA)) to alleviate the degradation of changing distance and head motion. On one side,
guided with representative-area information, PFE adaptively
encodes the arbitrary resolution facial frames to the fixedresolution facial structure features. On the other side, leveraging the estimated optical flow, TFA is able to counteract
the rPPG signal confusion caused by the head movement
thus benefits the motion-robust rPPG signal recovery. Besides, we also train the model with a cross-resolution constraint using a two-stream dual-resolution framework, which
further helps PFE learn resolution-robust facial rPPG features. Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets
(UBFC-rPPG, COHFACE and PURE) demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed method. One highlight
is that with PFE and TFA, the off-the-shelf spatio-temporal
rPPG models can predict more robust rPPG signals under
both varying face resolution and severe head movement scenarios. The codes are available at https://github.com/LJWGIT/Arbitrary Resolution rPPG.

Figure 1: rPPG measurement from arbitrary resolution
videos with head movements. (a) The ROIs might have different spatial size and shape across the temporal dimension.
(b) Compared with the baseline PhysNet (Yu, Li, and Zhao
2019), the proposed PFE-TFA can predict more accurate
rPPG signals with the ground truth BVP signals.

users, traditional ways limit the application scenarios such
as driver status assessment and patient health monitoring.
To solve this problem, non-contact HR measurement, which
aims to measure heart activity remotely, has become an increasingly popular research problem in physiological signal
measurement in recent years.
Most existing non-contact HR measurement approaches
are based on the facial video-based remote Photoplethysmograph (rPPG) technique. The rPPG method uses digital cameras to record variations of reflected ambient light on facial
skin, which contains information on cardiovascular blood
volume and pulsation. However, the rPPG measurement
is very susceptible and vulnerable to the quality of video
recording and head motions. In the early stage, handcrafted
features based methods (Takano and Ohta 2007; Verkruysse,
Svaasand, and Nelson 2008) require an exhausted multistage process (preprocessing, filtering and post-processing)
and are with low robustness to head motions and illumination changes. Thus, they are usually tested and deployed under controlled lab environment scenarios.
With the rapid development of deep learning, neural network models have also been widely applied in the rPPG
field. Recent spatio-temporal representation map (Niu et al.

Introduction
Heart rate (HR) is an important physiological signal which
is widely used in many circumstances, especially for healthcare or medical purposes. Electrocardiography (ECG) and
Photoplethysmograph (PPG)/Blood Volume Pulse (BVP)
are the two most common methods of measuring heart activities. However, these sensors need to be attached to body
parts, limiting their usefulness and scalability. Due to the inconvenience of long-term monitoring and discomfort for the
* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1334

