The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ConvNTM: Conversational Neural Topic Model
Hongda Sun,1, * Quan Tu,1, * Jinpeng Li,2 Rui Yan1,3,†
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
3
Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, Ministry of Education
{sunhongda98, quantu}@ruc.edu.cn, lijinpeng@stu.pku.edu.cn, ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract

we assume that there are different characteristics to model
topics in different textual analysis tasks. For general topic
modeling on long documents, each document is typically
assigned a topic distribution, and words in the document
are iteratively generated based on the distribution (Blei, Ng,
and Jordan 2003; Miao, Grefenstette, and Blunsom 2017;
Dieng, Ruiz, and Blei 2020). For short-text topic modeling, since the word co-occurrence information is limited, the
sparsity problem should be considered during topic extraction (Cheng et al. 2014; Zhu, Feng, and Li 2018; Lin, Hu,
and Guo 2019). While in the conversational scenario, topic
modeling is even more complicated with the following two
unique properties to discover topics: 1) A conversation session generally consists of multiple turns of short-text utterances (Zhang et al. 2019; Adiwardana et al. 2020), which
usually follow different topic distributions (Sun, Loparo, and
Kolacinski 2020). A simple operation of utterance concatenation as a long document—which is the way of existing
NTMs—leads to the omission of dialogue structural information in topic modeling. As a matter of fact, utterances
from different turns are connected and topic distributions are
dependent across turns. 2) There are multiple roles within a
conversation session, speakers and addressees (Holtgraves,
Srull, and Socall 1989). A series of studies indicate that such
roles are essential in keeping the topic consistency and content coherence within a conversation (Kim and Vossen 2021;
Ma, Zhang, and Zhao 2021). Without the modeling of the
conversational structure with multiple roles, it is likely that
the topic discovery will be compromised due to the missing
consistency and coherence in dialogue understanding.

Topic models have been thoroughly investigated for multiple years due to their great potential in analyzing and understanding texts. Recently, researchers combine the study
of topic models with deep learning techniques, known as
Neural Topic Models (NTMs). However, existing NTMs are
mainly tested based on general document modeling without considering different textual analysis scenarios. We assume that there are different characteristics to model topics
in different textual analysis tasks. In this paper, we propose
a Conversational Neural Topic Model (ConvNTM) designed
in particular for the conversational scenario. Unlike the general document topic modeling, a conversation session lasts
for multiple turns: each short-text utterance complies with a
single topic distribution and these topic distributions are dependent across turns. Moreover, there are roles in conversations, a.k.a., speakers and addressees. Topic distributions are
partially determined by such roles in conversations. We take
these factors into account to model topics in conversations
via the multi-turn and multi-role formulation. We also leverage the word co-occurrence relationship as a new training objective to further improve topic quality. Comprehensive experimental results based on the benchmark datasets demonstrate that our proposed ConvNTM achieves the best performance both in topic modeling and in typical downstream
tasks within conversational research (i.e., dialogue act classification and dialogue response generation).

Introduction
Topic models are used to discover abstract topics in a series
of documents to understand the latent semantics of a text
corpus (Hofmann 1999; Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003). With
the recent development of neural networks and generative
models, various neural topic models (NTMs) have been proposed and applied in document classification, retrieval, semantic analysis, etc (Larochelle and Lauly 2012; Dieng et al.
2017; Zhao et al. 2021).
Most existing NTMs are designed for document analysis.
Their main modeling scenarios lie in news articles or social
platform posts (Lang 1995; Li et al. 2016), with less consideration on various other textual analysis scenarios. However,

To this end, we propose a Conversational Neural Topic
Model (ConvNTM) which is in particular designed for the
conversational scenario with the mentioned characteristics
formulated in topic modeling. Specifically, we develop a hierarchical conversation encoder to capture the multi-turn dialogue structure. A sequence encoder is utilized to model
the conversation contexts and extract utterance-level representations for the role modeling of speakers and addressees.
Then we construct a multi-role interaction graph to model
speaker/addressee information from two perspectives. On
the one hand, different roles hold personalized topic distributions and they need to integrate the intra-speaker information in their utterances to determine the current topic. All
utterances from a particular speaker should be consistent on

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13609

