The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

GAM : Gradient Attention Module of Optimization for Point Clouds Analysis
Haotian Hu1 , Fanyi Wang2 * , Zhiwang Zhang3 , Yaonong Wang1 , Laifeng Hu1 , Yanhao Zhang2
1

Zhejiang Leapmotor Technology CO., LTD.
2
OPPO Research Institute
3
The University of Sydney
{hu haotian, wang yaohong, hu laifeng}@leapmotor.com, {wangfanyi,zhangyanhao}@oppo.com,
zhiwang.zhang@sydney.edu.au
Abstract

However, existing LFAD cannot effectively distinguish
points in a point cloud neighborhood, and thus are unable to
learn finer semantic information of the point cloud. This observation motivates us to consider the attention mechanism
within a point cloud neighborhood. The previous works treat
all points in the neighborhood as equally important (Wang
et al. 2019b), or only use distance information to constrain
aggregation process (Lan et al. 2019; Thomas et al. 2019;
Ma et al. 2022), ignoring deeper geometric relationships
within the neighborhood. These operations include too much
outlier information in the local feature aggregation process
and impede the model to conform the original geometry of
the point cloud. Therefore, we propose a novel gradient attention module (GAM) that utilizes neighboring gradient information to better constrain the aggregation process of the
neighborhood features. As shown in Figure 1, with gradient information, our proposed method is enabled to predict
clearer object boundaries.
In addition, we find that the gradient calculation
method (Pauly 2003) based on the local surface fitting
method is very slow, and hinders real-time inference after
adding gradient information. To solve this problem, we propose to simplify the calculation of gradient information in
the neighborhood, by converting gradient information to an
explicit representation of the Zenith Angle and Azimuth Angle between the center point and its neighboring points. Our
proposed method can accelerate computation speed by 35
times. As shown in Figure 2, GAM is a plug-and-play module, which effectively improves the performance of baseline
methods while maintaining a similar inference speed.
Our proposed GAM is portable and can be added to previous state-of-the-art methods with a few lines of code. We
conduct experiments on 3D semantic segmentation task using S3DIS dataset (Armeni et al. 2016), 3D shape classification task using ScanObjectNN dataset (Uy et al. 2019) and
ModelNet40 dataset (Wu et al. 2015), 3D part segmentation
task using ShapeNet (Yi et al. 2016), and 3D object detection task on KITTI dataset (Geiger et al. 2013). Experiment
results demonstrate that GAM is an effective module and
applicable to a wide range of point cloud analysis tasks with
good performance improvements for various models.
The contributions of this paper are summarised as follows:

In point cloud analysis tasks, the existing local feature aggregation descriptors (LFAD) are unable to fully utilize information in the neighborhood of central points. Previous
methods rely solely on Euclidean distance to constrain the
local aggregation process, which can be easily affected by
abnormal points and cannot adequately fit with the original
geometry of the point cloud. We believe that fine-grained
geometric information (FGGI) is significant for the aggregation of local features. Therefore, we propose a gradientbased local attention module, termed as Gradient Attention
Module (GAM), to address the aforementioned problem. Our
proposed GAM simplifies the process that extracts gradient
information in the neighborhood and uses the Zenith Angle matrix and Azimuth Angle matrix as explicit representation, which accelerates the module by 35X. Comprehensive experiments were conducted on five benchmark datasets
to demonstrate the effectiveness and generalization capability of the proposed GAM for 3D point cloud analysis. Especially on S3DIS dataset (Armeni et al. 2016), GAM achieves
the best performance among current point-based models with
mIoU/OA/mAcc of 74.4%/90.6%/83.2%, respectively.

Introduction
In recent years, point cloud analysis has become a hot topic
in academia and industry due to the rapid development of
autonomous driving and indoor robotics. Considering that
point cloud is unordered, sparse, and irregular, traditional
methods for 2D image processing cannot be directly applied to point clouds. PointNet (Qi et al. 2017a) is a pioneering work that uses Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) to
learn point features independently. Qi et al. proposed PointNet++ (Qi et al. 2017b), which introduces local features
to point cloud analysis models for further performance improvement of point cloud analysis models. Recent works
present some promising results, using convolutional layers
(Boulch 2020; Thomas et al. 2019; Xiang et al. 2021), graph
structures (Wang et al. 2019b; Xu et al. 2020), MLP (Ma
et al. 2022), or attention mechanisms (Guo et al. 2021; Zhao
et al. 2021) for point cloud analysis. Among them, local feature aggregation descriptors (LFAD) play an important role.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a lightweight and efficient gradient attentive
835

