The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SAH: Shifting-Aware Asymmetric Hashing for Reverse k Maximum Inner
Product Search
Qiang Huang1 , Yanhao Wang2 * , Anthony K. H. Tung1
1

2

School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
School of Data Science and Engineering, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
huangq@comp.nus.edu.sg, yhwang@dase.ecnu.edu.cn, atung@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

the search performance (Ram and Gray 2012; Koenigstein,
Ram, and Shavitt 2012; Keivani, Sinha, and Ram 2018;
Teflioudi and Gemulla 2017; Li et al. 2017; Abuzaid et al.
2019; Shrivastava and Li 2014; Neyshabur and Srebro 2015;
Shrivastava and Li 2015; Huang et al. 2018; Yan et al. 2018;
Ballard et al. 2015; Yu et al. 2017; Ding, Yu, and Hsieh
2019; Lorenzen and Pham 2020; Pham 2021; Shen et al.
2015; Guo et al. 2016; Dai et al. 2020; Xiang et al. 2021;
Morozov and Babenko 2018; Tan et al. 2019; Zhou et al.
2019; Liu et al. 2020; Tan et al. 2021).
In this paper, we investigate a problem relevant to kMIPS
yet less explored: how to find the users who are possibly interested in a given item? This problem is essential for market analysis from a reverse perspective, i.e., the perspective
of service providers instead of users. For example, when
an e-commerce service promotes a discounted product or
launches a new product, a vital issue for designing an effective advertising campaign is identifying the customers
who may want to buy this product. In this case, the kMIPS
might not be beneficial in finding potential customers: It can
be leveraged to find k user vectors having the largest inner
products with the item vector. Still, these users might not be
the target customers for the item if they are more interested
in many other items than it. A more suitable formulation is
to find the set of users for whom a query item is included in
their kMIPS results, called Reverse k-Maximum Inner Product Search (RkMIPS). Formally,
Definition 1 (RkMIPS (Amagata and Hara 2021)). Given
an integer k (k ≥ 1), a query (item) vector q ∈ Rd , a set of
n item vectors P ⊂ Rd , and a set of m user vectors U ⊂ Rd ,
the RkMIPS problem finds every user vector u ∈ U such that
q belongs to the kMIPS results of u among P ∪ {q}.
Compared with the kMIPS, the problem of RkMIPS is
much more challenging. The reasons are two folds. First, the
sizes of its result sets vary among query vectors rather than
being a fixed k. In the worst case, all m users can be included
in the RkMIPS results of a query q. Second, the number of
items and users is typically large in real-world recommender
systems. A trivial approach is performing a linear scan over
all items in P ∪ {q} for each user u ∈ U and adding u to
the RkMIPS results of q once q is included in the kMIPS
results of u. For simplicity, we assume m = O(n), i.e., n
and m are of the same magnitude. This trivial approach takes
O(n2 d) time, which is much higher than the time complex-

This paper investigates a new yet challenging problem called
Reverse k-Maximum Inner Product Search (RkMIPS). Given
a query (item) vector, a set of item vectors, and a set of
user vectors, the problem of RkMIPS aims to find a set of
user vectors whose inner products with the query vector are
one of the k largest among the query and item vectors. We
propose the first subquadratic-time algorithm, i.e., Shiftingaware Asymmetric Hashing (SAH), to tackle the RkMIPS
problem. To speed up the Maximum Inner Product Search
(MIPS) on item vectors, we design a shifting-invariant asymmetric transformation and develop a novel sublinear-time
Shifting-Aware Asymmetric Locality Sensitive Hashing (SAALSH) scheme. Furthermore, we devise a new blocking strategy based on the Cone-Tree to effectively prune user vectors (in a batch). We prove that SAH achieves a theoretical
guarantee for solving the RMIPS problem. Experimental results on five real-world datasets show that SAH runs 4∼8×
faster than the state-of-the-art methods for RkMIPS while
achieving F1-scores of over 90%. The code is available at
https://github.com/HuangQiang/SAH.

Introduction
Recommender systems based on Matrix Factorization (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009) (MF) and Deep Matrix Factorization (Xue et al. 2017) (DMF) models have been prevalent over the last two decades due to their precisely predictive accuracy, superior scalability, and high flexibility in various real-world scenarios. In MF and DMF models, users
and items are represented as vectors in a d-dimensional Euclidean space Rd obtained from a user-item rating matrix.
The relevance (or interestingness) of an item to a user is usually measured by the inner product of their representing vectors. This naturally gives rise to the Maximum Inner Product
Search (MIPS) problem, which finds the vector in a set of n
item vectors P ⊂ Rd that has the largest inner product with
a query (user) vector q ∈ Rd , i.e., p∗ = arg maxp∈P ⟨p, q⟩,
as well as its extension kMIPS that finds k (k > 1) vectors with the largest inner products for recommending items
to users. Due to its prominence in recommender systems,
the kMIPS problem has attracted significant research interests, and numerous methods have been proposed to improve
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4312

