The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Optimal Pricing Schemes for Identical Items with Time-Sensitive Buyers
Zhengyang Liu1 , Liang Shan2 , Zihe Wang2 *
1

Beijing Institute of Technology
Renmin University of China
zhengyang@bit.edu.cn, shanliang@ruc.edu.cn, wang.zihe@ruc.edu.cn
2

Abstract

online shopping platform tends to keep customers spending
as long time as possible by designing complicated schemes
requiring customers to spend a lot of effort to get the discount vouchers (Chen and Li 2021). The case makes the customer trapped by the time vs. money dilemma. They either
devote time effort following the rules of the platform to get
the discount voucher or take the item directly, without any
discount.
In this paper, we try to understand the customers’ tradeoff between time and money in the view of sellers. We consider the optimal dynamic pricing scheme for heterogeneous
unit-demand customers. In our setting, a single seller tries
to sell identical items with unlimited supply to unit-demand
buyers. To attract more potential customers and attain more
revenue, the seller designs many complicated promotions.
The rules of these promotions are not easy to understand or
you need wait for the starting time of the promotions, so one
needs spending time on the vouchers. For convenience, we
assume that if a buyer spends time t on her purchase, the
price should be deterministic, say p(t), where p : R → R
is the pricing function set by the seller. The objective of the
seller is to come up with a pricing scheme seeking to maximize the revenue. Each buyer has her own CPUT (Cost Per
Unit Time), denoted by θ, and the valuation to the item, denoted by v. A buyer tends to buy the item if the condition
mint {θt + p(t)} ≤ v is satisfied. The seller’s revenue is
p(t), where t is the time spent by the buyer.
In this paper, we introduce the pricing scheme problem
with time-sensitive buyers and make a few contributions:
• We formulate the pricing scheme problem in our setting as an optimization problem in a Bayesian way. We
then propose a polynomial algorithm to find the optimal
scheme in the discrete distribution setting. To handle the
continuous distribution setting, we can discretize the distributions and reduce to the problem with the discrete
distribution. We give an upper bound of the revenue loss
caused by this discretization. We also show that the calculus method is not applicable if the continuous distribution is not good enough.
• We consider the revenue change and measure the value of
wasted time in our pricing scheme. We show a tight ratio
between the performance of the optimal k-step pricing
scheme and the fixed pricing scheme in terms of the revenue. We show the value of wasted time could far out-

Time or money? That is a question! In this paper, we consider
this dilemma in the pricing regime, in which we try to find the
optimal pricing scheme for identical items with heterogenous
time-sensitive buyers. We characterize the revenue-optimal
solution and propose an efficient algorithm to find it in a
Bayesian setting. Our results also demonstrate the tight ratio
between the value of wasted time and the seller’s revenue, as
well as that of two common-used pricing schemes, the k-step
function and the fixed pricing. To explore the nature of the
optimal scheme in the general setting, we present the closed
forms over the product distribution and show by examples
that positive correlation between the valuation of the item and
the cost per unit time could help increase revenue. To the best
of our knowledge, it is the first step towards understanding
the impact of the time factor as a part of the buyer cost in
pricing problems, in the computational view.

Introduction
The Time vs. Money dilemma exists for everyone in our life.
When buying durable, more or less expensive, one may wait
for the discount activities or choose the lowest price by visiting various stores. However, the valuation of time differs, the
higher buyer’s valuation of time is, the less time she wants
to waste on the deal. Another scenario in the real world is
the online in-app purchase. In the App Store or Google Play,
many applications charge in their apps to promote the efficiency of the service or the user experience. They often
prepare other ways for users to implement similar functionalities or finish the same jobs by putting more effort. For
example, a platform could set different limits on the speed
of data transmission. Once we can distinguish the CPUTs
(Cost Per Unit Time) of various agents, one can design more
reasonable pricing schemes, that is “lose the money, or lose
the time”.
From the sellers’ perspective, they can leverage the buyers’ sensitiveness for time or money to gain more revenue.
We illustrate the “Double 11”, the biggest online shopping
festival in the world, as an example. The shopping festival has already become the world’s largest shopping festival
since 2015 (Chen 2016). During the shopping period, the
* Zihe Wang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5773

