The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

T2G-F ORMER: Organizing Tabular Features into Relation Graphs Promotes
Heterogeneous Feature Interaction
Jiahuan Yan1 * , Jintai Chen1 * , Yixuan Wu2 , Danny Z. Chen3 , Jian Wu4†
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
4
The First Affiliated Hospital, and Department of Public Health, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China
jyansir@zju.edu.cn, jtchen721@gmail.com, wyx chloe@zju.edu.cn, dchen@nd.edu, wujian2000@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

Liao et al. 2022). Such studies either leveraged ensembling
of neural networks (Popov, Morozov, and Babenko 2019;
Arik and Pfister 2021; Katzir, Elidan, and El-Yaniv 2020)
to build differentiable tree models, or explored diverse interaction approaches (Guo, Tang et al. 2017; Wang, Fu et al.
2017; Song et al. 2019; Wang, Shivanna et al. 2021; Gorishniy, Rubachev et al. 2021; Chen, Liao et al. 2022) to learn
comprehensive features by fusing different tabular features.
However, different from images and texts, it is challenging for fusion-based models to handle tabular feature interaction due to the feature heterogeneity problem (Borisov
et al. 2021). DANets (Chen, Liao et al. 2022) suggested
the “selection & abstraction” principle that processes tabular data by first selecting and then interacting the selected
features. Known neural feature selection schemes can be
categorized into soft and hard versions. The soft selection
essentially exerts fully connected interactions among features (see Fig. 1(b)), such as multiplicative interaction (Guo,
Tang et al. 2017), feature crossing (Wang, Fu et al. 2017;
Wang, Shivanna et al. 2021), and attention-based interaction (Song et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2020; Gorishniy,
Rubachev et al. 2021). However, tabular features by nature
are heterogeneous, and fully connected interaction is a suboptimal choice since it blindly fuses all features together.
DANets (Chen, Liao et al. 2022) performed hard selection by grouping correlative features and then constraining
interactions among grouped features (Fig.1(c)). Although
DANets achieved promising results, its feature selection operation cannot thoroughly address intra-group interactions
(see Fig. 1(c)), and thus features assigned in a same group
are indiscriminately fused, making the model inferiorly expressive.
There are numerous daily applications that exemplify the
significance of selective interaction for heterogeneous tabular features. The left part of Fig. 1 gives an example of a
medical data table. Using underlying medical knowledge, a
static graph can be formed to indicate relations of reasonable feature pairs. For instance, the relation of height and
weight gives a probability representing a high-level semantic physique. Also, the relation between weight and blood
pressure (BP) is likely to indicate a semantic cardiovascular
health. Besides, there might be some “inert features” that
are unrelated to any other features, such as the features rep-

Recent development of deep neural networks (DNNs) for
tabular learning has largely benefited from the capability of
DNNs for automatic feature interaction. However, the heterogeneity nature of tabular features makes such features relatively independent, and developing effective methods to promote tabular feature interaction still remains an open problem. In this paper, we propose a novel Graph Estimator,
which automatically estimates the relations among tabular
features and builds graphs by assigning edges between related features. Such relation graphs organize independent
tabular features into a kind of graph data such that interaction of nodes (tabular features) can be conducted in an
orderly fashion. Based on our proposed Graph Estimator,
we present a bespoke Transformer network tailored for tabular learning, called T2G-F ORMER, which processes tabular data by performing tabular feature interaction guided
by the relation graphs. A specific Cross-level Readout collects salient features predicted by the layers in T2G-F ORMER
across different levels, and attains global semantics for final prediction. Comprehensive experiments show that our
T2G-F ORMER achieves superior performance among DNNs
and is competitive with non-deep Gradient Boosted Decision
Tree models. The code and detailed results are available at
https://github.com/jyansir/t2g-former.

Introduction
Data in the form of table structures are ubiquitous in many
fields, e.g., medical records (Johnson, Pollard et al. 2016;
Hassan, Al-Insaif et al. 2020) and click-through rate (CTR)
prediction (Covington, Adams, and Sargin 2016; Song et al.
2019). It was observed that Gradient Boosted Decision Trees
(GBDT) (Chen and Guestrin 2016; Ke, Meng et al. 2017;
Prokhorenkova, Gusev et al. 2018) were dominating models for tabular data tasks in machine learning and industrial
applications. Due to big successes of deep neural networks
(DNNs) in various fields, there has been increasing development of specialized DNNs for tabular data learning (Popov,
Morozov, and Babenko 2019; Arik and Pfister 2021; Wang,
Shivanna et al. 2021; Gorishniy, Rubachev et al. 2021; Chen,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10720

