The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Incentive-Boosted Federated Crowdsourcing
Xiangping Kang1 , Guoxian Yu1,2, * , Jun Wang2 , Wei Guo2 , Carlotta Domeniconi3 , Jinglin Zhang4
1
School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
SDU-NTU Joint Centre for AI Research, Shandong University, Jinan, China
3
Department of Computer Science, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA
4
School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan, China
x.p.kang@mail.sdu.edu.cn, {gxyu, kingjun, guowei, jinglin.zhang}@sdu.edu.cn, carlotta@cs.gmu.edu
2

Abstract

protection techniques usually achieve privacy preservation
through injecting imprecision, such as cloaking (Pournajaf
et al. 2014; Zhai et al. 2019), inaccuracy (e.g., local differential privacy (Wang et al. 2016, 2018)) to perturb crowd workers’ sensitive information (Wang, Yu, and Han 2020). Nevertheless, these techniques would inevitably lead to qualityloss crowdsourcing as they need to modify the original data.
To solve the above challenge, the federated learning (FL)
paradigm is proposed (McMahan et al. 2017). FL enables
distributed computing nodes to collaboratively train models
without exposing their sensitive data, thus realizing privacypreserving model training with little loss (or even no loss) of
model performance (Wang, Yu, and Han 2020; Yang et al.
2019). The crowdsourcing system typically outsources data
collection tasks to Internet workers and then aggregates and
analyzes the sensing data (Capponi et al. 2019; Gummidi,
Xie, and Pedersen 2019; Tu et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2020a).
Nevertheless, the centralized platform is generally untrusted
and may leak workers’ private information. With the prevalence of mobile devices with increasing computation power
(e.g., laptops and cell phones) and advanced network infrastructure (e.g., 5G), we can directly outsource data processing
tasks instead of data collecting tasks to participants within
the FL framework. Consequently, the collected data that involves private information can be kept locally without being
exposed to other workers and the server. The significance
in the lens of federated crowdsourcing has been well recognized (Tong, Wang, and Shi 2020; Wang, Yu, and Han 2020;
Pandey et al. 2020).
Although FL has shown great advantages in privacypreserving crowdsourcing, it still faces an open challenge
that how to incentive clients to participate in the FL by contributing their computational/communication resource and
data (Zhan et al. 2021). Clients may be reluctant to perform
local training and share their model updates without sufficient compensation. Moreover, although FL does not require
participants to upload their raw data to the remote server,
the malicious attackers and the curious server may still infer
the private information of training data from the intermediate model parameters and gradients (Song, Ristenpart, and
Shmatikov 2017). Such security risks and potential threats
aggravate the reluctance of client participation (Song et al.
2020). On the other hand, sufficient rewards can motivate
them to tolerate these risks and make contributions. In addi-

Crowdsourcing is a favorable computing paradigm for processing computer-hard tasks by harnessing human intelligence. However, generic crowdsourcing systems may lead
to privacy-leakage through the sharing of worker data. To
tackle this problem, we propose a novel approach, called
iFedCrowd (incentive-boosted Federated Crowdsourcing),
to manage the privacy and quality of crowdsourcing projects.
iFedCrowd allows participants to locally process sensitive
data and only upload encrypted training models, and then aggregates the model parameters to build a shared server model
to protect data privacy. To motivate workers to build a highquality global model in an efficacy way, we introduce an incentive mechanism that encourages workers to constantly collect fresh data to train accurate client models and boosts the
global model training. We model the incentive-based interaction between the crowdsourcing platform and participating
workers as a Stackelberg game, in which each side maximizes
its own profit. We derive the Nash Equilibrium of the game
to find the optimal solutions for the two sides. Experimental
results confirm that iFedCrowd can complete secure crowdsourcing projects with high quality and efficiency.

Introduction
Crowdsourcing becomes increasingly popular in recent
decades which coordinates the Internet workers to do microtasks so as to solve computer-hard problems (e.g., image annotation, answering database-hard queries (Fan et al. 2015;
Tong et al. 2020; Kang et al. 2021)). Moreover, the development of crowdsourcing platforms, such as Amazon Mechanical Turk1 , CrowdFlower2 and Baidu Test3 , makes it more
convenient to get crowdsourced data by recruiting broad
workers. However, prior researches have found that the submitted data can reveal crowd workers’ private information,
such as locations, vocal prints, face images and even business secrets (Tong, Wang, and Shi 2020; Zhao, Liu, and
Chen 2021). With the increasing concerns and regulations
on data security and personal privacy, data privacy in crowdsourcing is getting more and more vital. State-of-the-art
* Corresponding author: Guoxian Yu.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.mturk.com/
2
http://www.crowdflower.com/
3
https://test.baidu.com/

6021

