The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Estimating Reflectance Layer from a Single Image: Integrating Reflectance
Guidance and Shadow/Specular Aware Learning
Yeying Jin1 , Ruoteng Li1,2 , Wenhan Yang3 , Robby T. Tan1,4
1

National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
ByteDance, Singapore
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
4
Yale-NUS College, Singapore
jinyeying@u.nus.edu, liruoteng@u.nus.edu, yangwh@pcl.ac.cn, robby.tan@nus.edu.sg
Abstract
Estimating the reflectance layer from a single image is a challenging task. It becomes more challenging when the input
image contains shadows or specular highlights, which often
render an inaccurate estimate of the reflectance layer. Therefore, we propose a two-stage learning method, including reflectance guidance and a Shadow/Specular-Aware (S-Aware)
network to tackle the problem. In the first stage, an initial
reflectance layer free from shadows and specularities is obtained with the constraint of novel losses that are guided by
prior-based shadow-free and specular-free images. To further
enforce the reflectance layer to be independent of shadows
and specularities in the second-stage refinement, we introduce an S-Aware network that distinguishes the reflectance
image from the input image. Our network employs a classifier to categorize shadow/shadow-free, specular/specular-free
classes, enabling the activation features to function as attention maps that focus on shadow/specular regions. Our quantitative and qualitative evaluations show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in the reflectance layer
estimation that is free from shadows and specularities.

Input

Ours

Ground Truth

PIENet (2022)

Input

Ours

UID (2021)

PIENet (2022)

Figure 1. Comparison between our results and the stateof-the-art methods UIDNet (Zhang et al. 2021) and
PIENet (Das, Karaoglu, and Gevers 2022). Unlike existing methods, our method estimates the reflectance layer free
from shadows and specularities.

Among these methods, only few consider shadows (Baslamisli et al. 2021a,b) and specular highlights (Yi,
Tan, and Lin 2020). However, they suffer from a few drawbacks. First, most of them are trained only on synthesized
datasets, and thus their accuracy depends heavily on the
quality of the synthesized data. Second, while these methods
work well in some cases, they tend to fail in handling large
shadow or specular regions, as shown in Fig. 1. Third, most
of these methods assume that reflectance changes cause
abrupt image intensity changes, while shading changes
cause smooth image intensity changes (Land and McCann
1971). However, shadows, which should belong to the
shading layer, can also cause abrupt intensity changes in the
real world, which goes against this assumption.
In this paper, our goal is to decompose a diffuse reflectance layer that is free from shadows and specularities.
To achieve this, we introduce a two-stage network based
on reflectance guidance and a Shadow/Specular-Aware (SAware) network. The first stage is to obtain an initial diffuse reflectance layer free from shadows and specularities.
To achieve this, we introduce novel losses constrained by
prior-based shadow-free (Finlayson, Drew, and Lu 2004)
and specular-free images (Tan and Ikeuchi 2005).

Introduction
Reflectance layer estimation is a fundamental task in computer vision. It is a part of intrinsic image decomposition,
which decomposes an input image into the reflectance layer
and the shading layer (Barrow et al. 1978). The reflectance
layer provides useful information for real-world applications, e.g., surface retexturing (Garces et al. 2012), relighting (Liu et al. 2020a), object compositing (Bi, Han, and
Yu 2015). Unfortunately, reflectance layer estimation from
a single image is an inherently ill-posed problem.
Several methods have been proposed to deal with the
problem. Non-deep learning methods e.g., (Bell, Bala, and
Snavely 2014) impose priors on the estimated reflectance
layer. Supervised learning methods e.g., (Das, Karaoglu,
and Gevers 2022), while effective, still suffer from problems, particularly those related to shadows and specularities.
Some existing unsupervised learning methods learn from
time-lapse data (Li and Snavely 2018b; Liu et al. 2020a),
multi-view data (Yi, Tan, and Lin 2020) or sets of unpaired
images (Liu et al. 2020b).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1069

