The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Quantum-Inspired Representation for Long-Tail Senses of
Word Sense Disambiguation
Junwei Zhang1 , Ruifang He1* , Fengyu Guo2
1

Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cognitive Computing and Application,
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China.
2
College of Computer and Information Engineering, Tianjin Normal University, Tianjin, China.
junwei@tju.edu.cn, rfhe@tju.edu.cn, fyguo@tjnu.edu.cn
Abstract

training samples to complete effective feature representation, and then obtain correct recognition (Aliwy and Taher
2019; Bevilacqua et al. 2021).
Researchers employ data augmentation methods, such as
oversampling (Fujii et al. 1998), data synthesis (Bolshina
and Loukachevitch 2020), multilingualism (Scarlini, Pasini,
and Navigli 2020a), etc., to improve the disadvantaged position of LTSs. These methods are not universally effective
and destroy the statistical laws inherent in the data. Methods of changing learning strategies have also been extensively studied, such as transfer learning (Kohli 2021), metalearning (Holla et al. 2020), few-shot learning (Kumar et al.
2019), etc.
Kumar et al. (Kumar et al. 2019) adjusted the discrete label space often used in the WSD task into a continuous sense
embedding space, resulting in state-of-the-art performance
in experiments. The success of this scheme is not only because the sense embeddings replace the original labels, but
also more importantly because the continuous space constraint helps to obtain correct sense representations. Compared with the Euclidean space without constraints, continuous space constraints can compress the range of parameter
values and reduce the number of parameters.
Considering that quantum states are constructed in Hilbert
space, it naturally has the advantage of continuous space
constraints. In addition, considering that many new quantum
states, that is, superposition states (Nielsen and Chuang
2002), can be constructed from several known quantum
states in quantum mechanics, the concept of superposition
states provides the possibility to obtain more accurate representations from inferior representations learned from small
sample sizes. In this article, we leverage quantum states to
describe representations learned from insufficient training
samples, and further obtain more accurate representations
in their quantum state form by constructing superposition
states.
In quantum mechanics, quantum states, including superposition states, are points on the sphere of Hilbert space (the
special case of entangled states is not discussed here), so
the representations described by quantum states have the advantage of continuous space constraints. Furthermore, learning the representations does not require adding additional
parameters. Because building a superposition state requires
an additional parameter, the continuous space constraint can

Data imbalance, also known as the long-tail distribution of
data, is an important challenge for data-driven models. In
the Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) task, the long-tail
phenomenon of word sense distribution is more common,
making it difficult to effectively represent and identify LongTail Senses (LTSs). Therefore exploring representation methods that do not rely heavily on the training sample size is
an important way to combat LTSs. Considering that many
new states, namely superposition states, can be constructed
from several known states in quantum mechanics, superposition states provide the possibility to obtain more accurate
representations from inferior representations learned from a
small sample size. Inspired by quantum superposition states,
a representation method in Hilbert space is proposed to reduce the dependence on large sample sizes and thus combat
LTSs. We theoretically prove the correctness of the method,
and verify its effectiveness under the standard WSD evaluation framework and obtain state-of-the-art performance. Furthermore, we also test on the constructed LTS and the latest
cross-lingual datasets, and achieve promising results.

Introduction
Data imbalance is very common in the field of data mining (Abd Elrahman and Abraham 2013). For real data, the
sample sizes of different categories are generally not uniform distributions, but unbalanced, such as the most common long-tailed distribution. Large datasets often exhibit
such a long tail phenomenon (Yang and Xu 2020). For datadriven models, data imbalance directly leads to difficulty
in obtaining effective representation and recognition for tail
categories (Ntoutsi, Fafalios, and Gadiraju 2020).
Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) is to determine the
word sense of the target word according to the given context, which belongs to the basic research topic in natural
language processing (Bevilacqua et al. 2021; Navigli 2009).
But for high-level tasks based on natural language understanding, an accurate identification of word senses at the lexical level can effectively improve the overall performance.
Due to the long-tail phenomenon of word sense distribution
in linguistics, the Long-Tailed Senses (LTSs) lack sufficient
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13949

