The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

UniSyn: An End-to-End Unified Model for Text-to-Speech and Singing Voice
Synthesis
Yi Lei1 , Shan Yang2 , Xinsheng Wang1 , Qicong Xie1 , Jixun Yao1 , Lei Xie1 * , Dan Su2
1

Audio, Speech and Language Processing Group (ASLP@NPU), School of Computer Science,
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, China
leiyi@npu-aslp.org, {xieqicong, yaojx}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, lxie@nwpu.edu.cn,
w.xinshawn@gmail.com, {shaanyang, dansu}@tencent.com
Abstract

singing voice recorded by different persons, e.g., it is nontrivial to build a singing corpus for a person who is not good
at singing. While the multi-task cascaded system consisting
of TTS and singing voice conversion (SVC) (Zhang et al.
2020; Guo et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2021c) models can achieve
this goal, it leads to a complex pipeline and inflexible generation depending on reference audio.
Both TTS and SVS share a similar pipeline that generates
vocal voices from abstract information, i.e., textual input or
musical scores, thus making it intuitively reasonable to realize the SVS and TTS tasks with a unified model that enables
a target speaker timbre to speak and sing with the absence
of speech or singing data. However, several challenges will
rise to unify TTS and SVS into one model. First, as the important input information, musical scores in the SVS task
are quite different from the textual input in the TTS task.
Second, although both speaking and singing voices are generated from the same vocal articulation system, the acoustic outcomes have substantial differences in both timbre and
prosodic aspects. Third, the speaker timbre and style (i.e.
speak and sing) of source audio are heavily entangled. When
only one style from each person is accessible in the training
phase, this entanglement tends to result in the timbre leakage issue (Lee et al. 2020; Xue et al. 2021), which means the
synthesized singing voice sounds like the timbre that provides the singing training data rather than the target speaker
that only has speech training data and vice versa. Due to
these challenges, previous efforts to build the unified TTS
and SVS model did not obey the typical pipeline but utilized the explicit features (e.g. pitch contour and rhythm)
extracted from the waveform as input to generate the desired
speaking or singing voice for the target speaker timbre (Valle
et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Xue et al. 2021). However, the
reference signals are always essential for providing explicit
features at inference time. Therefore, the generated singing
voice relies on the reference and cannot synthesize arbitrary
songs, which reduces the flexibility in practical applications.
In this paper, we develop UniSyn, which is an end-to-end
unified system for both speech and singing voice synthesis with only speaking or singing data from each person.
UniSyn consists of three components: 1) a variational autoencoder to encode the waveform into a latent space, 2) a
prior model to estimate the latent distribution from the input

Text-to-speech (TTS) and singing voice synthesis (SVS) aim
at generating high-quality speaking and singing voice according to textual input and music scores, respectively. Unifying
TTS and SVS into a single system is crucial to the applications requiring both of them. Existing methods usually suffer from some limitations, which rely on either both singing
and speaking data from the same person or cascaded models of multiple tasks. To address these problems, a simplified elegant framework for TTS and SVS, named UniSyn,
is proposed in this paper. It is an end-to-end unified model
that can make a voice speak and sing with only singing
or speaking data from this person. To be specific, a multiconditional variational autoencoder (MC-VAE), which constructs two independent latent sub-spaces with the speakerand style-related (i.e. speak or sing) conditions for flexible
control, is proposed in UniSyn. Moreover, supervised guidedVAE and timbre perturbation with the Wasserstein distance
constraint are leveraged to further disentangle the speaker
timbre and style. Experiments conducted on two speakers
and two singers demonstrate that UniSyn can generate natural speaking and singing voice without corresponding training
data. The proposed approach outperforms the state-of-the-art
end-to-end voice generation work, which proves the effectiveness and advantages of UniSyn.

Introduction
Recent advances in text-to-speech (TTS) (Ren et al. 2019;
Wang et al. 2017; Li et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2021; Liu et al.
2021a; Jeong et al. 2021; Weiss et al. 2021) and singing
voice synthesis (SVS) (Nishimura et al. 2016; Kim et al.
2018; Blaauw and Bonada 2020; Liu et al. 2022; Gu et al.
2021; Lu et al. 2020; Ren et al. 2020) have greatly improved the quality and naturalness of the generated speech
and singing voices, which results in the widespread applications of TTS and SVS. The increasing requirements in realworld applications necessitate the ability for versatile voices
that can not only speak but also sing. Intuitively, training
such a system needs high-quality speech and singing voice
from the same speaker. However, obtaining such a corpus
is more difficult than the corpus consisting of speaking and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13025

