The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Planning with Hidden Parameter Polynomial MDPs
Clarissa Costen, Marc Rigter, Bruno Lacerda, Nick Hawes
Oxford Robotics Institute, University of Oxford
{clarissa, mrigter, bruno, nickh}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
For many applications of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs),
the transition function cannot be specified exactly. BayesAdaptive MDPs (BAMDPs) extend MDPs to consider transition probabilities governed by latent parameters. To act optimally in BAMDPs, one must maintain a belief distribution
over the latent parameters. Typically, this distribution is described by a set of sample (particle) MDPs, and associated
weights which represent the likelihood of a sample MDP being
the true underlying MDP. However, as the number of dimensions of the latent parameter space increases, the number of
sample MDPs required to sufficiently represent the belief distribution grows exponentially. Thus, maintaining an accurate
belief in the form of a set of sample MDPs over complex latent
spaces is computationally intensive, which in turn affects the
performance of planning for these models. In this paper, we
propose an alternative approach for maintaining the belief over
the latent parameters. We consider a class of BAMDPs where
the transition probabilities can be expressed in closed form as
a polynomial of the latent parameters, and outline a method
to maintain a closed-form belief distribution for the latent
parameters which results in an accurate belief representation.
Furthermore, the closed-form representation does away with
the need to tune the number of sample MDPs required to represent the belief. We evaluate two domains and empirically show
that the polynomial, closed-form, belief representation results
in better plans than a sampling-based belief representation.

Introduction
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) (Puterman 1994) are a
common framework for sequential decision-making under
uncertainty. In this paper, we consider an agent acting in
an environment where the parameters governing the underlying MDP model are unknown. In such environments, the
agent must reason over the uncertainty in the parameters,
and balance exploration of the environment with gathering
reward. An example of this is a robot planning over a domain
with unknown weather conditions. As the robot interacts
with the environment, the observations made by the robot
can be used by it to plan for future steps. Bayes-Adaptive
MDPs (BAMDPs) (Duff 2002) are used to model such problems in a way that allows for optimally trading off exploration
and exploitation.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11963

In BAMDPs, latent parameters are used to represent unknown dynamics that influence the transition probabilities.
Therefore, the state space of the original MDP is augmented
by a posterior distribution which represents the belief over
the true value of the latent parameters. As transitions are
observed, the posterior distribution over the latent parameters is refined. By reasoning about the information currently
known about the MDP in the form of the posterior, BAMDPs
provide an elegant and optimal solution to the explorationexploitation trade-off. Specifically, solving the BAMDP optimally results in the optimal behaviour in expectation under
the initial belief. One challenge in developing algorithms for
BAMDPs is the need to accurately maintain the posterior.
There are several methods to do so, depending on the class
of BAMDP needed to be solved.
In a BAMDP where every transition probability is independent, each transition probability is a latent parameter. The
posterior distribution over the latent parameters is represented
by a set of Dirichlet distributions, where each distribution represents the transition function from a state-action pair. This
allows us to maintain an exact closed-form representation of
the posterior distribution. However, for many problems, the
transitions cannot be assumed to be independent of each other.
In such problems, the posterior distribution of the BAMDP
can be approximated by a discrete set of particles, i.e. a set
of sampled MDPs plus a categorical distribution over the
samples (Guez et al. 2014). This method relies on the MDP
samples providing adequate coverage of the space of possible
parameters. As the number of latent parameters increases,
so does the dimensionality of the belief distribution over the
parameters. Thus, the number of samples must increase exponentially to represent the posterior over the belief accurately.
This causes scalability issues, which in turn limits the ability
to effectively plan for BAMDPs with realistic latent spaces.
In this paper, we present a new class of BAMDPs, hidden
parameter polynomial MDPs (HP2 -MDP). In a HP2 -MDP,
the transition probabilities are defined by polynomial functions of the latent parameters. MDPs where the transitions are
described by polynomial functions are traditionally used in
probabilistic model checking for parameter synthesis, where
the variables of the polynomials are assumed to be known and
controllable (Junges et al. 2018). We re-frame these models
such that the variables represent latent aspects of the environment that can be estimated during execution. This allows

