The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Supervised Primal-Dual Learning for Constrained Optimization
Seonho Park, Pascal Van Hentenryck
H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial & Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
seonho.park@gatech.edu, pascal.vanhentenryck@isye.gatech.edu

Abstract

of an optimization problem. This approach has raised significant interest in recent years, especially in power systems.
Supervised machine learning has been the most prominent
approach to tackling these problems (e.g., (Zamzam and
Baker 2020; Fioretto, Mak, and Van Hentenryck 2020; Chatzos, Mak, and Van Hentenryck 2021; Kotary, Fioretto, and
Van Hentenryck 2021; Chatzos et al. 2020; Kotary, Fioretto,
and Van Hentenryck 2022; Chen et al. 2022)). Moreover,
to balance feasibility and optimality, existing methods may
perform a Lagrangian relaxation of the constraints. Supervised learning relies on a collection of pre-solved instances
usually obtained through historical data and data generation.
These supervised methods have achieved promising results on a variety of problems. They also have some limitations including the need to generate the instance data which
is often a time-consuming and resource-intensive process.
Moreover, the data generation is often subtle as optimization
problems may admit multiple solutions and exhibit many
symmetries. As a result, the data generation must be orchestrated carefully to simplify the learning process (Kotary, Fioretto, and Van Hentenryck 2021). Recently, Donti,
Rolnick, and Kolter (2021) have proposed a self-supervised
learning method, called DC3, that addresses these limitations: it bypasses the data generation process by training the
machine-learning model with a loss function that captures
the objective function and constraints simultaneously.
Existing approaches are also primal methods: they learn
a network to predict the values of the decision variables. As
a result, the constraint multipliers they use to balance feasibility and optimality are not instance-specific: they are aggregated for each constraint over all the instances. This aggregation limits the capability of the learning method to ensure feasibility. For these reasons, dedicated procedures have
been proposed to restore feasibility in a post-processing step
(e.g., (Zamzam and Baker 2020; Velloso and Van Hentenryck 2021; Chen et al. 2021a; Fioretto, Mak, and Van Hentenryck 2020)). This repair process however may lead to
sub-optimal solutions.
This paper is an attempt to address these limitations for
some classes of applications. It proposes Primal-Dual Learning (PDL), a self-supervised primal-dual learning method to
approximate the input/output mapping of a constrained optimization problem. Being a self-supervised method, PDL
does not rely on a set of pre-solved instances. Moreover, be-

This paper studies how to train machine-learning models that
directly approximate the optimal solutions of constrained optimization problems. This is an empirical risk minimization
under constraints, which is challenging as training must balance optimality and feasibility conditions. Supervised learning methods often approach this challenge by training the
model on a large collection of pre-solved instances. This paper takes a different route and proposes the idea of PrimalDual Learning (PDL), a self-supervised training method that
does not require a set of pre-solved instances or an optimization solver for training and inference. Instead, PDL mimics
the trajectory of an Augmented Lagrangian Method (ALM)
and jointly trains primal and dual neural networks. Being a
primal-dual method, PDL uses instance-specific penalties of
the constraint terms in the loss function used to train the primal network. Experiments show that, on a set of nonlinear
optimization benchmarks, PDL typically exhibits negligible
constraint violations and minor optimality gaps, and is remarkably close to the ALM optimization. PDL also demonstrated improved or similar performance in terms of the optimality gaps, constraint violations, and training times compared to existing approaches. 1

1

Introduction

This paper considers constrained optimization problems
which are ubiquitous in many disciplines including power
systems, supply chains, transportation and logistics, manufacturing, and design. Some of these problems need to be
solved within time limits to meet business constraints. This
is the case for example of market-clearing optimizations in
power systems, sensitivity analyses in manufacturing, and
real-time transportation systems to name only a few. In many
cases, these optimization problems must be solved repeatedly for problem instances that are closely related to each
other (the so-called structure hypothesis (Bengio, Lodi, and
Prouvost 2021)). These observations have stimulated significant interest in recent years at the intersection of machine
learning and optimization.
This paper is concerned with one specific approach in this
rich landscape: the idea of learning the input/output mapping
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The extended version of this paper is available at https://arxiv.
org/pdf/2208.09046

4052

