The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

The Devil Is in the Frequency: Geminated Gestalt Autoencoder
for Self-Supervised Visual Pre-Training
Hao Liu†* , Xinghua Jiang* , Xin Li, Antai Guo, Yiqing Hu, Deqiang Jiang, Bo Ren
Tencent YouTu Lab
{ivanhliu, clarkjiang, fujikoli, ankerguo, hooverhu, dqiangjiang, timren}@tencent.com

Abstract

MAE (pixel)

MAE(freq.)

Ours

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Phase-only
image

Fourier
spectrum

The self-supervised Masked Image Modeling (MIM) schema,
following “mask-and-reconstruct” pipeline of recovering
contents from masked image, has recently captured the increasing interest in the community, owing to the excellent ability of learning visual representation from unlabeled
data. Aiming at learning representations with high semantics abstracted, a group of works attempts to reconstruct nonsemantic pixels with large-ratio masking strategy, which may
suffer from “over-smoothing” problem, while others directly
infuse semantics into targets in off-line way requiring extra
data. Different from them, we shift the perspective to the
Fourier domain which naturally has global perspective and
present a new Masked Image Modeling (MIM), termed Geminated Gestalt Autoencoder (Ge2 -AE) for visual pre-training.
Specifically, we equip our model with geminated decoders in
charge of reconstructing image contents from both pixel and
frequency space, where each other serves as not only the complementation but also the reciprocal constraints. Through this
way, more robust representations can be learned in the pretrained encoders, of which the effectiveness is confirmed by
the juxtaposing experimental results on downstream recognition tasks. We also conduct several quantitative and qualitative experiments to investigate the learning behavior of our
method. To our best knowledge, this is the first MIM work
to solve the visual pre-training through the lens of frequency
domain.

Raw image

Figure 1: Demonstrations of reconstructed images (1st.
row), Fourier spectrum maps (2nd. row) and phase-only images (3rd. row) yielded by MAE and our proposed method.
The (a) column is the raw image and corresponding maps,
while (b) and (c) are results of MAE regarding pixel and
frequency as targets. (d) are ours. The direct predictions are
highlighted by red boundaries, and their corresponding pixel
or frequency maps are obtained by 2D-FFT or 2D-IFFT. The
phase-only images indicating semantics are obtained by setting the amplitude component to a constant.
learn latent representations from the visible regions by encoder, which are then used to reconstruct content by decoder.
For the downstream visual tasks, the encoder is expected to
yield robust representation with rich semantic information.
However, the language naturally has semantics highly abstracted by human (He et al. 2021), where the elemental unit
is also discrete. In contrast, pixels contained in image merely
contain low-level statistics and often present the heavy redundancy due to the continuous property of image. Therefore, the targets setting become the crucial component in the
MIM, which essentially determine what unwanted minutiae
should be compressed for the semantic-perceiving purpose.
To implement the purpose, existing MIM methods have
made attempts mainly in two directions w.r.t the target setting. Among, MAE (He et al. 2021) and SimMIM (Xie et al.
2021) are two simple and straightforward methods, which
regard raw pixels as targets and encourage the model concentrating on semantics by large-ratio masking strategy. Although ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) is adopted, the target
pixels serving as non-semantic entities still contain heavy

Introduction
Recently, self-supervised visual pre-training has witnessed
a fast-paced progress in learning robust representations of
visual content, which can overcome the data appetite problem suffered by supervised learning paradigm, where large
amount of labeled training data is required. Among, a series
of methods, termed Masked Image Modeling (MIM) (He
et al. 2021; Wei et al. 2021; Xie et al. 2021; Dong et al. 2021;
Zhou et al. 2021b; Chen et al. 2022), exhibits promising potential, which inherits the “mask-and-reconstruct” thought
from masked autoencoding methods in natural language processing (NLP) field, such as BERT(Devlin et al. 2018). More
concretely, parts of content in input image are masked to
* Equal contribution. † Contact person.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1649

