The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Good Practices for Missing Modality Robust Action Recognition
Sangmin Woo, Sumin Lee, Yeonju Park, Muhammad Adi Nugroho, Changick Kim
Korea Advanced Institue of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{smwoo95, suminlee94, yeonju29, madin, changick}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Standard multi-modal models assume the use of the same
modalities in training and inference stages. However, in practice, the environment in which multi-modal models operate
may not satisfy such assumption. As such, their performances
degrade drastically if any modality is missing in the inference stage. We ask: how can we train a model that is robust
to missing modalities? This paper seeks a set of good practices for multi-modal action recognition, with a particular
interest in circumstances where some modalities are not available at an inference time. First, we study how to effectively
regularize the model during training (e.g., data augmentation). Second, we investigate on fusion methods for robustness
to missing modalities: we find that transformer-based fusion
shows better robustness for missing modality than summation
or concatenation. Third, we propose a simple modular network, ActionMAE, which learns missing modality predictive
coding by randomly dropping modality features and tries to
reconstruct them with the remaining modality features. Coupling these good practices, we build a model that is not only
effective in multi-modal action recognition but also robust to
modality missing. Our model achieves the state-of-the-arts on
multiple benchmarks and maintains competitive performances
even in missing modality scenarios.

Fusion
&
Predict

Fusion
&
Predict

𝓛𝓛𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄

(a) Multi-modal Training

(b) Multi-modal Inference

RGB Missing
Predict

Predict

Depth Missing

(c) Missing-modality Inference

Figure 1: Action recognition with missing modality. Standard
multi-modal action recognition assumes that the modalities
used in the training stage are complete at inference time: (a)
→ (b). This paper addresses the action recognition problem
in situations where such assumption is not established, i.e.,
when modalities are incomplete at inference time: (a) → (c).
Our goal is to maintain performance in the absence of any
input modality. ^ indicates the weight-frozen.

Introduction
This study aims to answer the underlying question about
multi-modal learning for action recognition in practical situations: How can we train a model that is robust to missing modalities? Typical multi-modal models assume complete modalities in both training and inference phases (Bruce,
Liu, and Chan 2021; Bruce et al. 2022). In reality, however,
the multi-modal system may be unable to access particular
modalities during the inference phase, despite being able
to access all modalities reliably during the training phase
(see Figure 1). There are a number of potential causes for
such circumstances, including malfunctioning sensors, high
data acquisition costs, inaccessibility due to security or privacy concerns, self-deficiencies, etc. This situation affects the
reliability, accuracy, and safety of the model in real-world applications. Considering the autonomous driving situation, an
error caused by insufficient use of the sensors due to factors

such as inclement weather would be life-threatening. As such,
the missing modality problem is critical when multi-modal
models are employed in practice.
To address the missing modality scenarios, we require a
robust model that operates reliably even when certain modalities are unavailable in multi-modal systems. However, conventional multi-modal models are learnt under the premise
that all modalities exist, so that they cannot achieve sufficient
performances when directly applied to missing modality settings. Table 1 shows how much the conventional multi-modal
models suffer from missing modality. Our goal is to achieve

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2776

