The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Why Capsule Neural Networks Do Not Scale:
Challenging the Dynamic Parse-Tree Assumption
Matthias Mitterreiter1,4 , Marcel Koch2 , Joachim Giesen1 , Sören Laue3
1
Friedrich-Schiller-University, Jena, Germany
Ernst Abbe University of Applied Sciences, Jena, Germany
3
Technical University Kaiserslautern, Germany
4
Data Assessment Solutions GmbH, Hannover, Germany
matthias.mitterreiter@uni-jena.de, marcel.koch@eah-jena.de, joachim.giesen@uni-jena.de, laue@cs.uni-kl.de
2

Abstract

form virtually any complex object, which can then be recognized by decomposition into its respective parts (Biederman
1987).
A capsule may represent a visual entity by encapsulating
its properties, also known as instantiation parameters, such
as position, size, orientation, deformation, texture, or hue.
A multi-level assembly of such capsules represents a complex image scene, where lower-level capsules model less
abstract objects or object parts, and higher-level capsules
model complex and composite objects. Lower-level capsules
are connected to higher-level capsules if the corresponding
entities are in a part-whole relationship. For a composite object, the hierarchy of capsules defines a syntactic structure
like a parse-tree defines the syntactic structure of a sentence.
Therefore, the hierarchy of capsules is also referred to as
parse-tree. If an object or object part is present in an image,
its respective capsule will be present within the parse-tree.
Ideally, the parse-tree is invariant under affine transformations as well as changes of viewpoint. That is, a slightly
modified viewpoint on a visual entity should not change
a capsule’s presence within the parse-tree. Such parsetrees would be highly efficient distributed representations
of image scenes (Sabour, Frosst, and Hinton 2017; Hinton, Ghahramani, and Teh 1999). Also, explainable machine
learning can profit from interpretable capsules that stand for
dedicated visual entities, and the discrete nature of trees may
connect deep learning with a symbolic approach to AI. Furthermore, capsules can be related to inverse graphics, and
there is hope that they can lead to debuggable, parameter efficient, and interpretable models with a broad range of applications for all kinds of image-related tasks like image classification or segmentation.
However, capsules are only conceptually defined, and the
difficulty is finding an implementation with all the highlydesirable properties from above. The capsule neural network (CapsNet) by Sabour, Frosst, and Hinton (2017) aims
at such an implementation of the conceptual capsule idea.
It was specifically designed to surpass convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) (LeCun et al. 1989) as the latter
were found to suffer from several limitations, including a
lack of robustness to affine transformations and change of
viewpoint, the susceptibility to adversarial attacks, exponential inefficiencies, and a general lack of interpretability in the
network’s decision-making process. Considering these limi-

Capsule neural networks replace simple, scalar-valued neurons with vector-valued capsules. They are motivated by
the pattern recognition system in the human brain, where
complex objects are decomposed into a hierarchy of simpler object parts. Such a hierarchy is referred to as a parsetree. Conceptually, capsule neural networks have been defined to realize such parse-trees. The capsule neural network
(CapsNet), by Sabour, Frosst, and Hinton, is the first actual implementation of the conceptual idea of capsule neural
networks. CapsNets achieved state-of-the-art performance on
simple image recognition tasks with fewer parameters and
greater robustness to affine transformations than comparable approaches. This sparked extensive follow-up research.
However, despite major efforts, no work was able to scale
the CapsNet architecture to more reasonable-sized datasets.
Here, we provide a reason for this failure and argue that it
is most likely not possible to scale CapsNets beyond toy examples. In particular, we show that the concept of a parsetree, the main idea behind capsule neuronal networks, is not
present in CapsNets. We also show theoretically and experimentally that CapsNets suffer from a vanishing gradient problem that results in the starvation of many capsules during
training.

1

Introduction

The concept of capsules (Hinton, Krizhevsky, and Wang
2011) describes a hypothetical system that parses a complex
image scene into a hierarchy of visual entities that stand in
part-whole relationship to each other (Hinton, Ghahramani,
and Teh 1999). A capsule is conceptually defined as a highly
informative, compact representation of a visual entity or object within an image. The idea of capsules is motivated by
the pattern recognition system in the visual cortex of the human brain (Sabour, Frosst, and Hinton 2017). There is some
psychological evidence that the human object recognition
system assigns hierarchical structural descriptions to complex objects by decomposing them into parts (Hinton 1979).
The theory of recognition by components (Biederman 1987)
proposes that a relatively small set of simple 3D shapes,
called geons, can be assembled in various arrangements to
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9209

