The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Automated Verification of Social Laws in Numeric Settings
Ronen Nir1 , Alexander Shleyfman2 , Erez Karpas1
1

Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
2
Bar-Ilan University
ronen.nx@gmail.com, alexash@biu.ac.il, karpase@technion.ac.il

Abstract

to solve the coordination problem via centralized methods
(e.g., Brafman and Domshlak 2008; Nissim, Brafman, and
Domshlak 2010). This approach, unfortunately, has a major
drawback – it produces a single plan for each agent, denying
them the choice of plan, thus preventing adaptive behavior.
This approach also requires the agents to trust and communicate with the central planner, which is often infeasible.
The social law (SL) paradigm aims at mitigating these
drawbacks (Tennenholtz and Moses 1989). An SL is a set
of restrictions imposed on a multi-agent system to prevent
agents’ undesirable behavior. Karpas et al. (2017) defined
the concept of SL in the MA - STRIPS environment. An SL is
robust if it allows agents to plan, act and achieve their goals
without conflicts and without considering other agents’ actions in the environment. Karpas proposed an algorithm that
verifies whether an SL, given in a classical planning multiagent environment with binary variables, is robust.
While classical multi-agent planning is quite popular, it
falls short of faithfully representing real-world problems.
Consider, for example, a robotic factory where planning involves reasoning about timing and numbers, which requires
more expressive formalisms, such as temporal and numeric
planning, respectively. Nir and Karpas (2019) partially addressed this by proposing an SL verification method for temporal planning. As in the classical case, they compiled the
verification problem into a temporal planning problem.
Following this trail, we propose a method for solving the
SL verification problem in the setting of simple numeric
planning. Unsurprisingly, we do it via a compilation into a
simple numeric planning problem. The proposed compilation constructs a counterexample to the robustness of a given
SL. Thus to verify that the SL is indeed robust we need
to prove that the numeric planning problem is unsolvable,
which can be challenging, as numeric planning is undecidable even in the simplest constellations (Helmert 2002).
Nevertheless, although it is impossible to prove that an
SL is robust in the numeric setting in the general case, our
experimental evaluation shows that when the SL is not robust, state of the art numerical planners manage to find a
counterexample rather quickly and that there are numeric
domains where the existence of SL can be verified. Furthermore, there are several problems where we can manually
prove that a social law is robust, yet numerical planners can
not prove this as these problems have an infinite number of

It is possible for agents operating in a shared environment
to interfere with one another. One mechanism of coordination is called Social Law. Enacting such a law in a multiagent setting restricts agents’ behaviors. Robustness, in this
case, ensures that the agents do not harmfully interfere with
each other and that each agent achieves its goals regardless
of what other agents do. Previous work on social law verification examined only the case of boolean state variables.
However, many real-world problems require reasoning with
numeric variables. Moreover, numeric fluents allow a more
compact representation of multiple planning problems.
In this paper, we develop a method to verify whether a given
social law is robust via compilation to numeric planning. A
solution to this compilation constitutes a counterexample to
the robustness of the problem, i.e., evidence of cross-agent
conflict. Thus, the social law is robust if and only if the proposed compilation is unsolvable. We empirically verify robustness in multiple domains using state-of-the-art numeric
planners. Additionally, this compilation raises a challenge by
generating a set of non-trivial numeric domains where unsolvability should be either proved or disproved.

Introduction
During the past decade, the coordination of autonomous
agents in shared environments has been one of the main
challenges facing the AI community. Agents in this setting
have a set of actions and goals they strive to achieve. Even
with a single agent, planning or learning in such an environment is challenging. Managing interactions between multiple agents present an additional challenge, as the actions
of one agent can negatively affect those of another. If coordination or communication is impossible, each agent must
produce a contingent plan, which considers all detrimental courses of action of all other agents. This is not always
possible, not only because computations do not scale, but
also because even in the most basic settings, agents need to
trust each other to behave reasonably. Imagine a pedestrian
stopped at a red light at a crossroad; they still assume that
cars will not drive on the sidewalk, even though they can.
Multiple approaches have been proposed to avoid destructive collisions between two or more agents. One may try
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12087

