The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Isometric Manifold Learning Using Hierarchical Flow
Ziqi Pan, Jianfu Zhang* , Li Niu* , Liqing Zhang
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{panziqi ai, c.sis, ustcnewly}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

and LLE) are commonly non-parametric methods by utilizing the Multidimensional Scaling (Carroll and Arabie 1998)
(MDS) algorithm and eigendecomposition. However, classical manifold learning algorithms are hard to apply to modern datasets, since these datasets are typically complex and
high-dimensional (Verleysen and François 2005). Since nonparametric methods do not produce an embedding function,
the inference of the embedding can not be generalized to
unseen samples. To tackle this problem, some parametric
methods are proposed such as SNE (Van Der Maaten 2009),
t-SNE (Van der Maaten and Hinton 2008), DrLIM (Hadsell,
Chopra, and LeCun 2006) and so on (Gong et al. 2006; Chui
and Mhaskar 2018; Mishne et al. 2019), which can perform
out-of-sample-extension. There are also methods combining
classical algorithms and neural networks for manifold learning (Pai et al. 2019; Geng et al. 2020). In terms of the neural
network methods (Basri and Jacobs 2017), GANs and VAEs
as generative models can also be regarded as manifold learning framework, which is able to efficiently sample from the
manifold by using ancestral sampling. However, GANs and
VAEs lack the ability to estimate densities on the manifold.
Compared to GANs and VAEs, since NFs induce an explicit
density on the manifold based on the change-of-variable formula and are intrinsic nonlinear bijective mappings between
the embeddings and the manifold, many NF-based manifold
learning models are proposed, including NFs on a prescribed
manifold (Gemici, Rezende, and Mohamed 2016; Bose et al.
2020) such as tori and spheres (Rezende et al. 2020), and the
M-flow (Brehmer and Cranmer 2020) for learning a manifold topologically equivalent to Euclidean space. In this paper, we propose a Hierarchical Flow (HF) model by extending the M-flow into a hierarchical architecture constrained
by isometric regularizations for manifold learning.
Given a set of training samples from a manifold M ⊂ RD
whose ground-truth dimensionality K ∗ is unknown, our proposed HF model combines the following manifold learning
goals in one unified framework:

We propose the Hierarchical Flow (HF) model constrained by
isometric regularizations for manifold learning that combines
manifold learning goals such as dimensionality reduction, inference, sampling, projection and density estimation into one
unified framework. Our proposed HF model is regularized to
not only produce embeddings preserving the geometric structure of the manifold, but also project samples onto the manifold in a manner conforming to the rigorous definition of projection. Theoretical guarantees are provided for our HF model
to satisfy the two desired properties. In order to detect the real
dimensionality of the manifold, we also propose a two-stage
dimensionality reduction algorithm, which is a time-efficient
algorithm thanks to the hierarchical architecture design of our
HF model. Experimental results justify our theoretical analysis, demonstrate the superiority of our dimensionality reduction algorithm in cost of training time, and verify the effect of
the aforementioned properties in improving performances on
downstream tasks such as anomaly detection.

1

Introduction

Manifold learning (Pless and Souvenir 2009) is the task aiming to recover low-dimensional embeddings from nonlinear
high-dimensional data that preserve the geometric structure
of data manifolds (Fefferman, Mitter, and Narayanan 2016),
which is a fundamental research topic in the field of machine
learning. Applications of manifold learning include nonlinear dimensionality reduction (Gisbrecht and Hammer 2015),
denoising (Buades, Coll, and Morel 2005), anomaly detection (Chandola, Banerjee, and Kumar 2009), etc.
The research on manifold learning has a long history, and
the manifold learning methods range from classical algorithms such as LLE (Rowes 2000), Local Preserving Projections (He and Niyogi 2003), Semidefinite Embedding (Weinberger and Saul 2006), and Isomap (Tenenbaum, Silva, and
Langford 2000), to modern deep learning methods based on
neural network frameworks such as Generative Adversarial
Nets (Goodfellow et al. 2014) (GANs), Variational Autoencoders (Kingma and Welling 2013) (VAEs), and Normalizing Flow (Dinh, Krueger, and Bengio 2014) (NF) based
generative models. Classical spectral methods (e.g., Isomap

• Dimensionality reduction. The model is able to detect the
ground-truth dimensionality K ∗ of M efficiently.
• Sampling. The model can efficiently sample from M.
• Inference: Given a manifold sample x ∈ M, the model
∗
can infer the embedding u (x) ∈ RK of x that is faithful
to the geometric structure of M. Specifically, ∀x1 , x2 ∈

* Corresponding authors

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9381

