The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Beyond Smoothing: Unsupervised Graph Representation Learning
with Edge Heterophily Discriminating
Yixin Liu1 , Yizhen Zheng1 , Daokun Zhang1 , Vincent CS Lee1 , Shirui Pan2
1

Monash University, Australia
Griffith University, Australia
{yixin.liu, yizhen.zheng1, daokun.zhang, vincent.cs.lee}@monash.edu, s.pan@griffith.edu.au
2

Abstract

attributes with each other (Hamilton 2020). Depending on
such an assumption, they utilize low-pass filter-like graph
neural networks (GNNs) (Wu et al. 2019; Kipf and Welling
2017; Li et al. 2019) to smooth the representations of adjacent nodes. Meanwhile, to provide supervision signals for
representation learning, they often use objectives that preserve local smoothness, i.e., encouraging the representations
of nodes within the same edge (Kipf and Welling 2016; Peng
et al. 2020), random walk (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec
2017; Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014), or subgraph (Qiu
et al. 2020) to have higher similarity to each other. As a result, all the nodes are forced to have similar representations
to their neighbors. As shown in Fig. 1(a), all the connected
nodes are pushed to be closer in the representation space,
even if some of them have moderate feature similarities that
are comparable to randomly sampled node pairs.
With such a representation smoothing mechanism,
existing UGRL methods cannot always generate optimal
representations, since real-world graph data are likely to
violate the homophily assumption (Zhu et al. 2020a; Bo
et al. 2021). Actually, apart from homophilic edges that
connect similar nodes, there widely exist heterophilic edges
in real-world graphs, which otherwise link dissimilar nodes.
Take social networks as an example, a person may have the
same hobby with some friends, but also have quite different
interests with other friends. Moreover, in a special type of
graphs named heterophilic graphs (e.g., Web Knowledge
Base graph Texas, as shown in Fig. 1(b)), heterophilic edges
are far more than homophilic ones (Pei et al. 2020). Besides,
graphs in reality inevitably contain noisy links caused by the
uncertain factors in real-world systems or even adversarial
attacks (Zhao et al. 2021a; Chang et al. 2021). In this
situation, smoothing the information along all edges can
lead to indistinguishable node representations, hindering
the generalization ability and robustness of UGRL methods.
Considering the existence of homophilic and heterophilic
edges, a natural question can be raised: (Q1) Is it possible to
distinguish between two types of edges in an unsupervised
manner? In supervised scenarios, edge discriminating can
be designed as a built-in component in node classification
models, with labels providing direct evidence (Zhao et al.
2021b). Nevertheless, in unsupervised scenarios, it is hard
to discriminate edge types through only node features and
graph structure, especially for the widely existing edges that

Unsupervised graph representation learning (UGRL) has
drawn increasing research attention and achieved promising
results in several graph analytic tasks. Relying on the homophily assumption, existing UGRL methods tend to smooth
the learned node representations along all edges, ignoring
the existence of heterophilic edges that connect nodes with
distinct attributes. As a result, current methods are hard
to generalize to heterophilic graphs where dissimilar nodes
are widely connected, and also vulnerable to adversarial attacks. To address this issue, we propose a novel unsupervised Graph Representation learning method with Edge
hEterophily discriminaTing (GREET) which learns representations by discriminating and leveraging homophilic edges
and heterophilic edges. To distinguish two types of edges,
we build an edge discriminator that infers edge homophily/heterophily from feature and structure information. We
train the edge discriminator in an unsupervised way through
minimizing the crafted pivot-anchored ranking loss, with randomly sampled node pairs acting as pivots. Node representations are learned through contrasting the dual-channel
encodings obtained from the discriminated homophilic and
heterophilic edges. With an effective interplaying scheme,
edge discriminating and representation learning can mutually
boost each other during the training phase. We conducted extensive experiments on 14 benchmark datasets and multiple
learning scenarios to demonstrate the superiority of GREET.

Introduction
Unsupervised graph representation learning (UGRL) aims
to learn low-dimensional representations from graphstructured data without costly labels (Kipf and Welling
2016; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Veličković et al.
2019). Such representations can benefit myriads of downstream tasks, including node classification, link prediction
and node clustering (Zhang, Yin, and Philip 2022; Pan et al.
2018). In recent years, UGRL has attracted increasing research attention and been applied to diverse applications,
such as recommender systems (Ge et al. 2020), traffic prediction (Jenkins et al. 2019), and drug molecular modeling (Wang et al. 2021).
Most of the UGRL methods are designed based on the homophily assumption, i.e., linked nodes tend to share similar
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4516

