The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Transferable Post-hoc Calibration on Pretrained Transformers
in Noisy Text Classification
Jun Zhang1,2 * , Wen Yao2 * , Xiaoqian Chen2 , Ling Feng1† ,
1

2

Tsinghua University
National Innovation Institute of Defense Technology, Chinese Academy of Military Science
jun-zhan19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wendy0782@126.com,
chenxiaoqian@nudt.edu.cn, fengling@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Recent work has demonstrated that pretrained transformers
are overconfident in text classification tasks, which can be
calibrated by the famous post-hoc calibration method temperature scaling (TS). Character or word spelling mistakes
are frequently encountered in real applications and greatly
threaten transformer model safety. Research on calibration
under noisy settings is rare, and we focus on this direction.
Based on a toy experiment, we discover that TS performs
poorly when the datasets are perturbed by slight noise, such
as swapping the characters, which results in distribution shift.
We further utilize two metrics, predictive uncertainty and
maximum mean discrepancy (MMD), to measure the distribution shift between clean and noisy datasets, based on which
we propose a simple yet effective transferable TS method for
calibrating models dynamically. To evaluate the performance
of the proposed methods under noisy settings, we construct a
benchmark consisting of four noise types and five shift intensities based on the QNLI, AG-News, and Emotion tasks. Experimental results on the noisy benchmark show that (1) the
metrics are effective in measuring distribution shift and (2)
transferable TS can significantly decrease the expected calibration error (ECE) compared with the competitive baseline
ensemble TS by approximately 46.09%.

Figure 1: The distributional shift (measured by the maximum mean discrepancy between clean and noisy datasets)
results in the poor calibration performance of temperature
scaling (TS) under noisy settings, which increases with the
noise proportion. The noisy texts are generated by swapping
the adjacent characters based on the clean Emotion dataset.

The first category is multimodel methods, which alleviate
overconfidence issues by averaging multiple model predictions. Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) (Welling and Teh
2011; Blundell et al. 2015) calibrate the prediction probability by sampling multiple models from the approximated posterior distribution of weights. MC dropout (MCD) (Gal and
Ghahramani 2016) can be viewed as a special BNN case,
which achieves multiple predictions by maintaining an activated dropout layer in the inference phase. Deep ensemble
(DE) (Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017) trains
multiple individual models by different random initialization
schemes. BNNs are generally difficult to train because the
prior distribution of weights and initialization schemes are
difficult to determine. DE is not practical for transformerbased models due to the considerable memory costs.
The second category regularizes the loss function with
a calibration-related term. Some recent works incorporate
differential calibration regularizers, such as MMCE (Kumar, Sarawagi, and Jain 2018), AvUC (Krishnan and Tickoo
2020) and SB-ECE (Karandikar et al. 2021), in the train-

Introduction
Recently, pretrained transformer-based models have been
used widely in natural language processing (NLP), such as
machine translation (Vaswani et al. 2017), question answering (Pearce et al. 2021), dialog generation (Oluwatobi and
Mueller 2020), and text classification (Li et al. 2021). Recent studies (Guo et al. 2017) demonstrate that transformerbased models are seriously overconfident in their predictions, which leads to severe consequences, especially in
safe-critical applications, such as suicidal ideation detection
(Cao, Zhang, and Feng 2020). Calibrating a classifier means
matching the probability of correct predictions at all levels
of confidence (Guo et al. 2017). Numerous calibration methods have been proposed and can be organized into three aspects to deal with overconfidence issues.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13940

