The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DrugOOD: Out-of-Distribution Dataset Curator and Benchmark for AI-Aided
Drug Discovery – a Focus on Affinity Prediction Problems with Noise Annotations
Yuanfeng Ji1,3* , Lu Zhang1,2 * , Jiaxiang Wu1 , Bingzhe Wu1 , Lanqing Li1 ,
Long-Kai Huang1 , Tingyang Xu1 , Yu Rong1 , Jie Ren1 , Ding Xue1 , Houtim Lai1 ,
Wei Liu1 , Junzhou Huang1 , Shuigeng Zhou2 , Ping Luo3 , Peilin Zhao1 , Yatao Bian1†
1

Tencent AI Lab, China
Fudan University, China
3
The University of Hong Kong, China
u3008013@connect.hku.hk
2

Affinity
pred

Abstract

Train (seen domain)
Test (unseen domain)

AI-aided drug discovery (AIDD) is gaining popularity due to
its potential to make the search for new pharmaceuticals faster,
less expensive, and more effective. Despite its extensive use in
numerous fields (e.g., ADMET prediction, virtual screening),
little research has been conducted on the out-of-distribution
(OOD) learning problem with noise. We present DrugOOD,
a systematic OOD dataset curator and benchmark for AIDD.
Particularly, we focus on the drug-target binding affinity prediction problem, which involves both macromolecule (protein target) and small-molecule (drug compound). DrugOOD
offers an automated dataset curator with user-friendly customization scripts, rich domain annotations aligned with biochemistry knowledge, realistic noise level annotations, and
rigorous benchmarking of SOTA OOD algorithms, as opposed
to only providing fixed datasets. Since the molecular data
is often modeled as irregular graphs using graph neural network (GNN) backbones, DrugOOD also serves as a valuable
testbed for graph OOD learning problems. Extensive empirical
studies have revealed a significant performance gap between
in-distribution and out-of-distribution experiments, emphasizing the need for the development of more effective schemes
that permit OOD generalization under noise for AIDD.

performance

(a) Structure-based Affinity Prediction

(b) Protein/Compound Distribution

Figure 1: (a) Structure-based affinity prediction aims to predict binding affinity values between a pair of target (protein)
and compound (molecule), and (b) model performance is often severely degraded when the data distributions are shifted.
Distribution shift is a ubiquitous problem in the field of
AIDD, where the training distribution differs from the test
distribution. Typically, the prediction model is trained on
known target proteins when conducting virtual screening for
hit findings. A “black swan” event, such as COVID-19, may
nevertheless occur, resulting in a new target with unseen data
distributions. Hence, the performance of the unseen target
will decline drastically. To address the performance degradation (Koh et al. 2021) caused by distribution shift, it is
necessary to develop robust and generalizable algorithms
for this challenging issue in AIDD. Despite its importance
in real-world problems, the community still lacks curated
OOD datasets and benchmarks for inspiring relevant research.
Besides, label noise is another critical issue. Generally, AI
models are trained using publicly deposited datasets, such
as ChEMBL, whereas the bioassay data are typically noisy
(Kramer et al. 2012; Cortés-Ciriano and Bender 2016). For instance, the activity data from ChEMBL is manually extracted
from the full texts of seven Medicinal Chemistry journals
(Mendez et al. 2019). Various factors, including but not limited to different confidence levels for activities measured
through experiments, unit-translation errors, repeated citations of single measurements, and different “cut-off” noise1 ,

Introduction
Traditional drug discovery procedures are lengthy and expensive. To accelerate the drug development process, drugmakers and investors are turning to artificial intelligence
techniques (Muratov et al. 2020) for drug discovery (e.g.,
ADMET prediction (Rong et al. 2020), target identification,
protein structure prediction(Shen et al. 2021)), which aim to
rapidly identify new compounds and model complex mechanisms to automate previously manual processes (Schneider
2018). In this paper, we focus on one of the most challenging
applications, called drug-target binding affinity prediction,
which aims to identify a subset of compounds with high binding affinity for a given protein target among many candidate
compounds.
* Equal contribution. Order was determined by tossing a coin.
†
Corresponding author: Yatao Bian.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial

Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
E.g., measurements could be recorded with <, ≤, ≈, >, ≥,

8023

