The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Beyond NaN: Resiliency of Optimization Layers in The Face of Infeasibility
Wai Tuck Wong1 , Sarah Kinsey2 , Ramesha Karunasena1 , Thanh H. Nguyen2 , Arunesh Sinha3
1

Singapore Management University
2
University of Oregon
3
Rutgers University
wt.wong.2020@msc.smu.edu.sg, sarahevekinsey@gmail.com, rameshak@smu.edu.sg, thanhhng@cs.uoregon.edu,
arunesh.sinha@rutgers.edu
Abstract

meaningful output can lead to catastrophic outcomes in critical domains such as autonomous driving where decisions
are needed in real time. Also, such inputs when present in
training data lead to abrupt failure of training. Our work exploits the failure conditions of the optimization layer of the
joint network in order to induce such failure. This vulnerability has not been exploited in prior literature.
First, we present a numerical instability attack. Typically,
an optimization solver or an equation set solver takes in parameters θ as input. In the joint network, this parameter θ
is output by the learning layers and feeds into the last optimization layer (see Fig. 1). At its core, the issue lies in
using functions which are prone to numerical stability issues in its parameters (see appendix). Most optimization or
equation solvers critically depend on the matrix A—part of
the parameter θ—to be sufficiently far from a singular matrix to solve the problem. Our attack proceeds by searching
for input(s) that cause the matrix A to become singular. The
instability produces NaNs—undefined values in floatingpoint arithmetic—which may result in undesired behavior
in downstream systems that consume them. We perform this
search via gradient descent and test three different ways of
finding a singular matrix in neighborhood of A; only one of
which works consistently in practice.
Second, to tackle the numerical instability attack, we propose a novel powerful defense via an efficiently computable
intermediate layer in the neural network. This layer utilizes
the singular value decomposition (SVD) of the matrix A
and, if needed, approximates A closely with a matrix A′ that
has bounded condition number; the bound is a hyperparameter. Large condition number implies closeness to singularity, hence the bounded condition number guarantees numerical stability in the forward pass through the optimization
(or equation) solver. Surprisingly, we find that the training
performance with our defense in place surpasses the performance of the undefended model, even in the absence of attack, perhaps due to more stable gradients.
Finally, we show the efficacy of our attack and defense in
(1) a synthetic data problem designed in Amos and Kolter
(2017) and (2) a variant of the Sudoku experiment used
in Amos and Kolter (2017) and (3) an autonomous driving
scenario from Liu, Zhan, and Tomizuka (2017), where failures can occur even without attacks and how augmenting
with our defense prevent these failures. Lastly, we identify

Prior work has successfully incorporated optimization layers as the last layer in neural networks for various problems,
thereby allowing joint learning and planning in one neural
network forward pass. In this work, we identify a weakness
in such a set-up where inputs to the optimization layer lead to
undefined output of the neural network. Such undefined decision outputs can lead to possible catastrophic outcomes in
critical real time applications. We show that an adversary can
cause such failures by forcing rank deficiency on the matrix
fed to the optimization layer which results in the optimization
failing to produce a solution. We provide a defense for the
failure cases by controlling the condition number of the input
matrix. We study the problem in the settings of synthetic data,
Jigsaw Sudoku, and in speed planning for autonomous driving. We show that our proposed defense effectively prevents
the framework from failing with undefined output. Finally, we
surface a number of edge cases which lead to serious bugs in
popular optimization solvers which can be abused as well.

Introduction
There is a recent trend of incorporating optimization and
equation solvers as the final layer in a neural network, where
the penultimate layer outputs parameters of the optimization
or the equation set that is to be solved (Amos and Kolter
2017; Donti, Amos, and Kolter 2017; Agrawal et al. 2019;
Wilder, Dilkina, and Tambe 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Perrault et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Paulus et al. 2021). The
learning and optimizing is performed jointly by differentiating through the optimization layer, which by now is incorporated into standard libraries. Novel applications of this
method have appeared for decision focused learning, solving games, clustering after learning, with deployment in real
world autonomous driving (Xiao et al. 2022) and scheduling (Wang et al. 2022). In this work, we explore a novel
attack vector that is applicable for this setting, but we note
that the core concepts in this attack can be applied to other
settings as well. While a lot of work exists in attacks on machine learning, in contrast, we focus on a new attack that
forces the decision output to be meaningless via specially
crafted inputs. The failure of the decision system to produce
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15242

