The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fair-CDA: Continuous and Directional Augmentation for Group Fairness
Rui Sun1,2 * , Fengwei Zhou3 * , Zhenhua Dong3 , Chuanlong Xie4† , Lanqing Hong3 , Jiawei Li3 ,
Rui Zhang5 , Zhen Li1,2† , Zhenguo Li3
1

The Future Network of Intelligence Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
2
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
4
Beijing Normal University
5
Tsinghua University
ruisun@link.cuhk.edu.cn, fzhou@connect.ust.hk, {dongzhenhua, honglanqing, li.jiawei, li.zhenguo}@huawei.com,
rayteam@yeah.net, clxie@bnu.edu.cn, lizhen@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract

Mroueh 2021), ensuring that different groups shall be treated
similarly. However, these constraints are data-dependent,
the learnt fair classifiers might not generalize at evaluation
time. Agarwal et al. (2018) and Cotter et al. (2019) consider two-player games to formulate the constrained optimization problem and analyze the solutions and generalization guarantees. Chuang and Mroueh (2021) proposes Fair
Mixup to generate a path of distributions that connects sensitive groups and regularize the smoothness of transitions
among the path to improve the generalization of group fairness metrics. They show that their strategy ensures a better
generalization for both accuracy and fairness in a wide range
of benchmarks.
Motivated by Fair Mixup, we propose Fair-CDA, a continuous and directional augmentation method, to seek a finegrained balance between fairness and accuracy. An overview
of our method is illustrated in Figure 1.
Accuracy. The Mixup (Zhang et al. 2018) generates augmented samples via convex combinations of pairs of data
points. However, the between-group augmentation performs
Mixup on both sensitive attributes and non-sensitive attributes. This may change the correlation between nonsensitive attributes and the targets and further lead to the fall
of prediction accuracy. What’s more, Verma et al. (2019)
shows that interpolations in deeper hidden layers, which
capture higher-level information (Zeiler and Fergus 2014),
can provide additional training signal and smooth decision
boundaries that benefit generalization. Therefore we develop
a fine-grained augmentation via feature disentanglement and
focus on the transitions over sensitive features.
We decompose representations in latent space into sensitive and non-sensitive features via DecAug (Bai et al. 2020),
which is a powerful feature disentanglement technique for
Out-of-Distribution (OoD) generalization. The sensitive features encode the information that is strongly correlated to
the sensitive attributes, while the non-sensitive features retain as much other information (essential for prediction) as
possible. Then we apply semantic augmentation on the sensitive features aiming to generate features correlated to the
opposite sensitive attributes. The augmented sensitive fea-

In this work, we propose Fair-CDA, a fine-grained data augmentation strategy for imposing fairness constraints. We use a
feature disentanglement method to extract the features highly
related to the sensitive attributes. Then we show that group
fairness can be achieved by regularizing the models on transition paths of sensitive features between groups. By adjusting
the perturbation strength in the direction of the paths, our proposed augmentation is controllable and auditable. To alleviate
the accuracy degradation caused by fairness constraints, we
further introduce a calibrated model to impute labels for the
augmented data. Our proposed method does not assume any
data generative model and ensures good generalization for
both accuracy and fairness. Experimental results show that
Fair-CDA consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods
on widely-used benchmarks, e.g., Adult, CelebA and MovieLens. Especially, Fair-CDA obtains an 86.3% relative improvement for fairness while maintaining the accuracy on the
Adult dataset. Moreover, we evaluate Fair-CDA in an online
recommendation system to demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method in terms of accuracy and fairness.

Introduction
Many machine learning systems have achieved empirically
success in practical problems but may sometimes raise issues of discrimination and unfairness. In job candidate
search, different protected groups (e.g., gender and ethnic
groups) may be treated unfairly in terms of their members
appearing in recommended candidate lists (Ekstrand et al.
2021). In the context of information retrieval, unfairness
may happen among multiple parties. For example, unfair exposure allocation may favour monopolies and drive small
content providers out of the market (Morik et al. 2020). This
reduces diversity and impairs the whole ecosystem.
There have been various studies to impose fairness constraints during training procedure (Zemel et al. 2013; Hardt,
Price, and Srebro 2016; Zafar et al. 2017; Chuang and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Correspondence to: lizhen@cuhk.edu.cn,clxie@bnu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9918

