The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Supervised Learning for Multilevel Skeleton-Based Forgery Detection via
Temporal-Causal Consistency of Actions
Liang Hu* †1,2 , Dora D. Liu* 2,3 , Qi Zhang†4,2 , Usman Naseem5 , Zhong Yuan Lai2
1

Tongji University
DeepBlue Academy of Sciences
3
BirenTech Research
4
University of Technology Sydney
5
University of Sydney
lianghu@tongji.edu.cn, liudongmei 0506@163.com
qi.zhang-13@student.uts.edu.au, usman.naseem@sydney.edu.au
abrikosoff@yahoo.com
2

Reference Action Clip (Cr)

Abstract

Tampered Action Clip (Ct)

(a) Throw

Skeleton-based human action recognition and analysis have
become increasingly attainable in many areas, such as security surveillance and anomaly detection. Given the prevalence of skeleton-based applications, tampering attacks on
human skeletal features have emerged very recently. In particular, checking the temporal inconsistency and/or incoherence
(TII) in the skeletal sequence of human action is a principle
of forgery detection. To this end, we propose an approach
to self-supervised learning of the temporal causality behind
human action, which can effectively check TII in skeletal sequences. Especially, we design a multilevel skeleton-based
forgery detection framework to recognize the forgery on
frame level, clip level, and action level in terms of learning the
corresponding temporal-causal skeleton representations for
each level. Specifically, a hierarchical graph convolution network architecture is designed to learn low-level skeleton representations based on physical skeleton connections and highlevel action representations based on temporal-causal dependencies for specific actions. Extensive experiments consistently show state-of-the-art results on multilevel forgery detection tasks and superior performance of our framework
compared to current competing methods.

h1
h1

h2

h1

h2

h2

T2

T3

Frame-level
Temporal
Causality

h2

h1

k2

T1

f1

T4

T5

T6

Cr→T4

(b) Throw

Clip-level
Temporal
Causality
T1

T3

T2

T4

T6

T5

Cr→Ct

(c) Clapp

Action-level
Temporal
Causality
C1

C2

C3

C4

T5

T6

Cr→Ct

Figure 1: Frame, clip, and action-level skeleton forgeries.
The joints highlighted in red are tampered from the original
positions. Red and green boxes distinguish the two actions.

and testing much faster compared to high-dimensional pixel
features; (3) skeletal features are more friendly and easily
transferable to robots for imitation learning.
With the increasing skeleton-based applications, there has
been emerging work on the study of direct attacks on skeletal features (Liu, Akhtar, and Mian 2022; Tanaka, Kera,
and Kawamoto 2022; Diao et al. 2021). Compared to traditional pixel-based attacks, skeleton-based attacks enable
intentional misleading of skeleton recognition systems and
result in more severe consequences. For example, intentional manipulation of the skeletal action “walking” to “stop
to stand” will mislead a self-driving car equipped with a
skeleton-based pedestrian action recognition system. Unfortunately, there is no skeleton-based forgery detection (SFD)
method available to our best knowledge.
Current human action recognition methods mainly consider the physical connections between skeleton joints (Yan,
Xiong, and Lin 2018; Dang et al. 2021; Li et al. 2020). Johansson (Johansson 1973) showed that human actions could
be recognized by only a few tracked points with specific
causal continuities. Figure 1 illustrates two types of hu-

Introduction
Skeleton-based human action recognition and analysis have
seen wide applications in many different areas of industry
and academia, in diverse fields ranging from anomaly detection (Markovitz et al. 2020) to imitation learning (Yuan
and Kitani 2018; Wang et al. 2019). In recent years, an increasing number of human behavior analysis scenarios are
based on skeletal features because it offers several advantages (Morais et al. 2019; Markovitz et al. 2020) compared
to pixel-based features: (1) it allows the algorithm to focus
on overall poses rather than irrelevant features such as illumination or background clutter; (2) the human skeleton
can be represented as a compact graph that makes training
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

844

