The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Large-State Reinforcement Learning for Hyper-Heuristics
Lucas Kletzander, Nysret Musliu
Christian Doppler Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence and Optimization for Planning and Scheduling
DBAI, TU Wien, Karlsplatz 13, 1040 Vienna, Austria
{lucas.kletzander,nysret.musliu}@tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

LAST-RL (Large State Reinforcement Learning) based on
reinforcement learning using the linear state-action value
function approximation method tile coding, the learning
method SARSA-lambda, and an epsilon-greedy policy that
uses probability distributions based on Iterated Local Search
for increased performance. It further uses solution chains
based on the Luby sequence, where we introduce some novel
improvements as well, and a restart strategy.
The method is then evaluated on instances from six different domains from the Cross Domain Heuristic Search
Challenge 2011, where the contributions of the individual
components are evaluated, and where LAST-RL can outperform previous approaches based on reinforcement learning,
as well as on a benchmark of three complex real-life personnel scheduling domains, providing several improved results
compared to both previous hyper-heuristics and domainspecific solution methods on two of these domains.

Hyper-heuristics are a domain-independent problem solving
approach where the main task is to select effective chains of
problem-specific low-level heuristics on the fly for an unseen
instance. This task can be seen as a reinforcement learning
problem, however, the information available to the hyperheuristic is very limited, usually leading to very limited state
representations. In this work, for the first time we use the trajectory of solution changes for a larger set of features for
reinforcement learning in the novel hyper-heuristic LASTRL (Large-State Reinforcement Learning). Further, we introduce a probability distribution for the exploration case in our
epsilon-greedy policy that is based on the idea of Iterated Local Search to increase the chance to sample good chains of
low-level heuristics. The benefit of the collaboration of our
novel components is shown on the academic benchmark of
the Cross Domain Heuristic Challenge 2011 consisting of six
different problem domains. Our approach can provide stateof-the-art results on this benchmark where it outperforms recent hyper-heuristics based on reinforcement learning, and
also demonstrates high performance on a benchmark of complex real-life personnel scheduling domains.

Related Work
The term hyper-heuristics was introduced in 2000 (Cowling,
Kendall, and Soubeiga 2000), even though the general ideas
were used even earlier. In the most common classification
of hyper-heuristics (Burke et al. 2010, 2019), this paper introduces a perturbative selection hyper-heuristic, a class that
perturbs existing solutions by selecting from a set of existing
low-level heuristics.
A review was published in 2013 (Burke et al. 2013) and
2020 (Drake et al. 2020). Much work in the area is related to
the Cross Domain Heuristic Search Challenge 2011 (Burke
et al. 2011), where the framework HyFlex (Ochoa et al.
2012a) was introduced for a uniform implementation of different hyper-heuristics, featuring six different domains and
low-level heuristics in four different categories, which are
local search, mutation, ruin-and-recreate, and crossover. The
challenge was won by Mısır et al. (2012) with a combination of adaptive mechanisms to manage a set of active lowlevel heuristics. A streamlined version of this algorithm was
published by Adriaensen and Nowé (2016). The following
places in the competition were taken by a self-adaptive variable neighbourhood search (Hsiao, Chiang, and Fu 2012),
and an algorithm using cycles of diversification and intensification (Larose 2011). Extensions to the framework have
been provided later (Ochoa et al. 2012b), including several
additional domains (Adriaensen, Ochoa, and Nowé 2015).

Introduction
Instead of providing problem-specific solution methods for
different domains, hyper-heuristics aim to stay fully domainindependent by enforcing a strict domain barrier and only
having access to a set of low-level heuristics (LLHs) to apply
on a given instance. Often hyper-heuristics try to find certain
combinations of LLHs that are beneficial to apply, e.g., a
combination of a perturbation followed by a local search.
However, a combination that is beneficial in the early part of
the search might not work well in a later part of the search.
On the other hand, the solution value and the execution time
are the only information the hyper-heuristic gets back from
the LLH.
Still, the trajectory of solution values can help to draw
conclusions about the current state of the search. Therefore,
we propose to use this information to learn efficient applications of low-level heuristics and introduce a new set of
15 features to characterize the current state of the search.
Then we use these features for the novel hyper-heuristic
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12444

