The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Efficient Answer Enumeration in Description Logics with Functional Roles
Carsten Lutz, Marcin Przybyłko
Institute of Computer Science, Leipzig University, Germany
{clu,przybyl}@informatik.uni-leipzig.de

but (mary, ∗) is a minimal partial answer that conveys information which is otherwise lost. The ontologies in (Lutz
and Przybylko 2022b) are sets of guarded existential rules
which generalize well-known description logics such as EL
and ELIH. An important feature of description logics that
is not captured by guarded rules are functionality assertions
on roles, which make it possible to declare that some binary
relation symbols must be interpreted as partial functions.
The purpose of this paper is to study the enumeration of
answers to OMQs that combine a CQ with an ontology formulated in a description logic with functional roles, in particular ELIHF and its fragments. We consider both the traditional complete answers and two versions of minimal partial answers that differ in which kind of wildcards are admitted. In one version, there is only a single wildcard symbol ‘∗’
while in the other version, multiple wildcards ‘∗1 ’, ‘∗2 ’, etc
are admitted and multiple occurrences of the same wildcard
represent the same unknown constant.
We study enumeration algorithms with a preprocessing
phase that takes time linear in the size of D and with constant
delay, that is, in the enumeration phase the delay between
two answers must be independent of D. Note that we assume the OMQ Q to be fixed and of constant size, as in data
complexity. If such an algorithm exists, then enumeration
belongs to the complexity class DelayClin . If in addition the
algorithm writes in the enumeration phase only a constant
amount of memory, then it belons to the class CD◦Lin. Enumeration algorithms with these properties have been studied
intensely, see (Berkholz, Gerhardt, and Schweikardt 2020;
Segoufin 2015) for an overview. It is not known whether
DelayClin and CD◦Lin coincide (Kazana 2013).
It is an important result for CQs q without ontologies that
enumeration is possible in CD◦Lin if q is acyclic and freeconnex acyclic (Bagan, Durand, and Grandjean 2007), the
latter meaning that q is acyclic after adding an atom that
covers all answer variables. If these conditions are not met
and q is self-join free (i.e., no relation symbol occurs more
than once), then enumeration is not possible in DelayClin unless certain algorithmic assumptions fail that pertain to the
triangle conjecture, the hyperclique conjecture, and Boolean
matrix multiplication (Bagan, Durand, and Grandjean 2007;
Brault-Baron 2013). In the presence of functional dependencies, which in their unary version are identical to functionality assertions in description logic, the characteriza-

Abstract
We study the enumeration of answers to ontology-mediated
queries when the ontology is formulated in a description logic
that supports functional roles and the query is a CQ. In particular, we show that enumeration is possible with linear preprocessing and constant delay when a certain extension of the
CQ (pertaining to functional roles) is acyclic and free-connex
acyclic. This holds both for complete answers and for partial answers. We provide matching lower bounds for the case
where the query is self-join free.

1

Introduction

In ontology-mediated querying, a query is combined with
an ontology to inject domain knowledge and to facilitate access to incomplete and heterogeneous data (Bienvenu et al.
2014; Calvanese et al. 2009; Calı̀, Gottlob, and Lukasiewicz
2012). Intense research has been carried out on the complexity of ontology-mediated querying, often focussing on conjunctive queries (CQs) and on description logics and existential rules as ontology languages. Most of the existing studies have concentrated on the basic problem of single-testing
which means to decide, given an ontology-mediated query
(OMQ) Q, a database D, and a candidate answer ā, whether
ā is indeed an answer to Q on D. From the viewpoint of
many practical applications, however, the assumption that a
candidate answer is provided is hardly realistic and it seems
much more relevant to enumerate, given an OMQ Q and a
database D, all answers to Q on D.
The investigation of answer enumeration for OMQs has
recently been initiated in (Lutz and Przybylko 2022b) which
also introduces useful new notions of minimal partial answers; such answers may contain wildcards to represent objects that are known to exist, but whose exact identity is unknown. If, for example, the ontology stipulates that
Researcher
Unversity

v ∃worksFor.University
v Academia

and the database D is {Researcher(mary)}, then there are
no complete answers to the CQ
q(x, y) = worksFor(x, y) ∧ Academia(y),
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6483

