The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

TrOCR: Transformer-Based Optical Character Recognition
with Pre-trained Models
Minghao Li1 * , Tengchao Lv2 , Jingye Chen2∗ , Lei Cui2 ,
Yijuan Lu2 , Dinei Florencio2 , Cha Zhang2 , Zhoujun Li1 , Furu Wei2
1
Beihang University
Microsoft Corporation
{liminghao1630, lizj}@buaa.edu.cn
{tengchaolv, v-jingyechen, lecu, yijlu, dinei, chazhang, fuwei}@microsoft.com
2

Abstract

Recent progress in text recognition (Diaz et al. 2021)
has witnessed the significant improvements by taking advantage of the Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) architectures. However, existing methods are still based on CNNs
as the backbone, where the self-attention is built on top of
CNN backbones as encoders to understand the text image.
For decoders, Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC)
(Graves et al. 2006) is usually used compounded with an
external language model on the character-level to improve
the overall accuracy. Despite the great success achieved by
the hybrid encoder/decoder method, there is still a lot of
room to improve with pre-trained CV and NLP models:
1) the network parameters in existing methods are trained
from scratch with synthetic/human-labeled datasets, leaving large-scale pre-trained models unexplored. 2) as image
Transformers become more and more popular (Dosovitskiy
et al. 2021; Touvron et al. 2020), especially the recent selfsupervised image pre-training (Bao, Dong, and Wei 2021),
it is straightforward to investigate whether pre-trained image Transformers can replace CNN backbones, meanwhile
exploiting the pre-trained image Transformers to work together with the pre-trained text Transformers in a single
framework on the text recognition task.

Text recognition is a long-standing research problem for document digitalization. Existing approaches are usually built
based on CNN for image understanding and RNN for charlevel text generation. In addition, another language model is
usually needed to improve the overall accuracy as a postprocessing step. In this paper, we propose an end-to-end text
recognition approach with pre-trained image Transformer and
text Transformer models, namely TrOCR, which leverages
the Transformer architecture for both image understanding
and wordpiece-level text generation. The TrOCR model is
simple but effective, and can be pre-trained with large-scale
synthetic data and fine-tuned with human-labeled datasets.
Experiments show that the TrOCR model outperforms the
current state-of-the-art models on the printed, handwritten
and scene text recognition tasks. The TrOCR models and
code are publicly available at https://aka.ms/trocr.

Introduction
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) is the electronic or
mechanical conversion of images of typed, handwritten or
printed text into machine-encoded text, whether from a
scanned document, a photo of a document, a scene photo
or from subtitle text superimposed on an image. Typically,
an OCR system includes two main modules: a text detection module and a text recognition module. Text detection
aims to localize all text blocks within the text image, either at word-level or textline-level. The text detection task
is usually considered as an object detection problem where
conventional object detection models such as YoLOv5 and
DBNet (Liao et al. 2019) can be applied. Meanwhile, text
recognition aims to understand the text image content and
transcribe the visual signals into natural language tokens.
The text recognition task is usually framed as an encoderdecoder problem where existing methods leveraged CNNbased encoder for image understanding and RNN-based decoder for text generation. In this paper, we focus on the text
recognition task for document images and leave text detection as the future work.

To this end, we propose TrOCR, an end-to-end
Transformer-based OCR model for text recognition with
pre-trained CV and NLP models, which is shown in Figure 1. Distinct from the existing text recognition models,
TrOCR is a simple but effective model which does not use
the CNN as the backbone. Instead, following (Dosovitskiy
et al. 2021), it first resizes the input text image into 384×384
and then the image is split into a sequence of 16×16 patches
which are used as the input to image Transformers. Standard Transformer architecture with the self-attention mechanism is leveraged on both encoder and decoder parts, where
wordpiece units are generated as the recognized text from
the input image. To effectively train the TrOCR model, the
encoder can be initialized with pre-trained ViT-style models (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; Touvron et al. 2020; Bao,
Dong, and Wei 2021) while the decoder can be initialized
with pre-trained BERT-style models (Devlin et al. 2019;
Liu et al. 2019; Dong et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020b), respectively. Therefore, the advantage of TrOCR is three-fold.
First, TrOCR uses the pre-trained image Transformer and

* Work done during internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13094

