The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Exploring the Interaction between Local and Global Latent Configurations for
Clustering Single-Cell RNA-Seq: A Unified Perspective
Nairouz Mrabah, Mohamed Mahmoud Amar, Mohamed Bouguessa, Abdoulaye Banire Diallo
University of Quebec at Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
{mrabah.nairouz, amar.mohamed mahmoud}@courrier.uqam.ca, {bouguessa.mohamed, diallo.abdoulaye}@uqam.ca

Abstract

As an unsupervised learning strategy, clustering constitutes
the most effective method to accurately identify cell types
(Kiselev, Andrews, and Hemberg 2019). It is a crucial step in
almost any scRNA-seq data analysis. After the breakthrough
of high-dimensional gene expression profiles, researchers
have tried to address the clustering problem by combining dimensionality reduction techniques, such as PCA, T-SNE and
UMAP (McInnes, Healy, and Melville 2018), with classical
clustering methods, including K-means, hierarchical clustering (Johnson 1967), and the density-based methods (Ester
et al. 1996). Unfortunately, due to the non-trivial relationships
between within-cluster cells, the severe sparsity induced by
dropout events, as well as the high variability of gene expression levels (Kiselev, Andrews, and Hemberg 2019), these
approaches achieve suboptimal clustering results.
To overcome the limitations of the classical clustering
methods, more advanced techniques have been introduced.
Several methods, including scImpute (Li and Li 2018), CIDR
(Lin, Troup, and Ho 2017), MAGIC (van Dijk et al. 2017),
and SAVER (Huang et al. 2018), first impute the dropouts in
the gene expression count matrix and then cluster the clean
data. Although these approaches manage to reduce the number of false-zero values, they generally fail to capture the
complex structure inherent to scRNA-seq data. To address
this problem, kernel clustering methods, such as MPSSC
(Park and Zhao 2018) and SIMLR (Wang et al. 2017) can
learn robust similarity measures. However, these approaches
can not match the expressive power of deep learning. Futhermore, the time/memory prohibitive costs can be a barrier to
their use on the rapidly growing gene transcriptional datasets.
Recently, several auto-encoder-based models follow the
deep clustering paradigm to identify cell clusters such as
scDC (Tian et al. 2019), scDCC (Tian et al. 2021), and
scziDesk (Chen et al. 2020). In addition, most of these
approaches incorporate a zero-inflated negative bionomial
(ZINB) model to characterize the discreteness, zero-inflation
and over-dispersion of gene expression data. Although these
deep models achieve considerable improvement in clustering
performance, the structural relationships between cells are
ignored, making the clustering task more difficult. This is
why a new class of models (Liu et al. 2022) has emerged
based on graph neural networks (GNNs), including scGNN
(Wang et al. 2021), scGAE (Luo et al. 2021), scTAG (Yu et al.
2022) and scDSC (Gan et al. 2022).

The most recent approaches for clustering single-cell RNAsequencing data rely on deep auto-encoders. However, three
major challenges remain unaddressed. First, current models
overlook the impact of the cumulative errors induced by the
pseudo-supervised embedding clustering task (Feature Randomness). Second, existing methods neglect the effect of the
strong competition between embedding clustering and reconstruction (Feature Drift). Third, the previous deep clustering
models regularly fail to consider the topological information
of the latent data, even though the local and global latent configurations can bring complementary views to the clustering
task. To address these challenges, we propose a novel approach that explores the interaction between local and global
latent configurations to progressively adjust the reconstruction
and embedding clustering tasks. We elaborate a topological
and probabilistic filter to mitigate Feature Randomness and
a cell-cell graph structure and content correction mechanism
to counteract Feature Drift. The Zero-Inflated Negative Binomial model is also integrated to capture the characteristics
of gene expression profiles. We conduct detailed experiments
on real-world datasets from multiple representative genome
sequencing platforms. Our approach outperforms the state-ofthe-art clustering methods in various evaluation metrics.

Introduction
Single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) is a broadly
adopted technique for measuring transcriptome-wide gene
expression levels at the mono-cell resolution. The derived
datasets can provide valuable insights into critical biological
topics, such as developing a deeper understanding of complex
tissues (Welch et al. 2019), the discovery of rare/novel cell
types (Jindal et al. 2018), the study of complex diseases such
as the detection of cancer stem cells (Bhaduri et al. 2020;
Paik et al. 2020), the elucidation of cell heterogeneity (Papalexi and Satija 2018), the exploration of complex systems
(Stubbington et al. 2017) and the inference of cell trajectory
(Saelens et al. 2019). Despite being systematic, automatic
cell annotations regularly fail to achieve accurate labeling
and require a relevant reference dataset. Furthermore, expertmanaged cell annotations are slow, expensive, and can be
subjective. In this context, we investigate the unsupervised
identification of cell types for scRNA-seq datasets.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9235

