The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On Solution Functions of Optimization: Universal Approximation and Covering
Number Bounds
Ming Jin, Vanshaj Khattar, Harshal Kaushik, Bilgehan Sel, and Ruoxi Jia
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech
jinming@vt.edu, vanshajk@vt.edu, harshaldkaushik@vt.edu, bsel@vt.edu, ruoxijia@vt.edu

Abstract

renewed interests. However, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, a mathematical theory characterizing the global properties of solution functions is still missing. Two of the basic
questions are:

We study the expressibility and learnability of convex optimization solution functions and their multi-layer architectural
extension. The main results are: (1) the class of solution functions of linear programming (LP) and quadratic programming
(QP) is a universal approximant for the smooth model class
or some restricted Sobolev space, and we characterize the
rate-distortion, (2) the approximation power is investigated
through a viewpoint of regression error, where information
about the target function is provided in terms of data observations, (3) compositionality in the form of a deep architecture
with optimization as a layer is shown to reconstruct some basic functions used in numerical analysis without error, which
implies that (4) a substantial reduction in rate-distortion can
be achieved with a universal network architecture, and (5) we
discuss the statistical bounds of empirical covering numbers
for LP/QP, as well as a generic optimization problem (possibly
nonconvex) by exploiting tame geometry. Our results provide
the first rigorous analysis of the approximation and learningtheoretic properties of solution functions with implications for
algorithmic design and performance guarantees.

1

(1) which classes of functions can they approximate well?
(2) what is the statistical complexity of the class of solution
functions?
The first question pertains to the expressivity of the function class. Without proper restrictions, one can easily obtain
a construct with g(z; x, θ) := ∥z − µ(x, θ)∥ and R(x, θ) :=
Rnz so that π(x, θ) can represent any function µ(x, θ) despite being nonconvex or even discontinuous; however, such
construct is neither interesting nor practically relevant. To
prevent such degenerate cases, the optimization in (1) is, in
general, assumed to be convex. In fact, as we show later in
the analysis, further restrictions to LPs or QPs can still preserve the universal approximation property. Perhaps an even
more intriguing and related question is concerning the role
of “depth” by drawing an analogy to contemporary studies
on deep neural networks (DNNs) (see, e.g., (Hanin 2019;
Lu et al. 2021)). Indeed, the idea of concatenating optimizations as “layers” seems to be catching on (Amos and Kolter
2017; Agrawal et al. 2019; Kotary et al. 2021). Beyond the
current knowledge in the multi-parametric programming literature that the solution function of an LP/QP is piecewise
affine (PWA) (Grancharova and Johansen 2012), we provide
a simple construction with two layers of LPs/QPs that can
reproduce nonlinear functions such as product operator with
no error; repeated stacking such structures by adding depth
can thus reconstruct any polynomial functions of arbitrary
order. Such blessings of compositionality appear in a very
different form than DNNs, and will be exploited to reduce
the complexity of construction (measured in terms of the
number of variables and constraints). A key issue in training
multi-layer compositions is the ability to backpropagate, for
which we ensure compliance with the disciplined parametric programming (DPP) rules introduced in (Agrawal et al.
2018). Hence, in the first part of the study, we examine the
expressivity and role of depth from the perspective of approximation theory (DeVore and Lorentz 1993). The second
question has a bearing on learnability, which, ironically, has
not been well-established despite recent advancements in related fields (Amos 2022; Kotary et al. 2021; Ebert et al. 2021;

Introduction

We study the object referred to as solution function defined
by the following generic optimization:
π(x, θ) = arg min g(z; x, θ),

(1)

z∈R(x,θ)

where g(·; x, θ) : Rnz → R and R(x, θ) ⊆ Rnz are the objective function and feasible set (with R : Rnx ×Rnθ ⇒ Rnz
being a set-valued function), respectively, characterized by
both x ∈ Rnx and θ ∈ Θ ⊆ Rnθ . We use semicolon in
g(z; x, θ) to separate optimization variables from parameters.
To make a further distinction, in the context of decision making, x can be the input/state, θ is the parameter, and the output
is the decision/action. Since the optimization solution can
be a set, we make proper assumptions to ensure uniqueness
(Dontchev and Rockafellar 2009).
Historically, the solution function (and optimal value function) has been an important basis for local sensitivity/stability
and parametric analysis in optimization theory (Dontchev
and Rockafellar 2009; Fiacco 2020); see (Amos 2022) for
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8123

