The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Warm-Starting Nested Rollout Policy Adaptation with Optimal Stopping
Chen Dang1,2 , Cristina Bazgan2 , Tristan Cazenave2 , Morgan Chopin1 , Pierre-Henri Wuillemin3
1
Orange Labs, Châtillon, France
Université Paris-Dauphine, PSL Research University, CNRS, UMR 7243, LAMSADE, F-75016 Paris, France
3
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, UMR 7606, LIP6, F-75005 Paris, France
chen.dang@orange.com, cristina.bazgan@dauphine.psl.eu, tristan.cazenave@dauphine.psl.eu, morgan.chopin@orange.com,
pierre-henri.wuillemin@lip6.fr
2

Abstract

Our contributions deal with the initialization of NRPA using the optimal stopping theory and with better exploration
avoiding already scored sequences of decisions. More precisely, we observed that whenever NRPA gets unsatisfactory
solutions from the beginning it is highly unlikely that it will
find significantly better solutions in subsequent iterations.
To remedy this problem, we cast the initialization step of
NRPA as an instance of the secretary problem, a well-known
optimal stopping problem: a decision maker (DM) wants to
recruit a secretary for a job position, n candidate secretaries
are thus interviewed one after the other in a random order,
which can be ranked among the examined candidates. The
DM can decide whether to terminate the recruitment process
by accepting the last interviewed candidate. The decision of
DM about recruiting a candidate needs to be just after the
interview of the candidate and it is irrevocable. In addition,
DM has no knowledge of the quality of the upcoming candidates. The goal is to maximize the probability of selecting
the best candidate. In our case, we are interested in a variant
of this problem, where candidates are NRPA runs and we
aim at minimizing the expected rank of the chosen candidate. To our knowledge, this is the first time that the optimal
stopping theory is used in the context of Monte Carlo search.
The paper is organized in five sections. The second section deals with related works. The third section details our
contributions. The fourth section gives experimental results
for the Minimum Congestion Shortest Path Routing problem, the Traveling Salesman Problem with Time Windows
and the Snake-in-the-Box problem. Conclusions and future
works are given in section five.

Nested Rollout Policy Adaptation (NRPA) is an approach
using online learning policies in a nested structure. It has
achieved a great result in a variety of difficult combinatorial optimization problems. In this paper, we propose MetaNRPA, which combines optimal stopping theory with NRPA
for warm-starting and significantly improves the performance
of NRPA. We also present several exploratory techniques for
NRPA which enable it to perform better exploration. We establish this for three notoriously difficult problems ranging
from telecommunication, transportation and coding theory,
namely Minimum Congestion Shortest Path Routing, Traveling Salesman Problem with Time Windows and Snake-inthe-Box. We also improve the lower bounds of the Snake-inthe-Box problem for multiple dimensions.

Introduction
Search algorithms can be used to solve many difficult combinatorial optimization problems. Monte Carlo Search algorithms rely on randomness to discover good sequences of
decisions for difficult problems. Following their success in
games (Coulom 2007; Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006; Browne
et al. 2012; Silver et al. 2016, 2017, 2018), they were applied
with success to multiple combinatorial optimization problems (Cazenave 2009; Rosin 2011). They work particularly
well when combined with machine learning.
We propose new general techniques to Monte Carlo
Search algorithms that improve the algorithms for multiple
applications. Using these techniques we get better results
than the previous ones for three difficult combinatorial optimization problems from varied fields, namely telecommunication, transportation and coding theory.
The problems we address were already successfully addressed using Nested Rollout Policy Adaptation (NRPA)
(Rosin 2011). They are the Minimum Congestion Shortest Path Routing problem (Dang et al. 2021), the Traveling Salesman Problem with Time Windows (Edelkamp et al.
2013) and the Snake-in-the-Box problem (Edelkamp and
Cazenave 2016). For these three problems we improve the
results compared to standard NRPA. In particular for the
Snake-in-the-Box problem, we provide new lower bounds
for several dimensions.

Related Works
Monte Carlo Search
Monte Carlo Search has many applications in games and
difficult combinatorial optimization problems. When combined with deep learning it surpasses the level of the best
human players in games such as Go, Chess and Shogi (Silver
et al. 2018). The combination has been applied to many other
games with success (Cazenave et al. 2020). It is also the
best general algorithm to solve a problem when given only
the raw description of the problem as is the case in General
Game Playing. Since 2007, all the world champions of the
General Game Playing competition have used Monte Carlo

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12381

