The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Adaptive Hierarchy-Branch Fusion for Online Knowledge Distillation
Linrui Gong1 , Shaohui Lin1 * , Baochang Zhang2 , Yunhang Shen3 , Ke Li3 ,
Ruizhi Qiao3 , Bo Ren3 , Muqing Li3 , Zhou Yu1,4 , Lizhuang Ma1
1

East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
Beihang University, China
3
Tencent Youtu Lab, China
4
Key Laboratory of Advanced Theory and Application in Statistics and Data Science - MOE, China
linruigong965@gmail.com, bczhang@buaa.edu.cn, {odysseyshen,tristanli,ruizhiqiao,timren,ericqli}@tencent.com,
{shlin, lzma}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, zyu@stat.ecnu.edu.cn
Abstract
Online Knowledge Distillation (OKD) is designed to alleviate the dilemma that the high-capacity pre-trained teacher
model is not available. However, the existing methods mostly
focus on improving the ensemble prediction accuracy from
multiple students (a.k.a. branches), which often overlook the
homogenization problem that makes student models saturate
quickly and hurts performance. We assume that the intrinsic bottleneck of the homogenization problem comes from
the identical branch architecture and coarse ensemble strategy. We propose a novel Adaptive Hierarchy-Branch Fusion framework for Online Knowledge Distillation, termed
AHBF-OKD, which designs hierarchical branches and adaptive hierarchy-branch fusion module to boost the model diversity and learn complementary knowledge. Specifically,
we first introduce hierarchical branch architectures to construct diverse peers by increasing the depth of branches
monotonously on the basis of the target branch. To effectively
transfer knowledge from the most complex branch to the simplest target branch, we propose an adaptive hierarchy-branch
fusion module to create hierarchical teacher assistants recursively, which regards the target branch as the smallest teacher
assistant. During the training, the teacher assistant from the
previous hierarchy is explicitly distilled by the teacher assistant and the branch from the current hierarchy. Thus, the important scores to different branches are effectively and adaptively allocated to reduce branch homogenization. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of AHBF-OKD
on different datasets, including CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet
2012. For example, the distilled ResNet18 achieves the Top1 error of 29.28% on ImageNet 2012, which significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. The source code is
available at https://github.com/linruigong965/AHBF.

Figure 1: Different schematic frameworks of online knowledge distillation. (a) Mutual learning, (b) Ensemble the independent models by averaging outputs. (c) Ensemble the
identical branches with the attention mechanism. (d) The
proposed AHBF-OKD with gradual hierarchical distillation.

2015) have been widely used to transfer knowledge from a
high-capacity teacher to a high-efficiency student.
Traditional KD methods (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean
2015; Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2017; Yim et al. 2017)
employ a two-stage training procedure, i.e., first pre-training
a powerful teacher and then distilling its knowledge to
a compact student. Despite the significant improvements
in student discriminative ability, the following two problems still exist, prohibiting their usage in real applications.
(1) The high-capacity pre-trained teachers are not always
available; (2) The two-stage training process requires high
computation costs. To address these issues, Online Knowledge Distillation (OKD) employs an end-to-end teacher-free
training paradigm, which has received much research focus.
The existing OKD methods construct multiple students
with identical architecture, one of which is considered as
the target model and distilled from its peers. We compare
different OKD schematics in Fig. 1. Mutual learning (Zhang
et al. 2018) in Fig. 1(a) collaboratively learns the students
by transferring the knowledge from their peers. Recently,
consistency regularization (Berthelot et al. 2019; Sohn et al.
2020; Xie et al. 2020), a variant of mutual learning, aligns
the peer outputs with different data augmentations of the

Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success in
various scenarios (He et al. 2016; Ren et al. 2015; He et al.
2017). However, the over-parameterized models are difficult
to deploy on resource-limited devices, such as mobile and
embedded devices. To make a trade-off between the model
simplicity and efficiency, Knowledge Distillation (KD) techniques (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Romero et al.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7731

