The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Attention-Conditioned Augmentations
for Self-Supervised Anomaly Detection and Localization
Behzad Bozorgtabar1,2 , Dwarikanath Mahapatra3
1

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland
2
Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland
3
Inception Institute of AI (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE
behzad.bozorgtabar@epfl.ch, dwarikanath.mahapatra@inceptioniai.org

Abstract
Self-supervised anomaly detection and localization are critical to real-world scenarios in which collecting anomalous
samples and pixel-wise labeling is tedious or infeasible, even
worse when a wide variety of unseen anomalies could surface
at test time. Our approach involves a pretext task in the context of masked image modeling, where the goal is to impose
agreement between cluster assignments obtained from the
representation of an image view containing saliency-aware
masked patches and the uncorrupted image view. We harness the self-attention map extracted from the transformer to
mask non-salient image patches without destroying the crucial structure associated with the foreground object. Subsequently, the pre-trained model is fine-tuned to detect and localize simulated anomalies generated under the guidance of
the transformer’s self-attention map. We conducted extensive
validation and ablations on the benchmark of industrial images and achieved superior performance against competing
methods. We also show the adaptability of our method to the
medical images of the chest X-rays benchmark.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Given (a) the input image, we obtain (b) the average attention map of the transformer’s heads, which is
then leveraged for (c) attention-conditioned patch masking (APMask) by dropping the least attended patches and
(d) attention-conditioned anomaly simulation by cutting and
pasting local patch within the salient region.

Introduction
Anomaly detection and localization are the centerpieces of
many safety-critical applications, ranging from defect detection in industrial pipelines (Bergmann et al. 2019) to medical image inspection (Bozorgtabar et al. 2020; Spahr, Bozorgtabar, and Thiran 2021). Since it is challenging to gather
anomalous examples for training, most deep learning-based
anomaly detection and segmentation methods (Ruff et al.
2018; Baur et al. 2021; Akcay, Atapour-Abarghouei, and
Breckon 2018) are formulated to explore the general patterns of normal samples using one-class classification setup.
Current state-of-the-art (SOTA) anomaly detection and
localization methods (Roth et al. 2022; Lee, Lee, and Song
2022; Yu et al. 2021) often rely on deep representations
from ImageNet classification. Instead, we focus on the selfsupervised setting where we define a pretext task using
a multi-view consistency strategy from a training set of
only anomaly-free samples. Recently, self-supervised vision
transformers (ViTs), e.g., (Caron et al. 2021) have performed tremendously on a downstream classification task,

but they have not yet been fully explored for anomaly detection task. Nonetheless, these methods focus on learning
image-level invariant representation, neglecting local context, making them suboptimal for the anomaly localization
task. In particular, we are intrigued by the self-attention
mechanisms of ViT-based models (Touvron et al. 2021;
Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) and propose a pre-training strategy
based on masked image modeling (MIM) (Bao, Dong, and
Wei 2021; Zhou et al. 2022). Furthermore, we adopt the finetuning scheme using the transformer’s attention-conditioned
anomaly simulation (Fig. 1 (d)).
In summary, we make the following contributions: 1)
We propose a MIM strategy, namely Attention-conditioned
Patch Masking (APMask) (Fig. 1 (c)) for ViT-based pretraining by masking non-salient image patches that help
the model to capture the local semantics while preserving
the crucial structure associated with the foreground object.
We conducted ablations to validate the effectiveness of our
masking strategy. 2) We adopt the fine-tuning scheme using

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14720

