The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learnable Spectral Wavelets on Dynamic Graphs to Capture Global Interactions
Anson Bastos1 , Abhishek Nadgeri2 , Kuldeep Singh3 , Toyotaro Suzumura4 , Manish Singh1
1

Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, India
2
RWTH Aachen, Germany
3
Zerotha Research and Cerence Gmbh, Germany
4
The University of Tokyo, Japan
cs20resch11002@iith.ac.in, abhishek.nadgeri@rwth-aachen.de, kuldeep.singh1@cerence.com, suzumura@acm.org,
msingh@cse.iith.ac.in
Abstract

to capturing local interactions, missing out on other important information. For example, in the case of a dynamic
money transaction graph, having a skewed representation
of fraud users among genuine users, there would exist links
between these fraud and genuine users, thus, giving rise to
high-frequency signals. In the case of local neighborhood
aggregation (attending to low-frequency signals), the majority node(genuine) pattern will cause the fraudulent pattern
to diminish. Thus, capturing global properties becomes necessary. Here, the global information would help identify the
fraud pattern eventually assisting in identifying the criminal. Similarly, in the citation graph, the local properties will
help to understand the category of paper. In contrast, global
properties will help to understand the amount of interdisciplinary research across research domains. Hence, learning
the global dependencies is crucial for dynamic graphs which
is a relatively unexplored area in its scientific literature.
In this paper we aim to encompass global dependencies
in dynamic graphs, beyond local neighborhood aggregation, and view it through the lens of spectral graph theory
(Hammond, Vandergheynst, and Gribonval 2019). For the
same, we introduce a novel concept of learnable spectral
graph wavelets to capture global interactions of dynamic
graph. The concept of learnable wavelet has following motivation: (i) Computing the spectra using full eigen decomposition is computationally expensive and requires O(N 3 )
time. Moreover, this gets even more computationally costly
by a factor of the number of timesteps(T ) considered for dynamic graphs that evolve over every timestep. Spectral graph
wavelets can be computed efficiently in O(N + |E|) as we
shall see in the following sections. (ii) Wavelets are sparser
as compared to the graph Fourier transform adding to the
computational benefits (Tremblay and Borgnat 2014). (iii)
Wavelets give a sense of localization in the vertex domain
of the graphs thus enabling interpretability of the convolutions while also being able to capture the global properties
of the graph by changing the scale parameter (c.f., Figure 1).
iv) Focusing on dynamic learnable wavelets helps in capturing global properties in that evolving spectra as the graph
changes with time, where static and non-learnable wavelet
methods (Xu et al. 2019a) show empirical limitations.
Furthermore, build on the recent success of capturing
neighborhood features for evolving graphs, we propose to
learn homogeneous representation of spatial and spectral

Learning on evolving(dynamic) graphs has caught the attention of researchers as static methods exhibit limited performance in this setting. The existing methods for dynamic
graphs learn spatial features by local neighborhood aggregation, which essentially only captures the low pass signals
and local interactions. In this work, we go beyond current approaches to incorporate global features for effectively learning representations of a dynamically evolving graph. We propose to do so by capturing the spectrum of the dynamic graph.
Since static methods to learn the graph spectrum would not
consider the history of the evolution of the spectrum as the
graph evolves with time, we propose a novel approach to
learn the graph wavelets to capture this evolving spectra. Further, we propose a framework that integrates the dynamically
captured spectra in the form of these learnable wavelets into
spatial features for incorporating local and global interactions. Experiments on eight standard datasets show that our
method significantly outperforms related methods on various
tasks for dynamic graphs.

Introduction
Recently there has been tremendous progress in the domain of Graph Representation Learning (Khoshraftar and
An 2022). The aim here is to develop novel methods to learn
the features of graphs in a vector space. Such approaches
have successful applications in the domain of image recognition (Han et al. 2022), computational chemistry (Ying et al.
2021), drug discovery (Stärk et al. 2022) and Natural Language processing (Wu et al. 2021a). Although effective, the
underlying graphs are static in nature.
In many real-world scenarios, graphs are dynamic, for example, social networks, citation graphs, bank transactions,
etc. For such cases, various approaches have been developed (see survey by Kazemi et al. (2020)). Broadly, these
methods aim to learn the evolving nature of graphs through
spatial features relying on local neighborhood aggregation
(local dependencies) (Pareja et al. 2020; Goyal, Chhetri, and
Canedo 2020). For example, researchers (Pareja et al. 2020;
Shi et al. 2021) have resorted to using GNNs along with
RNNs to capture the dynamic evolving nature of graphs.
With initial successes, these methods are inherently limited
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6779

