The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Formally Verified SAT-Based AI Planning
Mohammad Abdulaziz1,2 , Friedrich Kurz2
1

2

King’s College London
Techniche Universität München

Abstract

Röger, and Helmert 2017. A fundamental problem with certified computation for classical planning, as well as other
PSPACE-complete problems, is that no succinct certificates
exist unless NP = PSPACE (Arora and Barak 2009, Chapter 4).
Thirdly, there is formal verification, where system properties are verified by means of a mechanically checkable
formal mathematical proof. This gives the highest possible trust in a program. Unlike certified computation, formal verification guarantees program completeness, in addition to its output correctness. Nonetheless, formal verification needs intensive effort, and it is usually much harder for
a formally verified program to perform as efficiently as an
unverified program since verifying all performance optimisations is usually infeasible. Nonetheless, formal verification has seen recent wide-spread success. Notable applications include a verified OS kernel (Klein et al. 2009), a verified SAT-solver (Blanchette et al. 2018), a verified model
checker (Esparza et al. 2013), a verified conference system (Kanav, Lammich, and Popescu 2014), a verified optimised C compiler (Leroy 2009), and, in the context of planning, verified validators (Abdulaziz and Lammich 2018; Abdulaziz and Koller 2022), and algorithms for bounding plan
lengths (Abdulaziz, Norrish, and Gretton 2018).
Encoding planning problems as logical formulae has a
long history (McCarthy and Hayes 1981). SAT-based planning (Kautz and Selman 1992) is the most successful such
approach, where the question of whether a planning problem
has a solution of bounded length is encoded into propositional (SAT) formulae. For a sound and complete encoding,
a formula for a length bound (aka horizon) h is satisfiable iff
there is a solution with length bounded by h. A series of such
formulae for increasing horizons are passed to a SAT solver
until a plan is found. The encoding of Kautz and Selman
was significantly improved by exploiting problem symmetries (Rintanen 2003), state invariants, and by parallelising
the encodings (Rintanen, Heljanko, and Niemelä 2006). In
this paper we present a formally verified ∀-step parallel encoding of classical planning (Kautz and Selman 1996; Rintanen, Heljanko, and Niemelä 2006). Using it as a reference,
we discover bugs in the state-of-the-art SAT-based planner
Madagascar (Rintanen 2012). We also show that our encoder
is an order of magnitude slower than Madagascar, which is
reasonable for formally verified software.

We present an executable formally verified SAT encoding of
ground classical AI planning problems. We use the theorem
prover Isabelle/HOL to perform the verification. We experimentally test the verified encoding and show that it can be
used for reasonably sized standard planning benchmarks. We
also use it as a reference to test a state-of-the-art SAT-based
planner, showing that it sometimes falsely claims that problems have no solutions of certain lengths.

Introduction
Planning systems are becoming more and more scalable and
efficient, as shown by different planning competitions (Long
et al. 2000; Coles et al. 2012; Vallati et al. 2015), making
them suited for realistic applications. Since many applications of planning are safety-critical, increasing the trustworthiness of planning algorithms and systems is instrumental
to their widespread adoption. Consequently there currently
are substantial efforts to improve the trustworthiness of planning systems (Howey, Long, and Fox 2004; Eriksson, Röger,
and Helmert 2017; Abdulaziz, Norrish, and Gretton 2018;
Abdulaziz and Lammich 2018).
Increasing trustworthiness of software is a well-studied
problem. Three approaches have been tried in the literature (Abdulaziz, Mehlhorn, and Nipkow 2019). Firstly, a
system’s trustworthiness can be increased by applying software engineering techniques, e.g. programming at the right
level of abstraction, code reviewing, and testing. Although
these practices are relatively easy to implement, they are incomplete.
Secondly, there is certified computation, where the given
program computes, along with its output, a certificate showing why this output is correct. This relegates the burden of
trustworthiness to the certificate checker, which should be
much simpler than the system whose output is to be certified, and thus is less error prone. Certified computation was
pioneered by Mehlhorn and Näher 1998 who used it for their
LEDA library. In the realm of planning, this approach was
pioneered by Howey, Long, and Fox who developed the plan
validator VAL (Howey, Long, and Fox 2004). Also, certifying unsolvability for planning was pioneered by Eriksson,
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14665

