The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Compositional Prototypical Networks for Few-Shot Classification
Qiang Lyu, Weiqiang Wang*
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
luqiang20@mails.ucas.ac.cn, wqwang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract

head_pattern:plain

It is assumed that pre-training provides the feature extractor
with strong class transferability and that high novel class generalization can be achieved by simply reusing the transferable
feature extractor. In this work, our motivation is to explicitly learn some fine-grained and transferable meta-knowledge
so that feature reusability can be further improved. Concretely, inspired by the fact that humans can use learned concepts or components to help them recognize novel classes,
we propose Compositional Prototypical Networks (CPN) to
learn a transferable prototype for each human-annotated attribute, which we call a component prototype. We empirically demonstrate that the learned component prototypes
have good class transferability and can be reused to construct
compositional prototypes for novel classes. Then a learnable
weight generator is utilized to adaptively fuse the compositional and visual prototypes. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method can achieve state-of-the-art results on
different datasets and settings. The performance gains are especially remarkable in the 5-way 1-shot setting. The code is
available at https://github.com/fikry102/CPN.

wing_pattern: multi-colored

…

eye_color: black

novel classes
bill_shape: hooked

base classes

Figure 1: An illustration of the reusable components which
can help humans recognize new birds better. We propose to
learn component prototypes for human-annotated attributes
from base classes and reuse them to construct compositional
prototypes for novel classes.

Meta-learning (Schmidhuber 1987), or learning to learn,
has become a popular learning paradigm for few-shot learning. Meta-learning based approaches aim to extract transferable meta-knowledge from collections of learning tasks
so that the learned model can quickly adapt to new tasks
using the learned meta-knowledge. A recent work (Raghu
et al. 2020) has demonstrated that the reusable features,
i.e., the high-quality features contained in the learned initial
condition, are the dominant factor for the effectiveness of
Model Agnostic Meta-Learning (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine
2017) (MAML), a well-known meta-learning method. In
addition to MAML, a succession of meta-learning based
approaches have been proposed to obtain various metaknowledge, e.g., a good initialization (Ravi and Larochelle
2017; Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017), an optimization algorithm (Andrychowicz et al. 2016; Ravi and Larochelle
2017), or a meta-structure (Ye et al. 2020; Hou et al. 2019).
However, many recent works (Chen et al. 2021b, 2019a;
Tian et al. 2020; Dhillon et al. 2020) indicate that pretraining a feature extractor on the whole base classes dataset
can achieve comparable or even better performance than
many existing meta-learning methods. Some researches
(Wang, Pontil, and Ciliberto 2021; Chen et al. 2021b) show
that global classification in the pre-training stage can provide the feature extractor with strong class transferability
and therefore is theoretically beneficial to the subsequent

Introduction
Deep learning models have made tremendous progress
in many computer vision tasks such as image classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al.
2016), object detection (Girshick et al. 2014; He et al. 2017),
and semantic segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell
2015). However, such models heavily rely on large-scale labeled data, which can be impractical or laborious to collect.
Humans, by contrast, can easily learn to recognize novel
classes from only one or a few examples by utilizing prior
knowledge and experience. To bridge the gap between deep
learning models and human intelligence, few-shot learning (Fei-Fei, Fergus, and Perona 2006; Miller, Matsakis,
and Viola 2000) (FSL) has recently received much attention from researchers. Inspired by human learning behavior, FSL aims to recognize unlabeled examples from novel
classes using only a few labeled examples, with prior knowledge learned from the disjoint base classes dataset containing abundant examples per class.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9011

