The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Conflicting Interactions among Protection Mechanisms for Machine Learning
Models
Sebastian Szyller1 , N. Asokan 2,1
1

Aalto University
University of Waterloo
contact@sebszyller.com, asokan@acm.org
2

Abstract

of security/privacy threats and ways to defend against them.
This facilitates iterative improvements, and allows practitioners to evaluate the benefit of any new approaches.
In this work, we argue that in realistic deployment setting,
multiple security/privacy concerns need to be considered simultaneously. Therefore, any protection mechanism for a
particular concern, needs to be tested together with defences
against other common concerns. We show that when deployed together, ML protection mechanisms may not work
as intended due to conflicting interactions among them.
We claim the following contributions:
1) We highlight the importance of understanding conflicting interactions among ML protection mechanisms, and
provide a framework for studying it (Section 3).
2) We use our framework to analyse the interaction between
model ownership verification mechanisms with two other
types of protection mechanisms: differentially private
training and adversarial training. We provide a theoretical justification (Section 4) for each potential pairwise
conflict, and evaluate it empirically (Sections 5 and 6).
3) We explore whether conflicts can be avoided by changing
(a) the hyperparameters of each protection mechanism,
or (b) the design of the mechanism itself (Section 7).

Nowadays, systems based on machine learning (ML) are
widely used in different domains. Given their popularity, ML
models have become targets for various attacks. As a result,
research at the intersection of security/privacy and ML has
flourished. Typically such work has focused on individual
types of security/privacy concerns and mitigations thereof.
However, in real-life deployments, an ML model will need to
be protected against several concerns simultaneously. A protection mechanism optimal for a specific security or privacy
concern may interact negatively with mechanisms intended
to address other concerns. Despite its practical relevance, the
potential for such conflicts has not been studied adequately.
In this work, we first provide a framework for analyzing such
conflicting interactions. We then focus on systematically analyzing pairwise interactions between protection mechanisms
for one concern, model and data ownership verification, with
two other classes of ML protection mechanisms: differentially
private training, and robustness against model evasion. We
find that several pairwise interactions result in conflicts.
We also explore potential approaches for avoiding such conflicts. First, we study the effect of hyperparameter relaxations, finding that there is no sweet spot balancing the performance of both protection mechanisms. Second, we explore
whether modifying one type of protection mechanism (ownership verification) so as to decouple it from factors that may
be impacted by a conflicting mechanism (differentially private training or robustness to model evasion) can avoid conflict. We show that this approach can indeed avoid the conflict
between ownership verification mechanisms when combined
with differentially private training, but has no effect on robustness to model evasion. We conclude by identifying the
gaps in the landscape of studying interactions between other
types of ML protection mechanisms.

1

2
2.1

Background

Machine Learning

The goal of a ML classification model FV trained on some
dataset DTR is to perform well on the given classification
task according to some metric ϕ measured on a test set DTE .
The whole dataset is denoted as D = {DTR , DTE }. An individual record consists of an input x and the corresponding
label y. Throughout this work, we use the accuracy metric
ϕACC (FV , DTE ) to assess a model FV using DTE :
X
1
ϕACC (FV , DTE ) =
1(FˆV (x) = y). (1)
|DTE |

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) models constitute valuable intellectual property. They are also increasingly deployed in risksensitive domains. As a result, various security and privacy
requirements for ML model deployment have become apparent. This, in turn, has led to substantial recent research
at the intersection of machine learning and security/privacy.
The research community largely focuses on individual types

x∈DTE

where FV (x) is the full probability vector and FˆV (x) is
the most likely class.

2.2

Ownership Verification

In a white-box model stealing attack an adversary A obtains an identical copy of FV belonging to a victim V,

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15179

