The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Contrastive Attention Networks for Attribution of Early Modern Print
Nikolai Vogler1 , Kartik Goyal2 , Kishore PV Reddy1 , Elizaveta Pertseva1 , Samuel V. Lemley3 ,
Christopher N. Warren3 , Max G’Sell3 , Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick1
1

University of California, San Diego
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
3
Carnegie Mellon University
nvogler@ucsd.edu, kartikgo@ttic.edu, cnwarren@cmu.edu, tberg@ucsd.edu
2

Abstract
In this paper, we develop machine learning techniques to
identify unknown printers in early modern (c. 1500–1800)
English printed books. Specifically, we focus on matching
uniquely damaged character type-imprints in anonymously
printed books to works with known printers in order to provide evidence of their origins. Until now, this work has been
limited to manual investigations by analytical bibliographers.
We present a Contrastive Attention-based Metric Learning
approach to identify similar damage across character image
pairs, which is sensitive to very subtle differences in glyph
shapes, yet robust to various confounding sources of noise
associated with digitized historical books. To overcome the
scarce amount of supervised data, we design a random data
synthesis procedure that aims to simulate bends, fractures,
and inking variations induced by the early printing process.
Our method successfully improves downstream damaged typeimprint matching among printed works from this period, as
validated by in-domain human experts. The results of our approach on two important philosophical works from the Early
Modern period demonstrate potential to extend the extant historical research about the origins and content of these books.

Figure 1: A depiction of the neural architecture behind Contrastive Attention-based Metric Learning (CAML), which
we train to identify pairs of damaged type-imprints in early
modern books that have similar damage and therefore likely
originate from the same damaged piece of metallic type and
printing apparatus. Our model uses a joint attention mechanism to attend to residual convolutional features after a
template feature map has been subtracted from both inputs.

Introduction
A complete understanding of the content of surviving historical works requires knowledge of the context of their printing.
This has long been acknowledged in the humanities, giving
rise to analytical bibliography, where physical evidence from
printed books is used to understand their means of production,
revealing incentives for their publication as well as cultural
diffusion of language and knowledge. One of the main kinds
of such physical evidence is character type-imprints pressed
from damaged type pieces. These anomalous type pieces,
when linked across printed works, can reveal which works
came from the same printing apparatus, as depicted in Figure 2. Historians have, for example, leveraged the analysis
of damaged type-imprints as a critical tool in identifying and
studying clandestine printers who withheld their identities to
avoid harsh penalties under censorship laws (Adams 2010;
Como 2018; Warren et al. 2020, 2021).
In this paper, we develop a computational model of the
same analytic techniques used by bibliographers. Our method

automatically compares type-imprint extractions across individual books, or larger collections of books, identifying
pairs of damaged type-imprints that match one another and
therefore likely originate from the same, damaged piece of
metallic type. Our approach enables computational bibliographical analysis that has the potential to scale far beyond
the limits of manual analyses – for example, to the tens of
thousands of censored early modern works that are of interest
to social, cultural, and intellectual historians.
Matching damaged type-imprints across texts is challenging, since the variation in scale, position, font, and inking in
scans of printed characters generally dominates the minute deviations due to localized damage that are of actual interest, as
shown in Fig. 3. We present a Contrastive Attention-based

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5285

