The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Temporal-Frequency Co-training for Time Series Semi-supervised Learning
Zhen Liu1 , Qianli Ma1,2 * , Peitian Ma1 , Linghao Wang1
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot (South China University of Technology), Ministry of Education
cszhenliu@mail.scut.edu.cn, qianlima@scut.edu.cn, ma scuter@163.com, wlhsama@gmail.com

Abstract

can make use of abundant unlabeled data, which can effectively alleviate the reliance of deep learning models on labeled data. Therefore, it is of great significance to explore
SSL paradigms for time series.
Consistent regularization (Sajjadi, Javanmardi, and Tasdizen 2016; Laine and Aila 2017) and pseudo-labeling (Lee
et al. 2013; Iscen et al. 2019) are two main strategies for
SSL. Consistent regularization generally adds an unsupervised loss term to the learning objective, enabling the model
to learn from unlabeled data. In the field of computer vision,
consistent regularization of samples with strong and weak
augmentations is a widely proven effective strategy (Berthelot et al. 2019). Nevertheless, related studies (Wen et al.
2021; Iwana and Uchida 2021) show that the selection and
combination of data augmentation techniques that facilitate time series classification remains a challenge. Recently,
MTL (Jawed, Grabocka, and Schmidt-Thieme 2020) and
SemiTime (Fan et al. 2021) construct time-series forecasting loss and temporal relation prediction loss as regularization terms utilizing the relationship between sampled subseries, respectively. However, the sampling bias of the subseries limits the performance of the above methods.
Pseudo-labeling enables SSL by assigning labels to unlabeled data. Generating pseudo-labels by utilizing the classifier prediction results is a common approach (Lee et al.
2013), whereas the quality of pseudo-labels overly depends
on the learning ability of the classifier. Meanwhile, based
on the assumption of label consistency of nearest neighbor
samples, some studies (Kamnitsas et al. 2018; Iscen et al.
2019) employ label propagation to create the nearest neighbor graph for labeled and unlabeled image data. Then, the
node information of the labeled data is utilized to propagate pseudo-labels to the unlabeled data (Wang and Zhang
2007). However, the quality of pseudo-labels obtained by
label propagation is susceptible to the influence of the distance of the sample distribution between categories. In addition, how to obtain high-quality pseudo-labels via feature
representations by exploiting the intrinsic properties of time
series has not been fully explored.
In recent years, time series representation learning has
attracted much attention. For example, TS-TCC (Eldele
et al. 2021) and TS2Vec (Yue et al. 2022) design universal representation learning frameworks based on contrastive
learning for capturing temporal dependence of time series.

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) has been actively studied due
to its ability to alleviate the reliance of deep learning models on labeled data. Although existing SSL methods based
on pseudo-labeling strategies have made great progress, they
rarely consider time-series data’s intrinsic properties (e.g.,
temporal dependence). Learning representations by mining
the inherent properties of time series has recently gained
much attention. Nonetheless, how to utilize feature representations to design SSL paradigms for time series has not
been explored. To this end, we propose a Time Series SSL
framework via Temporal-Frequency Co-training (TS-TFC),
leveraging the complementary information from two distinct
views for unlabeled data learning. In particular, TS-TFC
employs time-domain and frequency-domain views to train
two deep neural networks simultaneously, and each view’s
pseudo-labels generated by label propagation in the representation space are adopted to guide the training of the other
view’s classifier. To enhance the discriminative of representations between categories, we propose a temporal-frequency
supervised contrastive learning module, which integrates the
learning difficulty of categories to improve the quality of
pseudo-labels. Through co-training the pseudo-labels obtained from temporal-frequency representations, the complementary information in the two distinct views is exploited to
enable the model to better learn the distribution of categories.
Extensive experiments on 106 UCR datasets show that TSTFC outperforms state-of-the-art methods, demonstrating the
effectiveness and robustness of our proposed model.

Introduction
Time series data is widely available in real-world scenarios,
such as human activity recognition (Yang et al. 2015), fault
diagnosis (Liu et al. 2016), and clinical analysis (Song et al.
2018). In recent years, time series classification algorithms
have received much attention due to the powerful feature extraction capability of deep neural networks (Ismail Fawaz
et al. 2019). However, time series data have complex dynamic properties that lead to over-reliance on human expert
knowledge for annotation. As massive labeled time series
data are difficult to obtain, the performance of deep learning models is easily limited. Semi-supervised learning (SSL)
* Qianli Ma is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8923

