The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MIGA: A Unified Multi-Task Generation Framework for Conversational
Text-to-SQL
Yingwen Fu12 * † , Wenjie Ou2 * ‡ , Zhou Yu3 , and Yue Lin2
1

Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou, China
2
NetEase Games AI Lab, Guangzhou, China
3
Columbia University
20201010002@gdufs.edu.cn, zy2461@columbia.edu
{ouwenjie, gzlinyue}@corp.netease.com

Abstract

What country is Jetblue Airways
affiliated with?

Conversational text-to-SQL is designed to translate multiturn natural language questions into their corresponding SQL
queries. Most advanced conversational text-to-SQL methods
are incompatible with generative pre-trained language models
(PLMs), such as T5. In this paper, we present a two-stage unified MultI-task Generation frAmework (MIGA) that leverages PLMs’ ability to tackle conversational text-to-SQL. In
the pre-training stage, MIGA first decomposes the main task
into several related sub-tasks and then unifies them into the
same sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) paradigm with taskspecific natural language prompts to boost the main task from
multi-task training. Later in the fine-tuning stage, we propose four SQL perturbations to alleviate the error propagation
problem. MIGA tends to achieve state-of-the-art performance
on two benchmarks (SparC and CoSQL). We also provide extensive analyses and discussions to shed light on some new
perspectives for conversational text-to-SQL.

flight_2: <TAB> AIRLINES <COL>
Country <COL> Airiline...<TAB>...

Goal&DB

What are all the airlines?

Turn 1
SELECT * FROM AIRLINES

Of these, which is Jetblue Airways?
SELECT * FROM AIRLINES WHERE
Airline = "JetBlue Airways"

Turn 2

What is the country corresponding it?

Turn 3
SELECT Country FROM AIRLINES
WHERE Airline = "JetBlue Airways"

Figure 1: An example of conversational text-to-SQL.

Introduction
As an important branch of semantic parsing, the text-to-SQL
task (Zhong, Xiong, and Socher 2017; Xu, Liu, and Song
2017) aims to automatically generate SQL queries according to natural language questions. It could break through the
barrier for non-expert users to write SQL queries and interact with database systems. While in practical scenarios,
users tend to obtain target information from the system stepby-step through conversations. To meet this demand, conversational text-to-SQL has recently drawn considerable attention. As shown in Figure 1, it extends text-to-SQL into
multi-turn settings by generating interactive queries based
on conversations.
Recently, generative pre-trained language models (PLMs)
represented by T5 (Raffel et al. 2020) achieve competitive
performance on multiple sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq)
tasks. However, as a typical Seq2Seq task, most advanced

methods (Cai and Wan 2020; Hui et al. 2021; Chen et al.
2021; Yu et al. 2021b; Zheng et al. 2022; Li et al. 2021;
Xiao et al. 2022) for conversational text-to-SQL are based
on tree-based decoders (Yin and Neubig 2017; Scholak,
Schucher, and Bahdanau 2021). While effective, these methods require custom transition grammars which need additional overhead when being extended to new SQL structures.
Additionally, the custom decoder structures make them incompatible with the generative PLMs. On the contrary, some
recent attempts such as UNIFIEDSKG (Xie et al. 2022),
PICARD (Scholak, Schucher, and Bahdanau 2021), and
RASAT (Qi et al. 2022) have witnessed the potential of generative PLMs for this task. Another line of research on language pre-training (Phang, Févry, and Bowman 2018; Aghajanyan et al. 2021; Su et al. 2022; Deng et al. 2023) demonstrates that pre-training with intermediate-labeled data of related tasks can help improve the fine-tuned models. This
suggests that we could boost the model for conversational
text-to-SQL by pre-training on its related tasks.
In this paper, inspired by in-context learning (Brown
et al. 2020), we propose a two-stage unified MultI-task
Generation frAmework (MIGA) for conversational text-to-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

This work was conducted when Yingwen Fu was interning at
NetEase Games AI Lab.
‡
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12790

