The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Reliable Item Sampling for Recommendation Evaluation
Dong Li1 , Ruoming Jin1 , Zhenming Liu2 , Bin Ren2 , Jing Gao3 , Zhi Liu3
1
Kent State University,
College of William & Mary,
3
iLambda,
{dli12, rjin1}@kent.edu, {zliu, bren}@cs.wm.edu, {jgao, zliu}@ilambda.com
2

Abstract

it has emerged as a major controversy being hotly debated
among recommendation community.
Specifically, the item-sampling strategy calculates the
top-K evaluation metrics using only a small set of item samples (Koren 2008; Cremonesi, Koren, and Turrin 2010; He
et al. 2017; Ebesu, Shen, and Fang 2018; Hu et al. 2018;
Krichene et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2018a,b).
Krichene and Rendle (2020, 2022) show that the top-K metrics based on the samples differ from the global metrics using all the items. They suggested a cautionary use (avoiding if possible) of the sampled metrics for recommendation
evaluation. Due to the ubiquity of sampling methodology,
it is not only of theoretical importance but also of practical interest to understand item-sampling evaluation. Indeed,
since the number of items in any real-world recommendation system is typically quite large (easily in the order of
tens of millions), efficient model evaluation based on item
sampling can be very useful for recommendation researchers
and practitioners.
To address the discrepancy between item sampling results
and the exact top-K recommendation evaluation, Krichene
and Rendle (2020) have proposed a few estimators in recovering global top-K metrics from sampling. Concurrently, Li
et al. (2020) showed that for the top-K Hit-Ratios (Recalls)
metric, there is an (approximately) linear relationship between the item-sampling top-k and the global top-K metrics
(K = f (k), where f is approximately linear). In another recent study, Jin et al. (2021b) developed solutions based on
MLE (Maximal Likelihood Estimation) and ME (Maximal
Entropy) to learn the empirical rank distribution, which is
then used to estimate global top-K metrics.
Despite these latest works on item-sampling estimation (Li et al. 2020; Krichene and Rendle 2020; Jin et al.
2021b), there remain some major gaps in making itemsampling reliable and accurate for top-K metrics. Specifically, the following important problems are remaining open:
(i) What is the optimal estimator given the basic item
sampling? All the earlier estimation methods do not establish any optimality results with respect to the estimation errors (Krichene and Rendle 2020; Jin et al. 2021b).
(ii) What can we do for the problem of the basic item
sampling, which appears to have a fundamental limitation
that prevents us from recovering the global rank distributions
accurately? For the offline recommendation evaluation, we

Since Rendle and Krichene argued that commonly used
sampling-based evaluation metrics are “inconsistent” with
respect to the global metrics (even in expectation), there
have been a few studies on the sampling-based recommender
system evaluation. Existing methods try either mapping the
sampling-based metrics to their global counterparts or more
generally, learning the empirical rank distribution to estimate
the top-K metrics. However, despite existing efforts, there is
still a lack of rigorous theoretical understanding of the proposed metric estimators, and the basic item sampling also suffers from the “blind spot” issue, i.e., estimation accuracy to
recover the top-K metrics when K is small can still be rather
substantial. In this paper, we provide an in-depth investigation into these problems and make two innovative contributions. First, we propose a new item-sampling estimator that
explicitly optimizes the error with respect to the ground truth,
and theoretically highlights its subtle difference against prior
work. Second, we propose a new adaptive sampling method
that aims to deal with the “blind spot” problem and also
demonstrate the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm
can be generalized for such a setting. Our experimental results confirm our statistical analysis and the superiority of the
proposed works. This study helps lay the theoretical foundation for adopting item sampling metrics for recommendation evaluation and provides strong evidence for making item
sampling a powerful and reliable tool for recommendation
evaluation.

Introduction
As personalization and recommendation continue to play an
integral role in the emerging AI-driven economy (Fayyaz
et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2021; Peng, Sugiyama, and Mine
2022; Jin et al. 2021a; Chen et al. 2022), proper and rigorous
evaluation of recommendation models become increasingly
important in recent years for both academic researchers and
industry practitioners (Gruson et al. 2019; Cremonesi et al.
2011; Dacrema et al. 2019; Rendle 2019). Particularly, ever
since Krichene and Rendle (2020, 2022) pointed out the “inconsistent” issue of item-sampling based evaluation of commonly used (top-K) evaluation metrics, such as Recall (HitRatio)/Precision, Average Precision (AP) and Normalized
Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG), (other than AUC),
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4409

