The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Not All Neighbors Matter: Point Distribution-Aware Pruning for 3D Point Cloud
Yejin Lee1 , Donghyun Lee1 , JungUk Hong1 , Jae W. Lee1 , Hongil Yoon2
1

Seoul National University
2
Google
yejinlee@snu.ac.kr, eudh1206@snu.ac.kr, junguk16@snu.ac.kr, jaewlee@snu.ac.kr, hongilyoon@google.com

Abstract

cloud are known as sparse 3D convolution. There are several representative sparse 3D convolution libraries such as
Spconv (Yan et al., 2018), MinkowskiEngine (Choy et al.,
2019) and TorchSparse (Tang et al., 2022), to efficiently skip
unnecessary computations on the empty voxels.
However, along with the rapid increase in the size of 3D
point cloud neural network models and datasets, applications have demanded more computing power despite software optimization. Reducing such computational overhead
is a primary challenge given that many practical use cases of
3D point cloud require strict latency and energy constraints.
To address this challenge, we propose a new spatial point
distribution-aware weight pruning technique for 3D point
cloud. Our empirical analysis finds that particular groups of
neighborhood voxels in 3D point cloud contribute more frequently to actual output features than others. Our proposal
leverages this observation to selectively prune neighborhood
voxels by excluding groups of less contributing neighborhood voxels for each layer. With this approach, we can significantly reduce the computation and memory access cost
required for sparse 3D convolution operations. We apply
the proposed technique to the three representative sparse 3D
convolution libraries. The results show a significant reduction in FLOPs and model parameter size. This translates to a
considerable reduction in both end-to-end inference latency
and energy consumption for various tasks.
Our key contributions are summarized as follows:

Applying deep neural networks to 3D point cloud processing
has demonstrated a rapid pace of advancement in those domains where 3D geometry information can greatly boost task
performance, such as AR/VR, robotics, and autonomous driving. However, as the size of both the neural network model
and 3D point cloud continues to scale, reducing the entailed
computation and memory access overhead is a primary challenge to meet strict latency and energy constraints of practical
applications. This paper proposes a new weight pruning technique for 3D point cloud based on spatial point distribution.
We identify that particular groups of neighborhood voxels in
3D point cloud contribute more frequently to actual output
features than others. Based on this observation, we propose
to selectively prune less contributing groups of neighborhood
voxels first to reduce the computation overhead while minimizing the impact on model accuracy. We apply our proposal
to three representative sparse 3D convolution libraries. Our
proposal reduces the inference latency by 1.60× on average
and energy consumption by 1.74× on NVIDIA GV100 GPU
with no loss in accuracy metric.

1

Introduction

With the rapid advancements in capabilities of both computing and sensor (i.e., LiDARs, RGB-D cameras), 3D point
cloud has become a popular representation of scenes and objects in domains such as AR/VR, robotics, and autonomous
driving, where 3D geometry information can greatly boost
the task performance. There is extensive research that applies deep neural networks to 3D point cloud to efficiently
enable new machine learning-based use cases such as 3D
segmentation, object detection, classification, reconstruction, registration, completion, pose estimation, etc.
To effectively extract useful information out of a 3D point
cloud obtained from sensors, it is often voxelized (Xu et al.,
2021b; Song 2016; Liang et al., 2019) to impose regularity on irregular 3D point cloud by partitioning the 3D space
into structured grids of voxels. Unlike dense convolution,
there are many nearby empty voxels in the 3D space and
they do not actually contribute to generating output features. Carrying out the computation on them greatly impacts
performance and energy consumption. With this sparse nature of 3D point cloud, convolution operations for 3D point

• We are the first to make an empirical observation that
neighborhood voxels can be clustered into a small number of groups, where the voxels in a group have a similar
probability of having a point. This non-uniform, tiered
distribution of non-empty neighborhood voxels reflects
the spatial point distribution of the real-world dataset.
• Leveraging this observation, we propose a novel spatial
point distribution-aware pruning technique. Since not all
layers in a model have the same sensitivity to pruning, we
introduce a new metric called pruning-friendliness (P F )
to guide layer-wise non-uniform settings of the degree
of pruning. We also provide a search strategy to greatly
reduce the search space of this pruning parameter setting.
• We apply our proposal to three libraries: Spconv,
MinkowskiEngine and TorchSparse. Our evaluation on
NVIDIA GV100 shows significant improvements in both

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1240

