The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MAGIC: Mask-Guided Image Synthesis by Inverting a Quasi-robust Classifier
Mozhdeh Rouhsedaghat1 , Masoud Monajatipoor2 , C.-C. Jay Kuo1 , Iacopo Masi3
1
University of Southern California (USC)
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA)
3
Sapienza, University of Rome
rouhseda@usc.edu, monajati@ucla.edu, cckuo@sipi.usc.edu, masi@di.uniroma1.it
2

Position Control
We offer a method for one-shot mask-guided image synthesis
that allows controlling manipulations of a single image by inverting a quasi-robust classifier equipped with strong regularizers. Our proposed method, entitled MAGIC, leverages structured gradients from a pre-trained quasi-robust classifier to
better preserve the input semantics while preserving its classification accuracy, thereby guaranteeing credibility in the synthesis. Unlike current methods that use complex primitives
to supervise the process or use attention maps as a weak supervisory signal, MAGIC aggregates gradients over the input,
driven by a guide binary mask that enforces a strong, spatial
prior. MAGIC implements a series of manipulations with a single framework achieving shape and location control, intense
non-rigid shape deformations, and copy/move operations in
the presence of repeating objects and gives users firm control over the synthesis by requiring to simply specify binary
guide masks. Our study and findings are supported by various qualitative comparisons with the state-of-the-art on the
same images sampled from ImageNet and quantitative analysis using machine perception along with a user survey of
100+ participants that endorse our synthesis quality.

1

Copy/Move
Remove

Abstract

Add

a)
Shape Control

Shape Control

b)

Figure 1: MAGIC allows a diverse set of image synthesis
tasks following the semantic of objects and scenes requiring a single image, its binary segmentation source mask, and
a target mask. In each pair, the left image is the input, and
the right one is the manipulated image, guided by the mask
shown on top. a) position control and copy/move manipulation; b) non-rigid shape control on object (non repetitive)
and scene (repetitive) images.

not effectively learned. One-shot image synthesis is a relatively new task which focuses on using a single image as the
training data for the image synthesis task which not only addresses the mentioned challenge but also obviates the need
for large annotated datasets.
SINGAN (Shaham, Dekel, and Michaeli 2019) is the first
model proposed for unconditional one-shot image synthesis. SINGAN uses multi-scale image generator and patch discriminator to synthesize multi-scale images and is suitable
for synthesizing images with repetitive structures like landscapes of desired size but fails to synthesize realistic nonrepetitive images. IMAGINE (Wang et al. 2021) is proposed
to address this issue and handle both repetitive and nonrepetitive images by leveraging the knowledge of a classification model. Similar to SINGAN, IMAGINE utilizes a
patch discriminator for maintaining patch consistency between the training and synthesized images, while also benefits from model inversion for preserving the high-level semantics while synthesizing a new image. Although IMAG INE succeeds to synthesize more realistic results for nonrepetitive images compared with SINGAN, they tend to be
similar to the original image. In fact, when synthesizing
new images using IMAGINE (and also SINGAN) there is no

Introduction

“A picture is worth a thousand words”: a famous English
language adage that is even more relevant nowadays, where
the influence of multimedia data is making an impact in our
daily lives through social media, web pages, and TV shows.
Thus, image synthesis, a widely studied task in computer vision which enables editing an input image and/or generating
new variations out of it, is even more critical today.
With advances of deep learning techniques and the availability of large annotated datasets, image synthesis methods
could achieve promising results. A game changer technique
was an implicit density model that learns the data density
with no explicit likelihood by an adversarial game between a
generator, and a discriminator—Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014). While powerful
supervised models learning a mapping from one domain to
the other have been introduced in Wang et al. (2018), they
tend to perform poorly when synthesizing and manipulating rare or “long tail” images which their data distribution is
* Code: https://github.com/mozhdehrouhsedaghat/magic

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2172

