The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Policy-Based Primal-Dual Methods for Convex Constrained Markov Decision
Processes
Donghao Ying, Mengzi Amy Guo, Yuhao Ding, Javad Lavaei, Zuo-Jun Shen
UC Berkeley, Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
{donghaoy, mengzi_guo, yuhao_ding, lavaei, maxshen}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study convex Constrained Markov Decision Processes
(CMDPs) in which the objective is concave and the constraints
are convex in the state-action occupancy measure. We propose
a policy-based primal-dual algorithm that updates the primal
variable via policy gradient ascent and updates the dual variable via projected sub-gradient descent. Despite the loss of
additivity structure and the nonconvex nature, we establish the
global convergence of the proposed algorithm by leveraging
a hidden convexity in the problem, and prove the O (T −1/3 )
convergence rate in terms of both optimality gap and constraint violation. When the objective is strongly concave in
the occupancy measure, we prove an improved convergence
rate of O (T −1/2 ). By introducing a pessimistic term to the
constraint, we further show that a zero constraint violation can
be achieved while preserving the same convergence rate for
the optimality gap. This work is the first one in the literature
that establishes non-asymptotic convergence guarantees for
policy-based primal-dual methods for solving infinite-horizon
discounted convex CMDPs.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) aims to learn how to map situations to actions so as to maximize the expected cumulative
reward. Mathematically, this objective can be rewritten as an
inner product between the state-action occupancy measure induced by the policy and a policy-independent reward for each
state-action pair. However, many decision-making problems
of interests take a form beyond the cumulative reward, such
as apprenticeship learning (Abbeel and Ng 2004), diverse
skill discovery (Eysenbach et al. 2018), pure exploration
(Hazan et al. 2019), and state marginal matching (Lee et al.
2019), among others. Recently, Zhang et al. (2020) and Zahavy et al. (2021) abstract such problems as convex Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs), which focus on finding a policy
to maximize a concave function of the induced state-action
occupancy measure.
However, in many safety-critical applications of convex
MDP problems, e.g., in autonomous driving (Fisac et al.
2018), cyber-security (Zhang et al. 2019), and financial management (Abe et al. 2010), the agent is also subject to safety
constraints. Nonetheless, the classical safe RL and CMDPs
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10963

(Altman 1999), which assume that the objective and constraints are linear in the state-action occupancy measure, are
not directly applicable to more general convex CMDP problems where the objective and the constraints can respectively
be concave and convex in the occupancy measure.
In this paper, we focus on the optimization perspective
of convex CMDP problems and aim to develop a principled
theory for the direct policy search method. When moving
beyond linear structures in the objective and the constraints,
we quickly face several technical challenges. Firstly, the convex CMDP problem has a nonconcave objective and the
nonconvex constraints with respect to the policy even under the simplest direct policy parameterization. Thus, the
existing tools from the convex constrained optimization literature are not applicable. Secondly, as the gradient of the
objective/constraint with respect to the occupancy measure
becomes policy-dependent, evaluating the single-step improvement of the algorithm becomes harder without knowing
the occupancy measure. Yet, evaluating the occupancy measure for a given policy can be inefficient (Tsybakov 2008).
Thirdly, the performance difference lemma in Kakade and
Langford (2002), which is key to the analysis of the policybased primal-dual method for the standard CMDP in Ding
et al. (2020), is no longer helpful for general convex CMDPs.
In view of the aforementioned challenges, our main contributions to the policy search of convex CMDP problems are
summarized in Table 1 and are provided below:
• Despite being nonconvex with respect to the policy and
nonlinear with respect to the state-action occupancy measure, we prove that the strong duality still holds for convex
CMDP problems under some mild conditions.
• We propose a simple but effective algorithm – PrimalDual Projected Gradient method (PDPG) – for solving
discounted infinite-horizon convex CMDPs. We employ
policy gradient ascent to update the primal variable and
projected sub-gradient descent to update the dual variable.
Strong bounds on the optimality gap and the constraint
violations are established for both the concave objective
and the the strongly concave objective cases.
• Inspired by the idea of “optimistic pessimism in the face
of uncertainty”, we further propose a modified method,
named PDPG-0, which can achieve a zero constraint violation while maintaining the same convergence rate.

