The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Spatiotemporal Deformation Perception for Fisheye Video Rectification
Shangrong Yang, Chunyu Lin∗ , Kang Liao, Yao Zhao
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network, Beijing, 100044, China
{sr yang, cylin, kang liao, yzhao}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Spatial
deformation

Although the distortion correction of fisheye images has been
extensively studied, the correction of fisheye videos is still an elusive challenge. For different frames of the fisheye
video, the existing image correction methods ignore the correlation of sequences, resulting in temporal jitter in the corrected video. To solve this problem, we propose a temporal
weighting scheme to get a plausible global optical flow, which
mitigates the jitter effect by progressively reducing the weight
of frames. Subsequently, we observe that the inter-frame optical flow of the video is facilitated to perceive the local spatial
deformation of the fisheye video. Therefore, we derive the spatial deformation through the flows of fisheye and distortedfree videos, thereby enhancing the local accuracy of the predicted result. However, the independent correction for each
frame disrupts the temporal correlation. Due to the property
of fisheye video, a distorted moving object may be able to
find its distorted-free pattern at another moment. To this end,
a temporal deformation aggregator is designed to reconstruct the deformation correlation between frames and provide a
reliable global feature. Our method achieves an end-to-end
correction and demonstrates superiority in correction quality
and stability compared with the SOTA correction methods.

Perspective
frame

Intra-frame
flow

Fisheye frame

Temporal
deformation

Frame t-1
(Fisheye)

Inter-frame Frame t Inter-frame Frame t+1
(Fisheye)
flow
flow
(Fisheye)

Figure 1: The spatial and temporal deformation. The orange
line represents the pixel motion caused by the distortion. The
red box indicates that it is possible for the distorted moving
object to find its distorted-free appearance at other times.
processing. A series of traditional methods (Reimer et al.
2009)(Zhang 1999) correct fisheye images with the help of
calibration boards. They require labor-intensive manual operation. Many self-calibration methods (Dansereau, Pizarro,
and Williams 2013)(Melo et al. 2013) can automatically detect significant features to calculate the distortion parameters. However, the detected features are greatly affected by
the scene content. With the development of deep learning,
many novel networks have been designed for distortion correction. (Rong et al. 2016)(Bogdan et al. 2018)(X.Yin et al.
2018)(Xue et al. 2019) improve the convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to regress the distortion parameters. (Liao
et al. 2019)(Liao et al. 2020)(Li et al. 2019b) design the network on the architecture of generative adversarial networks
(GANs) to generate rectified images directly. These methods are specially devised for image rectification and do not
consider the temporal correlation of fisheye video frames.
Different frames generate different results, which cause instability in the corrected video. Achieving consistent correction for each frame is the biggest challenge for existing
correction methods.
We regard the pixel motion caused by the distortion of
a single image as intra-frame optical flow and the motion
between different frames as inter-frame optical flow. In this

Introduction
Many existing algorithms including object detection (Redmon et al. 2016)(Lin et al. 2017) and tracking (Zhang et al.
2013)(Li et al. 2019a), pedestrian re-identification (Pedagadi et al. 2013), and human pose estimation (Newell, Yang,
and Deng 2016) are designed based on the perspective camera models. Although they achieve satisfactory performance
on ordinary planar video, their field-of-view (FOV) are limited. As a result, in most scenarios, fisheye cameras replace
multiple perspective cameras to obtain a wider field-of-view
(FOV) at a cheap cost. However, the structure of the fisheye video is different from that of the distorted-free video.
If these algorithms are directly applied to fisheye video, the
performance will be dramatically degraded. Therefore, it is
necessary to pre-correct the video to maintain the performance of subsequent algorithms.
The correction methods for video processing have rarely
been investigated, and most of them are based on the image
∗

Corresponding author: cylin@bjtu.edu.cn
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3181

