The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MicroAST: Towards Super-fast Ultra-Resolution Arbitrary Style Transfer
Zhizhong Wang, Lei Zhao∗ , Zhiwen Zuo, Ailin Li,
Haibo Chen, Wei Xing∗ , Dongming Lu
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{endywon, cszhl, zzwcs, liailin, cshbchen, wxing, ldm}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Arbitrary style transfer (AST) transfers arbitrary artistic
styles onto content images. Despite the recent rapid progress,
existing AST methods are either incapable or too slow to
run at ultra-resolutions (e.g., 4K) with limited resources,
which heavily hinders their further applications. In this paper, we tackle this dilemma by learning a straightforward and
lightweight model, dubbed MicroAST. The key insight is to
completely abandon the use of cumbersome pre-trained Deep
Convolutional Neural Networks (e.g., VGG) at inference. Instead, we design two micro encoders (content and style encoders) and one micro decoder for style transfer. The content
encoder aims at extracting the main structure of the content
image. The style encoder, coupled with a modulator, encodes
the style image into learnable dual-modulation signals that
modulate both intermediate features and convolutional filters
of the decoder, thus injecting more sophisticated and flexible
style signals to guide the stylizations. In addition, to boost the
ability of the style encoder to extract more distinct and representative style signals, we also introduce a new style signal
contrastive loss in our model. Compared to the state of the art,
our MicroAST not only produces visually superior results but
also is 5-73 times smaller and 6-18 times faster, for the first
time enabling super-fast (about 0.5 seconds) AST at 4K ultraresolutions.

1

Figure 1: A 4K (4096×2160 pixels) ultra-resolution stylized
result, rendered in about 0.5 seconds by our proposed MicroAST on a single NVIDIA RTX 2080 (8GB) GPU. On the
upper left are the content and style images. Four close-ups
(256×128 pixels) are shown under the stylized image.

further applications in practical scenes, such as large posters,
ultra high-definition (UHD) photographs, and UHD videos.
Valuable efforts have been devoted to solving this
dilemma. One practice is to compress the large pre-trained
DCNN models without losing much performance. (Wang
et al. 2020a) used collaborative distillation to reduce the convolutional filters of VGG-19, successfully rendering ultraresolution images on a single 12GB GPU. While the memory consumption is significantly reduced, the pruned models are often not fast enough to run at ultra-resolutions.
Another solution is to stylize the images in a patch-wise
manner (Chen et al. 2022). This method, though achieving unconstrained resolution style transfer, still suffers from
the efficiency problem. Similar to our method, (Shen, Yan,
and Zeng 2018) and (Jing et al. 2020) likewise designed
lightweight networks for style transfer. However, since their
style features are still extracted from VGG, they are inherently difficult to process ultra-resolution images. Therefore,
despite the recent progress, existing AST methods are still
incapable or too slow to run at ultra-resolutions.
Facing the challenges above, in this paper, we propose a

Introduction

Style transfer has recently attracted ever-growing interest
in both academia and industry since the seminal work of
(Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016). A central problem in this
domain is the task of transferring the artistic style of an arbitrary image onto a content target, which is called arbitrary
style transfer (AST) (Huang and Belongie 2017; Li et al.
2017). By leveraging the remarkable representative power
of pre-trained Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) (e.g., VGG-19 (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014)), existing AST algorithms consistently achieve both stunning
stylizations and generalization ability on arbitrary images.
However, the large pre-trained DCNNs incur a high computational cost, which impedes the current AST methods to
process ultra-high resolution (e.g., “4K” or 4096×2160 pixels) images with limited resources. It heavily restricts their
∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2742

