The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Better Visualizing the Decision Basis of Networks via
Unfold and Conquer Attribution Guidance
Jung-Ho Hong1† , Woo-Jeoung Nam2† , Kyu-Sung Jeon1 , Seong-Whan Lee1

∗

1

2

Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Republic of Korea
{jungho-hong, ksjeon, sw.lee}@korea.ac.kr, nwj0612@knu.ac.kr
GradCAM

Abstract
Revealing the transparency of Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) has been widely studied to describe the decision mechanisms of network inner structures. In this
paper, we propose a novel post-hoc framework, Unfold
and Conquer Attribution Guidance (UCAG), which enhances the explainability of the network decision by spatially scrutinizing the input features with respect to the
model confidence. Addressing the phenomenon of missing detailed descriptions, UCAG sequentially complies
with the confidence of slices of the image, leading to
providing an abundant and clear interpretation. Therefore, it is possible to enhance the representation ability
of explanation by preserving the detailed descriptions
of assistant input features, which are commonly overwhelmed by the main meaningful regions. We conduct
numerous evaluations to validate the performance in several metrics: i) deletion and insertion, ii) (energy-based)
pointing games, and iii) positive and negative density
maps. Experimental results, including qualitative comparisons, demonstrate that our method outperforms the
existing methods with the nature of clear and detailed
explanations and applicability.

FullGrad

RAP

AGF

Original

Class: Goldfish

Ours

Figure 1: The qualitative results of our approach. The first
and second rows represent the existing visualization methods
and ours, respectively. Our approach enhances the representation ability of explanation maps, which is applicable to any
explanation technique.

success in producing the input-level explanation map, the
class-discriminativeness within their representation is still
limited. Recently, although Attribution Guided Factorization
(AGF) enhances the class discriminability of the explanation
by integrating both gradient/relevance-based methodologies,
it still provides biased attribution toward the class.
GradCAM (Selvaraju et al. 2017) computes the coefficients for each map which are averaged over the gradients of
the activation maps, and generates a class activation map by
linearly combining the maps with the corresponding coefficients to provide a visual explanation. Although the explanation map generated from GradCAM successfully provides the
class-discriminative explanation, the provided explanations
are still coarse and contain numerous non-saliency regions
due to the mechanism of utilizing the source map from the
deepest layer, which keeps the lowest resolution activation
map.
The compressive nature of DNNs limits the representation ability of relevance/gradient-based approaches. As the
features in the deep layer of the network hold the abbreviated information, it restricts the propagated regions to
represent abundant saliencies. Thus, the resulting saliency
maps produced from the gradient or relevance approach
are represented with limited quality, with obscured classdiscriminative regions. In this paper, we propose Unfoldand-Conquer Attribution Guidance (UCAG) framework to
guide the explaining methods to generate better saliencies.
It improves interpretability by investigating the detailed spa-

Introduction
Although Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) show remarkable
performance in various computer science tasks due to their
applicability, the issues of complexity and transparency derived from the non-linearity of the network hinder the clear
interpretation of the decision basis. Visual explanations of
network decisions alleviate these problems and provide analytical guidance for model development with intuitive explanations. Inspired by this, several approaches have been
introduced, such as relevance or gradient-based generation,
to describe the image regions that the network currently references to make decisions.
The approaches behind the relevance score generate the explanation based on the decomposition methods, Layer-wise
Relevance Propagation (LRP) (Bach et al. 2015). LRP constructs the propagation rule according to the predicted scores
of the specific class. Despite the nature of employing relevance score is robust to the shattered gradient problem and
∗

Corresponding Author, † Equal Contribution
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7884

