The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Collective Intelligence in Human-AI Teams: A Bayesian Theory of Mind Approach
Samuel Westby1 , Christoph Riedl2 ,
1

2

Network Science Institute, Northeastern University, Boston, MA
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University, Boston, MA
westby.s@northeastern.edu, c.riedl@northeastern.edu

Abstract

Premack and Woodruff 1978). Recent research on collective intelligence, has provided a wide range of empirical
evidence suggesting that ToM (and related processes governing collective memory, attention, and reasoning) is a significant predictor of human collective intelligence (Woolley
et al. 2010; Riedl et al. 2021; Woolley et al. 2022; Engel
et al. 2014). Indeed, ToM is especially beneficial for interdependent cognitive tasks that benefit when teams leverage
their members’ expertise (Lewis 2003). Some work suggests that ToM is the mechanism that allows collectives to
use more performance-relevant information from their environment than a single individual without such connections
could, for example, by facilitating a balance between diversity and cognitive efficiency (Riedl and Woolley 2017; Hong
and Page 2004). As human civilization shifts further toward
knowledge work (Autor 2014) where the most value is realized if members fully use and integrate their unique expertise, this ability is increasingly important.

We develop a network of Bayesian agents that collectively
model the mental states of teammates from the observed communication. Using a generative computational approach to
cognition, we make two contributions. First, we show that
our agent could generate interventions that improve the collective intelligence of a human-AI team beyond what humans
alone would achieve. Second, we develop a real-time measure of human’s theory of mind ability and test theories about
human cognition. We use data collected from an online experiment in which 145 individuals in 29 human-only teams
of five communicate through a chat-based system to solve a
cognitive task. We find that humans (a) struggle to fully integrate information from teammates into their decisions, especially when communication load is high, and (b) have cognitive biases which lead them to underweight certain useful,
but ambiguous, information. Our theory of mind ability measure predicts both individual- and team-level performance.
Observing teams’ first 25% of messages explains about 8%
of the variation in final team performance, a 170% improvement compared to the current state of the art.

Recent work has started to develop a formal account of
collective intelligence to explain the relationship between
individual interaction and collective performance using (approximate or variational) Bayesian inference (or free energy;
Friston 2010, 2013; Heins et al. 2022). The free energy principle is a mathematical framework for multiscale behavioral
processes that suggests a system of self-similar agents selforganizes by minimizing variational free energy in its exchanges with the environment (Fig. 1a; Friston, Kilner, and
Harrison 2006). Recent extensions have applied the framework to explain human communication (Vasil et al. 2020). A
key advantage of this approach is that free energy minimization can be translated into a generative, agent-based process
theory (Friston et al. 2017; Kaufmann, Gupta, and Taylor
2021). This generative theory provides a computational approach to cognition (Tenenbaum et al. 2011; Griffiths 2015)
that allows us to simultaneously (a) build agents for HumanAI teams that are highly explainable but also (b) test theories about human cognitive processes and measure human
theory of mind ability in real time. This promises to advance
our understanding of a key process of human collective intelligence. The current state of the art to measure theory of
mind—the Reading the Mind in the Eyes test (Baron-Cohen
et al. 2001)—is a static, indirect, survey-based instrument,
which typically explains about 3% of the variation (Riedl
et al. 2021).

Introduction
The reliance on teamwork in organizations (Wuchty, Jones,
and Uzzi 2007), coupled with remarkable recent progress
in artificial intelligence, have supercharged the vision to develop collaborative Human-AI teams (Malone and Bernstein
2015; O’Neill et al. 2020). Human-AI teams promise to
overcome human biases and information processing limitations, reaching performance higher than human-only teams
could (Brynjolfsson, Rock, and Syverson 2018). Despite
some recent advances (e.g., Bansal et al. 2019b; Pynadath
et al. 2022; Seraj et al. 2022) there remain significant difficulties in developing agents that interact with multiple,
heterogeneous humans working on cognitive tasks engaged
in cooperative communication in an ad-hoc team. Here, we
draw on research of cognitive processes to develop HumanAI teams and explain collaborative decision making.
To communicate efficiently, humans infer the beliefs,
opinions, knowledge, and related states of mind of other
people (Nickerson 1999; Call and Tomasello 2008). This is
referred to as social perceptiveness or theory of mind (ToM;
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6119

