The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AdaTask: A Task-Aware Adaptive Learning Rate Approach to Multi-Task Learning
Enneng Yang1 * † , Junwei Pan2 * , Ximei Wang2 , Haibin Yu2 , Li Shen3
Xihua Chen2 , Lei Xiao2 , Jie Jiang2 , Guibing Guo1‡
1

Northeastern University, China
2
Tencent Inc, China
3
JD Explore Academy, China
ennengyang@stumail.neu.edu.cn, mathshenli@gmail.com, guogb@swc.neu.edu.cn
{jonaspan,messixmwang,nathanhbyu,tinychen,shawnxiao,zeus}@tencent.com
Abstract

resolve the task dominance of parameter optimization during
MTL training. This is due to the fact that there are currently
no metrics to quantify the degree of task dominance in MTL.
To fill this gap, in this paper, we propose to calculate the total
updates of a parameter from a specific task by the exponentially decaying Average of the squared parameter Updates
(AU in short) from this task. The dominance of a task on a
given parameter is then measured by the ratio of AU from
this task against the overall AU from all tasks. Intuitively, for
a parameter, if a task has a much larger AU ratio than other
tasks, then this parameter can be regarded as being dominated
by this task. Based on this metric, we observe that all existing
MTL methods still suffer from task dominance on shared
parameters, especially on those in higher shared layers.
We suspect that the dominance of accumulative gradients
may be one of the main reasons for the task dominance issue
in MTL. Modern adaptive learning rate optimizers commonly
used in deep learning adaptively adjust the learning rate of
each parameter during the model training process, which
is usually better than the gradient descent optimizer with a
global learning rate (see our full version (Yang et al. 2022b)
for details). The adaptive learning rate is usually proportional
to the inverse of the accumulative gradients, and both the
learning rate and accumulative gradients are computed across
all tasks for shared parameters in MTL. Therefore, for a
given parameter, if a task provides much larger gradients
than other tasks, then this task would dominate both the
overall accumulative gradients and the learning rate.
Motivated by this, we propose AdaTask to separate the
accumulative gradients of each task for each shared parameter
in MTL optimizers. By doing this, no task would dominate
the overall accumulative gradients as well as the learning rate
anymore since each task accumulates and computes its own
ones. Almost all modern adaptive learning rate optimizers
and their variants (Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011; Zeiler
2012; Kingma and Ba 2015; Reddi, Kale, and Kumar 2018;
Zhuang et al. 2020; Zou et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2022a,b, 2021;
Zou et al. 2018), such as AdaGrad, AdaDelta, RMSProp,
Adam, AMSGrad, etc., can utilize AdaTask to resolve the
task dominance issue in MTL training. The contribution of
this work is summarized as follows:

Multi-task learning (MTL) models have demonstrated impressive results in computer vision, natural language processing,
and recommender systems. Even though many approaches
have been proposed, how well these approaches balance different tasks on each parameter still remains unclear. In this
paper, we propose to measure the task dominance degree of a
parameter by the total updates of each task on this parameter.
Specifically, we compute the total updates by the exponentially decaying Average of the squared Updates (AU) on a
parameter from the corresponding task. Based on this novel
metric, we observe that many parameters in existing MTL
methods, especially those in the higher shared layers, are still
dominated by one or several tasks. The dominance of AU is
mainly due to the dominance of accumulative gradients from
one or several tasks. Motivated by this, we propose a Taskwise Adaptive learning rate approach, AdaTask in short, to
separate the accumulative gradients and hence the learning
rate of each task for each parameter in adaptive learning rate
approaches (e.g., AdaGrad, RMSProp, and Adam). Comprehensive experiments on computer vision and recommender
system MTL datasets demonstrate that AdaTask significantly
improves the performance of dominated tasks, resulting SOTA
average task-wise performance. Analysis on both synthetic
and real-world datasets shows AdaTask balance parameters in
every shared layer well.

Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) has emerged as a promising approach to jointly learning multiple tasks together by sharing
structure across tasks in computer vision (Misra et al. 2016;
Zamir et al. 2018; Liu, Johns, and Davison 2019), natural
language processing (Dong et al. 2015; Radford et al. 2019),
and recommender systems (Ma et al. 2018a,b; Pan et al. 2019;
Tang et al. 2020). However, due to optimizing different tasks
simultaneously, MTL is prone to be dominated by one or several tasks, leading to the performance deterioration of other
tasks (Tang et al. 2020).
While there have been a significant number of approaches
to MTL, it is still unclear to what extent these approaches
* These authors contributed equally.
†

This work was done during an internship at Tencent.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

(1) We quantify the task dominance of a parameter by the
task-wise exponentially decaying average of the squared
10745

