The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FTM: A Frame-Level Timeline Modeling Method for Temporal Graph
Representation Learning
Bowen Cao1 * , Qichen Ye1 * , Weiyuan Xu1 , Yuexian Zou1,2†
1

ADSPLAB, School of ECE, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory,

 Shenzhen, China
cbw2021,xuwy @stu.pku.edu.cn, yeeeqichen,zouyx @pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning representations for graph-structured data is essential for graph analytical tasks. While remarkable progress has
been made on static graphs, researches on temporal graphs
are still in its beginning stage. The bottleneck of the temporal
graph representation learning approach is the neighborhood
aggregation strategy, based on which graph attributes share
and gather information explicitly. Existing neighborhood aggregation strategies fail to capture either the short-term features or the long-term features of temporal graph attributes,
leading to unsatisfactory model performance and even poor
robustness and domain generality of the representation learning method. To address this problem, we propose a Framelevel Timeline Modeling (FTM) method that helps to capture
both short-term and long-term features and thus learns more
informative representations on temporal graphs. In particular,
we present a novel link-based framing technique to preserve
the short-term features and then incorporate a timeline aggregator module to capture the intrinsic dynamics of graph
evolution as long-term features. Our method can be easily assembled with most temporal GNNs. Extensive experiments
on common datasets show that our method brings great improvements to the capability, robustness, and domain generality of backbone methods in downstream tasks. Our code can
be found at https://github.com/yeeeqichen/FTM.

Figure 1: An example of temporal graph modeling. Given
a model that has learnt the dynamics of a large number of
users’ shopping behaviors in high-dimensional space, what
the man in green tends to buy in the future is predictable.

much more difficult because of the temporal factors. Figure
1 gives an example of temporal graph modeling.
In learning representations on temporal graphs, a key
point is the neighborhood aggregation strategy, which allows information passing and gathering among graph attributes, so that nodes learn their representations from their
neighbors. For static graphs, directly linked nodes are neighbors to each other because they all appear in the one and
only topology. In contrast, temporal graph attributes scatter
sparsely across the timeline, leading to temporal-structure
inconsistency. For any node in a temporal graph, a node
connected to it is not necessarily a neighbor, for this node
may appear a long time ago or disappear soon. Each node
in a temporal graph may also have several temporal neighborhoods, posing a challenge for information aggregation.
Therefore, how to design the neighborhood aggregation
strategy on temporal graphs remains an open question.
Recent works introduce snapshot-based methods (Kumar,
Zhang, and Leskovec 2019; Pareja et al. 2020) and temporal
random walk-based methods (Nguyen et al. 2018; Xu et al.
2020) for neighborhood aggregation, but are often too simple to capture the evolution of temporal graphs over time.
The comparison of the above two methods and our method
is shown in Figure 2. In particular, snapshot-based methods
equally slice the timeline into a sequence of snapshots, each
of which contains nodes and links that occurred within its
time span. This kind of method treats a snapshot as a static
graph and fails to model the temporal properties within a
snapshot, losing short-term features of graph attributes. On

Introduction
Graph representation learning intends to transform nodes
and links on the graph into lower-dimensional vector embeddings, which can be quite challenging due to the complex
graph topological structures and node/link attributes. While
approaches on static graphs have made breakthroughs and
demonstrated distinguishable applicability in various fields
(Graepel et al. 2010; He et al. 2014; Li et al. 2022; Zhu et al.
2022), those on temporal graphs are just getting started.
Modeling a temporal graph (which may evolve over time
with the addition, deletion, and changing of its attributes)
is a core problem in developing real-world industrial systems (e.g., social network, citation network, recommendation systems) where many data are time-dependent, and is
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6888

