The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Latent-Variable Model for Intrinsic Probing
Karolina Stańczak* 1 , Lucas Torroba Hennigen* 2 , Adina Williams3 ,
Ryan Cotterell4 , Isabelle Augenstein1
1
University of Copenhagen
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
Meta AI
4
ETH Zürich
ks@di.ku.dk, lucastor@mit.edu, adinawilliams@meta.com,
rcotterell@inf.ethz.ch, augenstein@di.ku.dk
2

Abstract

In this paper, we focus on one type of probing known
as intrinsic probing (Dalvi et al. 2019; Torroba Hennigen,
Williams, and Cotterell 2020), a subset of which specifically aims to ascertain how information is structured within
a representation. This means that we are not solely interested in determining whether a network encodes the tense
of a verb, but also in pinpointing exactly which neurons
in the network are responsible for encoding the property.
Unfortunately, the naïve formulation of intrinsic probing
requires one to test all possible combinations of neurons,
which is intractable even for the smallest representations
used in modern-day NLP. For example, analyzing all combinations of 768-dimensional BERT representations would
require training 2768 probes, one for each combination of
neurons, which far exceeds the estimated number of atoms
in the observable universe.
To obviate this difficulty, we introduce a novel latentvariable probe for intrinsic probing. Our core idea, instead
of training a different probe for each subset of neurons, is to
introduce a subset-valued latent variable. We approximately
marginalize over the latent subsets using variational inference. Training the probe in this manner results in a set of
parameters which work well across all possible subsets. We
propose two variational families to model the posterior over
the latent subset-valued random variables, both based on
common sampling designs: Poisson sampling, which selects
each neuron based on independent Bernoulli trials, and conditional Poisson sampling, which first samples a fixed number of neurons from a uniform distribution and then a subset of neurons of that size (Lohr 2019). Conditional Poisson
sampling offers the modeler more control over the distribution over subset sizes; they may pick the parametric distribution themselves.
We compare both variants to the two main intrinsic probing approaches we are aware of in the literature (§5). To do
so, we train probes for 29 morphosyntactic properties across
6 languages1 from the Universal Dependencies (UD; Nivre
et al. 2017) treebanks. We show that, in general, both variants of our method yield tighter estimates of the mutual information, though the model based on conditional Poisson
sampling yields slightly better performance. This suggests

The success of pre-trained contextualized representations has
prompted researchers to analyze them for the presence of linguistic information. Indeed, it is natural to assume that these
pre-trained representations do encode some level of linguistic knowledge as they have brought about large empirical improvements on a wide variety of NLP tasks, which suggests
they are learning true linguistic generalization. In this work,
we focus on intrinsic probing, an analysis technique where
the goal is not only to identify whether a representation encodes a linguistic attribute but also to pinpoint where this attribute is encoded. We propose a novel latent-variable formulation for constructing intrinsic probes and derive a tractable
variational approximation to the log-likelihood. Our results
show that our model is versatile and yields tighter mutual information estimates than two intrinsic probes previously proposed in the literature. Finally, we find empirical evidence
that pre-trained representations develop a cross-lingually entangled notion of morphosyntax.

1

Introduction

There have been considerable improvements to the quality of pre-trained contextualized representations in recent
years (e.g., Peters et al. 2018; Devlin et al. 2019; Raffel et al.
2020). These advances have sparked an interest in understanding what linguistic information may be lurking within
the representations themselves (Poliak et al. 2018; Zhang
and Bowman 2018; Rogers, Kovaleva, and Rumshisky 2020,
inter alia). One philosophy that has been proposed to extract this information is called probing, the task of training
an external classifier to predict the linguistic property of interest directly from the representations. The hope of probing
is that it sheds light onto how much linguistic knowledge is
present in representations and, perhaps, how that information is structured. Probing has grown to be a fruitful area of
research, with researchers probing for morphological (Tang,
Sennrich, and Nivre 2020; Ács, Kádár, and Kornai 2021),
syntactic (Voita and Titov 2020; Hall Maudslay et al. 2020;
Ács, Kádár, and Kornai 2021), and semantic (Vulić et al.
2020; Tang, Sennrich, and Nivre 2020) information.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

13591

Arabic, English, Finnish, Polish, Portuguese, and Russian

