The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Local Explanations for Reinforcement Learning
Ronny Luss∗ , Amit Dhurandhar∗ and Miao Liu
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY
rluss@us.ibm.com, adhuran@us.ibm.com, miao.liu1@ibm.com

Abstract

evaluated in an application-grounded manner (Doshi-Velez
and Kim 2017; Dhurandhar et al. 2017), the exploration of
different perspectives to explain RL policies has been limited
and user study evaluations are rarely employed in this space.
In this paper, we provide a novel perspective to produce
human understandable explanations with a task-oriented user
study that evaluates which explanations help users predict the
behavior of a policy better. Our approach involves two steps:
1) learning meta-states, i.e., clusters of states, based on the
dynamics of the policy being explained, and 2) within each
meta-state, identifying states that act as intermediate goals,
which we refer to as strategic states. We call our method the
Strategic State eXplanation (SSX) method. Such an approach
has real-world applicability. Consider scenarios where businesses want to increase their loyalty base. Companies often
train RL policies to recommend next-best actions in terms
of promotions to offer. They try to maximize the Lifetime
Value (Theocharous, Thomas, and Ghavamzadeh 2015). For
such policies, SSX could identify strategic offers that lead
to becoming loyalty customers based on a state space with
features such as demographics, buying behavior, etc. Another
example is robotics; consider the task of a robotic arm lifting
a cup on a table which can be broken down to a sequence of
stages, i.e., strategic states (subgoals) to aim for.
Contrary to the global nature of recent explainability works
in RL (Topin and Veloso 2019; Sreedharan, Srivastava, and
Kambhampati 2020; Amir and Amir 2018), our focus is on
local explanations; given the current state, we explain the policy moving forward within a fixed distance from the current
state. This key distinction lets us consider richer state spaces
(i.e., with more features) because the locality restricts the
size of the state space. It is also important to recognize the
difference from bottlenecks (Menache, Mannor, and Shimkin
2002; Simsek and Barto 2004) which are policy-independent
and learned by approximating the state space with randomly
sampled trajectories; rather than help explain a policy, bottlenecks are used to learn efficient policies such as through
hierarchical RL (Botvinick, Niv, and Barto 2008) or options
frameworks (Ramesh, Tomar, and Ravindran 2019). Strategic
states are rather learned with respect to a policy and identified
without assuming access to the underlying topology.
An example of this for the Four Rooms game is seen in Figure 1a, where an agent moves through a grid with walls (represented by lack of a marker) looking for the goal state (upper

Many works in explainable AI have focused on explaining
black-box classification models. Explaining deep reinforcement learning (RL) policies in a manner that could be understood by domain users has received much less attention. In
this paper, we propose a novel perspective to understanding
RL policies based on identifying important states from automatically learned meta-states. The key conceptual difference
between our approach and many previous ones is that we form
meta-states based on locality governed by the expert policy
dynamics rather than based on similarity of actions, and that
we do not assume any particular knowledge of the underlying
topology of the state space. Theoretically, we show that our
algorithm to find meta-states converges and the objective that
selects important states from each meta-state is submodular
leading to efficient high quality greedy selection. Experiments
on four domains (four rooms, door-key, minipacman, and
pong) and a carefully conducted user study illustrate that our
perspective leads to better understanding of the policy. We
conjecture that this is a result of our meta-states being more
intuitive in that the corresponding important states are strong
indicators of tractable intermediate goals that are easier for
humans to interpret and follow.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has seen stupendous success over the last decade with superhuman performance in
games such as Go (Silver, Huang, and et al. 2016), Chess (Silver et al. 2018), and Atari benchmarks (Mnih, Kavukcuoglu,
and et al. 2015). With increasing superior capabilities of automated (learning) systems, there is a strong push to understand
the reasoning behind their decision making. One motivation
is for (professional) humans to improve their performance
in these games (Rensch 2021). An even deeper reason is for
humans to be able to trust these systems if they are deployed
in real life scenarios (Gunning 2017). The General Data
Protection Regulation (Yannella and Kagan 2018) passed in
Europe demands that explanations need to be provided for
any automated decisions that affect humans. While various
methods have been provided to explain classification models (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Lundberg and Lee
2017; Lapuschkin et al. 2016; Dhurandhar et al. 2018) and be
∗

Equal contribution
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9002

