The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Generative Label Enhancement with Gaussian Mixture and Partial Ranking
Yunan Lu1 , Liang He1 , Fan Min2 , Weiwei Li3,4 , Xiuyi Jia1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
School of Computer Science, Southwest Petroleum University, Chengdu, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
4
Ministry Key Laboratory for Safety-Critical Software Development and Verification, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, Nanjing, China
{luyn, heliang, jiaxy}@njust.edu.cn, minfan@swpu.edu.cn, liweiwei@nuaa.edu.cn
Abstract

to automatically recover label distributions from the dataset
annotated with logical labels by mining the additional information underlying the feature space and the label space.
Most existing LE methods are based on the discriminative approach, which model the label distribution by a decision function or a conditional likelihood function, and use
some additional information to learn the model parameters.
For example, methods such as LESC (Tang et al. 2020),
ML2 (Hou, Geng, and Zhang 2016) and LEMLL (Shao,
Geng, and Xu 2018) assume that each instance can be represented as a linear combination of other instances, and
use such linear combination to learn the decision function.
GLLE (Xu, Liu, and Geng 2021) and PLLE (Xu, Lv, and
Geng 2019) use a similarity graph to describe the instance
relationship and learn the decision function with the help of
this graph. However, the superior predictive performance of
the discriminative approach relies on the accurate supervisory information (Jebara 2012). Unfortunately, the LE task
lacks a ground-truth label distribution as the supervisory information, which limits the capability of discriminative approach. The generative approach aims to model the joint
distribution of observed data and is more concerned with
the underlying patterns of the observed data, which is more
important for unsupervised task (Jebara 2012). Hence, generative approach is more suitable for LE (an unsupervised
task). To the best of our knowledge, LEVI (Xu et al. 2020)
is the only generative LE method available. It treats the label distribution as a latent vector and infers its posterior by
variational inference. The experimental results of LEVI also
demonstrate the merits of generative approach in LE task.
However, LEVI has two drawbacks: (1) LEVI assumes
that the feature vector x is generated from a Gaussian distribution N (x|ϕ(d)) dominated by a nonlinear transformation
ϕ(·) of the label distribution d; in other words, if some instances are annotated with the same label distribution, then
LEVI assumes that they can be generated from the same
Gaussian distribution. However, in practical applications,
the same label distribution is likely to correspond to multiple widely different instances; as shown in Fig. 1, in the
Emotion6 dataset (Peng et al. 2015), the label distribution
[0, 0, 0, 0.67, 0, 0, 0.27, 0.06] corresponds to seven images
with various styles, which are obviously difficult to generate from the the same Gaussian distribution. (2) LEVI uses
the mean squared error (MSE) ky − dk22 to penalize the dif-

Label distribution learning (LDL) is an effective learning
paradigm for dealing with label ambiguity. When applying
LDL, the datasets annotated with label distributions (i.e., the
real-valued vectors like the probability distribution) are typically required. Unfortunately, most existing datasets only
contain the logical labels, and manual annotating with label
distributions is costly. To address this problem, we treat the
label distribution as a latent vector and infer its posterior by
variational Bayes. Specifically, we propose a generative label enhancement model to encode the process of generating
feature vectors and logical label vectors from label distributions in a principled way. In terms of features, we assume
that the feature vector is generated by a Gaussian mixture
dominated by the label distribution, which captures the oneto-many relationship from the label distribution to the feature
vector and thus reduces the feature generation error. In terms
of logical labels, we design a probability distribution to generate the logical label vector from a label distribution, which
captures partial label ranking in the logical label vector and
thus provides a more accurate guidance for inferring the label
distribution. Besides, to approximate the posterior of the label distribution, we design a inference model, and derive the
variational learning objective. Finally, extensive experiments
on real-world datasets validate our proposal.

Introduction
Label distribution learning (LDL) (Geng 2016) is a new
learning paradigm, where each instance is annotated by a label distribution (a real-valued vector like the probability distribution). Each element in label distribution is called label
description degree which indicates the relative importance
degree of each label. Currently, LDL has been applied to a
variety of real-world tasks, such as sentiment analysis (Jia
et al. 2019; Li et al. 2021; He and Jin 2019), facial age estimation (Hou et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2018; Wen et al. 2020),
head pose estimation (Liu et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020).
In the application of LDL, the datasets annotated with label distributions are typically required. Unfortunately, most
existing datasets only contain the logical labels, and manual annotating with label distributions is costly. Therefore,
Xu, Tao, and Geng (2018) proposed label enhancement (LE)
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8975

