The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Hard Sample Aware Network for Contrastive Deep Graph Clustering
Yue Liu1 , Xihong Yang1 , Sihang Zhou2 , Xinwang Liu1 † , Zhen Wang3 ,
Ke Liang1 , Wenxuan Tu1 , Liang Li1 , Jingcan Duan1 , Cancan Chen4
1

2

College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology
College of Intelligence Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University
4
Beijing Information Science and Technology University
yueliu@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract

of hard negative sample mining in contrastive learning. Concretely, GDCL (Zhao et al. 2021) is proposed to correct the
bias of the negative sample selection via clustering pseudo
labels. ProGCL (Xia et al. 2022a) first filters the false negative samples and then generates a more abundant negative
sample set by the sample interpolation.
Although verified to be effective, we point out two drawbacks in the existing methods as follows. 1) While measuring the hardness of samples, the important structural information is neglected for the sample similarity calculation, degrading the representativeness of the selected hard negative
samples. 2) Previous works only focus on the hard negative
samples while overlooking the hard positive samples, limiting the discriminative capability of samples. We argue that
the samples within the same cluster but with low similarity
should also be carefully learned.

Contrastive deep graph clustering, which aims to divide nodes
into disjoint groups via contrastive mechanisms, is a challenging research spot. Among the recent works, hard sample mining-based algorithms have achieved great attention
for their promising performance. However, we find that the
existing hard sample mining methods have two problems
as follows. 1) In the hardness measurement, the important
structural information is overlooked for similarity calculation, degrading the representativeness of the selected hard
negative samples. 2) Previous works merely focus on the
hard negative sample pairs while neglecting the hard positive
sample pairs. Nevertheless, samples within the same cluster but with low similarity should also be carefully learned.
To solve the problems, we propose a novel contrastive deep
graph clustering method dubbed Hard Sample Aware Network (HSAN) by introducing a comprehensive similarity
measure criterion and a general dynamic sample weighing
strategy. Concretely, in our algorithm, the similarities between samples are calculated by considering both the attribute embeddings and the structure embeddings, better revealing sample relationships and assisting hardness measurement. Moreover, under the guidance of the carefully collected
high-confidence clustering information, our proposed weight
modulating function will first recognize the positive and negative samples and then dynamically up-weight the hard sample pairs while down-weighting the easy ones. In this way,
our method can mine not only the hard negative samples but
also the hard positive sample, thus improving the discriminative capability of the samples further. Extensive experiments and analyses demonstrate the superiority and effectiveness of our proposed method. The source code of HSAN is
shared at https://github.com/yueliu1999/HSAN and a collection (papers, codes and, datasets) of deep graph clustering
is shared at https://github.com/yueliu1999/Awesome-DeepGraph-Clustering on Github.

(a) Positive Sample Pairs

(b) Negative Sample Pairs

Figure 1: Sample weighing strategy illustration. In the sample weighting process, according to the high-confidence
pseudo labels generated by the integrated clustering procedure, samples from the same clusters are recognized as
potential positive sample pairs. Meanwhile, samples from
different clusters are combined as potential negative sample
pairs. To drive the network to focus more on the hard samples, we assign larger weights to the positive sample pairs
with smaller similarities shown in sub-figure (a) and assign
smaller weights to the negative sample pairs with small similarities shown in sub-figure (b). In this way, samples in the
same cluster with low similarity and those in different clusters with large similarity are mined as hard samples.

Introduction
In recent years, contrastive learning has achieved promising
performance in the field of deep graph clustering benefiting
from the powerful potential supervision information extraction capability (Liu et al. 2022c; Gong et al. 2022). Among
the recent works, researchers demonstrate the effectiveness

To solve the mentioned problems, we propose a novel
contrastive deep graph clustering method termed Hard Sample Aware Network (HSAN) by designing a comprehensive
similarity measure criterion and a general dynamic sample

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Corresponding author

8914

