The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Optimal Sparse Regression Trees
Rui Zhang1 * , Rui Xin1 * , Margo Seltzer2 , Cynthia Rudin1
1

Duke University
University of British Columbia
{r.zhang, rui.xin926, cynthia.rudin}@duke.edu, {mseltzer}@cs.ubc.ca
2

Abstract

1997; Farhangfar, Greiner, and Zinkevich 2008; Narodytska et al. 2018; Janota and Morgado 2020; Shati, Cohen,
and McIlraith 2021; Hu et al. 2020; Avellaneda 2020) had
strong constraints, such as shallow depth or perfect classification accuracy. For classification (rather than regression),
scientists have had recent success in producing fully optimal trees (Günlük et al. 2021; Blanquero et al. 2020; Hu,
Rudin, and Seltzer 2019; Verwer and Zhang 2019; Angelino
et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2020; McTavish et al. 2022; Farhangfar,
Greiner, and Zinkevich 2008; Nijssen and Fromont 2007,
2010; Aghaei, Gomez, and Vayanos 2020; Verhaeghe et al.
2019; Nijssen, Schaus et al. 2020; Nijssen and Fromont
2010; Demirović et al. 2022) using mathematical programming or dynamic programming. However, building sparse
optimal classification trees is a much easier problem, since
the 0-1 loss has natural discrete lower bounds, and binary
integer programming can be used; this is not true of regression, which uses (real-valued) mean squared error as its loss
function.

Regression trees are one of the oldest forms of AI models,
and their predictions can be made without a calculator, which
makes them broadly useful, particularly for high-stakes applications. Within the large literature on regression trees,
there has been little effort towards full provable optimization,
mainly due to the computational hardness of the problem.
This work proposes a dynamic-programming-with-bounds
approach to the construction of provably-optimal sparse regression trees. We leverage a novel lower bound based on an
optimal solution to the k-Means clustering algorithm on one
dimensional data. We are often able to find optimal sparse
trees in seconds, even for challenging datasets that involve
large numbers of samples and highly-correlated features.

1

Introduction

Regression trees are one of the oldest and most popular
forms of machine learning model, dating back to the 1963
AID algorithm of Morgan and Sonquist (1963). Since then,
there has been a vast amount of work on regression trees, the
overwhelming majority of which involves greedy tree induction and greedy pruning (Breiman et al. 1984; Quinlan 1993;
Payne and Meisel 1977; Loh 2002). In these approaches,
trees are grown from the top down, with greedy splitting
at each branch node, and greedy pruning afterwards. These
techniques are easy and fast, but their trees have no notion of
global optimality. Greedily-grown trees can be much larger
than necessary, sacrificing interpretability, and their performance suffers when compared to other machine learning approaches. Thus, questions remain – is it possible to create
optimal regression trees? Would they be competitive with
other machine learning algorithms if they were fully optimized? Certainly there would be many uses for sparse interpretable regression trees if we could create them with
accuracy comparable to that of other machine learning approaches.
While the quest for fully-optimal decision trees began in
the mid-90’s with the work of Bennett and Blue (1996),
fully optimal decision tree learning was rarely attempted
over the last three decades, owing to the computational hardness of the problem. Works that did attempt it (Dobkin et al.

Let us discuss the few works that do address challenges
resembling optimal regression trees. The works of Blanquero et al. (2022) and Bertsimas, Dunn, and Wang (2021)
do not construct traditional sparse trees with constant predictions in the leaves; their leaf nodes contain linear or polynomial classifiers, thus the formula for producing predictions
is quite complex. The former (Blanquero et al. 2022) uses
ℓ∞ +ℓ1 regularization for the linear models within the nodes
and the latter (Bertsimas, Dunn, and Wang 2021) uses ℓ2
regularization for polynomial models in the leaves. Neither
of these regularize the number of leaves. The evtree algorithm (Grubinger, Zeileis, and Pfeiffer 2014) claims to construct globally optimal trees, but since it is purely an evolutionary method (no bounds are used to reduce the search
space), there is no guarantee of reaching optimality, and one
never knows whether optimality has already been reached.
Dunn (2018) and Verwer and Zhang (2017) provide mathematical programming formulas for optimal regression trees,
but no open source code is available; regardless, mathematical programming solvers are generally slow. Interpretable AI
(2022) provides proprietary software that requires a license,
but it is not possible to ascertain whether it uses local
search or mathematical programming; we suspect it uses local search heuristics, despite the claim of optimal solutions.
In other words, as far as we know, there is no other prior

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11270

