The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self Correspondence Distillation for End-to-End Weakly-Supervised Semantic
Segmentation
Rongtao Xu1,3, * , Changwei Wang1,3, * , Jiaxi Sun1,3 ,
Shibiao Xu2,† , Weiliang Meng1,3,† , Xiaopeng Zhang1,3
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
shibiaoxu@bupt.edu.cn, {xurongtao2019, wangchangwei2019, sunjiaxi2020, weiliang.meng, xiaopeng.zhang}@ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Efficiently training accurate deep models for weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) with image-level labels
is challenging and important. Recently, end-to-end WSSS
methods have become the focus of research due to their high
training efficiency. However, current methods suffer from
insufficient extraction of comprehensive semantic information, resulting in low-quality pseudo-labels and sub-optimal
solutions for end-to-end WSSS. To this end, we propose a
simple and novel Self Correspondence Distillation (SCD)
method to refine pseudo-labels without introducing external
supervision. Our SCD enables the network to utilize feature
correspondence derived from itself as a distillation target,
which can enhance the network’s feature learning process by
complementing semantic information. In addition, to further
improve the segmentation accuracy, we design a Variationaware Refine Module to enhance the local consistency of
pseudo-labels by computing pixel-level variation. Finally, we
present an efficient end-to-end Transformer-based framework
(TSCD) via SCD and Variation-aware Refine Module for the
accurate WSSS task. Extensive experiments on the PASCAL
VOC 2012 and MS COCO 2014 datasets demonstrate that our
method significantly outperforms other state-of-the-art methods. Our code is available at https://github.com/RongtaoXu/RepresentationLearning/tree/main/SCD-AAAI2023.

Figure 1: Visualization examples of CAMs generated by our
TSCD. The corresponding categories are drawn on the original image with red crosses.

2016) (CAMs). Due to the complex pipeline of multi-stage
methods and the need to train multiple models, recently
some end-to-end methods (Araslanov and Roth 2020; Zhang
et al. 2020a, 2021; Ru et al. 2022) have been proposed
to speed up the training process. However, these methods
rely heavily on the pseudo-labels generated by CAM as supervision information and still show limited performance
in obtaining the comprehensiveness of semantic information and segmentation accuracy. The recent work (Caron
et al. 2021) reveals that there is corresponding information
about image semantic segmentation in the dense features of
self-supervised transformers. We find that these dense features can be class activation maps, and further construct
novel CAM feature correspondence to learn semantic correspondence information. In this paper, we propose a simple
and novel method named Self Correspondence Distillation
(SCD), which can enhance the network feature learning process by complementing semantic information to refine CAM
without external supervision. Our SCD allows the network
to utilize the CAM feature correspondence derived from itself as the distillation target for segmentation prediction features. This mechanism can help the network obtain comprehensive image semantic information and improve accuracy.
To further refine the initial pseudo-labels obtained
by CAM, we design a Variation-aware Refine Module
(VARM), which introduces the idea of image noise reduc-

Introduction
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) aims
to use weak/cheap labels to alleviate the reliance on timeconsuming pixel-level annotations (Zhang et al. 2021). The
most challenging scenario for WSSS methods is to use only
image-level labels which we focus on, as it has no real localization information, and usually relies on multi-stage solutions to generate high-quality pseudo-labels.
Multi-stage methods (Hou et al. 2018; Lee et al. 2019; Wu
et al. 2021) first train a classification model and then train a
semantic segmentation network with refined pseudo-labels,
which are generated from class activation maps (Zhou et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Shibiao Xu and Weiliang Meng are the corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3045

