The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Instance Smoothed Contrastive Learning for Unsupervised Sentence Embedding
Hongliang He1,2 * , Junlei Zhang1,2 * , Zhenzhong Lan2,3† , Yue Zhang2,3†
1
Zhejiang University, China
School of Engineering, Westlake University, China
3
Institute of Advanced Technology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, China
{hehongliang, zhangjunlei, lanzhenzhong, zhangyue}@westlake.edu.cn
2

Abstract

:false negative embeddings

Contrastive learning-based methods, such as unsup-SimCSE,
have achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA) performances in learning unsupervised sentence embeddings. However, in previous
studies, each embedding used for contrastive learning only
derived from one sentence instance, and we call these embeddings instance-level embeddings. In other words, each
embedding is regarded as a unique class of its own, which
may hurt the generalization performance. In this study, we
propose IS-CSE (instance smoothing contrastive sentence
embedding) to smooth the boundaries of embeddings in the
feature space. Specifically, we retrieve embeddings from a
dynamic memory buffer according to the semantic similarity to get a positive embedding group. Then embeddings in
the group are aggregated by a self-attention operation to produce a smoothed instance embedding for further analysis.
We evaluate our method on standard semantic text similarity (STS) tasks and achieve an average of 78.30%, 79.47%,
77.73%, and 79.42% Spearman’s correlation on the base
of BERT-base, BERT-large, RoBERTa-base, and RoBERTalarge respectively, a 2.05%, 1.06%, 1.16% and 0.52% improvement compared to unsup-SimCSE.

:negative embeddings
:two views of the same sentence

:weighted average of semantically similar embeddings

Repel
Att
rac
t

Repel
bou

(a)

Att
rac
t

(b)

ry
da
un
bo

nda
ry

Figure 1: Comparison between our method with SimCSE.
In SimCSE, two views of the same input sentence are regarded as positive pairs. Other sentences in the same batch
are regarded as negative examples. (a): In SimCSE, each embedding is derived from one sentence, and one view of the
input sentence is regarded as a label of another view. (b):
Our method uses additional soft labels (weighted average of
closing-by embeddings).

Introduction
Learning better universal sentence embedding (Gao, Yao,
and Chen 2021) can benefit many natural language processing tasks, such as sentiment analysis, information retrieval
and semantic search (Klein and Nabi 2022; Zhang et al.
2018; Pilehvar and Navigli 2015), and thus has received
much attention. Recently, it has been shown that the contrastive learning-based methods give strong results for sentence embeddings (Gao, Yao, and Chen 2021; Wang et al.
2022; Zhou et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2021). The core idea
of contrastive learning is that positive and negative embedding pairs are generated given a batch of training sentences.
Whereas the positive embeddings are often obtained via augmentation, and negative embeddings are sampled from a
random collection of sentences. Following the construction
of pairs, contrastive learning forces the model to learn discriminative embeddings by pulling positive sentence pairs
together and pushing apart negative ones.

In the unsupervised contrastive learning framework, while
some works seek to optimize for selecting ”hard” negative
examples (Zhou et al. 2022) or using pre-defined prompt
(Jiang et al. 2022) to extract features, other methods investigate the effects of augmentation on constructing sentence
pairs. One of the most influential methods for learning sentence embeddings is SimCSE (Gao, Yao, and Chen 2021),
which takes drop-out as data augmentation, providing expressive semantically similar embeddings to construct positive pairs. ESimCSE(Wu et al. 2021) augmented the input
sentences by word repetition, insertion, and deletion. Similarly, CARDS (Wang et al. 2022) randomly flip the first letter
in a word to augment the inputs.
However, most of these methods take each of the sentences as a unique class and discriminate it from other sentences in a batch. This could make models become ”overconfident” about each sentence being a separate class, be-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12863

