The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Automatically Verifying Expressive Epistemic Properties of Programs
Francesco Belardinelli1 , Ioana Boureanu2 , Vadim Malvone3 , Fortunat Rajaona2
1
Imperial College London
Surrey Centre for Cyber Security, University of Surrey
3
Télécom Paris
francesco.belardinelli@imperial.ac.uk, {i.boureanu, s.rajaona}@surrey.ac.uk, vadim.malvone@telecom-paris.fr
2

logic for programs, denoted L□K . The programs/command
C in (Gorogiannis, Raimondi, and Boureanu 2017) could
be seen as formed of multiple threads/agents and each
thread i would have observable and non-observable variables w.r.t. the program space. Then, a formula □C Ki φ in
L□K denotes the thread/agent i knowing the state of affairs φ
at the end of executing program C. Under given conditions
(e.g., set of program-instructions, variable domain, mathematical behaviour of program transformer), (Gorogiannis, Raimondi, and Boureanu 2017) proved that the model
checking problem for L□K can be reduced to SMT-solving.
Whilst interesting, there are several limitations to (Gorogiannis, Raimondi, and Boureanu 2017):
a. The translation could handle reasoning about knowledge
only at states at the end of the execution of a given program, i.e., formulas □C Ki φ were handled by the translation, whereas formulas of type Ki □C φ were not.
b. The logic L□K only allowed to expressing aspects like
“at the end of executing program C, a formula holds”,
where the programs were not part of the logic, but rather
ad-hoc instructions defined outside of the logic.
c. The logic was “bespoke” in that, predicate transformers
were necessary to be defined w.r.t. the programs in the
logic and the transition relation of the logic be linked
to these predicate transforms. To this end, the reduction
of model checking L□K to SMT was also dependent on
these predicate transformers. However, no formal characterisation was given for these, and so we cannot ascertain
if their program semantics is therefore “standard”.
We overcome the limitations (a)-(c) above, and produce
the first approach that allows verifying knowledge over program without totally foregoing the temporal aspects and by
giving a logic and translation that is program-semantics independent and more general, in the sense of being “free” of
dependencies on “bespoke” predicate transformers.

Abstract
We propose a new approach to the verification of epistemic properties of programs. First, we introduce the new
“program-epistemic” logic LPK , which is strictly richer and
more general than similar formalisms appearing in the literature. To solve the verification problem in an efficient way, we
introduce a translation from our language LPK into first-order
logic. Then, we show and prove correct a reduction from the
model checking problem for program-epistemic formulas to
the satisfiability of their first-order translation. Both our logic
and our translation can handle richer specification w.r.t. the
state of the art, allowing us to express the knowledge of
agents about facts pertaining to programs (i.e., agents’ knowledge before and after a program is executed). Furthermore,
we implement our translation in Haskell in a general way (i.e.,
independently of the programs in the logical statements), and
we use existing SMT-solvers to check satisfaction of LPK formulas on a benchmark example in the AI/agency field.

1

Introduction

Explainability in learning, in security, etc (Viganò and Magazzeni 2018) is at the forefront of AI. In this vein, we aim
to verify knowledge beyond systems and onto code: e.g., to
formally answer what programs know, and what an observer
knows about a program modulo what is not private to them.
Our goal is to no longer “just” model check knowledge of
systems, but rather do knowledge verification of programs or
reason about programs’ knowledge. Moreover, if we could
do so by leveraging the benefits of program-verification being often reduced to SMT-solving, this would be ideal.
But, whilst reductions of general verification to SMTsolving are often done and prove worthwhile for Hoare
logics or program-intrinsic logics (such as separation
logic (Botincan, Parkinson, and Schulte 2009)), it is not always clear if it is possible to give such reductions for highlevel, non-classical logics defined on top of programs, such
as linear dynamic logic (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013a). Furthermore, this is even less so the case for logics of knowledge, or a sound mix of knowledge with code-driven logics.
We come to fill this gap.
To this end, in 2017, (Gorogiannis, Raimondi, and Boureanu 2017) promisingly introduced a “bespoke” epistemic

Contributions. Our contribution is threefold. First, we introduce a new logic to reason about agents’ knowledge
on program/command execution, in ways richer that the
state-of-the-art. Concretely, we define a program-epistemic
logic LPK that is strictly more expressive than the programepistemic logic L□K in (Gorogiannis, Raimondi, and Boureanu 2017): i.e., in LPK , the epistemic and the knowledge
operators can commute. Moreover, our program-epistemic

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6245

