The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Exploring Stroke-Level Modifications for Scene Text Editing
Yadong Qu1 , Qingfeng Tan2 * , Hongtao Xie1 , Jianjun Xu1 , Yuxin Wang1 , Yongdong Zhang1
1

University of Science and Technology of China,
Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology, GuangZhou University, GuangZhou, China
{qqqyd, xujj1998, wangyx58}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tqf528@gzhu.edu.cn, {htxie, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Scene text editing (STE) aims to replace text with the desired one while preserving background and styles of the original text. However, due to the complicated background textures and various text styles, existing methods fall short in
generating clear and legible edited text images. In this study,
we attribute the poor editing performance to two problems:
1) Implicit decoupling structure. Previous methods of editing the whole image have to learn different translation rules
of background and text regions simultaneously. 2) Domain
gap. Due to the lack of edited real scene text images, the network can only be well trained on synthetic pairs and performs
poorly on real-world images. To handle the above problems,
we propose a novel network by MOdifying Scene Text image
at strokE Level (MOSTEL). Firstly, we generate stroke guidance maps to explicitly indicate regions to be edited. Different
from the implicit one by directly modifying all the pixels at
image level, such explicit instructions filter out the distractions from background and guide the network to focus on
editing rules of text regions. Secondly, we propose a Semisupervised Hybrid Learning to train the network with both
labeled synthetic images and unpaired real scene text images.
Thus, the STE model is adapted to real-world datasets distributions. Moreover, two new datasets (Tamper-Syn2k and
Tamper-Scene) are proposed to fill the blank of public evaluation datasets. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
MOSTEL outperforms previous methods both qualitatively
and quantitatively. Datasets and code will be available at
https://github.com/qqqyd/MOSTEL.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: The comparison between MOSTEL and previous
methods. (a) is the pipeline. SLM means Stroke-Level Modification. The dashed boxes indicate all the changed pixels
throughout the editing process. (b) is the qualitative examples of previous method and ours.

Introduction
Chen, and Xu 2019; Du et al. 2022). Compared with existing synthesis methods (Jaderberg et al. 2014), which simply
place font-specific text on random background images, STE
can better simulate various text styles and provide more reliable training images. It can also be used in sensitive data
protection, smart city (Qiu et al. 2019) and augmented reality translation (Fragoso et al. 2011).
STE task has two main difficulties: 1) It is challenging to
simulate various text styles while keeping the background
textures intact. 2) The dearth of real-world training pairs
causes the domain gap between synthetic training data and
real scene text images. As shown in Fig. 1(a), previous methods (Wu et al. 2019; Yang, Huang, and Lin 2020) divide
the STE task into three simpler subtasks: background recon-

As an emerging task in recent years, scene text editing (STE)
has received increasing attention. It is designed to replace
text in a scene image with new text while maintaining the
original background textures and text styles (e.g. font, color,
size, spatial transformation, etc.). STE can convert any word
in an image to a desired one within a second and retain visual
consistency before and after tampering, eliminating the need
to spend hours manually editing images. The edited images
can be used as augmented data to train the scene text detector (Qin et al. 2021; Qu et al. 2022) and recognizer (Sheng,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2119

