The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Global Dilated Attention and Target Focusing Network for Robust Tracking
Yun Liang* , Qiaoqiao Li, Fumian Long
Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Intelligent Agriculture, College of Mathematics
and Informatics, South China Agricultural University
yliang@scau.edu.cn, qiaoqiaoli23@163.com, lfm_sunny@stu.scau.edu.cn

Abstract
Self Attention has shown the excellent performance in tracking due to its global modeling capability. However, it brings
two challenges: First, its global receptive field has less attention on local structure and inter-channel associations, which
limits the semantics to distinguish objects and backgrounds;
Second, its feature fusion with linear process cannot avoid
the interference of non-target semantic objects. To solve the
above issues, this paper proposes a robust tracking method
named GdaTFT by defining the Global Dilated Attention
(GDA) and Target Focusing Network (TFN). The GDA provides a new global semantics modeling approach to enhance
the semantic objects while eliminating the background. It is
defined via the local focusing module, dilated attention and
channel adaption module. Thus, it promotes semantics by focusing local key information, building long-range dependencies and enhancing the semantics of channels. Subsequently,
to distinguish the target and non-target objects both with rich
semantics, the TFN is proposed to accurately focus the target region. Different from the present feature fusion, it uses
the template as the query to build a point-to-point correlation
between the template and search region, and finally achieves
part-level augmentation of target feature in the search region.
Thus, the TFN efficiently augments the target embedding
while weakening the non-target objects. Experiments on challenging benchmarks (LaSOT, TrackingNet, GOT-10k, OTB100) demonstrate that the GdaTFT outperforms many stateof-the-art trackers and achieves leading performance. Code
will be available.

Search Region

Present Feature

Our GDA

Our TFN

Figure 1: Features of our GdaTFT. Compared with present
feature, our GDA distinguishes objects and background by
enhancing semantics. Then, our TFN further augments target embedding by weakening no-target semantic objects.

et al.; Guo et al.) map the template and the search region
to the same feature space, and achieve semantic-level feature matching through cross correlation to locate the target.
Therefore, it is critical to extract robust semantic information in tracking. However, limited by fixed operation mode
of convolution and small receptive field, these methods are
difficult to extract semantic information effectively. Thanks
to the flexible adaptability comparing to fixed weights of
convolution, attention mechanism can obtain the dynamic
weights according to different inputs, which helps to extract
robust semantics. By introducing attention mechanism, the
methods (Wang et al.; Choi et al.; Fu et al.; Du et al.) adaptively enhance feature with semantic information. But the
challenge raised by small receptive field remains unresolved,
which still limits the semantics extraction of feature. Therefore, due to its excellent ability to build long-range dependencies, self attention has been widely used in visual tracking. It is introduced to perform global semantics modeling
and achieve feature fusion between template and search region to replace cross correlation, which yields great performance (Yan et al.; Wang et al.; Yu et al.). However, even

Introduction
Visual tracking is a fundamental task in computer vision,
aiming to predict the state of a target in video sequences
given its initial state. It has been widely used in various applications such as visual surveillance and autonomous driving. Many efforts have been done in recent years, however,
developing a robust and accurate tracker is still challenging
due to the various hinders such as rapid deformations, occlusions and background clutters that often occur in tracking.
Recently, due to the good balance between accuracy and
speed, siamese network based trackers have drawn great attention. These methods (Bertinetto et al.; Li et al.; Chen
* Corresponding Author: Yun Liang.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1549

