The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Yet Another Traffic Classifier: A Masked Autoencoder Based Traffic Transformer
with Multi-Level Flow Representation
Ruijie Zhao1 * , Mingwei Zhan1 * , Xianwen Deng1 , Yanhao Wang2 ,
Yijun Wang1 , Guan Gui3† , Zhi Xue1†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
QI-ANXIN, Beijing, China
3
NJUPT, Nanjing, China
{ruijiezhao, mw.zhan, 2594306528, ericwyj, zxue}@sjtu.edu.cn; wangyanhao136@gmail.com; guiguan@njupt.edu.cn
Abstract

Session Flow

Header

Flow-Level Stacking
Packet-Level Matrices

Packet N

Flows

Raw Packet Bytes
Payload

Packet-Level Matrix
Header Matrix

…

1

Split

Raw Traffic

Traffic classification is a critical task in network security and
management. Recent research has demonstrated the effectiveness of the deep learning-based traffic classification method.
However, the following limitations remain: (1) the traffic representation is simply generated from raw packet bytes, resulting in the absence of important information; (2) the model
structure of directly applying deep learning algorithms does
not take traffic characteristics into account; and (3) scenariospecific classifier training usually requires a labor-intensive
and time-consuming process to label data. In this paper, we
introduce a masked autoencoder (MAE) based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation to tackle these
problems. To model raw traffic data, we design a formatted traffic representation matrix with hierarchical flow information. After that, we develop an efficient Traffic Transformer, in which packet-level and flow-level attention mechanisms implement more efficient feature extraction with lower
complexity. At last, we utilize the MAE paradigm to pretrain our classifier with a large amount of unlabeled data,
and perform fine-tuning with a few labeled data for a series
of traffic classification tasks. Experiment findings reveal that
our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods on five realworld traffic datasets by a large margin. The code is available
at https://github.com/NSSL-SJTU/YaTC.

Packet 1
Packet 2
Packet 3
Packet 4
Packet 5

Packets

Payload Matrix

Packet-Level Matrices

MFR Matrix

Figure 1: The schematic illustration of multi-level flow representation (MFR).

analyzer for more accurate traffic classification, it is necessary to capture implicit and robust patterns in diverse traffic.
Traditional traffic analysis methods identify different network services based on fundamental traffic features (e.g.,
communication protocol, port number), which are no longer
appropriate owing to the complexity and variability of the
current traffic (Taylor et al. 2016). To address this issue, several works use machine learning (ML) algorithms to classify traffic through statistical features. However, these approaches rely on expert experience to select specific features, and even insignificant statistical features might impact
analysis performance (Shen et al. 2020). Deep learning (DL)
techniques, which can automatically extract features from
packet bytes of raw traffic, have been used by an increasing number of researchers for more effective traffic analysis
in recent years. Unfortunately, once the length of a certain
packet is too long, the bytes from that packet can overwhelm
important information from other packets. Thus, the lack
of representation design in traditional DL-based methods
brings instability in performance. Besides, they often need
a large amount of labeled traffic data for training. Labeling
data is a time-consuming and labor-intensive operation, resulting in high deployment and update costs.
Pre-training methods with massive volumes of unlabeled
data have recently demonstrated outstanding performance in
computer vision (CV) (He et al. 2022; Caron et al. 2021;
Chen, Xie, and He 2021) and natural language processing
(NLP) (Devlin et al. 2019; Lan et al. 2020) tasks. When
compared to the traditional supervised learning paradigm,
the self-supervised learning paradigm pre-training method

Introduction

Traffic classification is attracting the attention of service
providers and equipment vendors as a significant solution
for solving network management problems. Understanding
the content of traffic allows network operators to respond
swiftly in support of diverse business goals, enhancing service quality and user experience (Papadogiannaki and Ioannidis 2021). Meanwhile, traffic classification is a critical
component of the intrusion detection system, which is utilized to detect threats and safeguard system security (Yao
et al. 2019). However, the growing usage of encrypted traffic
and anonymous network technology makes analyzing complicated traffic difficult. To construct a sophisticated traffic
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5420

