The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Diffeomorphic Information Neural Estimation
Bao Duong, Thin Nguyen
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute, Deakin University, Australia
{duongng,thin.nguyen}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract

random variables. Historically, MI has been estimated by
non-paramtric approachs (Kwak and Choi 2002; Paninski
2003; Kraskov, Stögbauer, and Grassberger 2004), which are
however not widely applicable due to their unfriendliness
with sample size or dimensionality. Recently, variational approaches have been proposed to estimate the lower bound of
MI (Belghazi et al. 2018; Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018). However, a critical limitation of MI lower bound estimators has
been studied by (McAllester and Stratos 2020), who show
that any distribution-free high-confidence lower bound estimation of mutual information is limited above by O (ln n)
where n is the sample size. More recent approaches includes
hashing (Noshad, Zeng, and Hero 2019), classifier-based estimator (Mukherjee, Asnani, and Kannan 2020), and inductive maximum-entropy copula approach (Samo 2021).
While estimating MI is hard, estimating CMI is of magnitudes harder due to the presence of the conditioning set.
Therefore, CMI estimation methods have seen slower developments than its MI counterparts. Recent developments for
CMI estimation include (Runge 2018; Molavipour, Bassi,
and Skoglund 2021; Mukherjee, Asnani, and Kannan 2020).
Present work. In this paper, we propose DINE1
(Diffeomorphic Information Neural Estimator)–a unifying
framework that closes the gap between the CMI and MI
estimation problems. The approach is advantageous compared with novel variational methods in the way that it
can estimate the exact information measure, instead of a
lower-bound. Specifically, we harness the observation that
CMI is invariant over conditional diffeomorphisms, i.e., differentiable and invertible maps with differentiable inverse
parametrized by the conditioning variable.
As a direct consequence, first, we can now build a welldesigned conditional diffeomorphic transformation that
breaks the statistical dependence between the conditioning
variable with the transformed variables, but keeps the information measure unchanged, reducing the CMI to an equivalent MI. Second, the approach offers a complete control over
the distribution form of the newly induced MI estimation
problem, thus we can easily restrict it to an amenable class
of simple distributions with well-established properties and
estimate the resultant MI via available analytic forms. Being

Mutual Information (MI) and Conditional Mutual Information (CMI) are multi-purpose tools from information theory that are able to naturally measure the statistical dependencies between random variables, thus they are usually of
central interest in several statistical and machine learning
tasks, such as conditional independence testing and representation learning. However, estimating CMI, or even MI,
is infamously challenging due the intractable formulation. In
this study, we introduce DINE (Diffeomorphic Information
Neural Estimator)–a novel approach for estimating CMI of
continuous random variables, inspired by the invariance of
CMI over diffeomorphic maps. We show that the variables of
interest can be replaced with appropriate surrogates that follow simpler distributions, allowing the CMI to be efficiently
evaluated via analytical solutions. Additionally, we demonstrate the quality of the proposed estimator in comparison
with state-of-the-arts in three important tasks, including estimating MI, CMI, as well as its application in conditional
independence testing. The empirical evaluations show that
DINE consistently outperforms competitors in all tasks and
is able to adapt very well to complex and high-dimensional
relationships.

Introduction
Mutual Information (MI) and Conditional Mutual Information (CMI) are pivotal dependence measures between random variables for general non-linear relationships. In statistics and machine learning, they have been employed in a
broad variety of problems, such as conditional independence testing (Runge 2018; Mukherjee, Asnani, and Kannan 2020), unsupervised representation learning (Chen et al.
2016), search engine (Magerman and Marcus 1990), and
feature selection (Peng, Long, and Ding 2005).
The MI of two random variables X and Y measures the
expected point-wise information, where the expectation is
taken over the joint distribution PXY . Due to the expectation, estimating mutual information for continuous variables remains notoriously difficult. Even if one possesses
the specification of the joint distribution, i.e., a closedform of the density, which is most of the time unknown
in practice, the expectation may still be intractable. Consequently, exact MI estimation is only possible for discrete

1
Source code and relevant data sets are available at
https://github.com/baosws/DINE

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7468

