The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DropMessage: Unifying Random Dropping for Graph Neural Networks
Taoran Fang1 , Zhiqing Xiao1 , Chunping Wang2 , Jiarong Xu3 , Xuan Yang1 , Yang Yang1 *
1

Zhejiang University
FinVolution Group
3
Fudan University
{fangtr, yangya}@zju.edu.cn, wangchunping02@xinye.com, jiarongxu@fudan.edu.cn
2

Abstract

and Welling 2017; Velickovic et al. 2018; Ding, Tang, and
Zhang 2018). In particular, GNNs adopt a message-passing
schema (Gilmer et al. 2017), in which each node aggregates
information from its neighbors in each convolutional layer,
and have been widely applied in various downstream tasks
such as node classification (Kipf and Welling 2017), link
prediction (Kipf and Welling 2016), vertex clustering (Ramaswamy, Gedik, and Liu 2005), and recommendation systems (Ying et al. 2018).
Yet, despite their rapid development, training GNNs on
large-scale graphs is facing several challenges such as overfitting, over-smoothing, and non-robustness. Indeed, compared to other data forms, gathering labels for graph data is expensive and inherently biased, which limits the generalization
ability of GNNs due to over-fitting. Besides, representations
of different nodes in a GNN tend to become indistinguishable as a result of aggregating information from neighbors
recursively. This phenomenon of over-smoothing prevents
GNNs from effectively modeling the higher-order dependencies from multi-hop neighbors (Li, Han, and Wu 2018; Xu
et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2020; Zhao and Akoglu 2020; Oono
and Suzuki 2020, 2019). Recursively aggregating schema
makes GNNs vulnerable to the quality of input graphs (Zhu
et al. 2019; Zügner, Akbarnejad, and Günnemann 2018). In
other words, noisy graphs or adversarial attacks can easily
influence a GNN’s performance.
The aforementioned problems can be helped by random
dropping methods (Hinton et al. 2012; Rong et al. 2019; Feng
et al. 2020), which integrate augmented data into models by
randomly masking parts of the input. These methods (Maaten
et al. 2013; Matsuoka 1992; Bishop 1995; Cohen, Rosenfeld,
and Kolter 2019) focus on randomly dropping or sampling
existing information, and can also be considered as a data
augmentation technique. Benefiting from the advantages of
being unbiased, adaptive, and free of parameters, random
dropping methods have greatly contributed to improving the
performance of most GNNs.
However, some open questions related to random dropping
methods on GNNs still exist. First, a general and critical issue
of existing random dropping methods is that augmented data
introduced to GNNs make parameters difficult to converge
and the training process unstable. Moreover, it is challenging
to find an optimal dropping method suitable to all graphs and
models, because different graphs and models are equipped

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are powerful tools for graph
representation learning. Despite their rapid development,
GNNs also face some challenges, such as over-fitting, oversmoothing, and non-robustness. Previous works indicate that
these problems can be alleviated by random dropping methods, which integrate augmented data into models by randomly
masking parts of the input. However, some open problems of
random dropping on GNNs remain to be solved. First, it is
challenging to find a universal method that are suitable for all
cases considering the divergence of different datasets and models. Second, augmented data introduced to GNNs causes the
incomplete coverage of parameters and unstable training process. Third, there is no theoretical analysis on the effectiveness
of random dropping methods on GNNs. In this paper, we propose a novel random dropping method called DropMessage,
which performs dropping operations directly on the propagated messages during the message-passing process. More
importantly, we find that DropMessage provides a unified
framework for most existing random dropping methods, based
on which we give theoretical analysis of their effectiveness.
Furthermore, we elaborate the superiority of DropMessage: it
stabilizes the training process by reducing sample variance;
it keeps information diversity from the perspective of information theory, enabling it become a theoretical upper bound
of other methods. To evaluate our proposed method, we conduct experiments that aims for multiple tasks on five public
datasets and two industrial datasets with various backbone
models. The experimental results show that DropMessage has
the advantages of both effectiveness and generalization, and
can significantly alleviate the problems mentioned above. A
detailed version with full appendix can be found on arXiv:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.10037.

Introduction
Graphs, ubiquitous in the real world, are used to present
complex relationships among various objects in numerous
domains such as social media (social networks), finance (trading networks), and biology (biological networks). As powerful tools for representation learning on graphs, graph neural
networks (GNNs) have attracted considerable attention recently (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Kipf
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4267

