The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CALIP: Zero-Shot Enhancement of CLIP with Parameter-Free Attention
Ziyu Guo1,2 * , Renrui Zhang2,3 * † , Longtian Qiu4 * , Xianzheng Ma3 ,
Xupeng Miao5 , Xuming He4 , Bin Cui1†
1

School of CS and Key Lab of HCST, Peking University
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory
4
ShanghaiTech University
5
Carnegie Mellon University
{guo.ziyu, bin.cui}@pku.edu.cn, zhangrenrui@pjlab.org.cn, {qiult, hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) has been
shown to learn visual representations with promising zeroshot performance. To further improve its downstream accuracy, existing works propose additional learnable modules
upon CLIP and fine-tune them by few-shot training sets.
However, the resulting extra training cost and data requirement severely hinder the efficiency for model deployment and
knowledge transfer. In this paper, we introduce a free-lunch
enhancement method, CALIP, to boost CLIP’s zero-shot performance via a parameter-free Attention module. Specifically,
we guide visual and textual representations to interact with
each other and explore cross-modal informative features via
attention. As the pre-training has largely reduced the embedding distances between two modalities, we discard all
learnable parameters in the attention and bidirectionally update the multi-modal features, enabling the whole process
to be parameter-free and training-free. In this way, the images are blended with textual-aware signals and the text representations become visual-guided for better adaptive zeroshot alignment. We evaluate CALIP on various benchmarks
of 14 datasets for both 2D image and 3D point cloud few-shot
classification, showing consistent zero-shot performance improvement over CLIP. Based on that, we further insert a small
number of linear layers in CALIP’s attention module and verify our robustness under the few-shot settings, which also
achieves leading performance compared to existing methods. Those extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our approach for efficient enhancement of CLIP. Code
is available at https://github.com/ZiyuGuo99/CALIP.

Figure 1: Visualization of Parameter-free Attention and
the Interacted Features. Without any parameters, CALIP’s
cross-modal attention map (Left-Bottom) shows favorable
weight distributions over the main objects, which well updates both visual and textual features: pixels within objects
of ground-truth labels are enhanced and the corresponding
category features in red are strengthened.

cloud understanding (Qi et al. 2017a,b). Despite their success in those specific scenarios, they often lack the ability
to attain general visual representations, which harms their
transferability to open-set applications. Alternatively, based
on exploiting the wide coverage of languages, Contrastive
Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) (Radford et al. 2021)
proposes to conduct visual learning contrastively with descriptive natural language data. Pre-trained by large-scale
image-text pairs, CLIP extracts both features of input images
and texts by independent encoders, and aligns the paired
ones within the same embedding space. On downstream
tasks, given a new dataset with images of “unseen” classes,
CLIP constructs the textual inputs by the category names
and converts the original classification task into a imagetext matching problem. As such, CLIP is able to achieve
zero-shot recognition in open-vocabulary settings and obtains promising performance on various benchmarks.

Introduction
With the advance of learning theories and network architectures, supervised methods under a close-set assumption
have achieved extraordinary results over a wide range of
vision tasks, such as image classification (He et al. 2016;
Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Parmar et al. 2018;
Mao et al. 2021), object detection (Ren et al. 2015; Carion
et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2017), and point
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
746

