The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Repair Is Nearly Generation: Multilingual Program Repair with LLMs
Harshit Joshi1 , José Cambronero Sanchez2 * , Sumit Gulwani2 * ,
Vu Le2 * , Ivan Radiček3 * , Gust Verbruggen4 *
1

Microsoft, India
Microsoft, USA
3
Microsoft, Croatia
4
Microsoft, Belgium
{t-hjoshi, jcambronero, sumitg, levu, ivradice, gverbruggen}@microsoft.com
2

Abstract

methods take a faulty program and a specification of correctness as input, and return as output a fixed version of the
program that conforms to the specification.
Recent work (Bavishi et al. 2022) has introduced the term
last-mile repairs to broadly describe the class of repairs where
the original program is a small edit distance away from the
correct program. In this definition, program correctness can
be checked without substantial additional context—a parser
and a type checker suffice. A quick search on most programming help forums reveals a large number of questions for
such errors. For example, as of August 2022, there are over
15K posts on StackOverflow tagged with Python and SyntaxError.
Existing work has explored performing these kind of
repairs automatically. Symbolic systems, such as Grmtools (Diekmann and Tratt 2020), typically build on errorrecovery mechanisms in parsers to enumerate local edits that
can resolve errors raised during parsing. Symbolic systems
typically restrict the search space to avoid state explosions
and they cannot easily encode properties such as the likelihood of particular repair candidates being correct or not.
More recently, neural approaches have been successfully
applied to repairing syntax and diagnostics errors. For example, Dr. Repair (Yasunaga and Liang 2020), BIFI (Yasunaga
and Liang 2021), and TFix (Berabi et al. 2021) use transformer architectures to produce repairs for C compilation
errors, Python syntax errors, and JavaScript linter diagnostics, respectively. Some systems, such as LaMirage (Bavishi
et al. 2022), have also combined symbolic and neural components to successfully repair broken programs in low-code
languages such as Excel and Power Fx.
Unfortunately, all these systems share a key drawback: they
require substantial engineering (symbolic) or additional data
and training (neural) to adapt to new languages. In this paper, we propose a single repair engine, that leverages a large
language model trained on code (LLMC) to perform multilingual repair. We select Codex by OpenAI as the LLMC.
Our system, RING, shows that repair is nearly generation
and exploits Codex’s few-shot learning capabilities (Bareiß
et al. 2022; Drori et al. 2022) to perform multilingual program
repair. To do this effectively, we break down program repair
into the same three phases as symbolic automated program
repair systems: fault localization, code transformation, and
candidate ranking (Goues, Pradel, and Roychoudhury 2019;

Most programmers make mistakes when writing code. Some
of these mistakes are small and require few edits to the original
program – a class of errors recently termed last mile mistakes.
These errors break the flow for experienced developers and can
stump novice programmers. Existing automated repair techniques targeting this class of errors are language-specific and
do not easily carry over to new languages. Transferring symbolic approaches requires substantial engineering and neural
approaches require data and retraining. We introduce RING, a
multilingual repair engine powered by a large language model
trained on code (LLMC) such as Codex. Such a multilingual
engine enables a flipped model for programming assistance,
one where the programmer writes code and the AI assistance
suggests fixes, compared to traditional code suggestion technology. Taking inspiration from the way programmers manually fix bugs, we show that a prompt-based strategy that
conceptualizes repair as localization, transformation, and candidate ranking, can successfully repair programs in multiple
languages with minimal effort. We present the first results for
such a multilingual repair engine by evaluating on 6 different
languages and comparing performance to language-specific
repair engines. We show that RING can outperform languagespecific repair engines for three of these languages.

Introduction
The number of people writing code across different languages
has steadily grown (Bureau of Labor Statistics 2022) and
ranges from novices to experts. Regardless of their experience level, programmers can make mistakes when writing
code. Program errors can range from those that are easy
to spot and fix, to those that require substantial application
knowledge and may be very subtle logical bugs. Even simple
mistakes, such as syntax errors that require a relatively small
edit and may be apparent to a programming expert, can be
frustrating for novice programmers. Moreover they can slow
down the workflow of more experienced programmers (Wexelblat 1976; Murphy et al. 2008; Altadmri and Brown 2015;
Drosos, Guo, and Parnin 2017).
One way to help programmers who encounter these small
mistakes is by using automated program repair (APR). These
* Listed in alphabetical order
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5131

