The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Spatio-Temporal Self-Supervised Learning for Traffic Flow Prediction
Jiahao Ji1 * , Jingyuan Wang1,2† , Chao Huang3 ,
Junjie Wu2 , Boren Xu1 , Zhenhe Wu1 , Junbo Zhang4,5 , Yu Zheng4,5
1

School of Computer Science & Engineering, Beihang University, China
2
School of Economics & Management, Beihang University, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Musketeers Foundation Institute of Data Science, University of Hong Kong, China
4
JD Intelligent Cities Research, Beijing, China
5
JD iCity, JD Technology, Beijing, China

Abstract
A

Robust prediction of citywide traffic flows at different time
periods plays a crucial role in intelligent transportation systems. While previous work has made great efforts to model
spatio-temporal correlations, existing methods still suffer
from two key limitations: i) Most models collectively predict
all regions’ flows without accounting for spatial heterogeneity, i.e., different regions may have skewed traffic flow distributions. ii) These models fail to capture the temporal heterogeneity induced by time-varying traffic patterns, as they typically model temporal correlations with a shared parameterized space for all time periods. To tackle these challenges, we
propose a novel Spatio-Temporal Self-Supervised Learning
(ST-SSL) traffic prediction framework which enhances the
traffic pattern representations to be reflective of both spatial
and temporal heterogeneity, with auxiliary self-supervised
learning paradigms. Specifically, our ST-SSL is built over an
integrated module with temporal and spatial convolutions for
encoding the information across space and time. To achieve
the adaptive spatio-temporal self-supervised learning, our STSSL first performs the adaptive augmentation over the traffic flow graph data at both attribute- and structure-levels. On
top of the augmented traffic graph, two SSL auxiliary tasks
are constructed to supplement the main traffic prediction
task with spatial and temporal heterogeneity-aware augmentation. Experiments on four benchmark datasets demonstrate
that ST-SSL consistently outperforms various state-of-the-art
baselines. Since spatio-temporal heterogeneity widely exists
in practical datasets, the proposed framework may also cast
light on other spatial-temporal applications. Model implementation is available at https://github.com/Echo-Ji/ST-SSL.

1

Transportation hub
B

Residential area

(a) Regions with different functions

Morning

Evening

(b) Spatial heterogeneity

Nighttime

Evening

(c) Temporal heterogeneity

Figure 1: Illustration of our motivation, i.e., the spatial and
temporal heterogeneity of traffic flow data.
traffic prediction aims to forecast the traffic volume (e.g.,
inflow and outflow of each region at a given time), from
past traffic observations. Recent advances have significantly
boosted the research of traffic flow prediction with various deep learning techniques, e.g., convolutional neural networks over region grids (Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017), graph
neural networks for spatial dependency modeling (Zhang
et al. 2021), and attention mechanism for spatial information aggregation (Zheng et al. 2020). Although significant
efforts have been made to improve the traffic flow prediction results, existing models still face two key shortcomings.
The first limitation is the lack of modeling spatial heterogeneity exhibited with skewed traffic distributions across
different regions. Taking Fig. 1(a) for example, A and B are
two real-world regions in Beijing with different urban functions, namely the residential area and transportation hub.
We can observe their quite different traffic flow distributions
from Fig. 1(b). However, most existing models ignore such
spatial heterogeneity and are easily biased towards popular
regions with higher traffic volume, which make them insufficient to learn quality citywide traffic pattern representations.
While some studies attempt to capture the heterogeneous
flow distributions with multiple parameter sets over different regions (Pan et al. 2019b; Bai et al. 2020), the involved
large parameter size may lead to the suboptimal issue over
the skewed-distributed traffic data. Worse still, the high computational and memory cost of these methods make them
infeasible to handle large-scale traffic data in practical urban scenarios. In addition, meta-learning has been used in

Introduction

Robust traffic flow prediction across different spatial regions
at different time periods is crucial for advancing intelligent
transportation systems (Zhang et al. 2020). For example, accurate traffic prediction results can not only enable effective traffic controls in a timely manner, but also mitigate
tragedies caused by the sudden traffic flow spike. In general,
* The paper was done when J. Ji interned at JD Intelligent Cities

Research supervised by J. Zhang (msjunbozhang@outlook.com).
†
Corresponding author: jywang@buaa.edu.cn
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4356

