The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Non-stationary Risk-Sensitive Reinforcement Learning: Near-Optimal Dynamic
Regret, Adaptive Detection, and Separation Design
Yuhao Ding1 , Ming Jin2 , Javad Lavaei1
1

UC Berkeley, Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
2
Virginia Tech, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
1
{yuhao_ding, lavaei}@berkeley.edu, 2 jinming@vt.edu

Abstract

requirement holds for the power grid control (Ding, Lavaei,
and Arcak 2021) where the power grid contingency needs to
be prepared with the time-varying electricity loads.
Despite the importance and ubiquity of non-stationary risksensitive RL problems, the literature lacks provably efficient
algorithms and theoretical results. In this work, we study
risk-sensitive RL with an entropic risk measure (Howard and
Matheson 1972) under episodic Markov decision processes
with unknown and time-varying reward functions and state
transition kernels.
The non-stationary RL problem with an entropic risk measure has the following technical challenges. (1) Due to the
non-stationarity of the model, any estimation error of the
expectation operator may be tremendously amplified in the
value function when the risk parameter β is small. (2) In
addition, the exponential Bellman equation (see Equation
(3)) used in our risk-sensitive analysis associates the instantaneous reward and value function of the next step in a multiplicative way (Fei et al. 2021). However, this multiplicative
feature of the exponential Bellman equation will also involve
the policy evaluation errors due to the non-stationary drifting as multiplicative terms, which makes it more difficult to
gauge the bounds than the risk-neural non-stationary setting
in which all policy evaluation errors are in an additive way.
(3) Furthermore, the non-linearity of the objective function
(see Equation (1)) makes it difficult to obtain an unbiased estimation of the value function, which is needed in the design
of a non-stationary detection mechanism in risk-neutral nonstationary RL (Wei and Luo 2021). (4) It is unclear whether
the risk control and the handling of the non-stationarity can
be separately designed when achieving the optimal dynamic
regret. To address these difficulties, we develop a novel analysis to carefully quantify the effect of the non-stationarity in
risk-sensitive RL. Our main theoretical contributions, summarized in Table 1, are as follows
• When the variation budget is known a prior, we propose
two provably efficient restart algorithms, namely RestartRSMB and Restart-RSQ, and establish their dynamic regrets. The stationary version of the model-based method
Restart-RSMB is also the first model-based risk-sensitive
algorithm in the stationary setting in the literature.
• When the variation budget is unknown (parameter-free),
we propose a meta-algorithm that adaptively detects the
non-stationarity of the exponential value functions. The

We study risk-sensitive reinforcement learning (RL) based on
an entropic risk measure in episodic non-stationary Markov
decision processes (MDPs). Both the reward functions and the
state transition kernels are unknown and allowed to vary arbitrarily over time with a budget on their cumulative variations.
When this variation budget is known a prior, we propose two
restart-based algorithms, namely Restart-RSMB and RestartRSQ, and establish their dynamic regrets. Based on these results, we further present a meta-algorithm that does not require
any prior knowledge of the variation budget and can adaptively
detect the non-stationarity on the exponential value functions.
A dynamic regret lower bound is then established for nonstationary risk-sensitive RL to certify the near-optimality of
the proposed algorithms. Our results also show that the risk
control and the handling of the non-stationarity can be separately designed in the algorithm if the variation budget is
known a prior, while the non-stationary detection mechanism
in the adaptive algorithm depends on the risk parameter. This
work offers the first non-asymptotic theoretical analyses for
the non-stationary risk-sensitive RL in the literature.

1

Introduction

Risk-sensitive RL considers problems in which the objective
takes into account risks that arise during the learning process,
in contrast to the typical expected accumulated reward objective. Effective management of the variability of the return in
RL is essential in various applications in finance (Markowitz
1968), autonomous driving (Garcıa and Fernández 2015) and
human behavior modeling (Niv et al. 2012).
While classical risk-sensitive RL assumes that an agent
interacts with a time-invariant (stationary) environment, both
the reward functions and the transition kernels can be timevarying for many risk-sensitive applications. For example,
in finance (Markowitz 1968), the federal reserve adjusts the
interest rate or the balance sheet in a non-stationary way and
the market participants should adjust their trading policies
accordingly. In the medical treatments (Man et al. 2014), the
patient’s health condition and the sensitivity of the patient’s
internal body organs to the medicine vary over time. This
non-stationarity should be accounted for to minimize the
risk of any potential side effects of the treatment. A similar
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7405

