The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Decision-Making Context Interaction Network
for Click-Through Rate Prediction
Xiang Li* , Shuwei Chen* , Jian Dong, Jin Zhang, Yongkang Wang,
Xingxing Wang, Dong Wang
Meituan, Beijing, China
{lixiang172,chenshuwei04,dongjian03,zhangjin11}@meituan.com
{wangyongkang03,wangxingxing04,wangdong07}@meituan.com
Abstract

Ratings 4.7
Sales 1723 ￥ 20

Click-through rate (CTR) prediction is crucial in recommendation and online advertising systems. Existing methods usually model user behaviors, while ignoring the informative
context which influences the user to make a click decision,
e.g., click pages and pre-ranking candidates that inform inferences about user interests, leading to suboptimal performance. In this paper, we propose a Decision-Making Context Interaction Network (DCIN), which deploys a carefully
designed Context Interaction Unit (CIU) to learn decisionmaking contexts and thus benefits CTR prediction. In addition, the relationship between different decision-making context sources is explored by the proposed Adaptive Interest
Aggregation Unit (AIAU) to improve CTR prediction further. In the experiments on public and industrial datasets,
DCIN significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. Notably, the model has obtained the improvement of
CTR+2.9%/CPM+2.1%/GMV+1.5% for online A/B testing
and served the main traffic of Meituan Waimai advertising
system.

Match

thousands

Pre-Rank

hundreds

Rank

Ratings 4.6
Sales 2384 ￥ 25

Personalized Candidate Items

Ratings 4.9
Sales 3498 ￥ 21

Ratings 4.8
Sales 2864 ￥ 28

Ratings 4.5
Sales 2231

￥ 41

(a) explicit context

(b) implicit context

Figure 1: Illustration of explicit and implicit decisionmaking contexts. (a) The user proactively compares the attributes of the highly-related items in a local scope colored
in red before making a click decision colored in blue. (b) We
can deduce that the user likes fast food so much that the preranking stage generates these candidate items for him.

Introduction
The performance of Click-through rate (CTR) prediction
model has a direct impact on final revenue and user satisfaction, and is therefore critical for recommendation and advertising systems. In recent years, deep network has been
introduced to CTR prediction due to its powerful modeling
capability. Feeding informative data to a deep network with
carefully designed structure, it learns the most representative
features for predicting and usually generalizes well.
Early CTR prediction models (Cheng et al. 2016; Guo
et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2017; Lian et al. 2018; Song et al.
2019) have designed specific components to learn sophisticated low-/high-order interactions among different feature
fields and obtained significant improvement, but they ignore
the relation among the user interacted items. Recently, some
pioneering methods (Zhou et al. 2018; Feng et al. 2019; Pi
et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2020) mitigate this problem by modeling user historical behaviors: the intrinsic properties contained in the items with positive user feedbacks (e.g., click)

are modeled as user interests to enrich the information perceived by CTR prediction model. Though significant improvement has been made, this paradigm still faces some
crucial issues. On the one hand, it only considers pointwise
information about whether each behavior matches user’s interests, while the historical behaviors tend to be noisy (Liu
et al. 2020), making the extracted user interests imprecise.
On the other hand, this paradigm only easily models the superficial information from user historical behaviors, while
ignoring the latent yet valuable contexts in the system (e.g.,
items’ co-occurrence relationship), leading to suboptimal
performance. We emphasize that there is a need to explore
these contexts to learn more stable representations.
First, page-level co-occurrence relationship should be utilized. In a typical display advertising system like Meituan
Waimai (the largest food delivery platform in China) shown
in Fig. 1(a), a user swipes through the ad list to find his preferred items. Suppose that the user likes eating fast foods
and this personalized page with three burgers co-occurred
was exposed to him earlier and he clicked the burger in the
blue box, behavior modeling based methods use only the

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5195

