The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Boosting Few-Shot Text Classification via Distribution Estimation
Han Liu1 , Feng Zhang2 , Xiaotong Zhang1 * , Siyang Zhao1 , Fenglong Ma3 ,
Xiao-Ming Wu4 , Hongyang Chen5 , Hong Yu1 , Xianchao Zhang1
1

Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
2
Peking University, Beijing, China
3
The Pennsylvania State University, Pennsylvania, USA
4
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
5
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
liu.han.dut@gmail.com, zfeng.maria@gmail.com, zxt.dut@hotmail.com, zhao siyang@mail.dlut.edu.cn,
fenglong@psu.edu, csxmwu@comp.polyu.edu.hk, dr.h.chen@ieee.org, {hongyu,xczhang}@dlut.edu.cn
Abstract

have been proposed to meet this challenge. Meta-learning
based methods aim to train a generalized model which can
quickly adapt to new tasks (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017;
Santoro et al. 2016; Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017; Liu
et al. 2021, 2022). This type of methods has been successfully applied to solve the few-shot learning problem. Finetuning based methods usually train a model on the base
set first and then transfer to novel classes via adjusting
the model parameters (Jeremy and Sebastian 2018; Suchin
et al. 2020), which are susceptible to the overfitting problem. Their variants like prompt-based and entailment-based
methods (Gao, Fisch, and Chen 2021; Wang et al. 2021) can
mitigate the above issue and have achieved promising performance. It is worth noting that most previous works focus
on developing stronger models, but less attention has been
paid to the property of the data itself. Intuitively, when more
informative data is available for supervision, the model tends
to generalize well during evaluation.
In order to explore the problem from the perspective of
data itself, several data-augmentation based methods (Kumar et al. 2019; Dopierre, Gravier, and Logerais 2021; Chen
et al. 2022) have been proposed. However, these methods
require the design of a complex model and loss function to
learn how to generate examples. Recently, one variant of
data-augmentation based methods named distribution calibration has shown to be effective in few-shot image classification. It first estimates the distribution of the unseen classes
by transferring statistics from the seen classes, and then samples an adequate number of examples to expand the size of
labeled data. Nevertheless, this method cannot directly extend to text domain. The main reason is as follows. In vision
domain, low-level patterns and their corresponding representations can usually be shared across classes. For example
the classes white wolf and arctic fox from ImageNet (Deng
et al. 2009) are very similar. The category difference, however, tends to be serious in text domain. For example, the
classes get weather and play music from SNIPS (Coucke
et al. 2018) are entirely different. That is to say, the unseen
classes probably have no overlap with the seen classes in text
domain. Simply transferring distribution statistics from seen
data seems not a good solution, as some distribution statistics from seen classes may be biased or even harmful to the
unseen classes.

Distribution estimation has been demonstrated as one of the
most effective approaches in dealing with few-shot image
classification, as the low-level patterns and underlying representations can be easily transferred across different tasks
in computer vision domain. However, directly applying this
approach to few-shot text classification is challenging, since
leveraging the statistics of known classes with sufficient samples to calibrate the distributions of novel classes may cause
negative effects due to serious category difference in text domain. To alleviate this issue, we propose two simple yet effective strategies to estimate the distributions of the novel classes
by utilizing unlabeled query samples, thus avoiding the potential negative transfer issue. Specifically, we first assume a
class or sample follows the Gaussian distribution, and use the
original support set and the nearest few query samples to estimate the corresponding mean and covariance. Then, we augment the labeled samples by sampling from the estimated distribution, which can provide sufficient supervision for training the classification model. Extensive experiments on eight
few-shot text classification datasets show that the proposed
method outperforms state-of-the-art baselines significantly.

Introduction
Text classification plays a fundamental and crucial role in
natural language processing, which has been widely applied
to various real applications, such as intent detection (Louvan and Magnini 2020), sentiment analysis (Kumar and Abirami 2021), news classification (Bozarth and Budak 2020)
and so on. Traditional text classification methods (Johnson
and Zhang 2017; Devlin et al. 2019) have achieved impressive performance, which require a large amount of labeled
instances per class for training. However, collecting and
annotating sufficient data is a time-consuming and laborintensive process, sometimes even unachievable in industry,
which motivates few-shot text classification.
Few-shot learning is a paradigm for solving the data
scarcity issue, which aims to detect novel categories with
very limited labeled examples by using prior knowledge
learned from known categories. Several kinds of methods
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13219

