The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Causal Conditional Hidden Markov Model for Multimodal Traffic Prediction
Yu Zhao1 , Pan Deng1 * , Junting Liu1 , Xiaofeng Jia2 , Mulan Wang1
1

Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China.
Beijing Big Data Centre, Beijing, 100024, China.
{iyzhao, pandeng, liujunting, wangmulan}@buaa.edu.cn, jiaxf@jxj.beijing.gov.cn
2

Abstract
Multimodal traffic flow can reflect the health of the transportation system, and its prediction is crucial to urban traffic
management. Recent works overemphasize spatio-temporal
correlations of traffic flow, ignoring the physical concepts that
lead to the generation of observations and their causal relationship. Spatio-temporal correlations are considered unstable under the influence of different conditions, and spurious
correlations may exist in observations. In this paper, we analyze the physical concepts affecting the generation of multimode traffic flow from the perspective of the observation
generation principle and propose a Causal Conditional Hidden Markov Model (CCHMM) to predict multimodal traffic flow. In the latent variables inference stage, a posterior
network disentangles the causal representations of the concepts of interest from conditional information and observations, and a causal propagation module mines their causal relationship. In the data generation stage, a prior network samples the causal latent variables from the prior distribution and
feeds them into the generator to generate multimodal traffic
flow. We use a mutually supervised training method for the
prior and posterior to enhance the identifiability of the model.
Experiments on real-world datasets show that CCHMM can
effectively disentangle causal representations of concepts of
interest and identify causality, and accurately predict multimodal traffic flow.

Figure 1: Multimodal traffic flow in different regions.

Most methods only predict a certain traffic flow (e.g., taxi
demand or speed)(Bai et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021b; Wu et al.
2020; Ye et al. 2021; Han et al. 2021). They are only partial
observations of the traffic system and cannot truly reflect the
real situation in real-world scenarios. In contrast, the existing multimodal traffic prediction methods often take different traffic flows as the channel expansion of input data(Wang
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021a; Zhou et al. 2021; Liang et al.
2021), or integrate the feature representation of different
flows in the model(Ye et al. 2019; Deng et al. 2021). They
implicitly extract the so-called spatio-temporal correlations
while lacking the description of causality. However, more
input information cannot improve the prediction ability of
the model. Instead, it will introduce a large number of confounding factors and extract spurious correlations in observations(Schölkopf et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021a; Deng and
Zhang 2021), resulting in the decline of model performance.
Nowadays, traffic flow prediction method overemphasizes
spatio-temporal correlations of traffic flow(Liu et al. 2021b;
Bai et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021b; Ye et al. 2021; Han et al.
2021), ignoring the physical concepts that lead to the generation of observations and the causal relationship between
these concepts. Spatio-temporal correlations are considered
unstable under the influence of different conditions, and spu-

Introduction
Urban transportation systems are generally multimodal in
nature, consisting of several interconnected subsystems representing different modes of transportation, such as bike,
taxi, bus and car. They aim to meet diverse travel demands
and provide residents with a variety of travel options(Liang,
Huang, and Zhao 2021). Multimodal traffic flow can reflect
the health of the transportation system. Urban traffic managers can formulate corresponding management strategies
according to the traffic flow in different environments to improve the smoothness of urban operation. Therefore, multimodal traffic flow prediction is a key part of urban traffic management, providing important data support for traffic
guidance (Liang, Huang, and Zhao 2021).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4929

