The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Cooperative and Adversarial Learning:
Co-enhancing Discriminability and Transferability in Domain Adaptation
Hui Sun, Zheng Xie, Xin-Ye Li, Ming Li
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{sunh,xiez,lixy,lim}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

representation space (Tzeng et al. 2014; Ganin et al. 2016;
Tan et al. 2018). Such features bridge the source domain and
target domain for transferring knowledge across domains.
A successful feature representation for domain adaptation
requires two properties, discriminability and transferability,
which form the fundamental goals of UDA feature learning (Ben-David et al. 2010; Chen et al. 2019b). Discriminability refers to the effectiveness of the representation to be
used for the discriminative task, e.g., classification. Transferability refers to the ability of the representation to capture
the invariance across the domains so that the different domains can be well aligned under the learned representation.
The modern deep UDA methods generally consist of a
discriminative module (e.g., a classifier) and a transfer module (e.g., a domain discriminator based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) or a
distribution distance function based on the statistical moment) upon the feature extractor. The two modules will be
trained by the discriminability and transferability loss correspondingly. However, existing literature treats them as two
separate terms in the loss function, produced by two modules that are optimized separately (Tzeng et al. 2014; Ganin
et al. 2016; Long et al. 2018). Since the discriminability and
transferability can be partly conflicting, without considering optimizing them together, the two goals may adversely
impact each other, leading to a degradation in the performance or even a negative transfer to some extent (Wang et al.
2019b; Chen et al. 2019a; Kontar, Raskutti, and Zhou 2020).
In this paper, we argue that the discriminability and transferability should be considered jointly. By letting the discriminative module and transfer module help each other, better domain adaptation can be achieved. We propose Cooperative and Adversarial LEarning (CALE) for UDA, which
exploits the knowledge of optimizing one property to guide
the another. Specifically, for cooperative learning (CLE), we
generate easy examples in terms of discriminability loss and
transferability loss, and then the discriminative and transfer module regularize their outputs to be consistent with the
easy examples for their complementary modules. The easy
examples contain the module knowledge of better feature
representation, by exchanging the easy examples, the two
modules take the guidance from each other, makes the UDA
model consider one property while optimizing another. Figure 1 demonstrates how the easy examples generated by the

Discriminability and transferability are two goals of feature
learning for domain adaptation (DA), as we aim to find the
transferable features from the source domain that are helpful for discriminating the class label in the target domain.
Modern DA approaches optimize discriminability and transferability by adopting two separate modules for the two goals
upon a feature extractor, but lack fully exploiting their relationship. This paper argues that by letting the discriminative
module and transfer module help each other, better DA can be
achieved. We propose Cooperative and Adversarial LEarning
(CALE) to combine the optimization of discriminability and
transferability into a whole, provide one solution for making the discriminative module and transfer module guide each
other. Specifically, CALE generates cooperative (easy) examples and adversarial (hard) examples with both discriminative
module and transfer module. While the easy examples that
contain the module knowledge can be used to enhance each
other, the hard ones are used to enhance the robustness of the
corresponding goal. Experimental results show the effectiveness of CALE for unifying the learning of discriminability
and transferability, as well as its superior performance.

1

Introduction

Transfer learning seeks to make the machine learning systems to perform well on new tasks by referring to the experience of some old tasks. Unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA), one of the most active subfields of transfer learning,
shows a great ability to transfer knowledge across tasks (Pan
and Yang 2010). It aims to build a model on an unlabeled
target domain with the help of the source domain data, and
has been applied to various tasks, e.g., computer vision (Liu,
Zhang, and Wang 2021; Liu, Wang, and Long 2021), natural
language processing (Lekhtman, Ziser, and Reichart 2021;
Zhu et al. 2021), information retrieval (Li and Caragea 2020;
Chen et al. 2020c; Kanagawa et al. 2019), reinforcement
learning (Chen et al. 2021; Rao et al. 2020), etc.
Due to the potent power of representation learning in the
deep neural networks, most of the modern UDA methods are
dedicated to designing elaborated mechanisms for learning
domain invariant feature representations, such that the distributions of source and target domain are well aligned in the
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9909

