The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Contrastive Masked Autoencoders for Self-Supervised Video Hashing
Yuting Wang1,3* , Jinpeng Wang1,3* , Bin Chen2† , Ziyun Zeng1,3 , Shu-Tao Xia1,3
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
3
Research Center of Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory
{wangyt22, wjp20, zengzy21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, chenbin2021@hit.edu.cn, xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Self-Supervised Video Hashing (SSVH) models learn to generate short binary representations for videos without groundtruth supervision, facilitating large-scale video retrieval efficiency and attracting increasing research attention. The success of SSVH lies in the understanding of video content and
the ability to capture the semantic relation among unlabeled
videos. Typically, state-of-the-art SSVH methods consider
these two points in a two-stage training pipeline, where they
firstly train an auxiliary network by instance-wise mask-andpredict tasks and secondly train a hashing model to preserve
the pseudo-neighborhood structure transferred from the auxiliary network. This consecutive training strategy is inflexible and also unnecessary. In this paper, we propose a simple
yet effective one-stage SSVH method called ConMH, which
incorporates video semantic information and video similarity relationship understanding in a single stage. To capture
video semantic information, we adopt an encoder-decoder
structure to reconstruct the video from its temporal-masked
frames. Particularly, we find that a higher masking ratio helps
video understanding. Besides, we fully exploit the similarity
relationship between videos by maximizing agreement between two augmented views of a video, which contributes
to more discriminative and robust hash codes. Extensive experiments on three large-scale video datasets (i.e., FCVID,
ActivityNet and YFCC) indicate that ConMH achieves stateof-the-art results. Code is available at https://github.com/
huangmozhi9527/ConMH.

Figure 1: Illustration of the current two-stage SSVH training pipeline and our single-stage pipeline. Previous methods
(a) firstly train an auxiliary network to provide the pseudo
neighborhood structure, which is then utilized to supervise
the relationship learning within videos. Instead of neighborhood preserving, our method (b) adopts contrastive learning
to explore the similarity structure between videos.

(SSVH) has attracted increasing attention to training the
video hashing model in an unsupervised manner.
Video retrieval needs to fully explore the temporal dynamics in video itself and exploit the similarity relationship
between videos. In the past few years, there has been a lot of
research (Zhang et al. 2016; Li et al. 2019, 2021; Hao et al.
2022; Zeng et al. 2022) using sequential (e.g., RNN, LSTM,
and Transformer, etc.) or graph-based models to solve selfsupervised video hashing problem. Some of these methods only utilize a reconstruction task to let the model learn
video semantic information and ignore the similarity relationship between videos, such as SSTH (Zhang et al. 2016),
JTAE (Li et al. 2017) and UDVH (Wu et al. 2017), leading
to poor retrieval performance. Other methods, e.g., SSVH
(Song et al. 2018), NPH (Li et al. 2019), BTH (Li et al.
2021), MCMSH (Hao et al. 2022) and MAGRH (Zeng et al.
2022), learn to preserve the semantic neighborhood structure among videos into binary representations. However,
these methods need to generate a dataset-covering pseudo
neighborhood structure to supervise the relationship learning among videos, as shown in Figure 1 (a). Such a twostage framework makes the training process impractical. In
addition, most SSVH methods take the complete video in-

Introduction
With the development of society, videos from various social media and search engines are increasingly abundant.
Therefore, to pursue a better balance between retrieval performance and efficiency, hashing has been widely applied to
large-scale video retrieval. The hashing methods map highdimensional data to compact binary codes (Gao et al. 2015;
Luo et al. 2018; Cui et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2022), making the retrieval process high-speed and require
low memory footprint. Besides, due to the large amount
of video data, manual annotation is time-consuming and
labor-intensive. Therefore, Self-Supervised Video Hashing
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2733

