The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Refined Semantic Enhancement towards Frequency Diffusion for Video Captioning
Xian Zhong1 , Zipeng Li1 , Shuqin Chen2, * , Kui Jiang3,∗ , Chen Chen4 , Mang Ye3
1

School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology
2
College of Computer, Hubei University of Education
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
4
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
{zhongx, lizipeng, csqcwx0801}@whut.edu.cn, kuijiang@whu.edu.cn, chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu, mangye16@gmail.com
Abstract

Training

Video captioning aims to generate natural language sentences
that describe the given video accurately. Existing methods
obtain favorable generation by exploring richer visual representations in encode phase or improving the decoding ability.
However, the long-tailed problem hinders these attempts at
low-frequency tokens, which rarely occur but carry critical semantics, playing a vital role in the detailed generation. In this
paper, we introduce a novel Refined Semantic enhancement
method towards Frequency Diffusion (RSFD), a captioning
model that constantly perceives the linguistic representation of
the infrequent tokens. Concretely, a Frequency-Aware Diffusion (FAD) module is proposed to comprehend the semantics
of low-frequency tokens to break through generation limitations. In this way, the caption is refined by promoting the
absorption of tokens with insufficient occurrence. Based on
FAD, we design a Divergent Semantic Supervisor (DSS) module to compensate for the information loss of high-frequency
tokens brought by the diffusion process, where the semantics of low-frequency tokens is further emphasized to alleviate the long-tailed problem. Extensive experiments indicate
that RSFD outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on two
benchmark datasets, i.e., MSR-VTT and MSVD, demonstrate
that the enhancement of low-frequency tokens semantics can
obtain a competitive generation effect. Code is available at
https://github.com/lzp870/RSFD.

a man is playing the keyboard.
insufficient
occurrence
a person is singing into a microphone.
a man is singing a cover of a song in a studio.
cause

Testing

a person is playing a video game.

no generation of the word
'keyboard'

Figure 1: Illustration of existing models limitations: the insufficient occurrence of low-frequency tokens affects the
information extraction during training, thus failing to generate refined low-frequency words in the testing phase.
et al. 2022b; Xu et al. 2022) are developed to explore richer
visual features. Prior works (Zhang and Peng 2019; Pan et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Li et al. 2022c) enhance the spatiotemporal representations between objects, while others (Jin
et al. 2020; Gao et al. 2022) tend to improve the architecture of the decoder to obtain better linguistic representations.
However, they either focus on the enhancement of visual representations or the generation ability of the model, ignoring
the tokens with insufficient occurrence in the training phase.
Many low-frequency tokens, as a critical factor to prove caption performance, have not received adequate attention, thus
challenging for the model to express similar information in
other videos in the testing phase like the instance in Fig. 1.
Concretely, a man is playing the keyboard and the model
has partially generated “a person is playing a video game”.
The result commonly occurs when the low-frequency token
“keyboard” is of insufficient occurrence in the given video.
To deal with the challenges of token imbalance, the approach (Wu et al. 2016) in neural machine translation splits
words into more fine-grained units. However, the token imbalance phenomenon is not fundamentally eliminated. BMI (Xu
et al. 2021) has been dedicated to assigning adaptive weights
to target tokens in light of the token frequency. Although

Introduction
Video captioning is the task of understanding video content and describing it accurately. It has considerable application value in social networks, human-computer interaction,
and other fields. Despite recent progress in this field, it remains a challenging task as existing models prefer to generate
commonly-used words disregarding many infrequent tokens
that carry critical semantics of video content, limiting the
refined semantic generation in the testing phase.
The existing methods generally adopt the encoder-decoder
framework (Venugopalan et al. 2015), where the encoder
generates visual representation by receiving a set of consecutive frames as input, and the decoder generates captions via
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) or Transformer (Hori et al.
2017). Some efforts (Hu et al. 2022a,b; Jia et al. 2022; Liao
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3724

