The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Local Justice and Machine Learning: Modeling and Inferring
Dynamic Ethical Preferences toward Allocations
Violet (Xinying) Chen1 , Joshua Williams2 , Derek Leben2 , Hoda Heidari2
1

Stevens Institute of Technology
2
Carnegie Mellon University
vchen3@stevens.edu, {jnwillia, dleben}@andrew.cmu.edu, hheidari@cmu.edu

Abstract

formulating values, such as fairness, for AI. Following this
human-centric view, we first posit that moral judgments are
seldom invariable across situations and contexts. In particular, the ethical principles they prioritize are often informed
by numerous consideration, including the historical contexts
and the future implications of policies. Even absent of disagreement regarding the right answer to the above questions,
how they inform the choice of allocational policies could
be a genuine point of normative disagreement. To further
complicate the task, allocational policies are often sequential in nature, and their deployment may shift the above determinants of moral judgments, giving rise to a new context
tomorrow. So an ethically-minded social planner has to understand and potentially reflect stakeholders’ dynamic moral
judgments. Understanding such dynamics allows the planner to design effective and acceptable interventions that stir
society in the appropriate direction over time.
Along with the increasing recognition that moral judgments are context dependent, e.g. Sinnott-Armstrong
(2008); van Baar, Chang, and Sanfey (2019); Andrejević
et al. (2020), there has been rising interests in quantifying
moral judgments, e.g. Armstrong and Skorburg (forthcoming); Awad et al. (2022). An important gap in literature is
how to concretely capture moral judgments’ evolution with
the decision contexts. In this work, we consider a stylized
setting in which a social planner or policymaker has to make
a sequence of decisions regarding the allocation of scarce
resources in a high-stakes domain. Stakeholders’ moral preferences regarding such allocation policies are influenced by
various ethical/moral principles. We aim to understand these
preferences, in particular, to evaluate their sensitivity to the
history of allocations and the expected future impacts on socially salient groups.
As a concrete example, consider a central agency in
charge of allocating scarce medical resources (e.g. vaccines
or hospital beds) to patients during a viral epidemic. The allocation decisions today influence the urgency and demand
for the resources in question tomorrow. Such context shifts
influence people’s judgments over who should be prioritized
for allocation, thus reflecting different normative moral principles as explained below.
Moral principles from bioethics. There is a robust history of debate in bioethics about normative principles for
the distribution of scarce medical resources across a vari-

We consider a setting in which a social planner has to make a
sequence of decisions to allocate scarce resources in a highstakes domain. Our goal is to understand stakeholders’ dynamic moral preferences toward such allocational policies. In
particular, we evaluate the sensitivity of moral preferences to
the history of allocations and their perceived future impact on
various socially salient groups. We propose a mathematical
model to capture and infer such dynamic moral preferences.
We illustrate our model through small-scale human-subject
experiments focused on the allocation of scarce medical resource distributions during a hypothetical viral epidemic.
We observe that participants’ preferences are indeed historyand impact-dependent. Additionally, our preliminary experimental results reveal intriguing patterns specific to medical resources—a topic that is particularly salient against the
backdrop of the global covid-19 pandemic.

Introduction
AI and ML tools are permeating society. These powerful
technologies are applied in numerous policy domains to inform or make consequential decisions impacting people’s
lives. In particular, they increasingly inform or automate
high-stakes allocation decisions in domains such as lending, employment, and healthcare. The past decade has witnessed an overwhelming body of evidence establishing the
need for AI and ML to reflect collective values, such as justice and fairness. However, translating these principles into
computationally tractable and verifiable forms has proven
challenging. Majority of the efforts towards formulating fairness for ML have adopted a static point of view to capture
fairness in terms of certain predictive parity condition across
demographic groups. These notions are useful in guiding the
design of one-shot algorithmic interventions, but as demonstrated in D’Amour et al. (2020); Liu et al. (2018), such interventions may be insufficient to attain long-term fairness
and justice goals. Due to the dynamics in decision contexts
and the context-dependent nature of moral ideals, incremental and evolving remedies are often needed to promote justice in the long run (Elster 1992).
A growing body of work has called on the AI-ethics community to bring stakeholders’ judgments into the process of
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5956

