The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MultiAct: Long-Term 3D Human Motion Generation
from Multiple Action Labels
Taeryung Lee* 1 , Gyeongsik Moon* 3 , Kyoung Mu Lee 1,2
1

IPAI, Seoul National University, Korea
Dept. of ECE & ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea
3
Meta Reality Labs Research
trlee94@snu.ac.kr, mks0601@meta.com, kyoungmu@snu.ac.kr
2

Action-conditioned

Abstract

ACTOR: short-term and single action

We tackle the problem of generating long-term 3D human motion from multiple action labels. Two main previous approaches, such as action- and motion-conditioned
methods, have limitations to solve this problem. The actionconditioned methods generate a sequence of motion from a
single action. Hence, it cannot generate long-term motions
composed of multiple actions and transitions between actions. Meanwhile, the motion-conditioned methods generate future motions from initial motion. The generated future
motions only depend on the past, so they are not controllable by the user’s desired actions. We present MultiAct,
the first framework to generate long-term 3D human motion from multiple action labels. MultiAct takes account of
both action and motion conditions with a unified recurrent
generation system. It repetitively takes the previous motion
and action label; then, it generates a smooth transition and
the motion of the given action. As a result, MultiAct produces realistic long-term motion controlled by the given sequence of multiple action labels. Code is publicly available in
https://github.com/TaeryungLee/MultiAct RELEASE.

walk

sit

Motion- and Action- conditioned
MultiAct: long-term and multiple actions

Motion-conditioned
MOJO: long-term and no action

previous motion generated future motion (uncontrollable)

Figure 1: Categorization. We show long-term motions generated
by our MultiAct (mid). Compared to ours, action-conditioned ACTOR (Petrovich, Black, and Varol 2021) (top) can only generate short-term single actions. Motion-conditioned MOJO (Zhang,
Black, and Tang 2021) (bottom) cannot control the generated motion with desired actions. MultiAct handles both conditions in a
single model to generate long-term motions of multiple actions.

Introduction
Modeling and generation of realistic human motion play an
essential role in computer vision and robotics, including automated avatars for AI assistant (Neuhaus et al. 2019), virtual reality (Ahuja et al. 2021) and human-robot interaction (Chan et al. 2021). However, despite decades of efforts
to model human motions, generating controllable long-term
3D human motions remains a challenging problem.
Fig. 1 categorizes 3D human motion generation methods
by conditions used in generation. The action-conditioned
methods (Cai et al. 2018; Petrovich, Black, and Varol 2021;
Guo et al. 2020) generate a short-term motion from an action label, and the motion-conditioned methods (Barsoum,
Kender, and Liu 2018; Habibie et al. 2017; Yuan and Kitani
2020) generate future motion based on the previous motion.
However, both methods have limitations in solving our
challenging target problem: “How to generate realistic longterm motion controlled by multiple actions labels?”. Actionconditioned methods can only produce the individual action

motions, but not the realistic long-term motions composed
of multiple actions and transitions between them. Simple linear interpolation between individually generated action motions can produce multiple-action motions. However, those
interpolated transitions are unrealistic since they do not consider the adjoining motion context. On the other hand, most
motion-conditioned methods cannot control the generated
motions. Some works (Wang et al. 2021b,a; Cao et al. 2020)
have tried to control the generated motion indirectly, but
still, controlling the motion with a series of actions remains
challenging. Simply combining above two methods together
still does not handle the target problem: Producing an action
motion with the action-conditioned method, and then generating the transition motion with the motion-conditioned
method fails to generate realistic multiple-action motion
since the generated transition motion is not guaranteed to be
consistent with the following action motion. This limitation
motivates us to handle both conditions in a unified model.
We propose a novel recurrent framework, MultiAct, to

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1231

