The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Dream to Generalize: Zero-Shot Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
for Unseen Visual Distractions
Jeongsoo Ha1 , Kyungsoo Kim2 , Yusung Kim3
1

Mechatronics Research, Samsung Electronics
2
Intelligent Agent Lab, NCSOFT
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
js1210.ha@samsung.com, unigary@ncsoft.com, yskim525@skku.edu
Abstract
Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) has been used
to efficiently solve vision-based control tasks in highdimensional image observations. Although recent MBRL
algorithms perform well in trained observations, they fail
when faced with visual distractions in observations. These
task-irrelevant distractions (e.g., clouds, shadows, and light)
may be constantly present in real-world scenarios. In this
study, we propose a novel self-supervised method, Dream to
Generalize (Dr. G), for zero-shot MBRL. Dr. G trains its encoder and world model with dual contrastive learning which
efficiently captures task-relevant features among multi-view
data augmentations. We also introduce a recurrent state inverse dynamics model that helps the world model to better understand the temporal structure. The proposed methods
can enhance the robustness of the world model against visual
distractions. To evaluate the generalization performance, we
first train Dr. G on simple backgrounds and then test it on
complex natural video backgrounds in the DeepMind Control suite, and the randomizing environments in Robosuite.
Dr. G yields a performance improvement of 117% and 14%
over prior works, respectively. Our code is open-sourced and
available at https://github.com/JeongsooHa/DrG.git

Figure 1: The agent is trained in a simple background environment on the DeepMind Control suite in the default setting
(left). We demonstrate the generalization ability in unseen
environments in video easy settings (a top row on the right)
and video hard settings (a bottom row on the right).

can compromise the accuracy of the reconstruction-based
representation learning. In particular, task-irrelevant information such as clouds, shadows, and light may change continuously depending on the time and place of the test. Therefore, generalization in terms of representation and policy
learning is crucial for solving real-world problems (Kim,
Ha, and Kim 2022).
In this study, we propose Dream to Generalize (Dr. G),
a zero-shot MBRL framework that can be robust to visual
distractions not experienced during training. Our proposed
Dr. G introduces two self-supervised methods; 1) Dual Contrastive Learning (DCL), and 2) Recurrent State Inverse Dynamics (RSID). Dr. G uses the same structure as the recurrent state space model (RSSM) (Hafner et al. 2019b)
also used in Dreamer (Hafner et al. 2019a) but replaces the
reconstruction-based learning part with DCL. The DCL approach consists of two objective functions over multi-view
data augmentations. One objective function is applied between realities, which are latent states encoded with different data augmentation techniques (hard and soft) for the
same image observation. It improves the generalization ability of the encoder against visual distractions. The other
objective function is applied between reality and dreams
(imagined latent states by RSSM). This allows the world
model to dream (predict) the next latent state more robustly,
enabling Dr. G to learn a more generalized control policy in

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) with visual observations has
achieved remarkable success in many areas, including video
games, robot control, and autonomous driving (Mnih et al.
2013; Levine et al. 2016; Nair et al. 2018; Kalashnikov et al.
2018; Andrychowicz et al. 2020). Because learning a control
policy from high-dimensional image data is inevitably more
difficult than learning from low-dimensional numerical data,
training a visual RL agent requires a larger amount of training data. To address the data inefficiency, recent modelbased RL (MBRL) studies have proposed learning a world
model in the latent space, followed by planning the control
policy in the latent world model.
Although latent-level MBRL studies have successfully
improved data efficiency, they have inherent drawbacks because they are typically designed as reconstruction-based
methods. The drawback of these methods comes from visually distracting elements (task-irrelevant information) that
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7802

