The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Risk-Sensitive Approach to Policy Optimization
Jared Markowitz1 , Ryan W. Gardner1 , Ashley Llorens2 , Raman Arora3 , I-Jeng Wang1
1

Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory
2
Microsoft Corporation
3
Johns Hopkins University
Jared.Markowitz@jhuapl.edu

Abstract

In reinforcement learning (RL), risk arises due to uncertainty around the possible outcomes of an agent’s actions. It is a result of randomness in the operating environment, mismatch between training and test conditions,
and the stochasticity of the policy. Risk-sensitive policies,
or those that consider a quantity other than the mean reward over the distribution of possible outcomes, offer the
potential for added robustness under uncertain and dynamic
conditions. There is an evolving landscape of algorithmic
paradigms for handling risk in RL, including distributional
methods (Bellemare, Dabney, and Munos 2017; Dabney
et al. 2018a,b; Barth-Maron et al. 2018; Fei et al. 2021)
and constraint-based approaches adapted from optimal control (Bhatnagar 2010; Achiam et al. 2017; Chow et al. 2019;
Ray, Achiam, and Amodei 2019; Tessler, Mankowitz, and
Mannor 2019; Zhong et al. 2020; Zhang, Vuong, and Ross
2020). Within this landscape, learning approaches that optimize distributional measures offer the ability to express design preferences over the full distribution of potential outcomes. Constraint-based approaches allow the level of average cost incurred by an agent to be adjusted, typically
through the use of dual methods.
In the following, we introduce a novel method for estimating the policy gradient of a broad class of risk-sensitive
objectives, applicable in both the unconstrained and constrained settings. The approach allows agents to be trained
with different risk profiles, based on full episode outcomes.
It can be used to mimic general human decision-making
(Tversky and Kahneman 1992), but is found to be most effective when implementing one particular human learning
strategy: emphasizing improvement on tasks where one is
deficient. We elucidate the mechanisms behind performance
gains associated with this strategy and evaluate its effectiveness for several stochastic continuous control problems.

Standard deep reinforcement learning (DRL) aims to maximize expected reward, considering collected experiences
equally in formulating a policy. This differs from human
decision-making, where gains and losses are valued differently and outlying outcomes are given increased consideration. It also fails to capitalize on opportunities to improve
safety and/or performance through the incorporation of distributional context. Several approaches to distributional DRL
have been investigated, with one popular strategy being to
evaluate the projected distribution of returns for possible
actions. We propose a more direct approach whereby risksensitive objectives, specified in terms of the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the distribution of full-episode
rewards, are optimized. This approach allows for outcomes
to be weighed based on relative quality, can be used for both
continuous and discrete action spaces, and may naturally be
applied in both constrained and unconstrained settings. We
show how to compute an asymptotically consistent estimate
of the policy gradient for a broad class of risk-sensitive objectives via sampling, subsequently incorporating variance reduction and regularization measures to facilitate effective onpolicy learning. We then demonstrate that the use of moderately “pessimistic” risk profiles, which emphasize scenarios
where the agent performs poorly, leads to enhanced exploration and a continual focus on addressing deficiencies. We
test the approach using different risk profiles in six OpenAI
Safety Gym environments, comparing to state of the art onpolicy methods. Without cost constraints, we find that pessimistic risk profiles can be used to reduce cost while improving total reward accumulation. With cost constraints, they are
seen to provide higher positive rewards than risk-neutral approaches at the prescribed allowable cost.

Introduction
While deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has been used to
master an impressive array of simulated tasks in controlled
settings, it has not yet been widely adopted for high-stakes,
real-world applications. One reason for this gap is its lack of
safety assurances. Endowing artificial agents with a distributional perspective, potentially used in conjunction with cost
constraints, should make their decision-making more robust.
This could in turn lead to increased trust from humans and
increased real-world adoption.

Related Work
The presence of stochasticity in Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs) can lead to variability in agent outcomes. Randomness can come from different sources- for instance the initial
state of the environment, noise in transition dynamics, and
sampling from a stochastic policy. Distributional RL methods allow for consideration of outcome variability in formulating policies, and have primarily been explored from
a value-based perspective. For example, Q-value distribu-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15019

