The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Underwater Ranker: Learn Which Is Better and How to Be Better
Chunle Guo1 * , Ruiqi Wu1 * , Xin Jin1 , Linghao Han1 , Weidong Zhang2 , Zhi Chai3 , Chongyi Li4†
1

TMCC, CS, Nankai University
School of Information Engineering, Henan Institute of Science and Technology
3
Hisilicon Technologies Co. Ltd.
4
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
guochunle@nankai.edu.cn, {wuruiqi, xjin, lhhan}@mail.nankai.edu.cn
chaizhi2@huawei.com, zwd wd@163.com, chongyi.li@ntu.edu.sg
Images
1st

Abstract
In this paper, we present a ranking-based underwater image
quality assessment (UIQA) method, abbreviated as URanker.
The URanker is built on the efficient conv-attentional image
Transformer. In terms of underwater images, we specially devise (1) the histogram prior that embeds the color distribution
of an underwater image as histogram token to attend global
degradation and (2) the dynamic cross-scale correspondence
to model local degradation. The final prediction depends on
the class tokens from different scales, which comprehensively
considers multi-scale dependencies. With the margin ranking loss, our URanker can accurately rank the order of underwater images of the same scene enhanced by different
underwater image enhancement (UIE) algorithms according
to their visual quality. To achieve that, we also contribute a
dataset, URankerSet, containing sufficient results enhanced
by different UIE algorithms and the corresponding perceptual rankings, to train our URanker. Apart from the good
performance of URanker, we found that a simple U-shape
UIE network can obtain promising performance when it is
coupled with our pre-trained URanker as additional supervision. In addition, we also propose a normalization tail that
can significantly improve the performance of UIE networks.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of our method. The key designs of our method are
discussed. Our code and dataset are available at https://lichongyi.github.io/URanker files/.

Ours NR-UIQA

Scores
1st

U

IQ
M
C
IQ
E
U

...
10th

R
an

...

10th

r

6th

U

2nd
...

...

6th

UIQA
Model

ke

2nd

Margin
Ranking Loss

2

(a) Learn which is better.
UIE
Model

UIQA Loss
L1 Loss

UIQA
Model
GT

(b) Learn how to be better.

Figure 1: (a) illustrates our URanker that is trained on wellsorted image groups and optimized by margin ranking loss.
The right part shows the predicted scores of the proposed
URanker and two widely-used non-reference UIQA methods, UCIQE and UIQM. The ratio of the height of the rectangle represents the ratio of the quality score of the corresponding image, and higher, better. Only our URanker produces the scores in decreasing order (align with the ground
truth rankings). (b) shows the overview of a simple UIE
model equipped with our pre-trained URanker as additional
supervision which helps a UIE model obtain better visual
quality.

Introduction
Underwater images commonly suffer from quality degradation issues such as color cast, low contrast, blurred details,
etc. The wavelength- and distance-dependent light attenuation and scattering are the culprits of these issues (Akkaynak
et al. 2017). To improve the visual quality of underwater images, underwater image enhancement (UIE) techniques have
been widely studied. With the rapid development of UIE, underwater image quality assessment (UIQA) plays a more and
more critical role. A good UIQA approach not only fairly
evaluates the visual quality of underwater images, but also
further motivates better UIE algorithms.

While existing UIQA approaches show good performance, they still have some limitations. Although fullreference IQA can objectively evaluate image quality, it is
almost impossible to simultaneously obtain both underwater
images and the ground truths in situ. To bypass this issue, Li
et al. (Li et al. 2019) proposed a paired underwater image
dataset, named UIEB. UIEB contains real-world underwater
images and their reference counterparts. The reference image is obtained by manually selecting the best enhancement
among the results enhanced by different UIE algorithms.
The advent of UIEB allows one to use full-reference IQA

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

702

