The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PointCA: Evaluating the Robustness of 3D Point Cloud Completion Models
against Adversarial Examples
Shengshan Hu1,4,5,6,7 , Junwei Zhang1,4,5,6,7 , Wei Liu1,4,5,6,7 , Junhui Hou9 , Minghui Li3 * , Leo Yu
Zhang10 , Hai Jin2,4,7,8 , Lichao Sun11
1
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
School of Software Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
4
National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System
5
Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security
6
Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security
7
Services Computing Technology and System Lab
8
Cluster and Grid Computing Lab
9
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
10
School of Information Technology, Deakin University
11
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Lehigh University
{hushengshan,jwzh,weiliu73,minghuili,hjin}@hust.edu.cn, jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk, leo.zhang@deakin.edu.au,
lis221@lehigh.edu
2

Introduction

Abstract

With the flourishing development of diverse 3D sensors
like LiDAR, RADAR, and depth camera, point cloud data
are utilized among many safety-critical fields such as autonomous driving, augmented reality, and robotics. Due to
its great success in the computer vision area (He et al. 2016),
deep learning techniques have been widely applied to point
cloud tasks as well. Recent studies show that neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, where misclassifications can be easily triggered when facing adversarial examples (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Hu
et al. 2022a). Therefore, more and more research efforts are
devoted to exploring the security and robustness of deep
learning-based 3D point cloud systems.
Unfortunately, existing works only concentrate on the
point cloud classification scenario, whereas point cloud
completion, another important task for point cloud systems,
has received no attention. The completion model is designed
to restore the incomplete point cloud data induced by various real-world circumstances, and thus it has become a necessary upstream procedure in point cloud processing.
As opposed to point cloud classification, adversarial attack of point cloud completion is more challenging since
it requires the manipulation of the geometric shapes rather
than the object labels. Specifically, the output of the completion model is an instantial point cloud with semantic and
geometric shape, instead of a hard label that directly indicates which class the object belongs to. No classification
score or cross-entropy loss can be exploited to generate an
adversarial point cloud. In other words, the goal of adversarial attacks on the point cloud completion models is to
generate a misleading geometric shape rather than a false
class label, thus a totally different loss function is needed
to measure the similarity between the adversarial example
and the target. Secondly, point cloud classification generally

Point cloud completion, as the upstream procedure of 3D
recognition and segmentation, has become an essential part
of many tasks such as navigation and scene understanding.
While various point cloud completion models have demonstrated their powerful capabilities, their robustness against adversarial attacks, which have been proven to be fatally malicious towards deep neural networks, remains unknown. In addition, existing attack approaches towards point cloud classifiers cannot be applied to the completion models due to different output forms and attack purposes. In order to evaluate the
robustness of the completion models, we propose PointCA,
the first adversarial attack against 3D point cloud completion models. PointCA can generate adversarial point clouds
that maintain high similarity with the original ones, while being completed as another object with totally different semantic information. Specifically, we minimize the representation
discrepancy between the adversarial example and the target
point set to jointly explore the adversarial point clouds in the
geometry space and the feature space. Furthermore, to launch
a stealthier attack, we innovatively employ the neighbourhood density information to tailor the perturbation constraint,
leading to geometry-aware and distribution-adaptive modification for each point. Extensive experiments against different
premier point cloud completion networks show that PointCA
can cause a performance degradation from 77.9% to 16.7%,
with the structure chamfer distance kept below 0.01. We conclude that existing completion models are severely vulnerable to adversarial examples, and state-of-the-art defenses for
point cloud classification will be partially invalid when applied to incomplete and uneven point cloud data.

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

872

