The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Leveraging Weighted Fine-Grained Cross-Graph Attention for
Visual and Semantic Enhanced Video Captioning Network
Deepali Verma, Arya Haldar, Tanima Dutta

Abstract

Video

Video captioning has become a broad and interesting research
area. Attention-based encoder-decoder methods are extensively used for caption generation. However, these methods mostly utilize the visual attentive feature to highlight
the video regions while overlooked the semantic features
of the available captions. These semantic features contain
significant information that helps to generate highly informative human description-like captions. Therefore, we propose a novel visual and semantic enhanced video captioning
network, named as VSVCap, that efficiently utilizes multiple ground truth captions. We aim to generate captions that
are visually and semantically enhanced by exploiting both
video and text modalities. To achieve this, we propose a
fine-grained cross-graph attention mechanism that captures
detailed graph embedding correspondence between visual
graphs and textual knowledge graphs. We have performed
intra- and inter-node level matching and structure level reasoning between the weighted regional graph and knowledge
graph. The proposed network achieves promising results on
three benchmark datasets: YouTube2Text, MSR-VTT, and
VATEX. The experimental results show that our network
accurately captures all key objects, relationships, and semantically enhanced events of a video to generate human
annotation-like captions.

···

1. a man is
slicing potatoes
2. a person is
cutting potatoe
with knife

Captions

Cross−Graph Attention Network

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT(BHU) Varanasi
{deepaliverma.rs.cse19, arya.haldar.cse17, tanima.cse}@itbhu.ac.in

<s> a man is slicing
potato using knife <e>
Captioning Decoder
cross
attention
man

slicing

person
knife

potatoe
with
Visual Semantic Reasoning

Fine−Grained Cross−Graph Attention

Figure 1: Cross-Graph attention focuses on node-level
matching. This model proposes fine-grained cross-graph attention network that combines cross-graph attention with
structural and semantic reasoning to generate human-like
captions based on semantic information. The global visual
data capture key objects (man, potato, knife) and facts (<
man, slicing, potato >) to generate captions.
that the approaches can effectively learn the generic representation using visual features. These generic captions are
rewritten from the training set that lacks to generate visually
and semantically enhanced captions.
To improve the captioning task, the attentive models
(Zhao, Li, and Lu 2019; Gao et al. 2017; Yan et al. 2019)
are explored over the region of interest (ROI). However,
these models ignore the saliency information present in a
video since the visual regions are often ambiguous and
over-sampled, which makes the captioning task more challenging. Even some works (Lin, Gan, and Wang 2020; Liu
et al. 2019) have focused on the ROI and visual grounding by decomposing expressions into logic structures. Yet,
these methods are not able to preserve the semantic structure of salient regions to generate human-like descriptions.
Therefore, it is better to leverage the semantic structures
by using a textual knowledge graph since ‘text’ is the defacto source, laden with ‘knowledge’. On the other hand,
a graph helps to structure the knowledge in a better way,
where nodes represent entities and edges denote relationships between nodes (Nickel et al. 2015). A knowledge
graph can structure the information and highlight the semantic facts present in an image or video as ‘SPO’ triples
(< subject, predicate, object >). These structured graphs,

Introduction
Video captioning aims to automatically generate natural
language descriptions for a video. It is highly utilized in
real-world problems, such as video understanding (Schroff,
Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015; Zhang et al. 2020a), assisting visually impaired people (Mocanu, Tapu, and Zaharia
2019), and visual intelligence (Kojima, Tamura, and Fukunaga 2002) in robotics. Video captioning (VC) lies in the intersection of two main domains, i.e., computer vision (CV)
and natural language processing (NLP). Natural languages
contain semantic information to better describe the visual
content of an image or a video. Generating captions based on
visual and spatio-temporal features is a challenging task as
videos contain complex regional structural patterns and features that may convey multiple different summaries (Zhang
et al. 2020b). Recent studies (Venugopalan et al. 2015; Donahue et al. 2015; Zhao, Li, and Lu 2019) on VC have shown
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2465

