The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

RankDNN: Learning to Rank for Few-Shot Learning
Qianyu Guo1,2 , Gong Haotong1 , Xujun Wei1,3 , Yanwei Fu2 , Yizhou Yu4 , Wenqiang Zhang2.3 ,
Weifeng Ge1,2*
1

Nebula AI Group, School of Computer Science, Fudan University,Shanghai,China
2
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,Shanghai,China
3
Academy for Engineering & Technology, Fudan University,Shanghai,China
4
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong,Hong Kong,China
wfge@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract
This paper introduces a new few-shot learning pipeline that
casts relevance ranking for image retrieval as binary ranking relation classification. In comparison to image classification, ranking relation classification is sample efficient and
domain agnostic. Besides, it provides a new perspective on
few-shot learning and is complementary to state-of-the-art
methods. The core component of our deep neural network is
a simple MLP, which takes as input an image triplet encoded
as the difference between two vector-Kronecker products,
and outputs a binary relevance ranking order. The proposed
RankMLP can be built on top of any state-of-the-art feature extractors, and our entire deep neural network is called
the ranking deep neural network, or RankDNN. Meanwhile,
RankDNN can be flexibly fused with other post-processing
methods. During the meta test, RankDNN ranks support images according to their similarity with the query samples,
and each query sample is assigned the class label of its
nearest neighbor. Experiments demonstrate that RankDNN
can effectively improve the performance of its baselines
based on a variety of backbones and it outperforms previous state-of-the-art algorithms on multiple few-shot learning benchmarks, including miniImageNet, tieredImageNet,
Caltech-UCSD Birds, and CIFAR-FS. Furthermore, experiments on the cross-domain challenge demonstrate the superior transferability of RankDNN.The code is available at:
https://github.com/guoqianyu-alberta/RankDNN.

Class 1

Class 2

Class 3

Query?

Positive triplets

Negative triplets

Query-Support triplet？

A 3-way 2-shot classification task

A binary rank order classification task

Query
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3

Query

Model

?

Positive
Negative

RankDNN

?

Figure 1: Ranking deep neural network (RankDNN) establishes a learning framework that can cast a N -way-K-shot
learning task into a binary relevance ranking problem, which
is sample efficient and domain agnostic.
not be well applicable to certain new tasks. Second, there is
simply too little data available for new tasks and overfitting
is very hard to avoid. Modern deep neural networks are so
flexible and overparameterized that they can even perfectly
fit image data with random labels, as stated in (Zhang et al.
2021; Arpit et al. 2017; Ge and Yu 2017). Overfitting creates
a large gap between training and testing performance.
Inspired by relevance ranking in information retrieval (Shashua, Levin et al. 2003; Joachims 2002), we
consider binary relevance ranking for few-shot learning, as
shown in Fig 1. Given a query image and two support images in a given order, binary relevance ranking ranks the relevance of these support images concerning the query image.
There are only two possible outcomes of this ranking problem. That is, the first support image is more relevant than the
second one or vice versa. Relevance ranking among images
focuses on the similarity of images, especially the similarity
of foreground objects, but not the specific categories of images or foreground objects. Thus a relevance ranking model
should be able to grasp the meta knowledge about the assessment of image or object similarity regardless of their specific contents. Such a capability endows the learned model
a strong transferability to a wide range of new tasks where
specific image contents may vary. Meanwhile, as we need
three images for each binary relevance ranking instance, the

Introduction
Contrary to the normal practice of using a large amount of
labeled data (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He
et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2022), few-shot learning (Lu et al.
2020; Afrasiyabi, Lalonde, and Gagne 2021) refers to learning new concepts from a very small amount of data by leveraging the learning “skills” gained from many similar learning tasks. State-of-the-art methods (Hong et al. 2021; Tang
et al. 2021; Rizve et al. 2021) attempt to learn meta knowledge that can be transferred to new tasks. Although much
progress has been made, recently proposed methods still
bear the risk of unsatisfactory generalization performance
on new tasks. The reason is two-fold. First, the meta knowledge they learn may have limited transferability and may
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

728

