The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Partial-Label Regression
Xin Cheng1 , Deng-Bao Wang2 , Lei Feng1 * , Min-Ling Zhang2 , Bo An3
1
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
xincheng@stu.cqu.edu.cn, lfeng@cqu.edu.cn, {wangdb, zhangml}@seu.edu.cn, boan@ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

one of which is the true label. Due to the massive label ambiguity and noise in data annotation tasks, PLL has been
increasingly used in many real-world applications, such as
web mining (Luo and Orabona 2010), multimedia content
analysis (Zeng et al. 2013), and automatic image annotations (Chen, Patel, and Chellappa 2018).
The major challenge of PLL lies in label ambiguity, as
the true label is concealed in the candidate label set and not
directly accessible to the learning algorithm. To tackle this
problem, many PLL methods have been proposed. These
methods achieved satisfactory performance by using appropriate techniques, such as the expectation-maximization algorithm (Jin and Ghahramani 2003; Wang et al. 2022), the
maximum margin criterion (Nguyen and Caruana 2008),
metric learning (Gong, Yuan, and Bao 2021a; Liu et al.
2018), the manifold regularization (Zhang and Yu 2015;
Zhang, Zhou, and Liu 2016; Gong et al. 2018; Wang, Li,
and Zhang 2019), and the self-training strategy (Feng and
An 2019; Lv et al. 2020; Feng et al. 2020; Wen et al. 2021).
Despite the effectiveness of previous PLL methods, they
only focused on the classification setting where candidate labels are all discrete, which cannot handle continuous labels
with real values. In many real-world scenarios, regression
tasks that learn with real-valued labels can be commonly
encountered. However, how to learn an effective regression
model with a set of real-valued candidate labels is an open
problem that still remains unexplored.
In this paper, we provide the first attempt to investigate
partial-label regression (PLR), where each training example is annotated with a set of real-valued candidate labels.
In order to solve the PLR problem, we make the following
contributions:

Partial-label learning is a popular weakly supervised learning setting that allows each training example to be annotated
with a set of candidate labels. Previous studies on partial-label
learning only focused on the classification setting where candidate labels are all discrete, which cannot handle continuous
labels with real values. In this paper, we provide the first attempt to investigate partial-label regression, where each training example is annotated with a set of real-valued candidate
labels. To solve this problem, we first propose a simple baseline method that takes the average loss incurred by candidate
labels as the predictive loss. The drawback of this method
lies in that the loss incurred by the true label may be overwhelmed by other false labels. To overcome this drawback,
we propose an identification method that takes the least loss
incurred by candidate labels as the predictive loss. We further
improve it by proposing a progressive identification method
to differentiate candidate labels using progressively updated
weights for incurred losses. We prove that the latter two methods are model-consistent and provide convergence analyses.
Our proposed methods are theoretically grounded and can be
compatible with any models, optimizers, and losses. Experiments validate the effectiveness of our proposed methods.

Introduction
Due to the difficulty of collecting strong supervision information (i.e., fully labeled datasets) in some real-world
scenarios, many weakly supervised learning settings were
investigated to deal with weak supervision information.
Typical weakly supervised learning settings include semisupervised learning (Chapelle, Scholkopf, and Zien 2006;
Sohn et al. 2020), noisy-label learning (Liu and Tao 2015;
Malach and Shalev-Shwartz 2017; Patrini et al. 2017), and
positive-unlabeled learning (Elkan and Noto 2008; Niu et al.
2016; Kiryo et al. 2017), and multiple-instance learning
(Maron and Lozano-Pérez 1997; Andrews, Tsochantaridis,
and Hofmann 2002).
In recent years, another weakly supervised learning setting called partial-label learning (PLL) (Cour, Sapp, and
Taskar 2011) has received much attention from the machine
learning and data mining communities. In PLL, each training example is annotated with a set of candidate labels, only

• We propose a simple baseline method that takes the average loss incurred by candidate labels as the predictive
loss to be minimized for model training.
• We propose an identification method that takes the least
loss incurred by candidate labels as the predictive loss to
be minimized for model training.
• We propose a progressive identification method that differentiates candidate labels by associating their incurred
losses with progressively updated weights.
• We theoretically show that the identification method
and the progressive identification method are model-

* Corresponding author: Lei Feng <lfeng@cqu.edu.cn>.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7140

