The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SEPT: Towards Scalable and Efficient Visual Pre-training
Yiqi Lin1 * , Huabin Zheng2 , Huaping Zhong2 , Jinjing Zhu1 , Weijia Li3† , Conghui He2 ,
Lin Wang1, 4†
1

AI Thrust, Information Hub, HKUST (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China
2
SenseTime Research
3
Sun Yat-Sen University
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, HKUST, Hong Kong, China
{ylin933, jzhu706}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, {zhenghuabin,zhonghuaping,heconghui}@sensetime.com
liweij29@mail.sysu.edu.cn, linwang@ust.hk

Abstract
Recently, the self-supervised pre-training paradigm has
shown great potential in leveraging large-scale unlabeled data
to improve downstream task performance. However, increasing the scale of unlabeled pre-training data in real-world scenarios requires prohibitive computational costs and faces the
challenge of uncurated samples. To address these issues, we
build a task-specific self-supervised pre-training framework
from a data selection perspective based on a simple hypothesis that pre-training on the unlabeled samples with similar distribution to the target task can bring substantial performance gains. Buttressed by the hypothesis, we propose
the first yet novel framework for Scalable and Efficient visual Pre-Training (SEPT) by introducing a retrieval pipeline
for data selection. SEPT first leverage a self-supervised pretrained model to extract the features of the entire unlabeled
dataset for retrieval pipeline initialization. Then, for a specific target task, SEPT retrievals the most similar samples
from the unlabeled dataset based on feature similarity for
each target instance for pre-training. Finally, SEPT pre-trains
the target model with the selected unlabeled samples in a
self-supervised manner for target data finetuning. By decoupling the scale of pre-training and available upstream data
for a target task, SEPT achieves high scalability of the upstream dataset and high efficiency of pre-training, resulting in
high model architecture flexibility. Results on various downstream tasks demonstrate that SEPT can achieve competitive
or even better performance compared with ImageNet pretraining while reducing the size of training samples by one
magnitude without resorting to any extra annotations.

Figure 1: (a) The general pipelines of our proposed SEPT.
(b) The down-stream task classification accuracy of SEPT
with 0.1m images and ImageNet 1k baselines. The ratio denotes the number of pre-training samples under the same
training epoch setting.

2017; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Sun et al. 2017).
To avoid such expensive annotation costs, self-supervised
learning (SSL) methods (Doersch, Gupta, and Efros 2015;
Zhang, Isola, and Efros 2016; Noroozi and Favaro 2016;
Komodakis and Gidaris 2018; Kingma and Welling 2013;
Bao et al. 2021) have shown that models can be trained with
freely available supervision from raw data itself. Recent advances of SSL methods (Caron et al. 2021; He et al. 2022;
Zhou et al. 2021) can achieve comparable or even superior
performance to their supervised pre-training version in solving the downstream task.
Several works (Goyal et al. 2021; Kolesnikov et al. 2020;
Pham et al. 2021; Dumoulin et al. 2021) suggest that scaling up the pre-training dataset can bring continuous ad-

Introduction
To reduce the demand for collecting large-scale labeled
data for each target application, supervised pre-training on
large-scale datasets, e.g., ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) and
then finetuning on the target tasks have become a successful and standard paradigm in many applications (He et al.
* This work was done during the internship at SenseTime when

his affiliation is Sun Yat-Sen University.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1622

