The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Pointerformer: Deep Reinforced Multi-Pointer Transformer
for the Traveling Salesman Problem
Yan Jin1 , Yuandong Ding1 , Xuanhao Pan1 , Kun He1,3 * , Li Zhao2 , Tao Qin2 , Lei Song2 , Jiang Bian2
1

School of Computer Science, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
HopcroftCenter on Computing Science, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{jinyan, yuandong, xhpan, brooklet60 }@hust.edu.cn, {lizo, taoqin, lei.song, jiang.bian}@microsoft.com
Abstract

Due to both of its theoretical and practical importance,
TSP has attracted a great number of research efforts in the
past decades that attempted to address it using either exact
or heuristic algorithms. In fact, the NP-hardness nature of
TSP makes it computationally intractable to leverage exact
algorithms to find the optimal solutions over a large-scale
TSP, since the corresponding computation complexity increases exponentially with respect to the number of nodes.
Hence, facing most real-world TSP applications, heuristic algorithms are usually adopted to obtain near-optimal solutions.
However, to ensure achieving high-quality solutions, a few
heuristic algorithms are designed to further rely on fine-tuned
search strategies, which may significantly increase the time
complexity for solving large-scale TSP.
Recently, there have been a soaring number of studies trying to solve TSP using Deep Learning (DL) algorithms with
either Supervised Learning (SL) or Reinforcement Learning
(RL) (Vinyals, Fortunato, and Jaitly 2015; Nowak et al. 2017;
Kool, van Hoof, and Welling 2018; Kwon et al. 2020; Zheng
et al. 2021; Fu, Qiu, and Zha 2021; Jiang et al. 2022; Kwon
et al. 2021; Ma et al. 2021; Kim, Park et al. 2021). Depending
on the specific ways to construct solutions, DL algorithms
can be roughly divided into two main categories: searchbased DL (d O Costa et al. 2020; Fu, Qiu, and Zha 2021; Ma
et al. 2021) and end-to-end DL (Kool, van Hoof, and Welling
2018; Kwon et al. 2020, 2021; Jiang et al. 2022; Kim, Park
et al. 2021). By incorporating heuristic search operators with
learning-based policy, search-based DL can solve larger-scale
TSP instances. However, they usually suffer from two major
limitations. The first one lies in the inference efficiency issue, meaning that the search component usually takes a long
time to terminate to obtain high quality solutions. Moreover,
the obtained solution performance is very sensitive to the
selection of search operators which is highly dependent on
sophisticated domain knowledge. In contrast, end-to-end DL
algorithms are very efficient in generating solutions and bear
much lower dependencies on domain knowledge. Therefore,
end-to-end DL algorithms are more suitable for many emerging TSP application scenarios, such as on-call routing (Ghiani
et al. 2003) and ride hailing service (Xu et al. 2018), that
require to generate solutions in almost real-time.
Compared with supervised learning relying on the optimal
solution as the learning labels, which is usually unknown
when facing the large-scale TSP, RL yields the advantage

Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP), as a classic routing optimization problem originally arising in the domain of transportation and logistics, has become a critical task in broader
domains, such as manufacturing and biology. Recently, Deep
Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has been increasingly employed to solve TSP due to its high inference efficiency. Nevertheless, most of existing end-to-end DRL algorithms only
perform well on small TSP instances and can hardly generalize
to large scale because of the drastically soaring memory consumption and computation time along with the enlarging problem scale. In this paper, we propose a novel end-to-end DRL
approach, referred to as Pointerformer, based on multi-pointer
Transformer. Particularly, Pointerformer adopts both reversible
residual network in the encoder and multi-pointer network in
the decoder to effectively contain memory consumption of
the encoder-decoder architecture. To further improve the performance of TSP solutions, Pointerformer employs a feature
augmentation method to explore the symmetries of TSP at
both training and inference stages as well as an enhanced
context embedding approach to include more comprehensive
context information in the query. Extensive experiments on
a randomly generated benchmark and a public benchmark
have shown that, while achieving comparative results on most
small-scale TSP instances as state-of-the-art DRL approaches
do, Pointerformer can also well generalize to large-scale TSPs.

Introduction
The Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) is a well-known combinatorial optimization problem. It can be stated as follows:
given a set of cities/nodes, a salesman departing from one city
needs to traverse all other cities exactly once and finally returns to the start city. The objective of TSP is to find the shortest route for the salesman. In addition to its well-recognized
theoretical importance as a classic combinatorial optimization problem, TSP also has a wide range of real-world applications, such as drilling of printed circuit boards (Alkaya
and Duman 2013), X-Ray crystallography (Bland and Shallcross 1989), warehouse order picking (Madani, Batta, and
Karwan 2020), transport routes optimization (Hacizade and
Kaya 2018), and many others (Matai, Singh, and Lal 2010).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8132

