The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Generative Approach for Script Event Prediction via Contrastive Fine-Tuning
Fangqi Zhu1 , Jun Gao1 , Changlong Yu, Wei Wang, Chen Xu3 ,
Xin Mu2 , Min Yang4 , Ruifeng Xu1,2,5 *
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Beijing University of Technology
4
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Novel Security Intelligence Technologies
{zhufangqi.hitsz, imgaojun}@gmail.com, xuruifeng@hit.edu.cn
Abstract

Script

Script event prediction aims to predict the subsequent event
given the context. This requires the capability to infer the
correlations between events. Recent works have attempted
to improve event correlation reasoning by using pretrained
language models and incorporating external knowledge (e.g.,
discourse relations). Though promising results have been
achieved, some challenges still remain. First, the pretrained
language models adopted by current works ignore event-level
knowledge, resulting in an inability to capture the correlations between events well. Second, modeling correlations between events with discourse relations is limited because it
can only capture explicit correlations between events with
discourse markers, and cannot capture many implicit correlations. To this end, we propose a novel generative approach
for this task, in which a pretrained language model is finetuned with an event-centric pretraining objective and predicts
the next event within a generative paradigm. Specifically, we
first introduce a novel event-level blank infilling strategy as
the learning objective to inject event-level knowledge into
the pretrained language model, and then design a likelihoodbased contrastive loss for fine-tuning the generative model.
Instead of using an additional prediction layer, we perform
prediction by using sequence likelihoods generated by the
generative model. Our approach models correlations between
events in a soft way without any external knowledge. The
likelihood-based prediction eliminates the need to use additional networks to make predictions and is somewhat interpretable since it scores each word in the event. Experimental results on the multi-choice narrative cloze (MCNC) task
demonstrate that our approach achieves better results than
other state-of-the-art baselines. Our code will be available at
https://github.com/zhufq00/mcnc.

gry
[E1] Jimmy felt hun
restaurant
[E2] Jimmy entered
seat
[E3] Jimmy found a
menu
the
d
[E4] Jimmy rea
the wait
to
ed
talk
[E5] Jimmy
e food
som
d
ere
ord
[E6] Jimmy
d
foo
ate
my
Jim
[E7]
[E8] Jimmy was full
Which is the next ?

Original Text

… Jimmy ordered some food then
ate it. Jimmy was full after …

Event Candidates
A. Jimmy was still hungry

B. Jimmy sat down
C. Jimmy paid the bill
D. Jimmy woke up
E. Jimmy left home

Figure 1: Script event prediction with external knowledge.
Giving a script, the task aims to select the subsequent event
from event candidates. Events E6∼E8 are extracted from the
original text where “then” is a discourse marker, which is
used by Lee, Pacheco, and Goldwasser (2020) to extract the
discourse relation. Note that our method is free with this
kind of external knowledge (dashed box).
to select the plausible subsequent event from the five event
candidates. Solving the script event prediction problem can
help us to acquire event knowledge from event chains and is
beneficial for many downstream tasks such as story generation (Chaturvedi, Peng, and Roth 2017) and dialogue generation (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil and Lee 2011).
Understanding events and inferring correlations between
events are crucial to acquiring event knowledge. Taking
Figure 1 for example, we first need to understand the
events (what is happening) and have the commonsense
knowledge - “You need to pay after the meal”, and then we
can infer the plausible subsequent event - “Jimmy paid the
bill” (what happens next). Early works (Granroth-Wilding
and Clark 2016; Wang, Zhang, and Chang 2017) used embedding method (e.g., Word2Vec) to learn event representation and then choose the subsequent event by calculating similarities between event candidates and script events.
After that, some works (Lv, Zhu, and Hu 2020) attempted
to leverage masked language model (MLM) (Liu et al.
2019) to obtain better event representations and they all
achieved a substantial improvement. However, some studies (Lee, Pacheco, and Goldwasser 2020) have shown that

Introduction
A script (Schank and Abelson 2013) refers to a kind of
structured knowledge, which involves sequences of events.
Script event prediction aims at predicting the subsequent
event given an event chain in a script. Figure 1 presents a
restaurant script involving sequences of events that occurs
when a person enters a restaurant. The goal of the script
event prediction task (Granroth-Wilding and Clark 2016) is
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14056

