The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Molformer: Motif-Based Transformer on 3D Heterogeneous Molecular Graphs
Fang Wu1,3 , Dragomir Radev2 , Stan Z. Li1 *
1
School of Engineering, Westlake University
Department of Computer Science, Yale University
3
Institute of AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University
fw2359@columbia.edu, dragomir.radev@yale.edu, stan.zq.li@westlake.edu.cn
2

Abstract

However, most existing GNNs only take atom-level information in homogeneous molecular graphs as input, which
fails to adequately exploit rich semantic information in
motifs. Remarkably, motifs are significant subgraph patterns that frequently occur, and can be leveraged to uncover molecular properties. For instance, a carboxyl group
(COOH) acts as a hydrogen-bond acceptor, which contributes to better stability and higher boiling points. Besides,
similar to the role of N-gram in natural language, molecular motifs can promote the segmentation of atomic semantic
meanings. While some regard motifs as additional features
of atoms (Maziarka et al. 2020, 2021), these methods increase the difficulty to separate the semantic meanings of
motifs from atoms explicitly and hinder models from viewing motifs from an integral perspective. Others (Huang et al.
2020) take motifs as the only input, but ignore the influence
of single atoms and infrequent substructures.
To overcome these problems, we formulate a novel heterogeneous molecular graph (HMG) that is comprised of
both atom-level and motif-level nodes as the model input.
It provides a clean interface to incorporate nodes of different levels and prevents the error propagation caused by incorrect semantic segmentation of atoms. As for the determination of motifs, we adopt different strategies for different
types of molecules. On the one hand, for small molecules,
the motif lexicon is defined by functional groups based on
chemical domain knowledge. On the other hand, for proteins
that are constituted of sequential amino acids, a reinforcement learning (RL) motif mining technique is introduced to
discover the most meaningful amino acid subsequences for
downstream tasks.
In order to better align with HMGs, we present Molformer, an equivariant geometric model based on Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017). Molformer differs from preceding Transformer-based models in two major aspects.
First, it utilizes heterogeneous self-attention (HSA) to distinguish the interactions between nodes of different levels
and incorporates them into the self-attention computation.
Second, an Attentive Farthest Point Sampling (AFPS) algorithm is introduced to aggregate node features and obtain a
comprehensive representation of the entire molecule.
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:

Procuring expressive molecular representations underpins
AI-driven molecule design and scientific discovery. The research mainly focuses on atom-level homogeneous molecular graphs, ignoring the rich information in subgraphs or motifs. However, it has been widely accepted that substructures
play a dominant role in identifying and determining molecular properties. To address such issues, we formulate heterogeneous molecular graphs (HMGs), and introduce a novel architecture to exploit both molecular motifs and 3D geometry.
Precisely, we extract functional groups as motifs for small
molecules and employ reinforcement learning to adaptively
select quaternary amino acids as motif candidates for proteins. Then HMGs are constructed with both atom-level and
motif-level nodes. To better accommodate those HMGs, we
introduce a variant of the Transformer named Molformer,
which adopts a heterogeneous self-attention layer to distinguish the interactions between multi-level nodes. Besides,
it is also coupled with a multi-scale mechanism to capture
fine-grained local patterns with increasing contextual scales.
An attentive farthest point sampling algorithm is also proposed to obtain the molecular representations. We validate
Molformer across a broad range of domains, including quantum chemistry, physiology, and biophysics. Extensive experiments show that Molformer outperforms or achieves the comparable performance of several state-of-the-art baselines. Our
work provides a promising way to utilize informative motifs
from the perspective of multi-level graph construction. The
code is available at https://github.com/smiles724/Molformer.

Introduction
The past decade has witnessed the extraordinary success
of deep learning (DL) in many scientific areas. Inspired
by these achievements, researchers have shown increasing interest in exploiting DL for drug discovery and material design with the hope of rapidly identifying desirable
molecules. A key aspect of fast screening is how to represent
molecules effectively, where graphs are a natural choice to
preserve their internal structures. As a consequence, a number of graph neural networks (GNNs) (Gilmer et al. 2017;
Ishida et al. 2021) have been invented and applied to molecular representation learning with noticeable performance.
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• To the best of our knowledge, we are the foremost to incorporate motifs and construct 3D heterogeneous molec5312

