The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Correct for Whom? Subjectivity and the Evaluation of Personalized
Image Aesthetics Assessment Models
Samuel Goree1 , Weslie Khoo2 , David J. Crandall2
1

Department of Informatics, Indiana University
Department of Computer Science, Indiana University
sgoree@iu.edu, weskhoo@iu.edu, djcran@indiana.edu
2

Abstract

social media data (Cui et al. 2017), demographics (Kairanbay, See, and Wong 2018, 2019), or psychometrics (Zhu
et al. 2021) to better capture a given user’s perspective. In
parallel, other researchers (Lv and Tian 2016; Lee and Kim
2019) have turned away from aesthetic quality as a real or
boolean-valued score assigned to each image and towards a
pairwise comparison between two images.
From a computer science perspective, these sorts of
changes to a problem statement might seem minor, however
philosophically attempting to account for the subjectivity of
a user takes IAQA in a highly unusual direction for machine
learning which we believe is worth examining closely.
This idea, that subjective difference exists but can be rationally explained, has roots in the work of the 18th century
philosopher Immanuel Kant. Kant claims that when we call
an object beautiful, we imply not just that we like it, but that
all other rational people should feel the same way about that
object. This position assumes that the subjective conditions
for judgment are essentially the same among all rational people — a central assumption in Kant’s philosophical system
(Pluhar 1987). Disagreements over matters of taste only exist because they are “bound up with interest,” meaning that
they are made based on external factors like our desires, future gratification or pleasure in looking (Kant 1790). But, if
we look beyond those personal interests, we find a universal
disinterested judgment.
IAQA is steeped in Kantian ideas about interested and disinterested judgment. Early papers in this area attempt to access a universal kind of aesthetic quality in photographs, and
ascribe individual variation to noise, similar to the way that
Kant ascribes individual variation to personal interest. For
example, Datta et al. (2006) claim that certain visual characteristics cause images to be, in general, more aesthetically
appealing, and cite Kant and discuss his concept of taste in
a later paper (Joshi et al. 2011). Similarly, when proposing
their well-known AVA dataset for IAQA, Murray, Marchesotti, and Perronnin (2012) observe that the score distributions for images usually look fairly Gaussian, indicating that
the mean score is a good estimate of the overall quality of the
image. In this way, IAQA research treats the mean of several individuals’ judgments as a universal disinterested judgment, abstracted from any one rater’s particular perspective.
Likewise, personalized models purport to add that perspective back in by accounting for deviation due to external fac-

The problem of image aesthetic quality assessment is surprisingly difficult to define precisely. Most early work attempted to estimate the average aesthetic rating of a group
of observers, while some recent work has shifted to an approach based on few-shot personalization. In this paper, we
connect few-shot personalization, via Immanuel Kant’s concept of disinterested judgment, to an argument from feminist aesthetics about the biased tendencies of objective standards for subjective pleasures. To empirically investigate this
philosophical debate, we introduce PR-AADB, a relabeling
of the existing AADB dataset with labels for pairs of images,
and measure how well the existing ground truth predicts our
new pairwise labels. We find, consistent with the feminist critique, that both the existing ground truth and few-shot personalized predictions represent some users’ preferences significantly better than others, but that it is difficult to predict
when and for whom the existing ground truth will be correct.
We thus advise against using benchmark datasets to evaluate models for personalized IAQA, and recommend caution
when attempting to account for subjective difference using
machine learning more generally.

Introduction
Over the past fifteen years, computer vision researchers have
investigated techniques for image aesthetic quality assessment (IAQA). This research area emerged from image quality assessment (Ke, Tang, and Jing 2006) and computational
aesthetics (Datta et al. 2006; Datta, Li, and Wang 2008).
Originally, the goal was to classify a photograph as either
“high quality” or “low quality,” trying to predict an average
of many labelers’ judgments of the photo (Murray, Marchesotti, and Perronnin 2012).
Recently, however, some researchers have claimed that
aesthetic quality is fundamentally subjective — not an attribute of the image itself but of a human user’s perception
of that image. These authors have begun to pose the problem in terms of distribution learning (Cui et al. 2017; Fang
et al. 2018) or few-shot personalization (Ren et al. 2017; Lee
and Kim 2019; Cui et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2021; Kairanbay,
See, and Wong 2018, 2019). To account for variation between users, some methods use auxiliary information from
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11818

