The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Hybrid CNN-Transformer Feature Fusion for Single Image Deraining
Xiang Chen1 , Jinshan Pan1 * , Jiyang Lu2 , Zhentao Fan2 , Hao Li1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
College of Electronic Information Engineering, Shenyang Aerospace University
{chenxiang, haoli}@njust.edu.cn, sdluran@gmail.com, {lujiyang1, fanzhentao}@stu.sau.edu.cn

Abstract

PSNR…vs.…Params

40

Since rain streaks exhibit diverse geometric appearances and
irregular overlapped phenomena, these complex characteristics challenge the design of an effective single image deraining model. To this end, rich local-global information representations are increasingly indispensable for better satisfying rain removal. In this paper, we propose a lightweight
Hybrid CNN-Transformer Feature Fusion Network (dubbed
as HCT-FFN) in a stage-by-stage progressive manner, which
can harmonize these two architectures to help image restoration by leveraging their individual learning strengths. Specifically, we stack a sequence of the degradation-aware mixture of experts (DaMoE) modules in the CNN-based stage,
where appropriate local experts adaptively enable the model
to emphasize spatially-varying rain distribution features. As
for the Transformer-based stage, a background-aware vision Transformer (BaViT) module is employed to complement spatially-long feature dependencies of images, so as to
achieve global texture recovery while preserving the required
structure. Considering the indeterminate knowledge discrepancy among CNN features and Transformer features, we introduce an interactive fusion branch at adjacent stages to further facilitate the reconstruction of high-quality deraining results. Extensive evaluations show the effectiveness and extensibility of our developed HCT-FFN. The source code is
available at https://github.com/cschenxiang/HCT-FFN.

Ours

Uformer-S

RCDNet
MPRNet

PSNR…(dB)

39
RESCAN

MSPFN

DCSFN

38
PReNet
37
NLEDN
36
SPANet
35

0

5

10

15

20

Number…of…Parameters…(Millions)

25

Figure 1: Comparison results on the Rain100L dataset. Our
method not only reconstructs a high-quality output but also
achieves the best performance-parameter trade-off.

been proposed for SID, which achieves remarkable progress
thanks to the rapid growing complicated architectures (Jiang
et al. 2020; Zamir et al. 2021; Mou, Wang, and Zhang 2022)
and learning strategies (Zhou et al. 2021; Xiao et al. 2021;
Chen et al. 2022). However, these approaches still encounter
performance bottlenecks due to the local receptive fields of
the CNN-based operations, which limits the ability to cope
with long-range dependency information. To this end, recent
Transformers have emerged in computer vision field (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021), which is attributed
to the unique advantage of self-attention with global feature
interaction. Since then, several modified Transformer-based
architectures (Xiao et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022; Zamir et al.
2022) have also been developed for SID task achieving superior performance over previous CNN-based models.
Since the rain streak layer and rain-free background layer
are highly interlaced, global and local representation learning are equally important for the challenging SID task, while
the self-attention in Transformer does not manipulate the local invariance that CNNs do well. Afterwards, some studies
(Yuan et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2021) attempt to introduce convolutional operations into vision Transformers, but they do
not play a full role for low-level image restoration. To mitigate this problem, a few recent works (Guo et al. 2022; Jiang

Introduction
Single image deraining (SID) is the task of recovering clear
and rain-free background from the given rainy images, since
the images captured under rainy conditions significantly degrade the performance of downstream computer vision systems (including autonomous driving and video surveillance,
etc.), which has drawn widespread attention in recent years.
Early prior-based methods (Kang, Lin, and Fu 2011; Luo,
Xu, and Ji 2015; Li et al. 2016; Zhang and Patel 2017) attempt to remove the rain by relying on statistical properties
of rain components and clear backgrounds. However, these
hand-crated priors from human observation may not always
hold in case of the complex and varying rainy scenarios.
To circumvent hypothetical priors dependency, numerous
CNN-based networks (Yang et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2022) have
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

378

