The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learned Distributed Image Compression with Multi-Scale Patch Matching in
Feature Domain
Yujun Huang1,3 , Bin Chen2,3,4 * , Shiyu Qin2 , Jiawei Li5 , Yaowei Wang3 , Tao Dai6 , Shu-Tao Xia1,3
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
3
Research Center of Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Novel Security Intelligence Technologies
5
HUAWEI Machine Co., Ltd. DongGuan
6
Shenzhen University
huangyj20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, chenbin2021@hit.edu.cn, 190110427@stu.hit.edu.cn, li-jw15@tsinghua.org.cn,
wangyw@pcl.ac.cn, daitao.edu@gmail.com, xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Beyond achieving higher compression efficiency over classical image compression codecs, deep image compression is
expected to be improved with additional side information,
e.g., another image from a different perspective of the same
scene. To better utilize the side information under the distributed compression scenario, the existing method only implements patch matching at the image domain to solve the
parallax problem caused by the difference in viewing points.
However, the patch matching at the image domain is not robust to the variance of scale, shape, and illumination caused
by the different viewing angles, and can not make full use of
the rich texture information of the side information image. To
resolve this issue, we propose Multi-Scale Feature Domain
Patch Matching (MSFDPM) to fully utilizes side information
at the decoder of the distributed image compression model.
Specifically, MSFDPM consists of a side information feature
extractor, a multi-scale feature domain patch matching module, and a multi-scale feature fusion network. Furthermore,
we reuse inter-patch correlation from the shallow layer to accelerate the patch matching of the deep layer. Finally, we find
that our patch matching in a multi-scale feature domain further improves compression rate by about 20% compared with
the patch matching method at image domain.

SI

(a) 0.0384 bpp
0.9058 MS-SSIM

(a) 0.0360 bpp
0.8829 MS-SSIM

SI with weakened
brightness

(a’) 0.0384 bpp
0.8975 MS-SSIM

(b’) 0.0360 bpp
0.8709 MS-SSIM

Figure 1: Visual comparisons of decoded main images with
different compression methods when the brightness of the
side information (SI) image is normal or weakened. (a) and
(b) are examples of path matching in the multi-scale feature
domain (proposed) and patch matching in the image domain,
respectively, when the brightness is normal. (a’) and (b’) are
the corresponding examples when the brightness of side information image is 60% of the original image. The visual
perception of (a) is similar to (a’). However, (b’) loses some
color and texture details compared to (b).

Introduction
Distributed image compression is less studied than the commonly known single image compression, as the inherent correlation among images taken from different viewpoints is
hard to capture. With the development of the stereo camera,
camera array, self-driving system, and multiple UAV/monitor camera systems during the past decade, high-volume
multi-view images become the primary data source in largescale digital communication. For example, it has been reported that self-driving cars can capture 1G of data per second (Mearian 2013). Since multi-view images are usually
captured from different angles of the same scene at the same
time, there exist overlapping fields with high correlation

among these images. In order to improve the compression
efficiency for such distributed compression scenario, the inherent correlation must be utilized to remove redundancy in
data. This inspires the development of distributed compression with side information, where the sensors encode their
data, independently, and the decoders recover the data with
the help of side information from another source only available at the decoder. The Distributed Source Coding (DSC)
theorem (Slepian and Wolf 1973; Cover 1975; Wyner and
Ziv 1976) reveals that the same compression rate can be
asymptotically achieved by using side information (SI) only

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4322

