The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Organization Preserved Graph Structure Learning
with Principle of Relevant Information
Qingyun Sun1, 2 , Jianxin Li1, 2 , Beining Yang1, 2 , Xingcheng Fu1, 2 , Hao Peng1 , Philip S. Yu3
1

Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, USA
{sunqy, lijx, yangbeining, fuxc, penghao}@buaa.edu.cn, psyu@uic.edu
Abstract

opinion
leader

Most Graph Neural Networks follow the message-passing
paradigm, assuming the observed structure depicts the
ground-truth node relationships. However, this fundamental
assumption cannot always be satisfied, as real-world graphs
are always incomplete, noisy, or redundant. How to reveal the inherent graph structure in a unified way remains
under-explored. We proposed PRI-GSL, a Graph Structure
Learning framework guided by the Principle of Relevant
Information, providing a simple and unified framework for
identifying the self-organization and revealing the hidden
structure. PRI-GSL learns a structure that contains the most
relevant yet least redundant information quantified by von
Neumann entropy and Quantum Jensen-Shannon divergence.
PRI-GSL incorporates the evolution of quantum continuous
walk with graph wavelets to encode node structural roles,
showing in which way the nodes interplay and self-organize
with the graph structure. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the superior effectiveness and robustness of PRI-GSL.

Disordered Network

Cooperative or Competitive
Spontaneous Interactions

political
party

Ordered Network

Figure 1: Self-organization in political network.

Most existing methods optimize the structure with heuristic
assumptions (e.g., community (Wang et al. 2021)) or certain
structure constraints (e.g., sparsity, low-rank, and smoothness (Jin et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2022b)). However, these assumptions and constraints cannot always be applicable to all
graphs and tasks. How to reveal the inherent graph structure
in a unified way remains an under-explored question.
Most of the graph data in the real-world shows “selforganization” property from molecules (Eigen and Schuster
1977) to social networks (Bonabeau et al. 1997), where the
nodes organize their interactions spontaneously through the
structure to create a global order amongst themselves. As
the example in Fig. 1, the emergence of opinion leaders and
the cooperation/competitive behaviors between people form
political parties, making the political network more ordered.
Since the structure navigates the information flow between
nodes and decides the graph’s fundamental mechanism, it
can be optimized to identify the organization and reduce the
disorder of the noisy graph.
In this paper, we introduce the self-organized Principle of
Relevant Information (PRI) to quantify the structure from
an information-theoretic point of view. We propose a novel
graph structure learning framework named PRI-GSL, which
inherits the merits of PRI to identify the self-organization
and reveal the inherent structure of graph. Rather than
imposing statistical constraints on the graph data, PRIGSL takes the structure learning as a trade-off between
structure redundancy reduction and information preservation, and then use the von Neumann entropy and the Quantum Jensen-Shannon divergence to quantify them. To better capture the contribution of nodes in the self-organization
evolution process, we use the quantum continuous walk evolution with multi-scale graph wavelets to characterize node

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Wu et al. 2020) have
gained popularity in recent years due to their remarkable
success in representing graph data in diverse tasks and applications. Most of the existing GNNs follow the messagepassing paradigm (Gilmer et al. 2017), i.e., exchanging
information between neighbors along the graph structure.
They take the raw graph structure as the path of information
flow, assuming the observed structure perfectly depicts the
ground-truth relations between nodes. However, these raw
graphs are naturally collected from network-structure data
(e.g., social networks), which are often noisy, incomplete,
and independent of the downstream tasks. There is a gap
between the raw structure and the optimal structure for specific tasks. The poor quality of graph structure leads to the
poor quality of representations produced by GNNs, making
GNNs prone to noise and adversarial attacks (Zügner, Akbarnejad, and Günnemann 2018; Sun et al. 2018, 2021).
Graph structure learning (Zhu et al. 2022) aims to learn a
new structure of high quality simultaneously with the graph
representations, which has received growing attention for its
utility for improving representation quality and robustness.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4643

