The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Centerless Multi-View K-means Based on the Adjacency Matrix
Han Lu1 , Quanxue Gao1 * , Qianqian Wang1 , Ming Yang2 , Wei Xia1
1

School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, P.R.China.
2
Mathematics department of the University of Evansville, Evansville, IN 47722 USA
luhan0@foxmail.com, {qxgao, qqwang}@xidian.edu.cn, {yangmingmath, xd.weixia}@gmail.com

Abstract

limitations. One is that the initialized cluster centroids affect the results, and the other is that it can only distinguish
Gaussian-distributed data. For the first limitation, The general workaround is doing multiple experiments with the randomly initial cluster centroids to obtain a near-local optimal
solution, which takes more time. Although some methods
can speed up computation such as (Elkan 2003; Arthur and
Vassilvitskii 2007), this just alleviates the instability of the
results rather than resolves. For the second limitation, kernel
K-Means (Kim et al. 2005; Wang et al. 2022; Ren, Sun, and
Wei 2021; Liu et al. 2020) are proposed. It is an extension
of the standard K-Means algorithm that maps data from the
input space to a higher dimensional feature space through
a nonlinear transformation and minimizes the clustering error in feature space. Thus non-linearly separated clusters are
obtained in the input space. However, the computational and
storage costs of the kernel matrix are high due to the increased dimension.
To solve these problems, we propose centerless multiview K-Means clustering method based on the adjacency
matrix. It is well known that K-Means cannot separate nonlinear datasets well. For this, we use the distances calculated
by affinity matrices instead of Euclidean distances. Meanwhile, our method avoids to initialize the centers of clusters.
Tensor Schatten p-norm (Gao et al. 2021) exploit the complementary information embedded in different views well.
So our method leverages the tensor Schatten p-norm regularizer on the third-order tensor, which consists of discrete
clustering assignment matrices of different views, to minimize the divergence between assignment matrices of different views. Finally, we introduce an adaptive weighted strategy to further improve the clustering performance. Code and
data are available1 . The main contributions are as follows:

Although K-Means clustering has been widely studied due
to its simplicity, these methods still have the following fatal drawbacks. Firstly, they need to initialize the cluster centers, which causes unstable clustering performance. Secondly,
they have poor performance on non-Gaussian datasets. Inspired by the affinity matrix, we propose a novel multi-view
K-Means based on the adjacency matrix. It maps the affinity
matrix to the distance matrix according to the principle that
every sample has a small distance from the points in its neighborhood and a large distance from the points outside of the
neighborhood. Moreover, this method well exploits the complementary information embedded in different views by minimizing the tensor Schatten p-norm regularize on the thirdorder tensor which consists of cluster assignment matrices of
different views. Additionally, this method avoids initializing
cluster centroids to obtain stable performance. And there is no
need to compute the means of clusters so that our model is not
sensitive to outliers. Experiment on a toy dataset shows the
excellent performance on non-Gaussian datasets. And other
experiments on several benchmark datasets demonstrate the
superiority of our proposed method.

Introduction
Clustering is one of the most representative unsupervised
techniques for analyzing data in data mining and artificial
intelligence, which has attracted more and more attention in
recent years due to a large amount of unlabeled data. Clustering aims to divide the data into C groups, i.e., clusters such
that the similarity between data points in the same cluster
is high, while the similarity between data points in different clusters is low. With the development of sensor technology, multi-view data are ubiquitous in real applications
and help provide some complementary information which is
important for clustering. Inspired by this, many multi-view
clustering methods have been proposed, and one of the most
representative techniques is multi-view K-Means clustering.
The purpose of the traditional K-Means (Hartigan and
Wong 1979) is graphing a dataset into some certain clusters by assigning each data sample to the cluster with the
nearest centroid. This algorithm suffers from two serious

• Compared with K-Means, our method constructs the distance matrices with the adjacency matrices, so it is suitable for both linearly and non-linearly separate cluster in
the input space.
• Our method avoids initializing cluster centroids so the
clustering performance is robust. What’s more, avoiding
compute the means of clusters makes our method insensitive to outliers.

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8949

https://github.com/luhan0/CMKOA

