The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Stop-Gradient Softmax Loss for Deep Metric Learning
Lu Yang1,2 , Peng Wang1,2,* , Yanning Zhang 1,2,*
1

2

School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
National Engineering Laboratory for Integrated Aero-Space-Ground-Ocean Big Data Application Technology, China
lu.yang@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, peng.wang@nwpu.edu.cn, ynzhang@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep metric learning aims to learn a feature space that models the similarity between images, and feature normalization
is a critical step for boosting performance. However directly
optimizing L2-normalized softmax loss cause the network to
fail to converge. Therefore some SOTA approaches appends
a scale layer after the inner product to relieve the convergence problem, but it incurs a new problem that it’s difficult to
learn the best scaling parameters. In this letter, we look into
the characteristic of softmax-based approaches and propose
a novel learning objective function Stop-Gradient Softmax
Loss (SGSL) to solve the convergence problem in softmaxbased deep metric learning with L2-normalization. In addition, we found a useful trick named Remove the last BNReLU (RBR). It removes the last BN-ReLU in the backbone
to reduce the learning burden of the model. Experimental results on four fine-grained image retrieval benchmarks show
that our proposed approach outperforms most existing approaches, i.e., our approach achieves 75.9% on CUB-2002011, 94.7% on CARS196 and 83.1% on SOP which outperforms other approaches at least 1.7%, 2.9% and 1.7% on
Recall@1.

Figure 1: Illustration of Softmax and our proposed SGSL.
SGSL and softmax share parameters, but there are three differences: 1) The value of γ. 2) The feature in SGSL is L2normlized. 3) We do not allow gradient update through Wj ,
which is identified as Ŵj . The derivation process and details
can be found in Section Method.

Introduction
Deep metric learning (DML) aims to learn a similarity metric, which can map samples to a high-dimensional space.
In the high-dimensional space, the samples of the same instance are closer, while the samples of different instances
are farther away. Typical deep metric learning applications
include image retrieval, person re-identification, etc. Popular methods of deep metric learning include pairwise based
methods and softmax based methods. Pairwise based methods focused on finding efficient ways to improve sample
weighting strategies over the existing pairwise losses, such
as contrastive loss and triplet loss. Pairwise based methods
directly affect the distance between point pairs in the embedded space, which is strongly related to the goal of DML.
Softmax based methods may seem unrelated to DML as it
does not explicitly involve pairwise distances at the surface.
Some methods such as (Movshovitz-Attias et al. 2017;
Wang et al. 2017a; Zhai and Wu 2019; Wang et al. 2018)

only use softmax loss to train the model which can achieve
good performance as well. In contrast to pairwise-based
methods, the softmax-based method can be viewed as approximating each class using a proxy (Movshovitz-Attias
et al. 2017), and uses all proxies to provide global context for each training iteration. Boudiaf et al. (Boudiaf et al.
2020) proves that optimizing the softmax-based method corresponds to an approximate bound-optimizer of an underlying pairwise loss, showing that minimizing the softmax loss
is equivalent to maximizing a discriminative view of the mutual information between the features and labels. In practice,
the inner product (last fully connection layer) without L2 normalization is the most widely used similarity measure
when training the softmax-based DML model, but the features are often L2 -normalized in the testing phase (Boudiaf
et al. 2020; He et al. 2020), that means the distance metric
used during training is different from that used in the testing
phase. In order to make up for this gap, a simple method is

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3164

