The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Spatial-Spectral Transformer for Hyperspectral Image Denoising
Miaoyu Li1 , Ying Fu1 * , Yulun Zhang2
1

Beijing Institute of Technology
2
ETH Zürich
{miaoyli, fuying}@bit.edu.cn, yulun100@gmail.com

Abstract

were used in (Renard, Bourennane, and Blanc-Talon 2008)
to extract spectral components and spatial information for
denoising. The parallel factor analysis model was employed
in (Liu, Bourennane, and Fossati 2012) to exploit the decomposition uniqueness and single rank character of HSIs. Lowrank prior (Chen et al. 2017; Chang et al. 2020), sparse representation (Zhuang and Bioucas-Dias 2018), and total variation regularization (Du et al. 2018) have also been widely
adopted to HSI denoising. Despite the various hand-crafted
priors, traditional model-based HSI denoising methods are
always hard to optimize and time-consuming.
With the development of deep learning, convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) based HSI denoising methods (Yuan et al. 2018; Chang et al. 2018; Dong et al. 2019;
Zhang et al. 2019; Shi et al. 2021) have shown distinguished
advantages over traditional HSI denoising methods. CNNbased methods rely on convolution filters to model the data
dependencies in spatial dimension and spectral dimension,
facing the trade-off between computational efficiency and
the ability to model the non-local similarity of HSIs. Besides, the learned convolution filters are with static weights,
which means the filters used for feature extraction are fixed
in the testing phase. The denoising process is based on the
knowledge learned from training dataset, but, the inner characteristics of the target HSI are not fully exploited.
Recently, Transformer models have been applied to vision tasks (Zhang et al. 2020; Carion et al. 2020; Dai
et al. 2021). Transformers apply the self-attention mechanism (Wang et al. 2018) across image regions and can well
capture the internal similarity of target image. According
to previous analysis (Cai et al. 2022; Zamir et al. 2022),
Transformer could be a powerful alternative to CNNs in HSI
denoising task. However, existing Transformer-based works
mainly aim at natural images with ignorance in spectral similarity. Since HSIs have strong spectral correlations, such neglect would negatively affect denoising results. A practical
way of employing Transformer to HSI denoising is applying
spectral-wise attention to well utilize spectral correlation.
In this work, we propose a Spatial-Spectral Transformer
to sufficiently explore the non-local spatial similarity and
global spectral correlation of HSIs. First, the spatial information of HSI is restored by the shifted window-based selfattention, which conducts a non-local spatial-wise coarse denoising beyond neighboring pixels. Secondly, the high cor-

Hyperspectral image (HSI) denoising is a crucial preprocessing procedure for the subsequent HSI applications. Unfortunately, though witnessing the development of deep learning in
HSI denoising area, existing convolution-based methods face
the trade-off between computational efficiency and capability to model non-local characteristics of HSI. In this paper,
we propose a Spatial-Spectral Transformer (SST) to alleviate
this problem. To fully explore intrinsic similarity characteristics in both spatial dimension and spectral dimension, we conduct non-local spatial self-attention and global spectral selfattention with Transformer architecture. The window-based
spatial self-attention focuses on the spatial similarity beyond
the neighboring region. While, the spectral self-attention exploits the long-range dependencies between highly correlative bands. Experimental results show that our proposed
method outperforms the state-of-the-art HSI denoising methods in quantitative quality and visual results. The code is released at https://github.com/MyuLi/SST.

Introduction
Hyperspectral images (HSIs) provide abundant information
in spectral dimension and have been widely applied to the
fields of remote sensing (Cloutis 1996), material recognition (Thai and Healey 2002), agriculture (Kersting et al.
2012), medical diagnosis (Fei 2020) and so on. However,
in the sensing process, due to limited light, photon effects,
and atmospheric interference, HSIs often suffer from corruption and noise, which negatively influences the subsequent
HSI applications. Therefore, HSI denoising is a critical preprocessing procedure to enhance image quality for the aforementioned high-level computer vision tasks.
Compared to color images, HSIs offer pixel-level spectral features by imaging narrow spectral bands over a continuous spectral range. It means there are statistical similarities between bands. Early denoising works, such as dictionary learning method (Elad and Aharon 2006), and BM3D
(Dabov et al. 2007), focused on the non-local similarity in
spatial dimension but did not take the spectral features into
account. Thus, more HSI denoising works exploit both the
spatial similarity and spectral correlation. Multilinear tools
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1368

