The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Structural Complexity Analysis of Synchronous Dynamical Systems
Eduard Eiben1 , Robert Ganian2 , Thekla Hamm3 , Viktoriia Korchemna2
1

Department of Computer Science, Royal Holloway, University of London, UK
2
Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Austria
3
Utrecht University, Netherlands
Eduard.Eiben@rhul.ac.uk, {rganian, vkorchemna}@ac.wien.ac.at, t.l.s.hamm@uu.nl

to v (i.e., the closed in-neighborhood of v). In line with recent works (Rosenkrantz et al. 2021; Chistikov et al. 2020),
here we focus our attention to the Boolean-domain case with
deterministic functions, which is already sufficiently rich to
model a variety of situations. SyDS with Boolean domains
are sometimes also called synchronous Boolean networks,
especially in the context of systems biology (Ogihara and
Uchizawa 2020; Akutsu et al. 2007; Kauffman et al. 2003).
A central notion in the context of SyDS is that of a configuration, which is a tuple specifying the state of each
node at a certain time step. In several use cases of SyDS,
there are clearly identifiable configurations that are either
highly desirable (e.g., when dealing with information propagation), or highly undesirable (when modeling the spread
of a disease or computer virus). Indeed, the R EACHABIL ITY problem (Rosenkrantz et al. 2021)—deciding whether a
given target configuration will be reached from a given starting configuration—is a classical computational problem on
SyDS (Ogihara and Uchizawa 2017; Akutsu et al. 2007).
In other settings such as in opinion diffusion (Auletta,
Ferraioli, and Greco 2018; Auletta et al. 2017), we do not
ask for the reachability of a specific configuration, but rather
whether the system eventually converges into a fixed point,
i.e., a configuration that transitions into itself. This idea has
led to the study of two different problems on SyDS (Chistikov et al. 2020): in C ONVERGENCE we ask whether the
system converges (to an arbitrary fixed point) from a given
starting configuration, while in C ONVERGENCE G UARAN TEE we ask for a much stronger property—notably, whether
the system converges from all possible configurations.
In view of the fundamental nature of these three problems,
it is somewhat surprising that so little is known about their
complexity. The PSPACE-completeness of C ONVERGENCE
and C ONVERGENCE G UARANTEE has been established
two years ago (Chistikov et al. 2020), while the PSPACEcompleteness of R EACHABILITY on directed acyclic networks was established even more recently (Rosenkrantz
et al. 2021). Earlier, Barrett et al. (Barrett et al. 2006) established the PSPACE-completeness of R EACHABILITY on
general directed networks of bounded treewidth and degree,
albeit the bounds obtained in that work are very large. In
spite of these advances, we still lack a detailed understanding of the complexity of fundamental problems on SyDS.
Contribution. Since R EACHABILITY, C ONVERGENCE

Abstract
Synchronous dynamic systems are well-established models
that have been used to capture a range of phenomena in networks, including opinion diffusion, spread of disease and
product adoption. We study the three most notable problems
in synchronous dynamic systems: whether the system will
transition to a target configuration from a starting configuration, whether the system will reach convergence from a starting configuration, and whether the system is guaranteed to
converge from every possible starting configuration. While
all three problems were known to be intractable in the classical sense, we initiate the study of their exact boundaries of
tractability from the perspective of structural parameters of
the network by making use of the more fine-grained parameterized complexity paradigm.
As our first result, we consider treewidth—as the most prominent and ubiquitous structural parameter—and show that
all three problems remain intractable even on instances of
constant treewidth. We complement this negative finding
with fixed-parameter algorithms for the former two problems parameterized by treedepth, a well-studied restriction of
treewidth. While it is possible to rule out a similar algorithm
for convergence guarantee under treedepth, we conclude with
a fixed-parameter algorithm for this last problem when parameterized by treedepth and the maximum in-degree.

Introduction
Synchronous dynamic systems are a well-studied model
used to capture a range of diffusion phenomena in networks (Rosenkrantz et al. 2021; Chistikov et al. 2020). Such
systems have been used, e.g., in the context of social contagions (e.g., the spread of information, opinions, fads, epidemics) as well as product adoption (Adiga et al. 2019;
Gupta et al. 2018a; Ogihara and Uchizawa 2017).
Informally, a synchronous dynamic system (SyDS) consists of a directed graph G (representing an underlying network) with each node v having a local function fv and containing a state value from a domain B, which may evolve
over discrete time steps1 . While each node v begins with an
initial state value at time 0, at each subsequent time step it
receives an updated value by invoking the node’s local function fv on the state value of v and of all nodes with arcs
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Formal definitions are provided in the Preliminaries.

6313

