The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Continual Learning with Scaled Gradient Projection
Gobinda Saha, Kaushik Roy
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
gsaha@purdue.edu, kaushik@purdue.edu

Abstract

Ebrahimi et al. 2020; Saha et al. 2021a; Kao et al. 2021)
achieves this goal by penalizing or preventing changes to the
most important weights of the model for the past tasks while
learning new tasks. Other works minimize forgetting by either storing samples from old tasks in the memory (Robins
1995; Lopez-Paz and Ranzato 2017; Chaudhry et al. 2019b,
2021; Saha and Roy 2023) or synthesizing old data by generative models (Shin et al. 2017) for rehearsal. Despite varying
degrees of success, the stability-plasticity balance in such
methods breaks down under long sequence of learning. Recently, gradient projection methods (Zeng et al. 2019; Farajtabar et al. 2020; Saha et al. 2021b; Wang et al. 2021; Guo et
al. 2022) have shown superior performance to the other approaches. These methods minimize forgetting by minimizing gradient interference among tasks where new tasks are
learned in the orthogonal gradient directions or spaces of
the old tasks. Despite their remarkable stability (nearly zero
forgetting) on the old tasks, performance of new tasks may
suffer due to such restrictive gradient updates. To facilitate
new learning, orthogonal gradient update is complemented
with task similarity-based weight scaling (Lin et al. 2022)
and dynamic gradient scaling (Deng et al. 2021). However,
these approaches either add significant training overheads or
require old data storage, raising privacy concerns.

In neural networks, continual learning results in gradient interference among sequential tasks, leading to catastrophic
forgetting of old tasks while learning new ones. This issue is
addressed in recent methods by storing the important gradient spaces for old tasks and updating the model orthogonally
during new tasks. However, such restrictive orthogonal gradient updates hamper the learning capability of the new tasks
resulting in sub-optimal performance. To improve new learning while minimizing forgetting, in this paper we propose a
Scaled Gradient Projection (SGP) method, where we combine the orthogonal gradient projections with scaled gradient
steps along the important gradient spaces for the past tasks.
The degree of gradient scaling along these spaces depends on
the importance of the bases spanning them. We propose an
efficient method for computing and accumulating importance
of these bases using the singular value decomposition of the
input representations for each task. We conduct extensive experiments ranging from continual image classification to reinforcement learning tasks and report better performance with
less training overhead than the state-of-the-art approaches.
Code available at https://github.com/sahagobinda/sgp.

Introduction
Continual learning (CL) (Ring 1998; Thrun and Mitchell
1995) aims to endue artificial intelligent (AI) systems with
human-like adaptation capability in dynamically changing
environments. In this learning paradigm, an AI model, commonly a deep neural network (DNN), learns from a sequence
of tasks over time with the aim of accumulating and maintaining past knowledge and transferring it to future tasks.
This objective is hard to achieve since standard optimization
methods for training DNNs overwrite the parametric representations of past tasks with new input representations during model update (Hadsell et al. 2020). This leads to ‘Catastrophic Forgetting’ (Mccloskey and Cohen 1989; Ratcliff
1990) where performance of the past tasks degrades drastically, making continual learning a challenging problem.
Many continual learning approaches for fixed capacity
DNNs have been proposed that aim to balance two competing objectives: maintaining stability of past knowledge
while providing sufficient plasticity for new learning. One
line of works (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; Schwarz et al. 2018;

In this paper, we propose a new method - Scaled Gradient
Projection (SGP) for continual learning that improves performance of the new task, while minimizing forgetting of
the past tasks. Utilizing the framework introduced by Saha
et al. (2021b), we find the bases of the core (important) gradient spaces (CGS) for the past tasks by Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of the input activations and store them in
the memory. From the singular value distributions, we propose an efficient method for finding the (relative) importance
of each basis of CGS. For each new task, we decompose the
gradients into two components (Figure 1(a)) - one is along
the past CGS and another is in the orthogonal direction to the
CGS. In our method, the orthogonal gradient component is
kept without modification and combined with a scaled version of the gradient component along the CGS. The degree
of gradient scaling along each CGS basis is determined by
importance of each basis stored in the memory. With this resultant gradient, the model is updated to achieve the CL objective. We evaluate our method in directly comparable settings on image classification datasets (CIFAR-100 and mini-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9677

