The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Low Emission Building Control with
Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
Scott Jeen13 , Alessandro Abate23 , Jonathan M. Cullen1
1

University of Cambridge
2
University of Oxford
3
Alan Turing Institute
{srj38, jmc99}@cam.ac.uk & alessandro.abate@cs.ox.ac.uk
Abstract

Morari 2017), RL’s strength is in obtaining polices tabula
rasa, and updating their parameters online as the environment
evolves. Recent successes in complex physics tasks (Lillicrap et al. 2016), gaming (Silver et al. 2017), and robotics
(Gu et al. 2017) have highlighted these characteristics. With
this generality, one can imagine RL agents being placed in
any energy-intensive setting, and feasibly learning to control
them more efficiently, minimising emissions.
Recent applications of RL to building control have indeed
shown marked energy efficiency improvements over conventional controllers. Chen et al. (2018) used Q-learning to
control HVAC and window actuation in a residential building with 23% less energy than the existing RBC. Similarly,
Zhang et al. (2019b) used Asynchornous Advantage Actor
Critic (A3C) to reduce heating demand in a real office building by 16.7%. However, these contributions are limited by
their deployment paradigm, which is:

Heating and cooling systems in buildings account for 31%
of global energy use, much of which are regulated by Rule
Based Controllers (RBCs) that neither maximise energy efficiency nor minimise emissions by interacting optimally
with the grid. Control via Reinforcement Learning (RL)
has been shown to significantly improve building energy efficiency, but existing solutions require access to buildingspecific simulators or data that cannot be expected for every building in the world. In response, we show it is possible to obtain emission-reducing policies without such knowledge a priori – a paradigm we call zero-shot building control. We combine ideas from system identification and modelbased RL to create PEARL (Probabilistic Emission-Abating
Reinforcement Learning) and show that a short period of
active exploration is all that is required to build a performant model. In experiments across three varied building energy simulations, we show PEARL outperforms an existing
RBC once, and popular RL baselines in all cases, reducing
building emissions by as much as 31% whilst maintaining
thermal comfort. Our source code is available online via
https://enjeeneer.io/projects/pearl/.

1

Introduction

Heating and cooling systems in buildings account for 31% of
global energy use, primarily in managing occupant thermal
comfort and hygiene (Cullen and Allwood 2010). Such systems are usually regulated by rule-based controllers (RBCs)
that take system temperature as input, use a temperature setpoint as an objective, and actuate equipment to minimise the
error between objective and current state. Whilst usefully
simple, RBCs do not maximise energy efficiency, nor can
they perform demand response: the manipulation of power
consumption to better match demand with supply. New techniques that demonstrate this capability across generalised settings would prove valuable climate change mitigation tools.
An option for obtaining control polices across complex, unknown settings is Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton and
Barto 2018). Where existing advanced control techniques,
like the receding-horizon architecture Model Predictive Control (MPC), require the specification of a dynamical model
that can be expensive to obtain (Borrelli, Bemporad, and
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14259

1. Simulate the real-world environment’s transition dynamics p(st+1 |st , at ) using a physics-based/generative
model;
2. Pre-train the agent by sampling the simulator sequentially and updating parameters until convergence; and
3. Deploy the pre-trained agent in the real-world environment.
We contend that the need to simulate the environment a priori
limits real-world scalability. In the context of building control,
creating an accurate simulator in EnergyPlus (Crawley et al.
2001), the favoured software, can take an expert months, and
is impossible without knowledge of the building topology
and thermal parameters. An alternative, is to deploy agents
in the real environment without pre-training, granting them
a short commissioning period of 3 hours to collect data and
model the state-action space (Lazic et al. 2018). We call this
zero-shot building control after Socher et al. (2013)’s use
for out-of-distribution image classification. Zero-shot control
could scale to any building given sufficient sensor installation,
but Lazic et al. (2018)’s agent only improved cooling costs by
9%, poorer performance than the agents trained in simulation.
To maximise the emission-abating potential of RL building
control, we need new systems that can elicit the performance
of pre-trained agents whilst being deployed zero-shot.
In this paper, our primary contribution is showing that
deep reinforcement learning algorithms can find performant

