The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Graphs, Constraints, and Search for the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus
Yudong Xu1 , Elias B. Khalil1, 2 , Scott Sanner1
1

2

Department of Mechanical & Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto
Scale AI Research Chair in Data-Driven Algorithms for Modern Supply Chains
wil.xu@mail.utoronto.ca, khalil@mie.utoronto.ca, ssanner@mie.utoronto.ca

Abstract
The Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC) aims at benchmarking the performance of general artificial intelligence algorithms. The ARC’s focus on broad generalization and fewshot learning has made it difficult to solve using pure machine
learning. A more promising approach has been to perform
program synthesis within an appropriately designed Domain
Specific Language (DSL). However, these too have seen limited success. We propose Abstract Reasoning with Graph Abstractions (ARGA), a new object-centric framework that first
represents images using graphs and then performs a search
for a correct program in a DSL that is based on the abstracted
graph space. The complexity of this combinatorial search is
tamed through the use of constraint acquisition, state hashing, and Tabu search. An extensive set of experiments demonstrates the promise of ARGA in tackling some of the complicated object-centric tasks of the ARC rather efficiently, producing programs that are correct and easy to understand.

Figure 1: Sample ARC Tasks. Three tasks (each two consecutive columns) are shown. For a given task, each row
contains one example input-output pair. The top three rows
contain the “training” instances and the bottom row contains
the “test” instance. The goal is to use the training instances
to solve the test instance. The left task (“object recoloring”)
requires recoloring the size-6 grey objects to red and other
grey objects to blue. The middle task (“object movement”)
requires moving the red columns up until they hit the blue
object. The right task (“object augmentation”) requires extending the size-1 objects directly above, below or to the
sides of the green object towards it until they make contact.

Introduction
In an attempt to better measure the gap between machine
and human learning, the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC) was created by Chollet in 2019. The dataset is a
collection of 1000 image-based reasoning tasks, where each
task asks for an output image given an input. To “learn” a
procedure that produces said output, each task comes with
2–5 input-output image pairs as training instances; these
training inputs are different from the actual test input, but
can be solved by the same (unknown) procedure. Some examples are shown in Figure 1. A competition with over
900 teams was hosted on Kaggle to solve the ARC (Kaggle
2020). Despite a massive effort, the solutions only achieved
20% accuracy on the hidden test set, at best. In fact, the
first-place solution could not solve two of the three examples shown in Figure 1 despite their simplicity to a human.
Recognizing objects, actions performed on them, and relationships between them makes up a large portion of human cognition core systems (Spelke and Kinzler 2007). The
ARC embodies this notion in its tasks. In fact, Acquaviva
et al. (2021) found that when humans attempt to solve ARC
tasks through language, half of the phrases they use relate
to object detection. Therefore, an object-centric approach to

solving the ARC is highly promising. Surprisingly, this key
insight is yet to be leveraged.

Abstract Reasoning with Graph Abstractions
Toward this goal, we propose Abstract Reasoning with
Graph Abstractions (ARGA), an object-centric framework
for solving ARC tasks. Our design rationale is to build
a computationally efficient, extensible, object-aware ARC
solver through careful integration of the following:
– Representation: Enabling object awareness requires a
move from treating the input as pixels towards a graph
of objects with spatial or other relations. We design a variety of such graph abstractions to cater to the diversity
of the ARC and its different definitions of objects.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4115

