The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FakeSV: A Multimodal Benchmark with Rich Social Context
for Fake News Detection on Short Video Platforms
Peng Qi1,2 , Yuyan Bu1,2 , Juan Cao1,2 * , Wei Ji3 , Ruihao Shui3 ,
Junbin Xiao3 , Danding Wang1 , Tat-Seng Chua3
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
National University of Singapore
{qipeng,caojuan,wangdanding}@ict.ac.cn, buyuyan22@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
{jiwei,dcscts}@nus.edu.sg, ruihaoshui@u.nus.edu, junbin@comp.nus.edu.sg
Abstract

Short video platforms have become an important channel for
news sharing, but also a new breeding ground for fake news.
To mitigate this problem, research of fake news video detection has recently received a lot of attention. Existing works
face two roadblocks: the scarcity of comprehensive and largescale datasets and insufficient utilization of multimodal information. Therefore, in this paper, we construct the largest
Chinese short video dataset about fake news named FakeSV,
which includes news content, user comments, and publisher
profiles simultaneously. To understand the characteristics of
fake news videos, we conduct exploratory analysis of FakeSV
from different perspectives. Moreover, we provide a new multimodal detection model named SV-FEND, which exploits
the cross-modal correlations to select the most informative
features and utilizes the social context information for detection. Extensive experiments evaluate the superiority of the
proposed method and provide detailed comparisons of different methods and modalities for future works. Our dataset and
codes are available in https://github.com/ICTMCG/FakeSV.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Typical cases of fake news videos. Figure (a)
shows a fake news video of which the content of some
frames have been tampered. The spliced region is marked
in red line. (b) shows a fake news video that is contextually
inappropriate, where the comments provide key clues.
detect fake news. Second, different from traditional video
platforms such as YouTube, short video platforms provide
advanced video-editing functions (e.g., text box and virtual
background) for users to conveniently modify the videos. It
weakens the discriminability of the visual content in measuring its truthfulness as both fake and real news videos could
be modified and exhibit editing traces. Moreover, fake news
videos typically contain real news videos where only some
frames or the accompanying titles have been maliciously
modified to alter their meanings (as shown in Figure 1). All
these characteristics make it inadequate to study fake news
videos from news content only. Thus, we need to explore
auxiliary social context information, such as user comments
(Shu et al. 2019a) (as shown in Figure 1(b)) and user profiles
(Shu, Wang, and Liu 2018), to help the detection.
Most works studying fake news focus on text-based or
text-image fake news, while few works pay attention to
video-form fake news. There are two major limitations
of existing works: 1) Dataset: Although there are several
datasets for fake news video detection, the majority of them
are constructed on traditional video platforms and contain
only a few hundred instances, and none of them provides information on news content, user comments, and user profiles
simultaneously. Further, the lack of comprehensive datasets

Introduction
With the prevalence of short video platforms (e.g., Tiktok),
they have become an important channel for news sharing
(Walker and Matsa 2021). Besides professional news outlets,
ordinary users also upload news videos happening around
them. However, this openness have led to such platforms becoming a new breeding ground for fake news. Video modality is more powerful in spreading fake news than other
modalities, and thus will exacerbate the influences of fake
news (Sundar, Molina, and Cho 2021). Therefore, studying
video-form fake news is important for detecting and intervening the spread of fake news in a timely manner.
Fake news videos refer to those that the video content and
title jointly describe a piece of news that is verifiably false.
Compared with traditional text-based or text-image fake
news detection, fake news video detection presents unique
challenges: First, video-form fake news has more modalities and thus more information. We need to select the most
informative clues from multiple modalities and fuse heterogeneous information to understand the news content and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14444

