The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Adversarial Self-Attention for Language Understanding
Hongqiu Wu1,2 , Ruixue Ding4 , Hai Zhao1,2,* , Pengjun Xie4 , Fei Huang4 , Min Zhang3
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction
and Cognitive Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University
4
Damo Academy, Alibaba Group
wuhongqiu@sjtu.edu.cn, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn,
{ada.drx,chengchen.xpj,f.huang}@alibaba-inc.com, minzhang@suda.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural models (e.g. Transformer) naturally learn spurious features, which create a “shortcut” between the labels and
inputs, thus impairing the generalization and robustness. This
paper advances the self-attention mechanism to its robust
variant for Transformer-based pre-trained language models
(e.g. BERT). We propose Adversarial Self-Attention mechanism (ASA), which adversarially biases the attentions to effectively suppress the model reliance on features (e.g. specific
keywords) and encourage its exploration of broader semantics. We conduct a comprehensive evaluation across a wide
range of tasks for both pre-training and fine-tuning stages.
For pre-training, ASA unfolds remarkable performance gains
compared to naive training for longer steps. For fine-tuning,
ASA-empowered models outweigh naive models by a large
margin considering both generalization and robustness.

smile
(a) SA

smile
(b) ASA

Figure 1: Empirical attention maps from SA and ASA of the
first BERT layer. The text is a smile on your face from SST2 dataset. The sum of horizontal scores is equal to 1. We
highlight some units receiving strong attention diversions.

Introduction
vastava, Hashimoto, and Liang 2020). It is harmful for generalizing on test data if the model learns to attend to spurious
tokens. Priorly keeping the model form them can hopefully
address this. However, crafting priorities is limited to taskspecific knowledge and by no means lets the model training
be an end-to-end process, whereas generating and storing
that knowledge can be even more troublesome.
The idea of ASA is to adversarially bias the self-attention
to effectively suppress the model reliance on specific features (e.g. keywords). The biased structures can be learned
by maximizing the empirical training risk, which automates the process of crafting specific prior knowledge. Additionally, those biased structures are derived from the input data itself, which sets ASA apart from conventional
adversarial training. It is a kind of Meta-Learning (Thrun
and Pratt 1998). The learned structures serve as the “metaknowledge” that facilitates the self-attention process.
We showcase a concrete example in Figure 1. For the
word on, it never attends to smile after being attacked in
ASA but strongly attends to your. It can be found that smile
serves as a keyword within the whole sentence, suggesting
a positive emotion. The model can predict the right answer
based on this single word even without knowing the others.

The emerging pre-trained language models (PrLMs) like
BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) have become the backbone of
nowadays natural language processing (NLP) systems. It
seems to reach the bottleneck in the recent NLP community. This paper rethinks the dilemma from the perspective of
self-attention mechanism (SA) (Vaswani et al. 2017), which
is broadly chosen as the fundamental architecture of PrLMs
and proposes Adversarial Self-Attention (ASA)1 .
A large body of empirical evidence (Shi et al. 2021; You,
Sun, and Iyyer 2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Wu, Zhao, and
Zhang 2021a) indicates that self-attention can benefit from
allowing bias, where researchers impose certain priorities
(e.g. masking, smoothing) on the original attention structure
to compel the model to pay attention to those “proper” tokens. We attribute such phenomena to the nature of deep
neural models, which lean to exploit the potential correlations between inputs and labels, even spurious features (Sri* Corresponding author; This paper was partially supported by
Key Projects of National Natural Science Foundation of China
(U1836222 and 61733011).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/gingasan/adversarialSA

13727

