The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Persuasion Strategies in Advertisements
Yaman Kumar* 1,2,3 , Rajat Jha1 , Arunim Gupta1 , Milan Aggarwal2 ,
Aditya Garg1 , Tushar Malyan1 , Ayush Bhardwaj1 ,
Rajiv Ratn Shah1 , Balaji Krishnamurthy2 , and Changyou Chen3
1

2

IIIT-Delhi,
Adobe Media and Data Science Research (MDSR),
3
University at Buffalo

Abstract
Modeling what makes an advertisement persuasive, i.e., eliciting the desired response from consumer, is critical to the
study of propaganda, social psychology, and marketing. Despite its importance, computational modeling of persuasion
in computer vision is still in its infancy, primarily due to
the lack of benchmark datasets that can provide persuasionstrategy labels associated with ads. Motivated by persuasion literature in social psychology and marketing, we introduce an extensive vocabulary of persuasion strategies and
build the first ad image corpus annotated with persuasion
strategies. We then formulate the task of persuasion strategy prediction with multi-modal learning, where we design
a multi-task attention fusion model that can leverage other
ad-understanding tasks to predict persuasion strategies. The
dataset also provides image segmentation masks, which labels persuasion strategies in the corresponding ad images on
the test split. We publicly release our code and dataset at
https://midas-research.github.io/persuasion-advertisements/.

1

Reciprocity +
Scarcity

Social Identity

Fashionable

Concreteness + Emotion
(Feminine)

Emotion(Active)

Anchoring &
Comparison

Figure 1: Different persuasion strategies are used for marketing the same product (footwear in this example). The strategies are in red words and to be defined by us in the paper.

recognizing and understanding persuasion strategies in ad
campaigns is vitally important to decipher viral marketing
campaigns, propaganda, and enable ad-recommendation.
Studying rhetorics of this form of communication is an essential part of understanding visual communication in marketing. Aristotle, in his seminal work on rhetoric, underlining the importance of persuasion, equated studying rhetorics
with the study of persuasion2 (Rapp 2008). While persuasion is studied extensively in social science fields, including marketing (Meyers-Levy and Malaviya 1999; Keller,
Lipkus, and Rimer 2003) and psychology (Hovland, Janis,
and Kelley 1953; Petty and Cacioppo 1986), computational
modeling of persuasion in computer vision is still in its infancy, primarily due to the lack of benchmark datasets that
can provide representative corpus to facilitate this line of
research. In the limited work that has happened on persuasion in computer vision, researchers have tried to address the
question of which image is more persuasive (Bai et al. 2021)
or extracted low-level features (such as emotion, gestures,
and facial displays), which indirectly help in identifying persuasion strategies without explicitly extracting the strategies
themselves (Joo et al. 2014). On the other hand, decoding

Introduction

Marketing communications is the mode by which companies and governments inform, remind, and persuade their
consumers about the products they sell. They are the primary means of connecting brand with consumers through
which the consumer can know what the product is about,
what it stands for, who makes it, and can be motivated to try
it out. To introduce meaning into their communication, marketers use various rhetorical devices in the form of persuasion strategies such as emotions (e.g., Oreo’s “Celebrate the
Kid Inside”, humor by showing Ronald McDonald sneaking into the competitor Burger King’s store to buy a burger),
reasoning (e.g., “One glass of Florida orange juice contains
75% of your daily vitamin C needs”), social identity (e.g.,
Old Spice’s “Smell like a Man”), and impact (e.g., Airbnb
showing a mother with her child with the headline “My
home is funding her future”)1 . Similarly, even for marketing
the same product, marketers use different persuasion strategies to target different demographies (see Fig. 1). Therefore,
* Contact Email: yamank@iiitd.ac.in, ykumar@adobe.com
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Refer Appendix:Fig:1 for seeing these ads. Our Appendix is
available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.09626

2

“Rhetoric may be defined as the faculty of discovering in any
particular case all of the available means of persuasion” (Rapp
2008)

57

