The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Safe Interval Path Planning with Kinodynamic Constraints
Zain Alabedeen Ali1 , Konstatin Yakovlev2, 3
2

1
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Moscow, Russia
Federal Research Center for Computer Science and Control of Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
3
AIRI, Moscow, Russia
ali.za@phystech.edu, yakovlev@isa.ru

Abstract

C

Safe Interval Path Planning (SIPP) is a powerful algorithm for
solving a single-agent pathfinding problem where the agent
is confined to a graph and certain vertices/edges of this graph
are blocked at certain time intervals due to dynamic obstacles
that populate the environment. The original SIPP algorithm
relies on the assumption that the agent is able to stop instantaneously. However, this assumption often does not hold
in practice, e.g. a mobile robot moving at a cruising speed
cannot stop immediately but rather requires gradual deceleration to a full stop that takes time. In other words, the robot
is subject to kinodynamic constraints. Unfortunately, as we
show in this work, in such a case, the original SIPP is incomplete. To this end, we introduce a novel variant of SIPP that
is provably complete and optimal for planning with acceleration/deceleration. In the experimental evaluation, we show
that the key property of the original SIPP still holds for the
modified version: it performs much fewer expansions compared to A* and, as a result, is notably faster.

B
A

t0 = 12

Time(s)

..
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

t0 = 6
v=1

Introduction

0

1

2

3

4

5

Distance (m)

6

7

8

9

Figure 1: An example of the challenging path planning instance with dynamic obstacles.

Planning a path in the presence of both static and moving
obstacles is a challenging problem with topical applications
in robotics, video games, and other domains. When the environment is fully observable and the trajectories of the dynamic obstacles are known (e.g., are predicted by the robot’s
perception system or by a global observer), it is reasonable
to account for them while planning. A prominent method
that is tailored for such a setting is Safe Interval Path Planning (SIPP) (Phillips and Likhachev 2011). This is a searchbased algorithm that operates on a graph where vertices correspond to the configurations of the agent (e.g., position,
heading, velocity, etc.) and edges correspond to the transitions between them. Due to the dynamic obstacles, certain
vertices/edges of this graph are blocked at certain time intervals. SIPP accounts for that and constructs plans in which an
agent can wait at the vertices to avoid collisions. An explicit
assumption of SIPP is that the agent can start/stop moving instantaneously. Under this assumption, the algorithm is
provably complete and optimal (w.r.t. the given spatial and
temporal discretization).

In our work, we adopt an assumption (more realistic from
the practical perspective) that decelerating to a full stop and,
similarly, accelerating from the full stop takes time. In other
words, the agent is subject to kinodynamic constraints. This
makes SIPP inapplicable as shown in Fig. 1. In this example, the environment is discretized to the 3 × 10 grid,
where the distance between the centers of the grid cells is
1 m, and the agent has to go from the leftmost cell B0 to
the rightmost one B9. Moreover, two dynamic obstacles are
present in the environment that block cells B5 and B7 during the intervals shown in black in the bottom part of the
figure. Assume that the agent’s cruising speed is 1 m s−1 . At
this speed, it takes 1 s to move between the cells. Furthermore, the maximum acceleration/deceleration of the agent
is 0.5 m s−2 , which means that accelerating to the cruising
speed from the full stop takes 2 s and 1 m. Therefore, when
starting to move from the full stop, the agent will arrive at
the neighboring cell not in 1 s, but rather in 2 s. If the algorithm ignores that, like the original SIPP, which assumes

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12330

