The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Automated Modeling Assistance:
An Efficient Approach for Repairing Flawed Planning Domains
Songtuan Lin, Alban Grastien, Pascal Bercher
School of Computing, The Australian National University
songtuan.lin@anu.edu.au, alban.grastien@anu.edu.au, pascal.bercher@anu.edu.au

Abstract

(and thus repair the domain). However, we did not provide
any insight into how this can be done in practice there, and
neither negative preconditions nor results for lifted models
were considered, both of which are essential for modeling
assistance in practice.
In this paper, we present an approach for repairing flawed
classical planning domains. Concretely, given a (flawed) domain and a plan that is known to be valid but contradict the
domain, our approach finds a cardinality-minimal set of repairs to the domain that turns the plan into a solution. This
scenario stems from how programmers debug their code,
namely by providing test cases that shall be passed. In our
context, the given plan serves as a test case, which is usually
known by a domain modeler in advance (or can be easily obtained/designed), and the proposed repairs are potential corrections to the domain. The domain modeler can judge the
repairs and rule out implausible ones. This process can be
done iteratively until all satisfactory repairs are found. We
thus believe that addressing this scenario will significantly
benefit domain modelers in debugging their models. In the
long run, we hope that we can integrate our approach into the
editor Planning.Domain to make planning more accessible.
Our approach is based on finding hitting sets. This aligns
with our earlier theoretical results(Lin and Bercher 2021)
that the problem is NP-complete, as finding a (minimal)
hitting set is also NP-complete. Further, we only proved
those results for the restricted case of being grounded and
not having negative preconditions. Here, we consider repairing not only grounded domains, but lifted ones with negative
preconditions, making the approach more practical.

Designing a planning domain is a difficult task in AI planning. Assisting tools are thus required if we want planning
to be used more broadly. In this paper, we are interested in
automatically correcting a flawed domain. In particular, we
are concerned with the scenario where a domain contradicts
a plan that is known to be valid. Our goal is to repair the domain so as to turn the plan into a solution. Specifically, we
consider both grounded and lifted representations support for
negative preconditions and show how to explore the space of
repairs to find the optimal one efficiently. As an evidence of
the efficiency of our approach, the experiment results show
that all flawed domains except one in the benchmark set can
be repaired optimally by our approach within one second.

Introduction
One major obstacle for planning techniques being used more
broadly, particularly outside academia, is the fact that modeling a planning domain is a non-trivial task (McCluskey,
Vaquero, and Vallati 2017). As an evidence of this, the competition on modeling domains, the International Competition on Knowledge Engineering for Planning and Scheduling (ICKEPS), has been held for many years.
Tools are thus developed for modeling assistance, e.g., the
successful online PDDL editor Planning.Domains (Muise
2016), itSIMPLE (Vaquero et al. 2012), MyPDDL (Strobel
and Kirsch 2020), and the Visual Studio Code plugin for
PDDL (see the work by Haslum et al. (2019) for more details about PDDL). Many of those tools provide a rich range
of features for assisting writing domain models, e.g., syntax
highlighting and auto-completion, whereas only few of they
provide advanced support. We will have a detailed review of
related works at the end of this paper.
As another contribution to modeling assistance, we revisit
the scenario studied in our previous work (Lin and Bercher
2021) of correcting flawed domains by giving plans known
to be valid. We studied the scenario in the context of both
hierarchical and non-hierarchical planning (Bercher, Alford,
and Höller 2019; Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2004). For the
latter, we investigated the complexity of checking whether
a certain number of changes to actions (alter their preconditions and effects) is able to turn the given plan into a solution

Preliminaries
We start by reviewing the fundamental mathematical notion,
called the set theoretical duality explored by Slaney (2014),
which we will exploit to solve the domain repair problem.
Let Σ be a universal set and ∆ a set of sets such that each
set δ ∈ ∆ satisfies a certain property ρ and δ ∈ 2Σ . The
dual set Θ of ∆ is defined as the set of all sets θ such that
the complement set of θ is not in ∆ (i.e., Σ\θ ∈
/ ∆), namely,
the complement set of θ does not satisfy the property ρ.
A set (of sets) ∆ together with its dual set Θ has many
nice properties. Among these properties, the most important
one which we are interested in is that if ∆ is monotonic (i.e.,
if δ ∈ ∆, then any δ ′ ⊇ δ is also in ∆), every set δ ∈ ∆ is a

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12022

