The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Locate Then Generate: Bridging Vision and Language with Bounding Box for
Scene-Text VQA
Yongxin Zhu1,3 , Zhen Liu2,3 , Yukang Liang2,3 , Xin Li4 , Hao Liu4 , Changcun Bao4 , Linli Xu2,3
1
School of Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
3
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
4
Tencent YouTu Lab
{zyx2016, liuzhenz, liangyukang}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {fujikoli, ivanhliu, changcunbao}@tencent.com, linlixu@ustc.edu.cn
2

(a)

Q: what number is on the black
and white sign?
OCR list: ['to', 'interstate', '15',
'to', '201', 'theu', 'garlicburger',
'89']
Answer: 201

(b)

Q: what country in on the coin?
OCR list: ['of', 'america', 'states',
'tenham', 'epluribus', 'unum',
'half', 'dollar', '3/4', '92.',
‘9999', 'fins', 'gold']
Answer: united states of america

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel multi-modal framework for
Scene Text Visual Question Answering (STVQA), which requires models to read scene text in images for question answering. Apart from text or visual objects, which could exist independently, scene text naturally links text and visual
modalities together by conveying linguistic semantics while
being a visual object in an image simultaneously. Different
to conventional STVQA models which take the linguistic semantics and visual semantics in scene text as two separate
features, in this paper, we propose a paradigm of “Locate
Then Generate” (LTG), which explicitly unifies this two semantics with the spatial bounding box as a bridge connecting
them. Specifically, at first, LTG locates the region in an image
that may contain the answer words with an answer location
module (ALM) consisting of a region proposal network and a
language refinement network, both of which can transform to
each other with one-to-one mapping via the scene text bounding box. Next, given the answer words selected by ALM, LTG
generates a readable answer sequence with an answer generation module (AGM) based on a pre-trained language model.
As a benefit of the explicit alignment of the visual and linguistic semantics, even without any scene text based pre-training
tasks, LTG can boost the absolute accuracy by +6.06% and
+6.92% on the TextVQA dataset and the ST-VQA dataset
respectively, compared with a non-pre-training baseline. We
further demonstrate that LTG effectively unifies visual and
text modalities through the spatial bounding box connection,
which is underappreciated in previous methods.

Figure 1: Examples in the TextVQA dataset (Singh et al.
2019). (a) The question requires models to consider linguistic semantics and visual semantics simultaneously. (b) Scene
text recognition mistakes in the STVQA task.

have shown their effectiveness in learning task-agnostic
vision-language joint representations, most of them focus on
vision-language understanding tasks such as image-text retrieval (Young et al. 2014), visual question answering (Antol
et al. 2015), visual grounding (Kazemzadeh et al. 2014), etc.,
which ignore scene text in images. As a consequence, they
are not capable of handling scene text based VL tasks (Singh
et al. 2019).
Recently, several methods (Hu et al. 2020; Yang et al.
2021; Biten et al. 2022) have been proposed to augment
visual-language models with the ability to read texts in images. They improve the models’ performance by relying
on powerful attention mechanisms and elaborately designed
features of scene text. Among them, M4C (Hu et al. 2020)
introduces the transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) module to
fuse different modalities, followed by proposing a multi-step
multi-choice decoding module to generate answer sequences
step by step from the OCR list or frequent words in natural languages. TAP (Yang et al. 2021) designs several scene
text based pre-training tasks to implicitly learn the relationship between scene text and other modalities. Inspired by
the success of LayoutLM (Xu et al. 2020), LaTr (Biten et al.
2022) is proposed with a layout-aware pre-training task to
learn the spatial information of scene text in images. Despite
the improvements achieved by the methods above in the task

Introduction
The vision-language tasks that incorporate scene text, such
as STVQA (Singh et al. 2019; Biten et al. 2019), Text Caption (Sidorov et al. 2020), require models to reason over
different modalities, including language (question text), vision (objects in an image), and a mixture of them (scene
text in an image which has linguistic and visual semantics). Scene text based multi-modal tasks have many potential applications, including assisting visually-impaired people (Bigham et al. 2010), interaction in augmented reality (Li et al. 2020), robotics (Anderson et al. 2018b) and
automatic driving (Zhang et al. 2021), etc. Although some
vision-language models (Chen et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021)
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11479

