The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Are Transformers Effective for Time Series Forecasting?
Ailing Zeng1,2 * , Muxi Chen1 * , Lei Zhang2 , Qiang Xu1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
International Digital Economy Academy
{zengailing, leizhang}@idea.edu.cn,{mxchen21, qxu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
2

Abstract

speech recognition (Dong, Xu, and Xu 2018), and computer
vision (Liu et al. 2021b). Recently, there has also been a
surge of Transformer-based solutions for time series analysis, as surveyed in (Wen et al. 2022). Most notable models, which focus on the less explored and challenging longterm time series forecasting (LTSF) problem, include LogTrans (Li et al. 2019) (NeurIPS 2019), Informer (Zhou et al.
2021) (AAAI 2021 Best paper), Autoformer (Xu et al. 2021)
(NeurIPS 2021), Pyraformer (Liu et al. 2021a) (ICLR 2022
Oral), Triformer (Cirstea et al. 2022) (IJCAI 2022) and the
recent FEDformer (Zhou et al. 2022) (ICML 2022).
The main working power of Transformers is from its
multi-head self-attention mechanism, which has a remarkable capability of extracting semantic correlations among elements in a long sequence (e.g., words in texts or 2D patches
in images). However, self-attention is permutation-invariant
and “anti-order” to some extent. While using various types
of positional encoding techniques can preserve some ordering information, it is still inevitable to have temporal information loss after applying self-attention on top of them. This
is usually not a serious concern for semantic-rich applications such as NLP, e.g., the semantic meaning of a sentence
is largely preserved even if we reorder some words in it.
However, when analyzing time series data, there is usually
a lack of semantics in the numerical data itself, and we are
mainly interested in modeling the temporal changes among
a continuous set of points. That is, the order itself plays
the most crucial role. Consequently, we pose the following
intriguing question: Are Transformers really effective for
long-term time series forecasting?
Moreover, while existing Transformer-based LTSF solutions have demonstrated considerable prediction accuracy improvements over traditional methods, in their experiments, all the compared (non-Transformer) baselines perform autoregressive or iterated multi-step (IMS) forecasting (Ariyo, Adewumi, and Ayo 2014; Salinas, Flunkert, and
Gasthaus 2017; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Taylor
and Letham 2017), which are known to suffer from significant error accumulation effects for the LTSF problem.
Therefore, in this work, we challenge Transformer-based
LTSF solutions with direct multi-step (DMS) forecasting
strategies to validate their real performance.
Not all time series are predictable, let alone long-term
forecasting (e.g., for chaotic systems). We hypothesize that

Recently, there has been a surge of Transformer-based solutions for the long-term time series forecasting (LTSF) task.
Despite the growing performance over the past few years,
we question the validity of this line of research in this work.
Specifically, Transformers is arguably the most successful solution to extract the semantic correlations among the elements
in a long sequence. However, in time series modeling, we are
to extract the temporal relations in an ordered set of continuous points. While employing positional encoding and using
tokens to embed sub-series in Transformers facilitate preserving some ordering information, the nature of the permutationinvariant self-attention mechanism inevitably results in temporal information loss.
To validate our claim, we introduce a set of embarrassingly
simple one-layer linear models named LTSF-Linear for comparison. Experimental results on nine real-life datasets show
that LTSF-Linear surprisingly outperforms existing sophisticated Transformer-based LTSF models in all cases, and often
by a large margin. Moreover, we conduct comprehensive empirical studies to explore the impacts of various design elements of LTSF models on their temporal relation extraction
capability. We hope this surprising finding opens up new research directions for the LTSF task. We also advocate revisiting the validity of Transformer-based solutions for other time
series analysis tasks (e.g., anomaly detection) in the future.

Introduction
Time series are ubiquitous in today’s data-driven world.
Given historical data, time series forecasting (TSF) is a
long-standing task that has a wide range of applications,
including but not limited to traffic flow estimation, energy
management, and financial investment. Over the past several decades, TSF solutions have undergone a progression
from traditional statistical methods (e.g., ARIMA (Ariyo,
Adewumi, and Ayo 2014)) and machine learning techniques
(e.g., GBRT (Friedman 2001)) to deep learning-based solutions, e.g., (Bai, Kolter, and Koltun 2018; Liu et al. 2022).
Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) is arguably the most
successful sequence modeling architecture, demonstrating
unparalleled performances in various applications, such as
natural language processing (NLP) (Devlin et al. 2018),
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11121

