The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Weight Predictor Network with Feature Selection
for Small Sample Tabular Biomedical Data
Andrei Margeloiu, Nikola Simidjievski, Pietro Liò, Mateja Jamnik
Department of Computer Science and Technology
University of Cambridge, UK
{am2770, ns779, pl219, mj201}@cam.ac.uk
Abstract

Jordon, and van der Schaar 2018), or modelling multiplicative feature interactions (Qin et al. 2021). However, such
specialised neural architectures are not necessarily superior
to tree-based ensembles (such as gradient boosting decision
trees) on tabular data, and their relative performance can
vary greatly between datasets (Gorishniy et al. 2021).
On tabular data, specialised neural architectures are outperformed by well-regularised feed-forward networks such
as MLPs (Kadra et al. 2021). As such, we believe that designing regularisation mechanisms for MLPs holds great
potential for improving performance on high-dimensional,
small size tabular datasets.
An important characteristic of feed-forward neural networks applied to high-dimensional data is that the first hidden layer contains a disproportionate number of parameters
compared to the other layers. For example, on a typical genomics dataset with ∼ 20,000 features, a five-layer MLP
with 100 neurons per layer contains 98% of the parameters
in the first layer. We hypothesise that having a large learning capacity in the first layer contributes overfitting of neural
networks on high-dimensional, small sample datasets.
In this paper, we propose Weight Predictor Network with
Feature Selection (WPFS), a simple but effective method
to overcome overfitting on high-dimensional, small sample
tabular supervised tasks. Our method uses two tiny auxiliary
networks to perform global feature selection and compute
the weights of the first hidden layer of a classification network. Our method is generalisable and can be applied to any
neural network in which the first hidden layer is linear. More
specifically, our contributions1 2 include:

Tabular biomedical data is often high-dimensional but with a
very small number of samples. Although recent work showed
that well-regularised simple neural networks could outperform more sophisticated architectures on tabular data, they
are still prone to overfitting on tiny datasets with many
potentially irrelevant features. To combat these issues, we
propose Weight Predictor Network with Feature Selection
(WPFS) for learning neural networks from high-dimensional
and small sample data by reducing the number of learnable
parameters and simultaneously performing feature selection.
In addition to the classification network, WPFS uses two
small auxiliary networks that together output the weights of
the first layer of the classification model. We evaluate on nine
real-world biomedical datasets and demonstrate that WPFS
outperforms other standard as well as more recent methods
typically applied to tabular data. Furthermore, we investigate
the proposed feature selection mechanism and show that it
improves performance while providing useful insights into
the learning task.

1

Introduction

The wide availability of high-throughput sequencing technologies has enabled the collection of high-dimensional
biomedical data containing measurements of the entire
genome. However, many clinical trials which collect such
high-dimensional, typically tabular, data are carried out on
small cohorts of patients due to the scarcity of available patients, prohibitive costs, or the risks associated with new
medicines. Although using deep networks to analyse such
feature-rich data promises to deliver personalised medicine,
current methods tend to perform poorly when the number of
features significantly exceeds the number of samples.
Recently, a large number of neural architectures have
been developed for tabular data, taking inspiration from treebased methods (Katzir, Elidan, and El-Yaniv 2020; Hazimeh
et al. 2020; Popov, Morozov, and Babenko 2020; Yang, Morillo, and Hospedales 2018), including attention-based modules (Arık and Pfister 2021; Huang et al. 2020), explicitly performing feature selection (Yang, Lindenbaum, and
Kluger 2022; Lemhadri, Ruan, and Tibshirani 2021; Yoon,

1. A novel method to substantially reduce the number
of parameters in feed-forward neural networks and simultaneously perform global feature selection (Sec. 3).
Our method extends DietNetworks to support continuous
data, use factorised feature embeddings, perform feature
selection, and it consistently improves performance.
2. A novel global feature selection mechanism that ranks
features during training based on feature embeddings
(Sec. 3). We propose a simple and differentiable auxiliary loss to select a small subset of features (Sec. 3.4).
We investigate the proposed mechanisms and show that
1

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

9081

Code is available at https://github.com/andreimargeloiu/WPFS
Supplementary material is available in Margeloiu et al. (2022)

