The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Med-EASi: Finely Annotated Dataset and Models for Controllable Simplification
of Medical Texts
Chandrayee Basu1 , Rosni Vasu2 , Michihiro Yasunaga1 , Qian Yang3
1

Stanford University
University of Zurich
3
Cornell University
cbasu@stanford.edu, rosni@ifi.uzh.ch, myasu@stanford.edu, qy242@cornell.edu
2

Abstract

and Lofi 2019). In this work, we present the very first finely
annotated dataset Med-EASi for medical text simplification
and describe two different T5-based models ctrlSIM and
ctrlSIMip that enable controllable simplification. We define controllability as the ability of a user to selectively simplify the contents of a short medical text. Existing unsupervised models (Prabhumoye et al. 2018; Subramanian et al.
2018; Shen et al. 2017; Alva-Manchego et al. 2020) and
hierarchical tagging and text editing models (Malmi et al.
2019; Mallinson et al. 2022, 2020) can be trained directly
on unlabeled datasets like (Cao et al. 2020) for medical
text simplification. However, we observe the need for finegrained annotations to enable word or phrase level controllability over the model outputs and for elaborative simplification (Srikanth and Li 2020).
Crowdsourcing annotations for medical texts is challenging, which explains the dearth of datasets and research in
this domain, compared to general text simplification. To obtain high-quality annotations, we must recruit a specific subpopulation of workers with domain expertise (Nye et al.
2018). Furthermore, when it comes to evaluating the quality of simplification, only experts can judge the correctness
and relevance of the added content. On the other hand, only
the laymen audience can validate the readability and comprehensibility of the model outputs. Therefore, we deploy
a novel data annotation format for this research, involving
both medical experts and layman crowd-workers.
We make the following contributions:

Automatic medical text simplification can assist providers
with patient-friendly communication and make medical texts
more accessible, thereby improving health literacy. But curating a quality corpus for this task requires the supervision of medical experts. In this work, we present MedEASi (Medical dataset for Elaborative and Abstractive
Simplification), a uniquely crowdsourced and finely annotated dataset for supervised simplification of short medical
texts. Its expert-layman-AI collaborative annotations facilitate controllability over text simplification by marking four
kinds of textual transformations: elaboration, replacement,
deletion, and insertion. To learn medical text simplification,
we fine-tune T5-large with four different styles of inputoutput combinations, leading to two control-free and two controllable versions of the model. We add two types of controllability into text simplification, by using a multi-angle training approach: position-aware, which uses in-place annotated
inputs and outputs, and position-agnostic, where the model
only knows the contents to be edited, but not their positions.
Our results show that our fine-grained annotations improve
learning compared to the unannotated baseline. Furthermore,
position-aware control generates better simplification than
the position-agnostic one. The data and code are available at
https://github.com/Chandrayee/CTRL-SIMP.

Introduction
Health literacy refers to our knowledge, and our ability to
obtain, process, and understand health information and services to make appropriate health decisions (Kindig et al.
2004). Low health literacy has several adverse effects including poor patient self-care, lack of timely communication of health issues, and even increased risk of hospitalization and mortality (King 2010; Berkman et al. 2011; Tajdar
et al. 2021). Low digital health literacy makes it harder for
consumers to disambiguate between reliable medical information (NIA 2018; Savery et al. 2020) and unreliable ones,
accelerating the spread of medical misinformation, as in the
case of COVID-19 (Bin Naeem and Kamel Boulos 2021).
Despite the promise of automated medical text simplification in mitigating this problem, there are limited datasets
and open-source libraries for this task (Siddharthan 2014;
Phan et al. 2021; Cao et al. 2020; Van den Bercken, Sips,

• Dataset: We finely annotate two existing parallel medical text simplification corpora with four kinds of textual
transformations, viz. elaboration, replacement, deletion,
and insertion of new content.
• Expert-layman-AI annotation: We divide the annotation tasks between medical experts and layman crowdworkers depending on the syntactic and domain-specific
complexity of the example texts. We assist layman
crowd-workers by providing AI-generated annotations.
• Controllable models: We train two multi-angle (Tafjord
and Clark 2021) text simplification models with T5-large
backbone. Our models perform controllable simplifications with satisfactory outputs.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14093

