The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Dynamic Latent Spaces for Lifelong Generative Modelling
Fei Ye and Adrian G. Bors
Department of Computer Science, University of York, York YO10 5GH, UK
fy689@york.ac.uk, adrian.bors@york.ac.uk

Abstract

These approaches, however, require knowing the task identity and class label for each data sample (Derakhshani et al.
2021), which is not feasible in TFCL.
Recent works have proposed to learn a dynamic expansion model to address TFCL. For instance, the Continual Unsupervised Representation Learning (CURL) (Rao
et al. 2019) dynamically builds the inference models to capture the data distribution shift while the Generative Replay
Mechanism (GRM) is used to relieve forgetting. However,
CURL still causes forgetting due to the frequent generative
replay processes, theoretically explained in (Ye and Bors
2021c, 2022b,f). This issue is solved in (Ye and Bors 2022b),
through an approach called the Online Cooperative Memorization (OCM), which optimizes a model structure by detecting the loss change. In addition, OCM employs two different memory buffers to store short- and long-term knowledge, further improving the performance. However, these
approaches usually optimize a simple structure on the latent
space where the previously learnt components are not fully
utilized when training on new data. These components usually contain prior information which is useful for the knowledge transfer (Phuong and Lampert 2019).
In this paper, we address TFCL from two aspects. First,
we address the forgetting problem in TFCL, by proposing
a new model, namely the Online Recursive Variational Autoencoder (ORVAE) which automatically preserves the prior
knowledge into the trained components while expanding its
network architecture to adapt to the data distribution shift.
Second, as novel samples in a data stream share similar characteristics with previously learnt ones, it is important to use
prior knowledge to learn novel concepts. However, directly
using all past samples in TFCL is impossible. Therefore, we
introduce a new recursive expansion mechanism for ORVAE, incorporating all previously learnt information flow
into the inference and decoding processes when learning
novel samples. Unlike CURL and CNDPM, which do not
fully utilize the latent variable information when learning
incoming samples, ORVAE integrates all previously learnt
and the currently updated variational distributions to form
an augmented distribution used for decoding, ensuring the
positive knowledge transfer. In addition, the proposed recursive expansion can also be helpful in learning a compact model because accumulating more knowledge can allow adapting to new samples fast while preventing the ex-

Task Free Continual Learning (TFCL) aims to capture novel
concepts from non-stationary data streams without forgetting previously learned knowledge. Mixture models, which
add new components when certain conditions are met, have
shown promising results in TFCL tasks. However, such approaches do not make use of the knowledge already accumulated for positive knowledge transfer. In this paper, we develop a new model, namely the Online Recursive Variational
Autoencoder (ORVAE). ORVAE utilizes the prior knowledge
by selectively incorporating the newly learnt information, by
adding new components, according to the knowledge already
known from the past learnt data. We introduce a new attention
mechanism to regularize the structural latent space in which
the most important information is reused while the information that interferes with novel samples is inactivated. The proposed attention mechanism can maximize the benefit from the
forward transfer for learning novel information without forgetting previously learnt knowledge. We perform several experiments which show that ORVAE achieves state-of-the-art
results under TFCL.

Introduction
The Variational Autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling
2013) is one of the most popular generative models, which
has been widely applied for density estimation (Kim and
Pavlovic 2020; Kingma et al. 2016; Maaløe et al. 2016),
disentangled representations (Higgins et al. 2017; Ye and
Bors 2021a,b) and in mixture models (Ye and Bors 2022c,
2020b). However, one challenge for VAEs is that they gradually lose performance on the previously learned probabilistic representations when learning a new task. This is caused
by catastrophic forgetting (Parisi et al. 2019), which occurs
when the network weights are over-written by network updating when training with a new task.
Episodic memory buffers, storing some of the past samples that will be incorporated together with samples from a
newly given task (Chaudhry et al. 2019b), have been used
for addressing catastrophic forgetting. Other memory-based
methods usually train a generator that produces a set of generative samples as memorized instances (Shin et al. 2017).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10891

