The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improving Adversarial Robustness with Self-Paced Hard-Class Pair Reweighting
Pengyue Hou, Jie Han, Xingyu Li
University of Alberta
pengyue@ualberta.ca, jhan8@ualberta.ca, xingyu@ualberta.ca

Abstract

et al. 2019; Jiang et al. 2020; Fan et al. 2021; Hou et al.
2022).
In existing adversarial training, untargeted attacks are
widely used in model optimization and evaluation (MoosaviDezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard 2016; Madry et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Kannan, Kurakin, and
Goodfellow 2018; Shafahi et al. 2019; Wong, Rice, and
Kolter 2020). Unlike targeted attacks that aim to misguide
a model to a particular class other than the true one, untargeted adversaries do not specify the targeted category and
perturb the clean data so that its prediction is away from its
true label. In theory, adversarial perturbation in untargeted
attacks can be added along arbitrary directions and classification of untargeted attacks should be unpredictable. However, the study by Carlini et al argues that an untargeted
attack is simply a more efficient method of running a targeted attack for each target and taking the closest (Carlini
and Wagner 2017b). Figure 1 (a) presents the misclassification statistics of PDG-attacked dog images, where almost
half of dog images are misclassified as cats, and over 40%
of the cat images are misclassified as dogs. Considering that
cat and dog images share many common features in vision,
we raise the following questions:
”Does the unbalanced inter-class semantic similarity lead to
the non-uniformly distributed misclassification statistics? If
yes, are classification predictions of untargeted adversaries
predictable?”
To answer these questions, this paper revisits the recipe
for generating gradient-based first-order adversaries and
surprisingly discovers that untargeted attacks may be targeted. In theory, we prove that adversarial perturbation directions in untargeted attacks are actually biased toward
the hard-class pairs of the clean data under attack. Intuitively, semantically-similar classes constitute hard-class
pairs (HCPs) and semantically-different classes form easyclass pairs (ECPs).
Accordingly, we propose explicitly taking the inter-class
semantic similarity into account in AT algorithm design and
develop a self-paced adversarial training (SPAT) strategy to
upweight hard/easy-class pair losses and downweight easyclass pair losses, encouraging the training procedure to neglect redundant information from easy class pairs. Since
HCPs and ECPs may change during model training (depending on the current optimization status), their scaling factors

Deep Neural Networks are vulnerable to adversarial attacks.
Among many defense strategies, adversarial training with untargeted attacks is one of the most effective methods. Theoretically, adversarial perturbation in untargeted attacks can
be added along arbitrary directions and the predicted labels
of untargeted attacks should be unpredictable. However, we
find that the naturally imbalanced inter-class semantic similarity makes those hard-class pairs become virtual targets
of each other. This study investigates the impact of such
closely-coupled classes on adversarial attacks and develops
a self-paced reweighting strategy in adversarial training accordingly. Specifically, we propose to upweight hard-class
pair losses in model optimization, which prompts learning
discriminative features from hard classes. We further incorporate a term to quantify hard-class pair consistency in adversarial training, which greatly boosts model robustness. Extensive experiments show that the proposed adversarial training method achieves superior robustness performance over
state-of-the-art defenses against a wide range of adversarial attacks. The code of the proposed SPAT is published at
https://github.com/puerrrr/Self-Paced-Adversarial-Training.

Introduction
In recent years, DNNs are found to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks, and extensive work has been carried out
on how to defend or reject the threat of adversarial samples (Szegedy et al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2014; Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune 2015). Adversarial
samples are carefully generated with human-imperceptible
noises, yet they can lead to large performance degradation
of well-trained models.
While numerous defenses have been proposed, adversarial training (AT) is a widely recognized strategy (Madry
et al. 2017) and achieves promising performance against a
variety of attacks. AT treats adversarial attacks as an augmentation method and aims to train models that can correctly classify both adversarial and clean data. Based on
the AT framework, further robustness improvements can
be achieved by exploiting unlabeled, miss-classified data,
pre-training, etc (Alayrac et al. 2019; Carmon et al. 2019;
Hendrycks, Lee, and Mazeika 2019; Zhai et al. 2019; Wang
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14883

