The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Rethinking Interpretation: Input-Agnostic Saliency Mapping of Deep Visual
Classifiers
Naveed Akhtar, Mohammad Amir Asim Khan Jalwana
The University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway Crawley 6009, Australia.
naveed.akhtar@uwa.edu.au, asimjalwana@gmail.com

Abstract
Saliency methods provide post-hoc model interpretation by
attributing input features to the model outputs. Current
methods mainly achieve this using a single input sample,
thereby failing to answer input-independent inquiries about
the model. We also show that input-specific saliency mapping
is intrinsically susceptible to misleading feature attribution.
Current attempts to use ‘general’ input features for model interpretation assume access to a dataset containing those features, which biases the interpretation. Addressing the gap,
we introduce a new perspective of input-agnostic saliency
mapping that computationally estimates the high-level features attributed by the model to its outputs. These features are
geometrically correlated, and are computed by accumulating
model’s gradient information with respect to an unrestricted
data distribution. To compute these features, we nudge independent data points over the model loss surface towards
the local minima associated by a human-understandable concept, e.g., class label for classifiers. With a systematic projection, scaling and refinement process, this information is transformed into an interpretable visualization without compromising its model-fidelity. The visualization serves as a standalone qualitative interpretation. With an extensive evaluation,
we not only demonstrate successful visualizations for a variety of concepts for large-scale models, but also showcase an
interesting utility of this new form of saliency mapping by
identifying backdoor signatures in compromised classifiers.

Figure 1: Difference between the proposed and conventional
saliency mapping. (Top) We propose to compute maps that
are input-agnostic and can attribute outputs to generic data
concepts. (Bottom) Conventional approaches allow interpretations that are specific to a given input.

Owing to the significance of the perceptual models, their
interpretability is currently considered a mainstream problem in computer vision (Fong, Patrick, and Vedaldi 2019),
(Fong and Vedaldi 2017), (Petsiuk, Das, and Saenko 2018),
(Zeiler and Fergus 2014), (Jalwana et al. 2021), (Selvaraju
et al. 2017). In the literature, it has been translated to the
task of identifying the input features deemed salient by the
model to make its predictions. Mainly two broad strategies
are popular to accomplish this task. The first searches for
salient features in an input image by selectively perturbing its different regions and analyzing the resulting effects
on the model predictions (Fong, Patrick, and Vedaldi 2019),
(Fong and Vedaldi 2017), (Petsiuk, Das, and Saenko 2018),
(Zeiler and Fergus 2014). Though effective, these methods
may require heuristics to control their search space, potentially compromising the model-fidelity of the map due to the
external influence (Jalwana et al. 2021).
The second strategy is commonly known as backpropagation saliency mapping (Selvaraju et al. 2017), (Rebuffi et al.
2020), (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2013), (Springenberg et al. 2014), (Zeiler and Fergus 2014), (Zhang et al.
2018). It estimates feature saliency by analysing the gra-

Introduction
Deep perceptual models are at the heart of many recent scientific developments (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015),
(Nature 2021). Their applications now reach beyond the
rudimentary decision making, to the automation of highstake domains, e.g., self-driving vehicles (Deng et al. 2021),
smart security (DARPA 2020), health-care (Tang et al.
2021). This is a direct consequence of their established
human-level ability to discriminate between intricate visual patterns (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015). However,
like any deep learning approach, they are black-box techniques (Vinuesa and Sirmacek 2021). It is normally very
hard to interpret what information has been learned by these
models and how it influences their predictions.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

178

