The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Reducing Domain Gap in Frequency and Spatial Domain for Cross-Modality
Domain Adaptation on Medical Image Segmentation
Shaolei Liu* , Siqi Yin* , Linhao Qu, Manning Wang†
Digital Medical Research Center, School of Basic Medical Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China
Shanghai Key Lab of Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention, Shanghai 200032, China
{slliu, lhqu20, mnwang}@fudan.edu.cn, sqyin21@m.fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

another domain (Chen et al. 2020; AlBadawy, Saha, and
Mazurowski 2018; Ghafoorian et al. 2017). Unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA) is the technique to address this
problem by training a network with labeled source domain
data and unlabeled target domain data, aiming at improving
the performance on target domain (Toldo et al. 2020).
The main objective of UDA is to minimize the influence
of domain gap on the performance of the trained model in
the target domain, which can be realized by either generating target-like images for model training or encouraging
the model to focus on domain-invariant information instead
of domain-variant information. In the UDA for medical image segmentation, most studies leverage adversarial learning to stylize source-domain images at the image level (Huo
et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2020, 2019; Zeng et al. 2021; Dou
et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2017; Hoffman et al. 2018; Du and
Liu 2021) to generate target-like images for model training. Other studies apply adversarial learning at the feature
level to maximize the confusion between representations in
source and target domains to make the model learn domain
invariant representations (Tsai et al. 2018; Ma et al. 2022).
Although satisfactory results have been achieved, the adversarial training process is complicated and is prone to collapse.
In recent years, several UDA methods without using adversarial learning have been developed in the CV field,
which can be divided into two categories: spatial domainbased methods and frequency domain-based methods. Spatial domain-based methods generate target-like images by
simple cutmix-like region replacement (Chen et al. 2021b),
statistical information adjustment (He et al. 2021; Nam et al.
2021) or histogram matching (Xu et al. 2021). Frequency
domain-based methods first transform images into frequency components by Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT)
(Yang and Soatto 2020; Xu et al. 2021) or Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) (Huang et al. 2021) and narrow domain gap by manipulating the frequency components. These
methods have yielded promising results in the CV field, but
no studies have been explored in medical image analysis.
In this paper, we propose a novel UDA method in the
frequency domain and combine it with a spatial domain
UDA method under a multi-teacher distillation framework
to achieve better segmentation performance in the target
domain. Specifically, we introduce Non-Subsampled Con-

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) aims to learn a
model trained on source domain and performs well on unlabeled target domain. In medical image segmentation field,
most existing UDA methods depend on adversarial learning
to address the domain gap between different image modalities, which is ineffective due to its complicated training process. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective UDA
method based on frequency and spatial domain transfer under multi-teacher distillation framework. In the frequency domain, we first introduce non-subsampled contourlet transform for identifying domain-invariant and domain-variant
frequency components (DIFs and DVFs), and then keep the
DIFs unchanged while replacing the DVFs of the source domain images with that of the target domain images to narrow the domain gap. In the spatial domain, we propose a
batch momentum update-based histogram matching strategy
to reduce the domain-variant image style bias. Experiments
on two cross-modality medical image segmentation datasets
(cardiac, abdominal) show that our proposed method achieves
superior performance compared to state-of-the-art methods.
Codes are available at https://github.com/slliuEric/FSUDA.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has a wide range of applications in the medical field, including image segmentation (Huo et al. 2018;
Chen et al. 2020), classification (Wollmann, Eijkman, and
Rohr 2018; Zhang et al. 2019), detection (Xing et al. 2020;
Shen et al. 2020), etc. The success of deep learning heavily depends on large amount of annotated data for model
training, but the pixel-level annotation of medical images for
segmentation is expensive and time-consuming, because the
annotation usually can only be done by experienced radiologists. To tackle the difficulty of obtaining new annotated
datasets, one solution is to utilize other annotated datasets
(Csurka et al. 2017; Guan and Liu 2021). However, the differences on imaging principles and equipment parameters
(scanners, protocols and modalities) lead to domain gap between datasets, and the performance of a model trained on
one domain tends to deteriorate when it is directly used in
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1719

