The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Prompt-Augmented Linear Probing:
Scaling beyond the Limit of Few-Shot In-Context Learners
Hyunsoo Cho1 , Hyuhng Joon Kim1 , Junyeob Kim1 , Sang-Woo Lee2, 3 ,
Sang-goo Lee1 , Kang Min Yoo1, 2,∗ , Taeuk Kim4, *
1

Seoul National University
2
NAVER Cloud
3
KAIST
4
Hanyang University
{johyunsoo, heyjoonkim, juny116, sglee}@europa.snu.ac.kr
{kangmin.yoo, sang.woo.lee}@navercorp.com, kimtaeuk@hanyang.ac.kr
Abstract
Through in-context learning (ICL), large-scale language
models are effective few-shot learners without additional
model fine-tuning. However, the ICL performance does not
scale well with the number of available training samples as
it is limited by the inherent input length constraint of the underlying language model. Meanwhile, many studies have revealed that language models are also powerful feature extractors, allowing them to be utilized in a black-box manner and
enabling the linear probing paradigm, where lightweight discriminators are trained on top of the pre-extracted input representations. This paper proposes prompt-augmented linear
probing (PALP), a hybrid of linear probing and ICL, which
leverages the best of both worlds. PALP inherits the scalability of linear probing and the capability of enforcing language
models to derive more meaningful representations via tailoring input into a more conceivable form. Throughout in-depth
investigations on various datasets, we verified that PALP significantly enhances the input representations closing the gap
between ICL in the data-hungry scenario and fine-tuning in
the data-abundant scenario with little training overhead, potentially making PALP a strong alternative in a black-box scenario.

Figure 1: Average accuracy (12 classification tasks) of various black-box transferring methods trained on GPT-J. ICL
can not leverage the full train dataset due to the length limit,
and their performance saturates quickly. Our method (PALP)
is scalable with available training samples and minimizes the
performance gap between ICL in a few-shot setting. The performance of the respective task is summarized in Table 2.

Introduction
Since the emergence of Transformer-based (Vaswani et al.
2017) language models, we have witnessed notable improvements in the natural language processing literature,
even attaining human-level performance on several benchmarks. In addition, as it becomes evident that scaling laws
work for such models (Kaplan et al. 2020), there has been
a significant amount of investment in the field to enhance
them in terms of the number of their parameters—from millions to billions—and the volume of the data they consume
during training (Brown et al. 2020; Chowdhery et al. 2022;
Fedus, Zoph, and Shazeer 2022; Hoffmann et al. 2022). As a
result, some cutting-edge language models become possible
to obtain intriguing extra functionalities, such as the ability
to capture world knowledge (Petroni et al. 2019), generate
codes (Poesia et al. 2022), or solve mathematical problems

(Henighan et al. 2020), in addition to being proficient in recognizing linguistic patterns. These anecdotes, which demonstrate the general power of large language models, naturally
raise researchers’ expectations that language models can act
as a universal, off-the-shelf solution for a range of downstream tasks while minimizing the cost required for adapting
them to a specific job at the same time.
However, there is no free lunch; the effectiveness and generalizability of large language models achieved by scaling
come at the cost of physically serving such gigantic neural architectures. Thus, the institutions that distribute large
models such as GPT-3 (Brown et al. 2020) usually pursue
the strategy of providing commercial APIs which only allow limited access to the models. In other words, it is often
the case that users cannot receive information about the inner workings of the models, such as gradients concerning
the models’ parameters which are crucial for fine-tuning the
models for a particular purpose. Therefore, there has been

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12709

