The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Debiased Fine-Tuning for Vision-Language Models by Prompt Regularization
Beier Zhu1 , Yulei Niu2 * , Saeil Lee3 , Minhoe Hur4 , Hanwang Zhang1
1

Nanyang Technological University
2
Columbia University
3
HMGICS AIR Center
4
AIRS Company, Hyundai Motor Group
beier002@e.ntu.edu.sg, yn.yuleiniu@gmail.com, saeil.lee@hmgics.com, minhoe.hur@hyundai.com,
hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

Despite the beneficial regularization, the pretraining
knowledge has a negative impact, especially when the downstream task data is limited or biased (Wang et al. 2019; Yang
et al. 2021): the early exposed encyclopedic or generic features from the pretrained model may mislead the fine-tuning
to focus on the task-unrelated attributes, resulting in a biased
fine-tuned model. Figure 1 shows three types of biases: Figure 1(a) contextual bias: images of training and test set contain distinct backgrounds, e.g., if most of the training “bird”
images are in “sky” background, the fine-tuning will misclassify “bird on ground” as “dog”; Figure 1(c) image style
gap: test image style is unseen during training, e.g., if training images are from art painting, cartoon and real domain,
the fine-tuned model is able to classify the in-distribution
art painting “dog” but is confused when testing on a sketch
“dog”; Figure 1(e) language bias: for every question type,
train and test sets have different prior distributions of answers, e.g., if most VQA training “bananas” images are “yellow”, it mistakes the answer “yellow” for question “what
color are the bananas?”, given an image of green bananas.
Recently, NLP community presents a tuning-free
paradigm called “pretrained, prompt, predict” (Liu et al.
2021a) and it has been quickly migrated to CV tasks (Zhou
et al. 2021; Tsimpoukelli et al. 2021; Yao et al. 2021) by
using a pretrained multi-modal model (Kim, Son, and Kim
2021; Radford et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021). For example,
image classification can be cast into the cloze prompt: “a
photo of a [CLASS]”, where the prediction can be found
as the class word whose fill-in sentence is most similar to
the query image. The similarity can be calculated directly
from the pretrained model in a zero-shot learning fashion.
As prompt is a rule-based query that has nothing to do with
the downstream statistics, the prediction is expected to be
independent to downstream domain and faithfully respects
the pretrained knowledge.
Yet, relying too much on the general knowledge also hurts
the domain-specific generalization. For example, as shown
in Figure 1(b), although prompt can correctly focus on the
foreground object, it is less discriminative to distinguish between “rat” and “cat” in domain-specific animal images; in
Figure 1(d), prompt’s prediction confidence is not as discriminative as that of fine-tuning; in Figure 1(f), promptbased VQA is too general to perform the downstream task
of counting “bananas”. To this end, “prompt tuning” is pro-

We present a new paradigm for fine-tuning large-scale visionlanguage pre-trained models on downstream task, dubbed
Prompt Regularization (ProReg). Different from traditional
fine-tuning which easily overfits to the downstream task
data, ProReg uses the prediction by prompting the pretrained
model to regularize the fine-tuning. The motivation is: by
prompting the large model “a photo of a [CLASS]”, the fillin answer is only dependent on the pretraining encyclopedic
knowledge while independent of the task data distribution,
which is usually biased. Specifically, given a training sample
prediction during fine-tuning, we first calculate its KullbackLeibler loss of the prompt prediction and Cross-Entropy loss
of the ground-truth label, and then combine them with a proposed sample-wise adaptive trade-off weight, which automatically adjusts the transfer between the pretrained and downstream domains. On various out-of-distribution benchmarks,
we show the consistently strong performance of ProReg
compared with conventional fine-tuning, zero-shot prompt,
prompt tuning, and other state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Please think about it: when you want to train a vision model
for a task, what is the first thing first? Most likely, you will
download an off-the-shelf foundation model (Bommasani
et al. 2021), e.g., ResNet (He et al. 2016) or CLIP (Radford
et al. 2021), pretrained on a large-scale dataset such as ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) or image-text pairs collected from
the Internet (Radford et al. 2021); then, remove its classifier head, plug in your own task-specific head to the penultimate layer, and finally fine-tune on your own task data.
Such “pretrain, fine-tune” paradigm has become a nearly
ubiquitous standard for CV community—from classification to generation (Viazovetskyi, Ivashkin, and Kashin 2020;
Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2018), regions to pixels (He
et al. 2017), and single modality to multi-modality (Anderson et al. 2018; Lu et al. 2019). The underlying empirical
principle is that the pretrained model as initialization plays
a role in regularization which reduces the variance of the
fine-tuning model (Sutskever et al. 2013).
* Corresponding author. Work started when at NTU.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3834

