The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Graph Structure Learning on User Mobility Data for
Social Relationship Inference
Guangming Qin1 , Lexue Song2 , Yanwei Yu1 * ,
Chao Huang3 , Wenzhe Jia1 , Yuan Cao1 , Junyu Dong1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China
2
Department of Data Science, Duke Kunshan University
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Hong Kong
qinguangming@stu.ouc.edu.cn, ls440@duke.edu, yuyanwei@ouc.edu.cn,
chaohuang75@gmail.com, jiawenzhe@stu.ouc.edu.cn, {cy8661,dongjunyu}@ouc.edu.cn
Abstract

such as friend recommendation (Yang et al. 2022), advertisement targeting (Wang et al. 2011), and ride-sharing (Cici
et al. 2014). Intuitively, there are certain correlations between social relationships and human mobility data (Cho,
Myers, and Leskovec 2011). Using the correlations, several
works (Eagle, Pentland, and Lazer 2009; Wang, Li, and Lee
2014; Pham, Shahabi, and Liu 2013, 2016) have been conducted to try to infer friendships between users from human
mobility trajectory data.

With the prevalence of smart mobile devices and locationbased services, uncovering social relationships from human
mobility data is of great value in real-world spatio-temporal
applications ranging from friend recommendation, advertisement targeting to transportation scheduling. While a handful
of sophisticated graph embedding techniques are developed
for social relationship inference, they are significantly limited
to the sparse and noisy nature of user mobility data, as they
all ignore the essential problem of the existence of a large
amount of noisy data unrelated to social activities in such
mobility data. In this work, we present Social Relationship
Inference Network (SRINet), a novel Graph Neural Network (GNN) framework, to improve inference performance
by learning to remove noisy data. Specifically, we first construct a multiplex user meeting graph to model the spatialtemporal interactions among users in different semantic contexts. Our proposed SRINet tactfully combines the representation learning ability of Graph Convolutional Networks
(GCNs) with the power of removing noisy edges of graph
structure learning, which can learn effective user embeddings
on the multiplex user meeting graph in a semi-supervised
manner. Extensive experiments on three real-world datasets
demonstrate the superiority of SRINet against state-of-theart techniques in inferring social relationships from user mobility data. The source code of our method is available at
https://github.com/qinguangming1999/SRINet.

Despite the effectiveness of existing social relationship inference methods (Wang, Li, and Lee 2014; Pham, Shahabi,
and Liu 2013, 2016), most of them are based on meeting
frequency and only focus on pairwise relationship inference
individually. They work poorly for inactive users since they
fail to solve the data sparsity challenge of inactive users.
Recently, graph embedding (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena
2014; Grover and Leskovec 2016; Liu et al. 2020) and graph
convolutional networks (GCNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Veličković et al. 2018; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017;
Liu et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2022) have been developed for
learning node representations in graph-structured data. A
line of works based on network embedding and GCNs have
been proposed, which no longer require hand-crafted features, but treat users as nodes and model the meeting events
between users as a homogeneous graph (Yu, Wang, and Li
2018) or a heterogeneous graph (Backes et al. 2017; Wu
et al. 2019). They leverage network embedding or GCNs to
learn representations of nodes (users), which take into account the relation propagation among users and even consider the rich semantic information, and thus improving prediction performance. More recently, LBSN2Vec++ (Yang
et al. 2022) and MSC-LBSN (Huynh et al. 2022) are proposed for friendship prediction based on an LBSN heterogeneous hypergraph consisting of four different data domains, i.e., spatial, temporal, semantic and social domains.
LBSN2Vec++ learns node embeddings from both friendship homogeneous edges and check-in heterogeneous hyperedges sampled from the LBSN heterogeneous hypergraph by a random-walk-with-stay scheme, while MSCLBSN learns from friendship edges, check-in hyperedges,
and node personas at the same time, and uses these to devise multiple representations for each user that respect their
multiple roles in a social context.

Introduction
The advance in positioning technologies and the prevalence
of location-based online services such as Uber, LocationBased Social Networks (LBSNs) such as Foursquare, and
geo-tagged social media such as Twitter have generated
massive human mobility data (Noulas et al. 2011). These
mobility data provide us with the opportunity to deeply analyze human behaviors in different scenarios. Understanding
the underlying human mobility patterns has been shown to
benefit various spatio-temporal applications, e.g., POI recommendation, urban planning, business site selection, traffic
scheduling, and many more (Dai et al. 2021b, 2022, 2021a;
Chen et al. 2022). To be specific, uncovering social relationships among users is crucial for many real-world problems,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4578

