The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Offline Imitation Learning with Suboptimal Demonstrations via
Relaxed Distribution Matching
Lantao Yu* 1 , Tianhe Yu* 1 , Jiaming Song 2 , Willie Neiswanger 1 , Stefano Ermon 1
1

Computer Science Department, Stanford University
2
NVIDIA (Work done while at Stanford)
{lantaoyu,tianheyu,tsong,neiswanger,ermon}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract

with supplementary imperfect demonstrations (Kim et al.
2021), which holds the promise of addressing these challenges (i.e. no large collection of expert data and no online
interactions with the environment during training). Specifically, we aim to learn a policy using a small amount of
expert demonstrations and a large collection of trajectories
with unknown level of optimality that are typically cheaper
to obtain.
As in prior offline reinforcement learning (RL) and offline policy evaluation works, offline IL (Kim et al. 2021)
also has the distribution shift problem (Levine et al. 2020;
Kumar et al. 2019; Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup 2018): the
agent performs poorly during evaluation because the learned
policy deviates from the behavior policy used for collecting the offline data. To mitigate this problem, prior works
based on distribution correction estimation (the “DICE”
family) (Nachum et al. 2019a,b; Lee et al. 2021; Kim et al.
2021; Kostrikov, Nachum, and Tompson 2020; Zhang et al.
2020; Zhang, Liu, and Whiteson 2020; Yang et al. 2020)
collectively use a distribution divergence measure (e.g. f divergence) to regularize the learned policy to be similar to
the behavior policy. However, such regularization schemes
based on exact distribution matching can be overly conservative. For example, in settings where the offline data is highly
suboptimal, such an approach will require careful tuning of
the regularization strength (denoted as α) in order to find
the delicate balance between policy optimization on limited
expert data and policy regularization to the behavior policy.
Otherwise, the resulting policy will either suffer from large
distribution shift because of small α or behave too similarly
to the suboptimal behavior policy due to large α. We argue
that a more appropriate regularization for offline imitation
learning with limited expert data and diverse supplementary
data is indispensable, which is the goal of this work.
Towards this end, we draw inspiration from domain adaptation theory (Wu et al. 2019a) and present RelaxDICE,
which employs an asymmetrically-relaxed f -divergence for
explicit support regularization instead of exact distribution
matching between the learned policy and the suboptimal behavior policy. On one hand, we still encourage the learned
policy to stay within the support of the pre-collected dataset
such that policy evaluation/improvement is stable and reliable. On the other hand, we will not drive the learned policy
to exactly match the behavior policy since the offline demon-

Offline imitation learning (IL) promises the ability to learn
performant policies from pre-collected demonstrations without interactions with the environment. However, imitating behaviors fully offline typically requires numerous expert data.
To tackle this issue, we study the setting where we have limited expert data and supplementary suboptimal data. In this
case, a well-known issue is the distribution shift between the
learned policy and the behavior policy that collects the offline data. Prior works mitigate this issue by regularizing the
KL divergence between the stationary state-action distributions of the learned policy and the behavior policy. We argue that such constraints based on exact distribution matching
can be overly conservative and hamper policy learning, especially when the imperfect offline data is highly suboptimal.
To resolve this issue, we present RelaxDICE, which employs
an asymmetrically-relaxed f -divergence for explicit support
regularization. Specifically, instead of driving the learned policy to exactly match the behavior policy, we impose little
penalty whenever the density ratio between their stationary
state-action distributions is upper bounded by a constant.
Note that such formulation leads to a nested min-max optimization problem, which causes instability in practice. RelaxDICE addresses this challenge by supporting a closedform solution for the inner maximization problem. Extensive
empirical study shows that our method significantly outperforms the best prior offline IL method in six standard continuous control environments with over 30% performance gain
on average, across 22 settings where the imperfect dataset is
highly suboptimal.

Introduction
Imitation learning (IL) (Pomerleau 1988; Ho and Ermon
2016a; Ross, Gordon, and Bagnell 2011) studies the problem of programming agents directly with expert demonstrations. However, successful IL usually demands a large
amount of optimal trajectories, and many adversarial IL
methods (Ho and Ermon 2016a; Fu, Luo, and Levine 2018;
Ke et al. 2020; Kostrikov et al. 2018) require online interactions with the environment to get samples from intermediate
policies for policy improvement. Considering these limitations, we focus on the setting of offline imitation learning
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11016

