The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Rethinking Disparity: A Depth Range Free Multi-View Stereo Based on Disparity
Qingsong Yan* ,1,2 , Qiang Wang* ,3 , Kaiyong Zhao4 , Bo Li2 , Xiaowen Chu†,2,5 , Fei Deng†,1
1

Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China
3
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China
4
XGRIDS, Shenzhen, China
5
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China
yanqs whu@whu.edu.cn, qiang.wang@hit.edu.cn, kyzhao@xgrids.com, bli@cse.ust.hk
xwchu@ust.hk, fdeng@sgg.whu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Existing learning-based multi-view stereo (MVS) methods
rely on the depth range to build the 3D cost volume and may
fail when the range is too large or unreliable. To address this
problem, we propose a disparity-based MVS method based
on the epipolar disparity flow (E-flow), called DispMVS,
which infers the depth information from the pixel movement
between two views. The core of DispMVS is to construct a
2D cost volume on the image plane along the epipolar line
between each pair (between the reference image and several source images) for pixel matching and fuse uncountable
depths triangulated from each pair by multi-view geometry to
ensure multi-view consistency. To be robust, DispMVS starts
from a randomly initialized depth map and iteratively refines
the depth map with the help of the coarse-to-fine strategy.
Experiments on DTUMVS and Tanks&Temple datasets show
that DispMVS is not sensitive to the depth range and achieves
state-of-the-art results with lower GPU memory.

Figure 1: The influence of the depth range. This figure compares DispMVS with two state-of-the-art methods ( GBiNet
(Mi, Di, and Xu 2022) and IterMVS (Wang et al. 2022) ) and
shows that DispMVS can still generate high-quality point
clouds when changing the depth range by Eq. 15. Unlike
other methods that use the depth range to build a 3D cost
volume and estimate the depth map, DispMVS only builds
a 2D cost volume along the epipolar line and uses the multiview geometry to estimate the depth map.

Introduction
Multi-view stereo matching (MVS) is a core technique in 3D
reconstruction that has been extensively studied (Furukawa
and Ponce 2009; Galliani et al. 2015; Schönberger et al.
2016). Although traditional methods try to introduce additional constraints (Xu and Tao 2019; Romanoni and Matteucci 2019; Xu and Tao 2020a) to deal with textureless regions or repeated textures, they still have difficulty in guaranteeing the generation of high-quality point clouds in many
cases.
Recently, learning-based methods have brought a new
light to MVS. MVSNet (Yao et al. 2018) shows a fully differentiable pipeline, which firstly uses a convolutional neural network (CNN) to extract features from input images,and
then splits the 3D space into several bins covering a certain
depth range to build a 3D cost volume by differentiable homograph, and finally relies on a 3D CNN to regress the depth
map. Although MVSNet achieves impressive results on several public benchmarks (Aanæs et al. 2016; Knapitsch et al.
2017), it is not efficient and requires a lot of GPU memory to

infer. Therefore, the coarse-to-fine strategy (Gu et al. 2020;
Yang et al. 2020; Cheng et al. 2020; Mi, Di, and Xu 2022)
and the recurrent network (Yao et al. 2019; Wei et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2021, 2022) are used to upgrade the MVSNet.
The coarse-to-fine strategy uses the coarse stage to recover
a coarse depth map and reduces the number of bins needed
at the fine stage to reduce the GPU memory. Furthermore,
the recurrent network, such as LSTM and GRU, can directly
replace the 3D CNN to process the 3D cost volume with
a lower GPU memory footprint during the inference. Since
these strategies may sacrifice accuracy due to the reduced
search range and the lack of global context, many studies
have improved the design of loss functions and feature processing modules. In terms of loss functions, there is not only
the regression-based method to guide continuous depth (Yao
et al. 2018; Gu et al. 2020) but also the classification-based
method to guide discrete depth through 3D cost volume (Yao
et al. 2019; Mi, Di, and Xu 2022), or a mixture of them to
achieve better depth prediction quality (Peng et al. 2022). As
for the feature processing module, the deformation convolu-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3091

