The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

GPTR: Gestalt-Perception Transformer for Diagram Object Detection
Xin Hu1,2 , Lingling Zhang1,2∗ , Jun Liu1,2 , Jinfu Fan3 , Yang You4 , Yaqiang Wu 2,5
1

Shaanxi Provincial Key Laboratory of Big Data Knowledge Engineering,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
National Engineering Lab for Big Data Analytics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
3
Department of Control Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
4
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore
5
Lenovo Research, Beijing, China
dr.huxin711@foxmail.com, {zhanglling, liukeen}@xjtu.edu.cn, 1910648@tongji.edu.cn, youy@comp.nus.edu.sg,
wuyqe@lenovo.com
Abstract
Diagram object detection is the key basis of practical applications such as textbook question answering. Because the diagram mainly consists of simple lines and color blocks, its
visual features are sparser than those of natural images. In addition, diagrams usually express diverse knowledge, in which
there are many low-frequency object categories in diagrams.
These lead to the fact that traditional data-driven detection
model is not suitable for diagrams. In this work, we propose a
gestalt-perception transformer model for diagram object detection, which is based on an encoder-decoder architecture.
Gestalt perception contains a series of laws to explain human perception, that the human visual system tends to perceive patches in an image that are similar, close or connected
without abrupt directional changes as a perceptual whole object. Inspired by these thoughts, we build a gestalt-perception
graph in transformer encoder, which is composed of diagram
patches as nodes and the relationships between patches as
edges. This graph aims to group these patches into objects
via laws of similarity, proximity, and smoothness implied in
these edges, so that the meaningful objects can be effectively
detected. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed GPTR achieves the best results in the diagram object
detection task. Our model also obtains comparable results
over the competitors in natural image object detection.

1

Figure 1: Efficient diagram object detectors can assist textbook question answering. Q, A, and C represent question
text, candidate answer, and caption respectively.

usually consists of simple lines and color blocks, and exists
in many fields such as pedagogy and architecture (Hu et al.
2021). Diagram object detection is a key step in many applications as shown in Figure 1. On this basis, it plays an
important role in smart education and so on. Taking textbook question answering (Kembhavi et al. 2017; He et al.
2021) as an example, given the diagram and question text,
diagram object detector outputs the locations and categories
of objects in the diagram. And then, these objects interact
with the question text multimodally to facilitate the answer
of the question. However, detectors for natural images cannot be directly applied to diagram object detection. We adopt
some mainstream detectors to conduct experiments on natural images and diagrams, respectively. Taking the recent
SAM-DETR (Zhang et al. 2022) model as an example, the
average precision of this model on natural images is as high
as 39%, while the precision on diagrams drops to about 15%.
See Section 4 for more analyses of experimental results. The
reason is that the diagram has two characteristics different
from natural image. On the one hand, the visual features
of diagram are sparser than those of natural image. As
shown in Figure 2 (a), the frequency distribution histograms
are drawn corresponding to the RGB values for all pixels
from the diagrams in AI2D* dataset and the natural images
in MSCOCO (Lin et al. 2014). We can see that the RGB
value distribution of the natural image is more balanced than
that of the diagram, and the distribution of three RGB color
components in the diagram is extremely uneven, which is
concentrated around 255. This phenomenon illustrates the

Introduction

The goal of object detection (Liu et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2021;
Dong et al. 2021) is to accurately locate and classify all objects in a given image, which is indeed dominated by various
deep neural networks (Pan et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2021; Zhong
et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2021b; Cao et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2021). For this task, it is very important to understand the
detailed and implicit semantic information of images. It also
has great significance in practical applications such as visual
question answering (Yuan et al. 2021), cross-modal retrieval
(Chen et al. 2021a; Diao et al. 2021), etc.
Most existing detectors are designed for natural images of
variant objects, while the research on diagram object detection is still blank. Diagram is a special kind of image, which
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

899

