The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Progressive Modality-Shared Transformers for Effective
Visible-Infrared Person Re-identification
Hu Lu1 , Xuezhang Zou1 , Pingping Zhang2 *
1

School of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology
luhu@ujs.edu.cn;2222108016@stmail.ujs.edu.cn;zhpp@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identification (VI-ReID) is a challenging retrieval task under complex modality changes. Existing methods usually focus on extracting discriminative visual features while ignoring the reliability and commonality of visual features between different modalities. In this
paper, we propose a novel deep learning framework named
Progressive Modality-shared Transformer (PMT) for effective VI-ReID. To reduce the negative effect of modality gaps,
we first take the gray-scale images as an auxiliary modality and propose a progressive learning strategy. Then, we
propose a Modality-Shared Enhancement Loss (MSEL) to
guide the model to explore more reliable identity information from modality-shared features. Finally, to cope with
the problem of large intra-class differences and small interclass differences, we propose a Discriminative Center Loss
(DCL) combined with the MSEL to further improve the discrimination of reliable features. Extensive experiments on
SYSU-MM01 and RegDB datasets show that our proposed
framework performs better than most state-of-the-art methods. For model reproduction, we release the source code at
https://github.com/hulu88/PMT.

Figure 1: Several typical cases in visible-infrared person reidentification. (a) Discriminative information is not always
visible due to posture or viewpoint changes. (b) Partial information may disappear due to the modality shift and different
lighting conditions. (c) Modality-based clothing change due
to the large time span.

than visible images, resulting in less discriminative features
for cross-modality matching. 3) Modality-based clothing
changes can occur due to the large time span, which further
increases the difficulty of robust feature extraction.
To reduce the heterogeneous differences between two
modalities, existing approaches (Ye et al. 2021; Gao et al.
2021; Chen et al. 2021b) mainly use a dual-stream network
structure. The non-shared weight components are first used
to extract modality-specific features separately before learning modality-shared features. Although these methods can
effectively benefit from modality-specific features and deal
with inter-modality differences, they can hardly extract effective modality-shared features. Meanwhile, there are also
some Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)-based methods (Li et al. 2020; Dai et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019) that
generate cross-modality images by learning modality transformed patterns. However, these methods usually introduce
additional image noises and huge computational costs. Thus,
they are difficult to deploy in practical scenarios.
In addition, some outstanding methods aim to extract
more discriminative information. For example, (Zhu et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2021b) horizontally divide the portrait
into multiple regions to align independent local features

Introduction
Person Re-Identification (ReID) aims to retrieve the same
person under different cameras and times. It can be utilized
in many real-world applications, such as video surveillance,
smart security, etc. Recently, with the advances of deep
learning, person ReID has witnessed great success in performance and deployment. However, most of the existing ReID
methods target on the visible environment. Thus, they can
be regarded as visible-visible ReID. In fact, most of visiblevisible ReID methods can not work well at nighttime. To
address this problem, images captured by infrared cameras
are considered in practical scenarios, which greatly help
the ReID under different modalities and result in VisibleInfrared Person Re-Identification (VI-ReID).
Compared with single-modality ReID, VI-ReID has three
main challenges: 1) The large modality gap will make it difficult to align the identify-related features of the two modalities. 2) Infrared images are more sensitive to light conditions
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1835

