The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Predictive Multiplicity in Probabilistic Classification
Jamelle Watson-Daniels1 , David C. Parkes1,2 , Berk Ustun3
1

Harvard University
2
DeepMind
3
U.C. San Diego
jwatsondaniels@g.harvard.edu, parkes@eecs.harvard.edu, berk@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Machine learning models are often used to inform real world
risk assessment tasks: predicting consumer default risk, predicting whether a person suffers from a serious illness, or
predicting a person’s risk to appear in court. Given multiple
models that perform almost equally well for a prediction task,
to what extent do predictions vary across these models? If
predictions are relatively consistent for similar models, then
the standard approach of choosing the model that optimizes
a penalized loss suffices. But what if predictions vary significantly for similar models? In machine learning, this is referred
to as predictive multiplicity i.e. the prevalence of conflicting
predictions assigned by near-optimal competing models. In
this paper, we present a framework for measuring predictive
multiplicity in probabilistic classification (predicting the probability of a positive outcome). We introduce measures that
capture the variation in risk estimates over the set of competing models, and develop optimization-based methods to
compute these measures efficiently and reliably for convex
empirical risk minimization problems. We demonstrate the incidence and prevalence of predictive multiplicity in real-world
tasks. Further, we provide insight into how predictive multiplicity arises by analyzing the relationship between predictive
multiplicity and data set characteristics (outliers, separability,
and majority-minority structure). Our results emphasize the
need to report predictive multiplicity more widely.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic classification is often incorporated into realworld risk assessment tasks to inform decisions. For instance,
probabilistic classifiers that predict consumer default risk are
used by lenders to underwrite loans (Bekhet and Eletter 2014;
Attigeri, Pai, and Pai 2017). Similarly in clinical applications,
physicians make treatment decisions using models that predict whether a person suffers from a serious illness (Than
et al. 2014; Khand et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2021). In criminal
justice, judges often make parole and sentencing decisions
guided by models that predict the probability that a person
will fail to appear in court (Austin, Ocker, and Bhati 2010;
Latessa et al. 2010; Christin, Rosenblat, and Boyd 2015;
Zeng, Ustun, and Rudin 2017).
The standard approach to selecting a probabilistic classifier often involves optimizing a loss function via empiriCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10306

cal risk minimization. But for a given prediction task, there
may exist multiple models that perform almost equally well,
which is referred to in machine learning as model multiplicity (Breiman 2001). These near-optimal, competing models,
have similar performance but characteristic differences - e.g.
their interpretability (Semenova and Rudin 2019), explainability (Fisher, Rudin, and Dominici 2019; Dong and Rudin
2020), counterfactual invariance (D’Amour et al. 2022), or
fairness (Coston, Rambachan, and Chouldechova 2021; Black
and Fredrikson 2021; Ali, Lahoti, and Gummadi 2021). These
differences can drastically change how we develop, choose,
and use models (Black, Raghavan, and Barocas 2022).
We investigate how predictions change across competing
models by studying predictive multiplicity: the prevalence
of conflicting predictions over competing models (Marx,
Du Pin Calmon, and Ustun 2020). To understand our motivation, consider the significance of competing models assigning vastly different predictions in practice. In mortality
prediction, a conflicting risk prediction would alter treatment decisions and health outcomes (Moreno et al. 2005).
In drug discovery, a conflicting risk prediction could switch
the compounds chosen for confirmatory experiments (Stokes
et al. 2020). By measuring and reporting the prevalence of
conflicts, we can improve how we choose and use machine
learning models. If end-users know that an individual risk
estimate conflicts over the set of competing models, they
could abstain from prediction (Black, Leino, and Fredrikson
2022; Hamid et al. 2017) or defer a decision to a human expert (Mozannar and Sontag 2020; Kompa, Snoek, and Beam
2021a). If model developers know that many risk estimates
conflict when compared across competing models, they might
reconsider deployment and dedicate time to contend with
multiplicity. These implications underline the importance of
measuring and reporting predictive multiplicity more widely.
Our main contributions are:
1. We introduce measures of predictive multiplicity in our
setting. The Viable Prediction Range examines how multiplicity affects predictions. Ambiguity and discrepancy
reflect the proportion of individuals assigned conflicting
risk estimates by competing models.
2. We develop optimization-based methods to compute
our measures for convex empirical risk minimization
problems. This includes employing mixed-integer non-

