The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FLAME: Free-Form Language-Based Motion Synthesis & Editing
Jihoon Kim1,2 , Jiseob Kim2 , Sungjoon Choi1
1

Korea University
2
Kakao Brain
jihoon-kim@korea.ac.kr, jiseob.kim@kakaobrain.com, sungjoon-choi@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Text-based motion generation models are drawing a surge of
interest for their potential for automating the motion-making
process in the game, animation, or robot industries. In this paper, we propose a diffusion-based motion synthesis and editing model named FLAME. Inspired by the recent successes
in diffusion models, we integrate diffusion-based generative
models into the motion domain. FLAME can generate highfidelity motions well aligned with the given text. Also, it can
edit the parts of the motion, both frame-wise and joint-wise,
without any fine-tuning. FLAME involves a new transformerbased architecture we devise to better handle motion data,
which is found to be crucial to manage variable-length motions and well attend to free-form text. In experiments, we
show that FLAME achieves state-of-the-art generation performances on three text-motion datasets: HumanML3D, BABEL, and KIT. We also demonstrate that FLAME’s editing
capability can be extended to other tasks such as motion prediction or motion in-betweening, which have been previously
covered by dedicated models.

(a) Text-to-motion synthesis result from FLAME with prompt:
“A person walks forward and bends down to pick up something.”

(b) (Green) Reference motion. (Blue) Text-based motion editing
result from FLAME with prompt: “A person dribbles a ball.”;
The editing model is allowed to edit upper body parts while
fixing lower body parts in this example.

Introduction
Given the difficulty of 3D motion generation, automating
text-based motion synthesis and editing has been considered
a difficult problem despite their usefulness in industries. The
process of text-to-motion synthesis and text-based motion
editing motion should not only deliver the clear intention of
motion but also be able to convey the naturalnesss of human
motion at the same time. This effort can be reduced considerably if one can generate motion through language or edit
existing motion to desirable motion simply by language. In
this study, we present a method that can perform motion synthesis and editing using free-form texts.
Recently, research on generating motion from language
has been actively conducted. Many previous studies (Guo
et al. 2020; Petrovich, Black, and Varol 2021; Song et al.
2022) have explored methods to synthesize motion from behavioral labels, such as ‘walking’, ‘jumping’, or ‘dancing’
and demonstrated promising results on text-to-motion synthesis tasks. However, synthesizing motion from behavioral
labels lacks descriptive power, which limits both diversity

Figure 1: Overview of text-to-motion synthesis and textbased motion editing. Motion flows from left to right.

and controllability in motion synthesis. As large-scale pretrained language models (PLMs) advance, there are studies
(Ghosh et al. 2021; Petrovich, Black, and Varol 2022) take
the advantage of using PLMs to generate motion from freeform texts, overcoming the limited expressiveness of simple
labels. Although these methods present promising results in
synthesizing motion from free-form texts, they lack capability in a flexible conditional generation.
In this paper, we introduce a versatile motion synthesis method that can generate motion well-aligned with the
provided prompts and perform editing of a reference motion from textual descriptions. As we aim to present a
method that can generate and edit motion, we employ the
diffusion model (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Dhariwal and
Nichol 2021; Nichol et al. 2021), which has been presenting many successful results in image generation and in-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8255

