The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Distributed Spectrum-Based Fault Localization
Avraham Natan, Roni Stern, Meir Kalech
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel
avinat123@gmail.com, roni.stern@gmail.com, kalech@bgu.ac.il

Abstract

while preserving privacy. We also evaluate three variations
of DSFLA-M ULTI, and show that with a small reduction in
diagnosis quality, DSFLA-M ULTI performs better in terms
of privacy, communication load and runtime.

Spectrum-Based Fault Localization (SFL) is a popular approach for diagnosing faulty systems. SFL algorithms are inherently centralized, where observations are collected and analyzed by a single diagnoser. Applying SFL to diagnose distributed systems is challenging, especially when communication is costly and there are privacy concerns. We propose
two SFL-based algorithms that are designed for distributed
systems: one for diagnosing a single faulty component and
one for diagnosing multiple faults. We analyze these algorithms theoretically and empirically. Our analysis shows that
the distributed SFL algorithms we developed output identical
diagnoses to centralized SFL while preserving privacy.

1

2

Background and Related Work

Our work builds on prior work on SFL. Thus, we provide
here a brief background on SFL. For a more comprehensive
background see Abreu, Zoeteweij, and Van Gemund 2009.
Definition 1 (SFL Problem). An SFL problem is defined by
a tuple ⟨C, R, S, E⟩ where C is a set of components, each
of which may be faulty; R is a set of runs executed on the
system; S is a binary |R| × |C| matrix where Si,j = 1 denotes that component cj participated in run ri ; and E is a
vector of length |R| where Ei = 1 denotes that ri failed, and
Ei = 0 otherwise. An SFL problem arises when ∃i : Ei = 1.
The matrix S is called spectrum and the vector E is called
error vector. Table 1a shows the spectrum and error vector
for a system with 3 components (c1 , c2 , c3 ) that is executed 4
(r1 , r2 , r3 , r4 ) times. Consider the second row, for example,
components c2 and c3 were involved, and the run failed.
A solution to an SFL problem is a set of diagnoses and a
ranking function to rank them. A diagnosis is a set of components that explain all the failed runs. Diagnosis ∆ explains a
failed run if at least one of the components in ∆ participated
in the failed run according to the spectrum S. Formally:
Definition 2 (SFL Diagnosis). A set of components ∆ ⊆
{1, .., |C|} is diagnosis for an SFL problem ⟨C, R, S, E⟩ if
∀i : Ei = 1 → ∃j : j ∈ ∆ ∧ Si,j = 1.
Some SFL algorithms diagnose single faults, while others
diagnose multiple faults.

Introduction

Spectrum-Based Fault Localization (SFL) is a popular approach for diagnosing faulty systems. Primarily used in software diagnosis (Abreu, Zoeteweij, and Van Gemund 2009),
SFL aims to identify faults in programs. To achieve this, SFL
models the program as a set of components, and runs tests,
each of which executes some components. This activity is
recorded into activity matrix (spectrum), and the tests outcomes are recorded in an error vector. Some SFL algorithms
diagnose single faults, while others diagnose multiple faults.
SFL algorithms are centralized. However, different systems are inherently distributed such as software systems,
multi-agent systems, communication networks etc. Applying centralized SFL techniques to diagnose such distributed
systems is challenging, especially when communication is
costly and the privacy should be considered: First, information on activity of a component may be hard to get or restricted. Second, privacy restrictions or communication load
might challenge the performance of a centralized algorithm.
The contribution of this paper is: (1) We define the
problem of Distributed SFL (DSFL). (2) We propose two
SFL-based diagnosis algorithms for distributed systems: one
for single faults (DSFLA-S INGLE) and one for multiple
faults (DSFLA-M ULTI). (3) We provide empirical and theoretical analysis of soundness, completeness, privacy, communication load and runtime. We show that the distributed
algorithms output identical diagnoses to the centralized

Single fault SFL: In this case, a component j is a diagnosis if it participated in at least one failed run. Diagnosis ranking uses Similarly Coefficients (Hofer et al. 2015), which
are evaluated using four Similarity Counters npq (j), p, q ∈
{0, 1} defined as: ∀cj , npq (j) = |{i|Sij = p ∧ Ei = q}|.
Table 1b shows these counters with respect to Table 1a.
For example, n11 (2)=2 since the number of runs where
Si,2 =1∧Ei =1 is 2. Using Ochiai (Abreu, Zoeteweij, and
Van Gemund 2007) similarity coefficient with those values
yields the probabilities: P (c1 )=0.67, P (c2 )=0.82, P (c3 ) =
0.41. The diagnosis set ranked by their probabilities in that
case is: D = {⟨{c2 }, 0.82⟩, ⟨{c1 }, 0.67⟩, ⟨{c3 }, 0.41⟩}.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6491

