The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Optimal Randomized Strategies in Adversarial Example Game
Jiahao Xie1 , Chao Zhang* 2 , Weijie Liu3,1 , Wensong Bai1,2 , Hui Qian1,4
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Advanced Technology Institute, Zhejiang University
3
Qiushi Academy for Advanced Studies, Zhejiang University
4
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
xiejh@zju.edu.cn, zczju@zju.edu.cn, westonhunter@zju.edu.cn, wensongb@zju.edu.cn, qianhui@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

and Kolter 2020; Bai et al. 2021), which usually constructs
a virtual attacker that generates the worst adversarial examples maximizing the loss in the neighborhood of clean examples and seeks a robust classification model (classifier)
by minimizing the loss on the generated examples.
Recent studies in the AT literature begin to explore randomized strategies for classifiers that probabilistically mix
multiple classification models and show that stochastic classifiers are more robust to adversarial examples than a single
deterministic classifier (Xie et al. 2018; Wang, Shi, and Osher 2019; Pinot et al. 2019, 2020; Meunier et al. 2021). Pinot
et al. (2020) demonstrate from a game-theoretic perspective
that randomized classifiers provide better worst-case theoretical guarantees than deterministic ones when attackers use
deterministic strategies. They empirically show that the mixture of two classifiers obtained by their proposed Boosted
Adversarial Training (BAT) algorithm achieves significant
improvement over the state-of-the-art deterministic classifier produced by the Standard Adversarial Training (SAT)
algorithm (Madry et al. 2018). Later, Meunier et al. (2021)
show that randomized classifiers also outperform deterministic ones when attackers are allowed to use sophisticated
randomized attack strategies.
In particular, Meunier et al. (2021) established the existence of an Mixed Nash Equilibrium (MNE) in randomized
adversarial training games, i.e., there is an optimal randomized strategy pair of classifier and attacker such that neither of them can benefit from unilaterally changing its strategy, whereas when the player uses a deterministic strategy, a
Nash equilibrium may not exist. For problems with discrete
classifier parameter spaces, Meunier et al. (2021) propose
two theoretically-guaranteed algorithms and then heuristically extend them to problems with continuous parameter.
However, their heuristics are not guaranteed to find an MNE,
and the efficiency may decrease as the number of mixture
components in the randomized classifier increases (see the
results in our experiments).
In this paper, we propose an efficient algorithm named
Fully Randomized Adversarial Training (FRAT) for finding
MNE in the randomized AT game with continuous classifier
parameter spaces. In particular, FRAT maintains a weighted
mixture of classification models for the classifier, where
both model parameters and mixture weights are updated in
each round with relatively low computational cost. Further-

The vulnerability of deep neural network models to adversarial example attacks is a practical challenge in many artificial
intelligence applications. A recent line of work shows that
the use of randomization in adversarial training is the key to
find optimal strategies against adversarial example attacks.
However, in a fully randomized setting where both the defender and the attacker can use randomized strategies, there
are no efficient algorithm for finding such an optimal strategy. To fill the gap, we propose the first algorithm of its
kind, called FRAT, which models the problem with a new
infinite-dimensional continuous-time flow on probability distribution spaces. FRAT maintains a lightweight mixture of
models for the defender, with flexibility to efficiently update
mixing weights and model parameters at each iteration. Furthermore, FRAT utilizes lightweight sampling subroutines to
construct a random strategy for the attacker. We prove that the
continuous-time limit of FRAT converges to a mixed Nash
equilibria in a zero-sum game formed by a defender and an
attacker. Experimental results also demonstrate the efficiency
of FRAT on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets.

Introduction
Deep Neural Network (DNN) models have been shown to
be highly vulnerable to adversarial example attacks, which
are tiny and imperceptible perturbations of the input designed to fool the model (Biggio et al. 2013; Szegedy et al.
2014; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015). The vulnerability severely hindered the use of DNNs in safety-critical
applications and became one of the main concerns of the
artificial intelligence community (Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2015). To improve the robustness of the model to
adversarial examples, various defense strategies have been
proposed in the past few years (Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2015; Papernot et al. 2016; Samangouei, Kabkab,
and Chellappa 2018; Madry et al. 2018; Cohen, Rosenfeld, and Kolter 2019; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. 2019; Zhang
et al. 2019; Pinot et al. 2020; Meunier et al. 2021; Gowal
et al. 2021). Among existing strategies, the adversarial training (AT) approach (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015;
Madry et al. 2018) is widely recognized as the most successful one (Schott et al. 2018; Pang et al. 2020; Maini, Wong,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10490

