The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Bespoke: A Block-Level Neural Network Optimization Framework
for Low-Cost Deployment
Jong-Ryul Lee1 , Yong-Hyuk Moon1,2 *
1

Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), Daejeon, Korea
2
University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon, Korea
{jongryul.lee,yhmoon}@etri.re.kr

Abstract

All(OFA), producing non-trivial neural networks simultaneously for multiple target environments. Sahni et al. (2021)
proposed a method called CompOFA which is more efficient
than OFA in terms of training cost and search cost based
on reducing the design space for model configuration. Since
these methods do not utilize a pretrained network, they require too much time for training the full network. In order to
address such an expensive cost, Molchanov et al. (2022) proposed a latency-aware network acceleration method called
LANA based on a pretrained teacher model. This method
dramatically reduces training and search costs with large design space. In LANA, for each layer in the teacher model,
more than 100 alternative blocks (sub-networks) are trained
to mimic it. After training them, LANA replaces ineffective layers in the teacher model with lightweight alternatives using integer programming. Even if LANA utilizes a
pretrained teacher model, it requires designing alternative
blocks. In addition, training many alternatives for every single layer may increase peak CPU/GPU memory usage. This
limitation leads LANA to require O(M ) epochs for training the alternatives on ImageNet where M is the number of
alternatives for each layer.
To significantly reduce the cost of searching for and retraining models for multiple target environments, we focus
on public pretrained neural networks like models in Keras’
applications1 . Each of those networks was properly searched
and trained with plentiful resources. Thus, instead of newly
exploring large search space with a number of expensive
GPUs, we devise a novel way of exploiting decent reusable
blocks (sub-networks) in those networks. Our work starts
from this rationale.
In this paper, we devise a framework named Bespoke efficiently optimizing neural networks for various target environments. This framework is supposed to help us to get
fast and small neural networks with practically affordable
cost, which a single modern GPU can handle. The illustration of comparing OFA, LANA, and Bespoke is depicted
in Figure 1. Our framework has following notable features
compared to previous methods like OFA and LANA.

As deep learning models become popular, there is a lot of
need for deploying them to diverse device environments. Because it is costly to develop and optimize a neural network for
every single environment, there is a line of research to search
neural networks for multiple target environments efficiently.
However, existing works for such a situation still suffer from
requiring many GPUs and expensive costs. Motivated by this,
we propose a novel neural network optimization framework
named Bespoke for low-cost deployment. Our framework
searches for a lightweight model by replacing parts of an
original model with randomly selected alternatives, each of
which comes from a pretrained neural network or the original model. In the practical sense, Bespoke has two significant
merits. One is that it requires near zero cost for designing the
search space of neural networks. The other merit is that it exploits the sub-networks of public pretrained neural networks,
so the total cost is minimal compared to the existing works.
We conduct experiments exploring Bespoke’s the merits, and
the results show that it finds efficient models for multiple targets with meager cost.

Introduction
Due to the great success of deep learning, neural networks are deployed into various environments such as smartphones, edge devices, and so forth. In addition, lots of techniques have been proposed for optimizing neural networks
for fast inference and small memory usage (Park et al. 2020;
Liu et al. 2021; Luo and Wu 2020; Yu, Mazaheri, and Jannesari 2021; Lee et al. 2020; Peng et al. 2019; Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Yim et al. 2017).
One of the major issues about optimizing neural networks
for efficient deployment is that it is not cheap to search for
an optimized model for even a single target environment. If
the target environment is changed, we need to search for another optimized model again. That is, if we have 100 target
environments, we have to do optimization 100 times separately. This situation is not preferred in practice due to the
expensive model search/training cost.
There is a line of research for addressing this issue. Cai
et al. (2020) proposed an efficient method, called Once-For-

• Near Zero-Cost Model Design Space: Our framework
is based on the sub-networks of a teacher (original)
model and those of pretrained models. Our framework

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8465

https://keras.io/api/applications

