The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

GAN-Based Domain Inference Attack
Yuechun Gu, Keke Chen
Trustworthy and Intelligent Computing Lab
Computer Science Department
Marquette University, Milwaukee, WI

Abstract

et al. 2021) allow the adversary to approximately reconstruct
the training set based on a trained model.
In all these model-based attacks, the adversaries are assumed to have the prior “domain knowledge” of the trained
model, which is often defined as the application or task behind the trained model, e.g., a model for facial recognition.
The domain knowledge is critical for identifying auxiliary
data (Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart 2015; Zhang et al.
2020), e.g., face images, in model inversion attacks. Zhang
et al. (Zhang et al. 2020) show that the attack accuracy
may drop significantly without auxiliary data, and the reconstructed images are not recognizable. Our experiments
(Section 5) confirm that this attack-accuracy difference can
be up to ∼ 30%. Thus, an interesting question is: what if
the attacker does not have the desired domain knowledge?
In addition to social engineering to explore the domain of
a model, does the model itself contain information to infer
the domain? Understanding this problem will help us better
assess the risk of model-based attacks and design defense
mechanisms to protect models.
Scope of research and our contributions. In this paper,
we hold the following minimum assumption about the attacker’s prior knowledge. We assume that the target model
is a black-box image classification model1 . The adversary
only knows the input image size and the output probability vector without any knowledge about the domain of the
model. However, the adversary can apply the model to any
input in the desired format. We assume a bunch of publicor private-domain datasets are available, which can be any
image datasets the adversary can find from a set of candidate landmark domains. We focus on a fundamental question which we call model domain inference: given a machine
learning model, estimate the most similar domain that the
model is likely trained on among the available landmark domains. By introducing a method called latent domain ranking, we show that even though the model is a black box to
the adversaries, it’s still possible to derive the target model’s
relative domain similarities to the landmark domains. Furthermore, we find that the data from top-ranked similar domains work well as the auxiliary data in model-inversion at-

Model-based attacks can infer training data information from
deep neural network models. These attacks heavily depend
on the attacker’s knowledge of the application domain, e.g.,
using it to determine the auxiliary data for model-inversion
attacks. However, attackers may not know what the model
is used for in practice. We propose a generative adversarial
network (GAN) based method to explore likely or similar domains of a target model – the model domain inference (MDI)
attack. For a given target (classification) model, we assume
that the attacker knows nothing but the input and output formats and can use the model to derive the prediction for any
input in the desired form. Our basic idea is to use the target
model to affect a GAN training process for a candidate domain’s dataset that is easy to obtain. We find that the target
model may distract the training procedure less if the domain
is more similar to the target domain. We then measure the
distraction level with the distance between GAN-generated
datasets, which can be used to rank candidate domains for the
target model. Our experiments show that the auxiliary dataset
from an MDI top-ranked domain can effectively boost the result of model-inversion attacks.

1

Introduction

Numerous companies are applying machine learning in marketing, advertising, and targeting users to improve revenues.
Many such machine-learned models depend on sensitive
personal or confidential business operational data, raising
privacy concerns. So far, most studies about the privacy issue in machine learning focus on problems with training and
testing data privacy in the stages of model development and
inference (Chakraborty et al. 2018).
In addition to training/testing data privacy, researchers
have been wondering how releasing models only can also
leak private information in training data. Surprisingly,
machine-learned models often remember much more than
what we expected (Song, Ristenpart, and Shmatikov 2017).
Membership inference attacks (Shokri et al. 2017; Rahman
et al. 2018; Li and Zhang 2020; Hui et al. 2021) can infer which data points were likely used to train the model,
and model inversion attacks (Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart
2015; Wang, Si, and Wu 2015; Zhang et al. 2020; Khosravy

1
Our current work focuses on the image classification problem.
However, it’s possible to extend the study to other learning problems and different types of data, where GAN or other generative
methods applies.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14214

