The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AutoGraph: Optimizing DNN Computation Graph for Parallel
GPU Kernel Execution
Yuxuan Zhao1 , Qi Sun1 * , Zhuolun He1 , Yang Bai1,2 , Bei Yu1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SmartMore
{yxzhao21,qsun,zlhe,ybai,byu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract

with relaxed performance constraints to enlarge the search
space. It adopts a flow-based method to split the graph and
uses a cost-based backtracking algorithm to find the optimized graphs. To save the engineering efforts for emerging
new operators, TASO (Jia et al. 2019a) takes operator definitions and specifications, then automatically generates and
verifies graph substitutions, enabling a much larger search
space than manually designed ones. It is non-trivial to find
the graphs with optimal execution time on hardware in this
exponential search space. OCGGS (Fang et al. 2020) introduces partial orders to substitution sequence to prune the redundant sequences and reuses the valid subgraph matching
from the previous step. TENSAT (Yang et al. 2021) relies
on the equality saturation technique to divide the graph optimization into two phases, exploration and extraction, to reduce the complexity. Despite these advancements, these existing graph optimization methods (Jia et al. 2019a,b; Fang
et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2021; Bai et al. 2021) focus on
sequential kernel launch frameworks, which is of low efficiency in the inference stage, given a static neural network with fixed input shape. In other words, only intraoperator parallelism is considered while no inter-operator
parallelism. Each kernel occupies all the on-chip resources
exclusively during execution though most resources are idle.

Deep learning frameworks optimize the computation graphs
and intra-operator computations to boost the inference performance on GPUs, while inter-operator parallelism is usually ignored. In this paper, a unified framework, AutoGraph,
is proposed to obtain highly optimized computation graphs in
favor of parallel executions of GPU kernels. A novel dynamic
programming algorithm, combined with backtracking search,
is adopted to explore the optimal graph optimization solution,
with the fast performance estimation from the mixed critical path cost. Accurate runtime information based on GPU
Multi-Stream launched with CUDA Graph is utilized to determine the convergence of the optimization. Experimental
results demonstrate that our method achieves up to 3.47×
speedup over existing graph optimization methods. Moreover, AutoGraph outperforms state-of-the-art parallel kernel
launch frameworks by up to 1.26×.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown remarkable
power on many tasks such as computer vision (He et al.
2016; Redmon et al. 2016) and natural language processing
(Vaswani et al. 2017; Devlin et al. 2018). The state-of-the-art
models get deeper and larger to achieve better performance,
which causes a great challenge to deployment in actual scenarios. As a result, the acceleration of modern DNNs is in
great demand.
Deep learning (DL) frameworks (Chen et al. 2015; Abadi
et al. 2016; Paszke et al. 2019) represent the neural networks as graphs and optimize the graphs to accelerate inference. In the graph, a node represents the atomic DL operator (e.g., convolution, pooling), and an edge represents the
data dependency between two nodes. A widely used graph
optimization approach is equivalent graph substitutions (Jia
et al. 2019a; Zhao et al. 2022; Xing et al. 2022). TensorFlow,
PyTorch and TVM (Chen et al. 2018) perform greedy rulebased substitutions in a predefined order. For example, one
rule used by them is to replace convolution, batch normalization, and activation with an equivalent fused operator, which
can eliminate intermediate results and reduce memory access. MetaFlow (Jia et al. 2019b) allows graph substitutions

Modern GPUs possess many computation and memory
resources that provide great potentials for high-performance
computations and are ideal for intensive tensor computations
in DNN models. With the rapid advances in GPUs (NVIDIA
A100 reaches 19.5 TFLOPS of FP32 performance), the exclusive execution of a single DNN operator in the previous
arts can no longer achieve sufficient resource utilization. In
addition, there is a trend in the DL community to replace the
linear chains of operators with multiple branches (Szegedy
et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2022) to capture diverse and deep information. The neural networks obtained by neural architecture search (NAS) (Zoph et al. 2018) show similar structures.
Such networks can perform better on GPUs by leveraging
inter-operator parallelism. IOS (Ding et al. 2021) divides the
computation into different stages and uses a dynamic programming technique to find the optimized launch schedule
for CNN models. Nimble (Kwon et al. 2020) is a framework
supporting parallel kernel launch for the whole DNN model
and leverages the ahead-of-time (AOT) scheduler to minimize hardware scheduling overhead. Parallel execution for

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11354

