The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fast Offline Policy Optimization for Large Scale Recommendation
Otmane Sakhi1, 2 , David Rohde1 , Alexandre Gilotte1
1

Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France
CREST-ENSAE, IPP, Palaiseau, France
{o.sakhi, d.rohde, a.gilotte}@criteo.com
2

performed by πθ . It can be written as:

Abstract

R(πθ ) = Ex∼ν(X ),a∼πθ (.|x) [r(a, x)]
X
= Ex∼ν(X ) [
πθ (a|x)r(a, x)]

Personalised interactive systems such as recommender systems require selecting relevant items from massive catalogs
dependent on context. Reward-driven offline optimisation of
these systems can be achieved by a relaxation of the discrete
problem resulting in policy learning or REINFORCE style
learning algorithms. Unfortunately, this relaxation step requires computing a sum over the entire catalogue making the
complexity of the evaluation of the gradient (and hence each
stochastic gradient descent iterations) linear in the catalogue
size. This calculation is untenable in many real world examples such as large catalogue recommender systems, severely
limiting the usefulness of this method in practice. In this paper, we derive an approximation of these policy learning algorithms that scale logarithmically with the catalogue size.
Our contribution is based upon combining three novel ideas:
a new Monte Carlo estimate of the gradient of a policy, the
self normalised importance sampling estimator and the use
of fast maximum inner product search at training time. Extensive experiments show that our algorithm is an order of
magnitude faster than naive approaches yet produces equally
good policies.

(1)
(2)

a∈A

In real world applications, we usually have access to a
finite number of context observations {xi }N
i=1 and a reward
estimator r̂(a, x) built depending on the application and the
task our system is trying to solve. We define an empirical
estimator aligned with Equation (1) by:
N

R̂(πθ ) =

1 X
Ea∼πθ (.|xi ) [r̂(a, xi )]
N i=1

=

1 XX
πθ (a|xi )r̂(a, xi ).
N i=1

(3)

N

(4)

a∈A

This simple equation actually encompasses the majority
of the objectives used in the offline bandit literature depending on the reward estimator chosen. For example, if
we have access to a bandit dataset with the actions done,
their propensities and the reward obtained {ai , pi , ri }N
i=1 ,
the IPS/Horwitz-Thompson estimator and its clipped variant
(Swaminathan and Joachims 2015a; Bottou et al. 2013) can
be obtained by choosing a reward estimator of the following
form :
(
ri
if a = ai
τ
r̂IP S (a, xi ) = max(τ,pi )
0
otherwise

Introduction
Large Scale Recommender systems are helping users navigate the enormous amount of content present on the internet, allowing them to identify relevant items. From movie
recommendation, basket completion to ad placement, all of
these systems need to make decisions in an accurate and fast
manner. In this work, we cast the problem of recommendation in the offline contextual bandit framework (Swaminathan and Joachims 2015a; Dudı́k et al. 2014). Given a context x, the decision system performs an action a, the context
then interacts with the action recommended and we receive
a reward r(a, x). We represent the recommender system as a
stochastic parametric policy πθ : X → P(A), which given
a context x ∈ X , defines a probability distribution over the
discrete action space A of size P . We suppose that the contexts x are stochastic and coming from an unknown distribution ν on X . Our objective is to maximize w.r.t to our
parameter θ the average reward over contexts and actions

with τ the clipping factor between 0 and 1, with the original
IPS retreived when τ = 0. With the additional assumption
that we have access to a reward model rM , we can similarly define the Doubly Robust estimator (Dudı́k et al. 2014)
and its clipped variant (Su et al. 2020) by choosing a reward
estimator of the form :
(
ri −rM (a,xi )
τ
max(τ,pi ) + rM (a, xi ) if a = ai
r̂DR (a, xi ) =
rM (a, xi )
otherwise .
One can also cast other methods (Wang, Agarwal, and
Dudık 2017) into this framework or just optimize any offline metric by designing an adequate reward estimator r̂ and
plugging it in the simple objective defined in Equation (3).

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9686

