The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Feature Distribution Fitting with Direction-Driven Weighting for Few-Shot
Images Classification
Xin Wei1 , Wei Du1 , Huan Wan2 , Weidong Min3, 4 *
1
School of Software, Nanchang University
School of Computer and Information Engineering, Jiangxi Normal University
3
School of Mathematics and Computer Science, Institute of Metaverse, Nanchang University
4
Jiangxi Key Laboratory of Smart City, Nanchang University
{xinwei, minweidong}@ncu.edu.cn, duwei@email.ncu.edu.cn, huanwan@jxnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

class data, and train the specific-task classifiers on the labeled samples in novel classes, surprisingly achieving outperformance. Li et al. (Li et al. 2020) construct conditional
Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Networks to synthesize
more training data to alleviate the data insufficiency problem. Most of the existing methods improve the generalization ability of the models through the optimization of training process, the learning of metric and sample generating
networks. They do not focus on the ground-truth distribution of samples in the feature space. The ground-truth distribution is hard to estimate precisely through only a few
feature vectors of samples. Yang et al. (Yang et al. 2021)
propose a distribution calibration strategy (DC) to estimate
the ground-truth distributions of the few-shot classes. The
strategy measures the matching strength between the base
classes and the samples in the support set (i.e., the target
samples), and then transfers the statistics from the similar
base classes to the few-shot classes in support sets based on
the matching strength.
When measuring the matching strength between a base
class and a target sample, a feasible way is to match all base
class samples and the within-class variation with the target sample. This manner is similar to sparse representation,
which makes full use of the location and sample distribution
information of the base class. We call this manner Manner
1. As the computational cost of Manner 1 is too high, DC
(Yang et al. 2021) calculates the sample mean of each base
class and uses it to compare the similarity with the target
sample, namely only keeps location information, thereby remarkably reducing the computational cost while maintaining a certain level of effectiveness. We observe that Manner
1 performs the matching with target samples through Euclidean distance, i.e., only measures the difference in each
dimension separately. Each dimension corresponds to a direction in the feature space. The observation means Manner
1 ignores the location and distribution information in other
directions, as shown in Fig. 1. Thus, it is necessary to add
descriptive information in other directions.
As a simple and efficient way, more directional information can be obtained by calculating the cross product of the
feature vector and its transpose to construct the feature description matrix of each base class sample and the description matrix of the different within-class variations, which
is called Manner 2. Values in new dimensions/directions

Few-shot learning has received increasing attention and witnessed significant advances in recent years. However, most
of the few-shot learning methods focus on the optimization
of training process, and the learning of metric and sample
generating networks. They ignore the importance of learning the ground-truth feature distributions of few-shot classes.
This paper proposes a direction-driven weighting method to
make the feature distributions of few-shot classes precisely
fit the ground-truth distributions. The learned feature distributions can generate an unlimited number of training samples for the few-shot classes to avoid overfitting. Specifically,
the proposed method consists of two optimization strategies.
The direction-driven strategy is for capturing more complete
direction information that can describe the feature distributions. The similarity-weighting strategy is proposed to estimate the impact of different classes in the fitting procedure and assign corresponding weights. Our method outperforms the current state-of-the-art performance by an average
of 3% for 1-shot on standard few-shot learning benchmarks
like miniImageNet, CIFAR-FS, and CUB. The excellent performance and compelling visualization show that our method
can more accurately estimate the ground-truth distributions.

Introduction
With the enormous amount of data and the rapid development of deep learning, supervised image classification has
achieved ultra-high precision. However, building large-scale
labeled datasets is expensive, and it is impossible to provide
a large amount of training data in many application scenarios. Therefore, few-shot learning develops significantly
in this context. Many few-shot learning methods have been
proposed to improve the performance of models in few-shot
image classification. Finn et al. (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine
2017) propose an algorithm based on meta-learning to make
the model quickly adapt to new tasks with only a small number of training samples. The method proposed by Vinyals et
al. (Vinyals et al. 2016) combines metric learning and attLSTM to build networks for classifying the query images,
improving the classification ability of the models. Chen et
al. (Chen et al. 2019a) train the feature extractor on base
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10315

