The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Probabilities Are Not Enough: Formal Controller Synthesis for
Stochastic Dynamical Models with Epistemic Uncertainty
Thom Badings1 , Licio Romao2 , Alessandro Abate2 , Nils Jansen1
1

Radboud University, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
thom.badings@ru.nl, licio.romao@cs.ox.ac.uk, alessandro.abate@cs.ox.ac.uk, n.jansen@science.ru.nl
2

Abstract
Capturing uncertainty in models of complex dynamical systems is crucial to designing safe controllers. Stochastic noise
causes aleatoric uncertainty, whereas imprecise knowledge of
model parameters leads to epistemic uncertainty. Several approaches use formal abstractions to synthesize policies that satisfy temporal specifications related to safety and reachability.
However, the underlying models exclusively capture aleatoric
but not epistemic uncertainty, and thus require that model parameters are known precisely. Our contribution to overcoming
this restriction is a novel abstraction-based controller synthesis method for continuous-state models with stochastic noise
and uncertain parameters. By sampling techniques and robust
analysis, we capture both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty,
with a user-specified confidence level, in the transition probability intervals of a so-called interval Markov decision process
(iMDP). We synthesize an optimal policy on this iMDP, which
translates (with the specified confidence level) to a feedback
controller for the continuous model with the same performance guarantees. Our experimental benchmarks confirm that
accounting for epistemic uncertainty leads to controllers that
are more robust against variations in parameter values.

1

s
Controller


P Ü = high

Control
input
System

P{ Ü = low }

−

Ù
−

Ù

+

Ù

+

Ù

Figure 1: Aleatoric (stochastic) uncertainty in the wind (Ü)
causes probability distributions over the outcomes of controls,
while epistemic uncertainty in the mass (Ù) of the drone
causes state transitions to be nondeterministic.
amenable to techniques and tools from formal verification:
by discretizing their state and action spaces, abstractions result in, e.g., finite Markov decision processes (MDPs) that
soundly capture the continuous dynamics (Abate et al. 2008).
Verification guarantees on the finite abstraction can thus carry
over to the continuous model. In this paper, we adopt such
an abstraction-based approach to controller synthesis.

Introduction

Stochastic models. Stochastic dynamical models capture
complex systems where the likelihood of transitions is specified by probabilities (Kumar and Varaiya 2015). Controllers
for stochastic models must act safely and reliably with respect to a desired specification. Traditional control design
methods use, e.g., Lyapunov functions and optimization to
guarantee stability and (asymptotic) convergence. However,
alternative methods are needed to give formal guarantees
about richer temporal specifications relevant to, for example,
safety-critical applications (Fan et al. 2022).
Finite abstractions. A powerful approach to synthesizing
certifiably safe controllers leverages probabilistic verification
to provide formal guarantees over specifications of safety
(always avoid certain states) and reachability (reach a certain
set of states). A common example is the reach-avoid specification, where the task is to maximize the probability of reaching desired goal states while avoiding unsafe states (Fisac
et al. 2015). Finite abstractions can make continuous models
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
14701

Probabilities are not enough. The notion of uncertainty is
often distinguished in aleatoric (statistical) and epistemic
(systematic) uncertainty (Fox and Ülkümen 2011; Sullivan 2015). Aleatoric uncertainty is caused by randomness,
whereas epistemic uncertainty is caused by a lack of knowledge of, for example, system parameters (Smith 2013). In
the absence of a prior distribution over these parameters, a
purely probabilistic approach fails to capture epistemic uncertainty (Hüllermeier and Waegeman 2021). In this paper,
we aim to reason under both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty (without a prior distribution) to synthesize provably
correct controllers for safety-critical applications. Existing
abstraction methods fail to achieve this novel, general goal.
Models with epistemic uncertainty. We consider reachavoid problems for stochastic dynamical models with continuous state and action spaces under epistemic uncertainty
described by parameters that lie within a convex uncertainty
set. In the simplest case, this uncertainty set is an interval, e.g.,
a drone whose mass is known to be between 0.75–1.25 kg.
As shown in Fig. 1, the dynamics of the drone depend on
uncertain factors, such as the wind and the drone’s mass.
Assume that for the wind, we can use weather data to estimate the likelihood of state dynamics, i.e., we can derive a
probabilistic model. For the mass, however, we may not have

