The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Video-Text Pre-training with Learned Regions for Retrieval
Rui Yan1 , Mike Zheng Shou2 , Yixiao Ge3 , Jinpeng Wang2 , Xudong Lin4 ,
Guanyu Cai5 , Jinhui Tang1 *
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Jiangsu, China
2
Show Lab, National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
Tencent PCG, Beijing, China
4
Columbia University, New York, USA
5
Tongji University, Shanghai, China
{ruiyan, jinhuitang}@njust.edu.cn, {mike.zheng.shou, geyixiao831}@gmail.com, wangjp23@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
xudong.lin@columbia.edu, caiguanyu@tongji.edu.cn
Abstract

“saleswomen in supermarket puts products in brown bag”

Video-Text pre-training aims at learning transferable representations from large-scale video-text pairs via aligning the
semantics between visual and textual information. State-ofthe-art approaches extract visual features from raw pixels in
an end-to-end fashion. However, these methods operate at
frame-level directly and thus overlook the spatio-temporal
structure of objects in video, which yet has a strong synergy with nouns in textual descriptions. In this work, we
propose a simple yet effective module for video-text representation learning, namely RegionLearner, which can take
into account the structure of objects during pre-training on
large-scale video-text pairs. Given a video, our module (1)
first quantizes continuous visual features via clustering patchfeatures into the same cluster according to content similarity,
then (2) generates learnable masks to aggregate fragmentary
features into regions with complete semantics, and finally (3)
models the spatio-temporal dependencies between different
semantic regions. In contrast to using off-the-shelf object detectors, our proposed module does not require explicit supervision and is much more computationally efficient. We pretrain the proposed approach on the public WebVid2M and
CC3M datasets. Extensive evaluations on four downstream
video-text retrieval benchmarks clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of our RegionLearner.

(i) whole frames

(ii) + Explicit obj. box

(iii) implicitly learning
obj. region (Ours)

Figure 1: Previous works for video-text pre-training usually
extract visual features from the whole frames of video. Inspired by the success of region features in image-text representation (Li et al. 2020b; Chen et al. 2020), some videobased works also extract semantic features (Zhu and Yang
2020; Liu et al. 2019) from explicit object regions. Our motivation is to implicitly learn object regions from raw pixels
without any supervision.
i), whole frames (Sun et al. 2019; Lei et al. 2021; Bain
et al. 2021): are directly encoded as the video features
through the pre-trained 2D or 3D visual backbone. Limited
to computing resources, early works (Liu et al. 2019; Sun
et al. 2019) extract such video features in an offline way, but
recent methods have managed to train the visual backbone
on the raw frames in an end-to-end manner (Bain et al. 2021;
Lei et al. 2021). Whereas, these methods evenly encode each
frame as a number of patch-features, which inevitably destroys the inherent spatio-temporal structure of the visual
entities. ii), whole frames + explicit object box (Zhu and
Yang 2020; Liu et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2022): extracts semantic region features from frames supervised by explicit
object boxes detected by the off-the-shelf algorithms for better performance. Intuitively, the visual information of local objects is more effective for semantic alignment. However, existing methods adopt offline region features which
are very computationally expensive and not flexible. Beyond
that, region features used in these methods also heavily rely
on the quality of the off-the-shelf detectors.
These observations motivate us to design a lightweight
approach to implicitly learning object region (as shown
in Figure 1 (iii)) without position supervision. We propose

Introduction
Video-Text pre-training (Lei et al. 2021; Bain et al. 2021),
which aims to learn transferable representations by aligning
the semantics of video and text, has attracted researchers’
attention in recent years. It enables a series of downstream
video-text tasks, such as video-text retrieval (Rohrbach et al.
2015; Xu et al. 2016), video question answering (Jang et al.
2017), and video captioning (Rohrbach et al. 2015; Xu et al.
2016). The conventional pipeline (Bain et al. 2021; Lei et al.
2021) of video-language pre-training is encoding video and
text into the shared feature space followed by the crossmodality modeling. The visual input used in existing methods can be categorized as whole frames and whole frames +
explicit object boxes, as shown in Figure 1.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3100

