The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Taming Continuous Posteriors for Latent Variational Dialogue Policies
Marin Vlastelica1 , Patrick Ernst2 , Gyuri Szarvas2
1

Autonomous Learning Group, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
2
Amazon Development Center Germany GmbH, Berlin, Germany
marin.vlastelica@tuebingen.mpg.de, {peernst, szarvasg}@amazon.de

Abstract
Utilizing amortized variational inference for latent-action reinforcement learning (RL) has been shown to be an effective
approach in Task-oriented Dialogue (ToD) systems for optimizing dialogue success. Until now, categorical posteriors
have been argued to be one of the main drivers of performance.
In this work we revisit Gaussian variational posteriors for
latent-action RL and show that they can yield even better performance than categoricals. We achieve this by introducing
an improved variational inference objective for learning continuous representations without auxiliary learning objectives,
which streamlines the training procedure. Moreover, we propose ways to regularize the latent dialogue policy, which helps
to retain good response coherence. Using continuous latent
representations our model achieves state of the art dialogue
success rate on the MultiWOZ benchmark, and also compares
well to categorical latent methods in response coherence.

1

Introduction

Task-oriented Dialogue (ToD) systems have reached a degree of maturity, which enables them to engage with human
users and assist them in various tasks. They are able to steer
natural-language conversations in order to complete users’
goals, such as booking restaurants, querying weather forecasts and resolving customer service issues. At their core, the
behavior of these systems is controlled by a dialogue policy,
which receives user inputs in the form of utterances and additional features or states. Template-based methods (Walker
et al. 2007; Inaba and Takahashi 2016) leverage ranking or
classification approaches to select the most fitting response
from a pre-defined set of responses, i.e. templates. While
template-based methods offer better control over the dialogue policy behavior, they are less versatile due to their
dependency on template sets. Moreover, constructing comprehensive template sets is a challenge in itself (Gao, Galley,
and Li 2019). In retrieval-based approaches (Yan, Song, and
Wu 2016; Henderson et al. 2019; Tao et al. 2019) candidate responses are not pre-defined, but are retrieved from
massive dialogue corpora, e.g. by executing ad-hoc search
queries a priori. Generative models do not require such additional inputs as prior knowledge. They enable end-to-end
(E2E) learning of dialogue policies and have the potential
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13673

to generate diverse responses by leveraging a large vocabulary (Serban et al. 2017; Zhao, Zhao, and Eskenazi 2017; Gu
et al. 2018). Even though such fully data-driven approaches
offer great versatility and a faster adoption, they may exhibit degenerate behavior by generating incomprehensible
utterances. This is apparent in multi-turn dialogues, which
span hundreds of words, while the success signal is only observed at the end of dialogues. Reinforcement learning (RL)
based approaches are able to optimize for such long-term,
sparse rewards and have been applied in this setup. Previous approaches prominently applied word-level RL (Lewis
et al. 2017; Kottur et al. 2017), where the action space is defined over the entire vocabulary. The response utterances are
then generated auto-regressively by consecutive next-word
predictions. Unfortunately, the use of large action spaces often impedes the convergence of policy learning algorithms,
which makes it hard to ensure coherent responses. Prior work
makes use of latent-action RL to address the dimensionality
problem by utilizing variational inference approaches (Zhao,
Xie, and Eskenazi 2019; Lubis et al. 2020). These methods
rely on a supervised learning stage, where latent action representations are learned over response utterances, followed by
fine-tuning via reinforcement learning in the latent space.
In this paper we follow this paradigm, but extend prior
work substantially by introducing the TCUP approach, which
aims to Tame ContinUous Posteriors for latent variational dialogue policies. TCUP makes the following contributions: (i)
A new formulation of the variational inference objective for
learning continuous latent response representations without
auxiliary learning objectives. (ii) A more robust approach for
learning from ToD data in an offline RL setup, which utilizes
the fact that we are dealing with expert dialogue trajectories.
Using the MultiWOZ benchmark (Budzianowski et al. 2018),
we show that TCUP is able to improve the state-of-the-art
performance across different metrics. In addition to MultiWOZ’s context-to-text metrics and following Lubis et al.
(2020), we demonstrate the benefits of the learned continuous latent representations quantitatively, using a clustering
analysis.

2

Preliminaries

Latent-action reinforcement learning methods are trained in
two stages: In the first stage, which we denote as SL Stage,
an encoder-decoder architecture is trained using a supervised

