The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Recovering the Graph Underlying Networked Dynamical Systems
under Partial Observability: A Deep Learning Approach
Sérgio Machado2,5 , Anirudh Sridhar3 , Paulo Gil2,4 , Jorge Henriques2
José M. F. Moura5 , Augusto Santos1,2 *
1

Instituto de Telecomunicações, Portugal
2
University of Coimbra, Portugal
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Princeton University, New Jersey, NJ, USA
4
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Portugal
5
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
smachado@student.dei.uc.pt, asridhar@princeton.edu, {psg,jh}@dei.uc.pt, moura@andrew.cmu.edu,
augusto.pt@gmail.com
Abstract

the main avenues of contagion) is critical for designing effective mitigation measures (Lahmanovich and James 1976;
Ganesh, Massoulié, and Towsley 2005; Santos, Moura, and
Xavier 2015; Braunstein et al. 2016; Ren et al. 2019). For
example, a natural mitigation policy is network dismantling: aiming to quarantine a minimal set of nodes to promote a maximal disconnect of the underlying contagion network (Braunstein et al. 2016; Ren et al. 2019) – thus, hindering virus propagation across communities without disrupting the global function of the networked system; ii) Brain
activity – based on temporal signals gathered from cranial
probes, an important task is to infer the so-called Functional Connectivity Matrix, which represents the graph of
interactions among the active regions of the brain (see,
e.g., (Liégeois et al. 2020)). Recent evidence shows that
the Functional Connectivity Matrix can be used to diagnose
or predict the onset of motor activities or cognitive disorders (Douw et al. 2010; Ranasinghe et al. 2014; Oltra et al.
2021; Stam et al. 2007; Monajemi et al. 2016; van Mierlo
et al. 2019; Lehnertz, Bröhl, and Rings 2020); iii) Finance
– the dynamics of stock prices can be influenced by interactions between firms, and knowledge of this interaction
network can inform government interventions, for instance
(Fenn et al. 2009, 2012; Bazzi et al. 2016).

We study the problem of graph structure identification, i.e., of
recovering the graph of dependencies among time series. We
model these time series data as components of the state of
linear stochastic networked dynamical systems. We assume
partial observability, where the state evolution of only a subset of nodes comprising the network is observed. We propose a new feature-based paradigm: to each pair of nodes,
we compute a feature vector from the observed time series.
We prove that these features are linearly separable, i.e., there
exists a hyperplane that separates the cluster of features associated with connected pairs of nodes from those of disconnected pairs. This renders the features amenable to train a variety of classifiers to perform causal inference. In particular,
we use these features to train Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs). The resulting causal inference mechanism outperforms state-of-the-art counterparts w.r.t. sample-complexity.
The trained CNNs generalize well over structurally distinct
networks (dense or sparse) and noise-level profiles. Remarkably, they also generalize well to real-world networks while
trained over a synthetic network – namely, a particular realization of a random graph.

Introduction
Networked dynamical systems are characterized by a set
of interconnected nodes or agents. The state of the nodes
evolves over time according to their peer-to-peer interactions constrained by a support network of contacts (Barrat, Barthélemy, and Vespignani 2012; Liggett 2005; Robert
2003; Porter and Gleeson 2016). More concretely, the state
of a node i is only immediately affected by the state of nodes
that directly link to i, i.e., nodes that bear a direct causal effect on node i. This causal network is captured by a graph,
which is often a latent structure underlying these systems.
Examples of networked dynamical systems include:
i) Pandemics – the fraction of infections within each community of individuals is captured by a time series that is
strongly influenced by contacts in neighboring communities. Knowledge of the contact network (which determines

In most practical instances of the examples above, the
node-level time series are readily accessible, but the underlying causal network – which is of fundamental importance in downstream tasks – is fully or partially unknown.
To address this issue, a growing body of literature has developed methods for reconstructing the network from the observed node-level time series (Chen, Wang, and Shen 2022;
Pereira, Ibrahimi, and Montanari 2010; Materassi and Salapaka 2015; Matta, Santos, and Sayed 2020). In this work,
we focus on linear stochastic networked dynamical systems, which is arguably one of the most natural settings
for network identification from time series since a great
class of nonlinear networked dynamical systems can be addressed via linearization about the equilibria under smallnoise regimes (Ching and Tam 2017; Napoletani and Sauer
2008) or via appropriate embedding in higher dimensional
spaces (Lim et al. 2015; Mauroy and Goncalves 2016).

* Corresponding author. E-mail: augusto.pt@gmail.com.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9038

