The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Generalization Bounds for Inductive Matrix Completion in Low-Noise Settings
Antoine Ledent1 * , Rodrigo Alves2 , Yunwen Lei3 , Yann Guermeur4 , and Marius Kloft5
1

Singapore Management University (SMU)
Czech Technical University in Prague (CTU)
3
Hong Kong Baptist University (HKBU)
4
Centre National de la Recherche Scientique (CNRS)
5
Technische Universität Kaiserslautern (TUK)
aledent@smu.edu.sg, rodrigo.alves@fit.cvut.cz, yunwen.lei@hotmail.com, yann.guermeur@loria.fr, kloft@cs.uni-kl.de
2

Abstract

regularization encourages component sparsity. The parameter
λ must be tuned with cross-validation.
Inductive matrix completion (IMC) (Herbster, Pasteris,
and Tse 2019; Zhang, Du, and Gu 2018; Menon and Elkan
2011; Chen et al. 2012) is another closely related model
which assumes that additional information is available in
the form of feature vectors for each user (row) and item
(column). It assumes that the side information is summarized
in matrices X P Rmˆa and Y P Rnˆb . IMC then optimizes
the following objective function

We study inductive matrix completion (matrix completion
with side information) under an i.i.d. subgaussian noise assumption at a low noise regime, with uniform sampling of the
entries. We obtain for the first time generalization bounds with
the following three properties: (1) they scale like the standard
deviation of the noise and in particular approach zero in the
exact recovery case; (2) even in the presence of noise, they
converge to zero when the sample size approaches infinity;
and (3) for a fixed dimension of the side information, they
only have a logarithmic dependence on the size of the matrix. Differently from many works in approximate recovery,
we present results both for bounded Lipschitz losses and for
the absolute loss, with the latter relying on Talagrand-type inequalities. The proofs create a bridge between two approaches
to the theoretical analysis of matrix completion, since they
consist in a combination of techniques from both the exact
recovery literature and the approximate recovery literature.

min

M PRaˆb

Introduction

1
}PΩ pZ ´ Rq}2Fr ` λ}Z}˚ ,
ZPRmˆn 2

(2)

An interesting question is whether one can provide sample
complexity guarantees for the optimization problem above.
Typically, doing so requires minor modification to the problem for technical convenience. There are several such analogues optimization problems (1) and (2), depending on the
type of statistical guarantee expected and the assumptions:
in exact recovery (with the assumption of perfectly noiseless observations), the Frobenius norm is replaced by a hard
equality constraint, whilst in approximate (noisy) recovery,
the nuclear norm regrulariser is replaced by a hard contraint.
More precisely, exact recovery results study the following
hard version of the optimization problem:

Matrix Completion (MC), the problem which consists in
predicting the unseen entries of a matrix based on a small
number of observations, presents the rare combination of
(1) a rich mathematical playground rife with fundamental
unsolved problems, and (2) a wealth of unexpected applications in lucrative and meaningful fields, from Recommender
Systems (Yao and Kwok 2019; Chen and Li 2017; Aggarwal
2016) to the prediction of drug interaction (Li et al. 2015).
One of the most celebrated algorithms for standard matrix
completion is the Softimpute algorithm (Mazumder, Hastie,
and Tibshirani 2010), which solves the following optimization problem:
min

1
}PΩ pXM Y J ´ Rq}2Fr ` λ}M }˚ .
N

min }Z}˚

subject to

ZPRmˆn

Zi,j “ Ri,j

@pi, jq P Ω.

(3)

In the case of IMC, the equivalent hard version is:
min }M }˚

M PRaˆb
J

subject to

rXM Y si,j “ Ri,j
(1)

@pi, jq P Ω.

(4)

The study of problem (3) is the earliest branch of the related
literature: it was shown in a series of papers (Candès and Tao
2010; Candès and Recht 2009; Recht 2011, to name but a
r
few) that if the number of samples is ě Opnrq
(where r is
the rank and n is the size of the matrix, i.e. the number of
rows or columns, which ever is larger), then it is possible
to recover the whole matrix exactly with high probability as
long as the entries are sampled uniformly at random. There
has also been some more recent interest in the problem (4):
it was shown in (Xu, Jin, and Zhou 2013) that assuming the

where PΩ denotes the projection on the set Ω of observed
entries, R is the ground truth matrix, } . }˚ denotes the nuclear
norm (the sum of the matrix’s singular values) and } . }Fr
denotes the Frobenius norm. The idea of the algorithm is
to encourage low-rank solutions in a similar way to how L1
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8447

