The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Certified Policy Smoothing for Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Ronghui Mu1 * , Wenjie Ruan2† , Leandro Soriano Marcolino1 , Gaojie Jin3 , Qiang Ni1
1

School of Computing & Communication, Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YW, UK
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QF, UK
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3BX, UK
{r.mu, l.marcolino, n.qiang}@lancaster.ac.uk, w.ruan@exeter.ac.uk, g.jin3@liverpool.ac.uk

Abstract

teracting with the surrounding environments (Rashid et al.
2018). When there is a team of agents, the system needs to
jointly optimise each agent’s actions to maximise the reward
of the team. In c-MARL, as the number of agents increases,
the joint action space of the agents grows exponentially,
requiring the learning of policies in a decentralised manner (Oliehoek, Spaan, and Vlassis 2008). Thus, each agent
learns its own policy based on its local action-observation
history, and then forms a centralised action-value that is conditioned to the global state and joint actions.
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are known to be vulnerable to tiny, non-random, ideally human-invisible perturbations of the input, which can lead to incorrect predictions
(Szegedy et al. 2013; Xu, Ruan, and Huang 2022; Jin et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2022; Mu et al. 2022; Yin, Ruan, and
Fieldsend 2022; Ruan et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020b). RL
has also been shown to be susceptible to perturbation in the
observations of an RL agent (Huang et al. 2017; Behzadan
and Munir 2017) or in environments (Gleave et al. 2019).
Some adversarial defence works for RL are proposed (Donti
et al. 2020; Eysenbach and Levine 2021; Shen et al. 2020;
Sun et al. 2022) and then towards these defences, stronger attacks are proposed (Salman et al. 2019; Russo and Proutiere
2019). To end this repeated game, Wu et al. (2021) and Kumar, Levine, and Feizi (2021) proposed to use probabilistic
approaches to provide robustness certification for RLs. Concerning c-MARL, Lin et al. (2020) addressed the challenges
of attacking such systems and proposed adding perturbations
to the state space. To date, the robustness certification on cMARL has not been touched upon by the community.
Compared to the RL system with a single agent, certifying
c-MARL is a more challenging task. Challenge 1: the action space grows exponentially with the number of agents;
moreover, for each time step, the agents need to be certified simultaneously, accumulating uncertainty. Challenge 2:
changing the action of one agent may not alter the team reward, thus, instead of following existing certification works
on a single agent, new criteria should be raised to evaluate
the robustness for the multi-agent system. Therefore, to cope
with such challenges, we propose two novel methods to certify the robustness of each state and of the whole trajectory.
We first propose a smoothed policy where each agent
chooses the most frequent action when its observation is
perturbed, and then we derive the certified bound of per-

Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (c-MARL) is
widely applied in safety-critical scenarios, thus the analysis
of robustness for c-MARL models is profoundly important.
However, robustness certification for c-MARLs has not yet
been explored in the community. In this paper, we propose a
novel certification method, which is the first work to leverage
a scalable approach for c-MARLs to determine actions with
guaranteed certified bounds. c-MARL certification poses two
key challenges compared to single-agent systems: (i) the accumulated uncertainty as the number of agents increases; (ii)
the potential lack of impact when changing the action of a
single agent into a global team reward. These challenges prevent us from directly using existing algorithms. Hence, we
employ the false discovery rate (FDR) controlling procedure
considering the importance of each agent to certify per-state
robustness. We further propose a tree-search-based algorithm
to find a lower bound of the global reward under the minimal certified perturbation. As our method is general, it can
also be applied in a single-agent environment. We empirically
show that our certification bounds are much tighter than those
of state-of-the-art RL certification solutions. We also evaluate our method on two popular c-MARL algorithms: QMIX
and VDN, under two different environments, with two and
four agents. The experimental results show that our method
can certify the robustness of all c-MARL models in various environments. Our tool CertifyCMARL is available at
https://github.com/TrustAI/CertifyCMARL.

1

Introduction

Recently, cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning
(c-MARL) has attracted increasing attention from researchers and is beneficial for a wide range of applications in the real world, such as autonomous cars (ShalevShwartz, Shammah, and Shashua 2016), traffic lights control (Van der Pol and Oliehoek 2016) and wireless communication (de Vrieze et al. 2018). As it is widely involved in
safety-critical scenarios, there is an urgent need to analyze
the robustness of c-MARLs.
Reinforcement learning (RL) aims to find the best actions
for agents that can optimise the long-term reward by in* Ronghui conducted this research when she was a visiting PhD

student at the University of Exeter.
†
Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15046

