The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On Manipulating Weight Predictions in Signed Weighted Networks
Tomasz Lizurej1,2 , Tomasz P. Michalak1,2 , Stefan Dziembowski1,2
1

University of Warsaw
2
IDEAS NCBR
tomasz.lizurej@crypto.edu.pl, tpm@mimuw.edu.pl, stefan.dziembowski@crypto.edu.pl

Abstract

ings are publicly available in the form of a who-trusts-whom
network. A 6-node sample fragment is presented in Figure 1.
A user who thinks of doing a transaction with another
user for the first time can use the information from such a
who-trust-whom network to predict the potential risk. Technically, given a trust network modeled as a weighted signed
network, predicting trust amounts to predicting the weights
of potential new edges. A well-known edge weight prediction method, called FGA, was proposed by (Kumar et al.
2016). FGA is based on two measures of node behavior:
the goodness that evaluates how much other nodes trust a
given node, and the fairness that captures how fair this node
is in rating other nodes. Both concepts have a mutually recursive definition that converges to a unique solution. Most
importantly, Kumar et al. showed that FGA is effective in
predicting edge weights, i.e., the level of trust between unlinked nodes. For example, in Figure 1, the trust of node
1031 towards node 715 is predicted by FGA to be 2.26.
While FGA seems to be an interesting tool to apply in
practice, little is known about its resilience to malicious
behaviour. In this paper, we present the first study of manipulating the FGA function by a rating fraud (Cai and
Zhu 2016; Mayzlin, Dover, and Chevalier 2014). It involves
fraudulent raters to strategically underrate or overrate other
users for their own benefit. To magnify the strength of the
manipulation, the attacker may create and act via multiple
fake user identities. Such so called Sybil attacks are especially tempting in environments such as cryptocurrency trading platforms where creating a new identity is affordable.
Rating fraud attacks may be direct—when targeted nodes
are rated directly by the attackers—and indirect—when the

Adversarial social network analysis studies how graphs can
be rewired or otherwise manipulated to evade social network
analysis tools. While there is ample literature on manipulating simple networks, more sophisticated network types are
much less understood in this respect. In this paper, we focus
on evading Fairness-Goodness Algorithm which is an edge
weight prediction method for signed weighted networks developed by Kumar et al. in 2016. Among others, this method
can be used for trust prediction in reputation systems. We
study the theoretical underpinnings of this algorithm and its
computational properties in terms of manipulability. Our positive finding is that, unlike many other tools, this measure is
not only difficult to manipulate optimally, but also it can be
difficult to manipulate in practice.

Introduction
Adversarial social network analysis studies how networks
can be rewired or otherwise manipulated to falsify network
examination. In particular, many works in this body of research studied how to manipulate classic tools of social network analysis such as centrality measures (Crescenzi et al.
2016; Bergamini et al. 2018; Was et al. 2020), and community detection algorithms (Waniek et al. 2018a; Fionda and
Pirro 2017; Chen et al. 2019). Also, a rapidly growing body
of works studies adversarial learning on graphs using deep
learning (Chen et al. 2020).
While most of the above literature focused on simple networks, in this paper, we consider a more complex model of
weighted signed networks. In this class of networks, links
are labeled with real-valued weights representing positive
or negative relations between the nodes (Leskovec, Huttenlocher, and Kleinberg 2010a,b; Tang et al. 2016). An
important application of signed weighted networks is the
modelling of trust networks/reputation systems, the goal of
which is to avoid transaction risk by providing feedback
data about the trustworthiness of a potential business partner (Resnick et al. 2000). As an example, let us consider the
cryptocurrency trading platform Bitcoin OTC (Kumar et al.
2016). In this platform, users are allowed to rate their business partners on the scale {−10, −9, . . . , 10}, and the rat-

Figure 1: A fragment of the Bitcoin OTC network composed
of nodes 993, 715, 707, 614, 1031, 762.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5222

