The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Action-Conditioned Generation of Bimanual Object Manipulation Sequences
Haziq Razali, Yiannis Demiris*
Personal Robotics Lab, Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Imperial College London
{h.bin-razali20,y.demiris}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

Wrist and Object
Pose Module

The generation of bimanual object manipulation sequences
given a semantic action label has broad applications in collaborative robots or augmented reality. This relatively new problem differs from existing works that generate whole-body
motions without any object interaction as it now requires the
model to additionally learn the spatio-temporal relationship
that exists between the human joints and object motion given
said label. To tackle this task, we leverage the varying degree each muscle or joint is involved during object manipulation. For instance, the wrists act as the prime movers for
the objects while the finger joints are angled to provide a firm
grip. The remaining body joints are the least involved in that
they are positioned as naturally and comfortably as possible.
We thus design an architecture that comprises 3 main components: (i) a graph recurrent network that generates the wrist
and object motion, (ii) an attention-based recurrent network
that estimates the required finger joint angles given the graph
configuration, and (iii) a recurrent network that reconstructs
the body pose given the locations of the wrist. We evaluate
our approach on the KIT Motion Capture and KIT RGBD Bimanual Manipulation datasets and show improvements over
a simplified approach that treats the entire body as a single
entity, and existing whole-body-only methods.

Body Pose
Module
Finger Pose
Module

Figure 1: Given the action label a, and initial human and
object pose, our network generates the entire manipulation
sequence using 3 separate modules.

tween the human and object motion e.g., how a person orients the bottle relative to a cup during a pour action. Our
goal in this work is thus to address the relatively new task of
action-conditioned generation of bimanual object manipulation, where we take a semantic action label such as ”Pour”
and generate a realistic sequence of both the human and object motion, from the moment the person approaches the objects and performs the pouring action, till the moment the
objects are placed back on the table after completion. A first
solution that can address said task would be to incorporate
a densely connected graph where the nodes represent the
human and object pose, and the edges their relation. However, one intuitive observation in the context of object manipulation is the varying degree each joint is involved during the action. We propose a network partitioned into three
modules, each dedicated to the respective body parts or objects: (1) a graph recurrent network that models the wrist
and object motion, (2) an attention-based recurrent network
for the finger joints, and (3) another recurrent network for
the body joints (Fig. 1). We show that this provides better
performance versus representing the entire body pose as a
single node.
Next, existing works use a recurrent network built for action recognition to quantify the performance of their generative models. However, the absence of object relation in the
recognition network makes it infeasible for use in our case.
To address this, we propose a bidirectional graph recurrent
network for bimanual action segmentation.
In summary, our contributions are as follows: (1) We introduce a novel neural network for the action-conditioned

Introduction
Modelling human and object motion given a semantic action label has broad applications in human-robot interaction
(HRI) (Chao et al. 2015) or virtual and augmented reality
(AR/VR) (Chacón-Quesada and Demiris 2022). In the context of HRI, being able to forecast the hand and object trajectories would allow the robot to respond in a timely manner
while avoiding collisions. For AR/VR, predictive computation facilitates systems to plan ahead on rendering with increased buffer time. Existing work however, have focused on
modelling only the human motion for whole-body actions
such as run, jump, walk, etc (Guo et al. 2020; Petrovich,
Black, and Varol 2021). The same set of methods cannot
be deployed in a setting that involves human-object interaction as there exists some spatio-temporal correlation be* Yiannis Demiris is supported by a Royal Academy of Engineering Chair in Emerging Technologies.
Code at www.imperial.ac.uk/personal-robotics/software
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2146

