The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

BIFRNet: A Brain-Inspired Feature Restoration DNN for Partially Occluded
Image Recognition
Jiahong Zhang 1,2 , Lihong Cao 1,2 * , Qiuxia Lai 1,2 , Bingyao Li 2 , Yunxiao Qin 1,2
1

State Key Laboratory of Media Convergence and Communication, Communication University of China, Beijing, China
2
Neuroscience and Intelligent Media Institute, Communication University of China, Beijing, China
{zhangjh, lihong.cao, qinyunxiao, qxlai}@cuc.edu.cn, l bingyao@163.com

Abstract

problem. In this paper, we try to solve the partially occluded
image recognition (POIR) problem.
A natural idea to solve the POIR problem is extracting robust features. For example, feature regularization (Liao et al.
2016) and convolution kernel regularization (Tabernik et al.
2016) were used to force feature activations to be disentangled for different objects. However, the paper (Kortylewski
et al. 2021) indicated that these methods are not always robust to partial occlusion. Some works proposed that using
generative models to restore the clean image from the partially occluded image before classification usually improves
the classification accuracy (Nguyen et al. 2016; Yu et al.
2018; Yuan and Park 2019; Banerjee and Das 2020). Nevertheless, image-level restoration commonly results in costly
computation, and training a generative model is challenging.
A recent popular direction to solve the POIR problem is
removing occluded features (ROF). It removes the features
that are corrupted by occluders and then utilizes the remaining visible features for classification. For example, an external sub-network can be used to generate mask-guided attention which discriminates occluded and visible features (Wan
and Chen 2017; Zhang, Yang, and Schiele 2018; Pang et al.
2019; Qiu et al. 2021; Zou et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021;
Song et al. 2019a). Networks then classify images based
only on the visible features.
Although ROF is effective to solve the POIR problem, it
does not restore occluded features. In contrast, several works
in neuroscience demonstrated that amodal completion which
restores features in human brain is important for humans to
recognize partially occluded objects (Weigelt, Singer, and
Muckli 2007). Amodal completion extends edges behind
occluders if a continuous smooth connection exists (Kellman and Shipley 1991) and fills missing surfaces (He and
Nakayama 1992) and volumes (Tse 1999). In addition, the
work (Peters and Kriegeskorte 2021) indicated that amodal
completion relies on prior knowledge about image statistics.
Based on this, we suggest that an occlusion robustness
model should be able to restore the occluded features. To
obtain this ability, the model should firstly be able to distinguish visible and occluded parts and should have prior
knowledge of the target objects.
We introduce a novel brain-inspired feature restoration
network (BIFRNet) with all these capabilities, as shown in
Figure 1. Inspired by human visual system, we construct a

The partially occluded image recognition (POIR) problem
has been a challenge for artificial intelligence for a long time.
A common strategy to handle the POIR problem is using the
non-occluded features for classification. Unfortunately, this
strategy will lose effectiveness when the image is severely
occluded, since the visible parts can only provide limited information. Several studies in neuroscience reveal that feature restoration which fills in the occluded information and is
called amodal completion is essential for human brains to recognize partially occluded images. However, feature restoration is commonly ignored by CNNs, which may be the reason why CNNs are ineffective for the POIR problem. Inspired
by this, we propose a novel brain-inspired feature restoration network (BIFRNet) to solve the POIR problem. It mimics a ventral visual pathway to extract image features and
a dorsal visual pathway to distinguish occluded and visible
image regions. In addition, it also uses a knowledge module to store object prior knowledge and uses a completion
module to restore occluded features based on visible features
and prior knowledge. Thorough experiments on synthetic and
real-world occluded image datasets show that BIFRNet outperforms the existing methods in solving the POIR problem. Especially for severely occluded images, BIRFRNet surpasses other methods by a large margin and is close to the human brain performance. Furthermore, the brain-inspired design makes BIFRNet more interpretable.

Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved remarkable results in computer vision and even reached
human-level performance in some tasks such as face recognition (Masi et al. 2018). However, the robustness of CNNs
under partial occlusion is much lower than that of the human visual system (Geirhos et al. 2017), possibly because
occluders can easily mislead CNNs to predict wrong results.
Since occlusion occurs in many real-world images or videos,
most computer vision tasks, such as human-computer interaction (Liu et al. 2020), instance segmentation (Ke, Tai,
and Tang 2021) and human pose estimation (Das, Kishore,
and Bhattacharya 2020) are troubled by the partial occlusion
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15296

