The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Securing Secure Aggregation: Mitigating Multi-Round Privacy Leakage in
Federated Learning
Jinhyun So* 1 , Ramy E. Ali∗1 , Başak Güler2 , Jiantao Jiao3 , A. Salman Avestimehr1
1

University of Southern California (USC)
2
University of California, Riverside
3
University of California, Berkeley
jinhyun.so@samsung.com, ramy.ali@samsung.com, bguler@ece.ucr.edu, jiantao@eecs.berkeley.edu, avestime@usc.edu
Abstract
Secure aggregation is a critical component in federated learning (FL), which enables the server to learn the aggregate
model of the users without observing their local models.
Conventionally, secure aggregation algorithms focus only on
ensuring the privacy of individual users in a single training round. We contend that such designs can lead to significant privacy leakages over multiple training rounds, due to
partial user participation at each round of FL. In fact, we
show that the conventional random user selection strategies
in FL lead to leaking users’ individual models within number of rounds that is linear in the number of users. To address
this challenge, we introduce a secure aggregation framework,
Multi-RoundSecAgg, with multi-round privacy guarantees.
In particular, we introduce a new metric to quantify the privacy guarantees of FL over multiple training rounds, and develop a structured user selection strategy that guarantees the
long-term privacy of each user (over any number of training
rounds). Our framework also carefully accounts for the fairness and the average number of participating users at each
round. Our experiments on MNIST, CIFAR-10 and CIFAR100 datasets in the IID and the non-IID settings demonstrate
the performance improvement over the baselines in terms of
privacy protection and test accuracy.

1

Figure 1: A qualitative comparison of the reconstructed images in two settings is shown. The first setting corresponds to
the case that model privacy with random user selection (e.g.,
FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2018)) is protected by conventional secure aggregation schemes as (Bonawitz et al. 2017)
at each round. In the second setting, our proposed method
ensures the long-term privacy of individual models over any
number of rounds, and hence model inversion attack cannot
work well. This reconstruction process is described in detail
in (So et al. 2021b, Appendix H).

Güler, and Avestimehr 2021; Kadhe et al. 2020; Zhao and
Sun 2021; Bell et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2021; So et al. 2021a))
to protect the privacy of the local models, from the server
and the other users, while still allowing the server to learn
their aggregate. More specifically, the secure aggregation
protocols ensure that, at any given round, the server can only
learn the aggregate model of the users, and beyond that no
further information is revealed about the individual model.
Secure aggregation, however, only ensures the privacy of
the users in a single training round, and do not consider their
privacy over multiple training rounds (Bonawitz et al. 2017;
Bell et al. 2020; So, Güler, and Avestimehr 2021; So et al.
2022). On the other hand, due to partial user selection (Cho,
Wang, and Joshi 2020; Chen, Horvath, and Richtarik 2020;
Cho et al. 2020; Ribero and Vikalo 2020), the server may
be able to reconstruct the individual models of some users
using the aggregated models from the previous rounds. In
fact, we show that after a sufficient number of rounds, all
local models can be recovered with a high accuracy if the
server uniformly chooses a random subset of the users to
participate at every round. As shown in Fig.1, performing
model inversion attack (Geiping et al. 2020) with the recov-

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) enables collaborative training of
learning models over the data collected and stored locally
by multiple data-owners. The training in FL is typically coordinated by a central server who maintains a global model
that is updated locally by the users. The local updates are
then aggregated by the server to update the global model.
Throughout the training, the users never share their data with
the server, rather, they only share their local updates. However, as shown recently, the local models may still reveal
substantial information about the local datasets, and the private training data can be reconstructed from the local models
through inference or inversion attacks (Fredrikson, Jha, and
Ristenpart 2015; Nasr, Shokri, and Houmansadr 2019; Zhu
and Han 2020; Geiping et al. 2020).
To prevent such information leakage, secure aggregation
protocols are proposed (e.g., (Bonawitz et al. 2017; So,
* Equal contribution
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9864

