The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Delving into the Adversarial Robustness of Federated Learning
Jie Zhang1∗ , Bo Li2∗‡ , Chen Chen3 , Lingjuan Lyu3‡ ,
Shuang Wu2 , Shouhong Ding2 , Chao Wu1‡
1

Zhejiang University
Youtu Lab, Tencent
3
Sony AI
{zj zhangjie, chao.wu}@zju.edu.cn
{libraboli, calvinwu, ericshding}@tencent.com, {chen.chen, Lingjuan.Lv}@sony.com
2

Abstract

adversarial examples as centrally trained models (i.e. zero
accuracy under PGD-40 attack (Madry et al. 2017)). Hence,
it is also important to consider how to defend against adversarial attacks in federated learning.
There are several works that aim to deal with adversarial
attacks in FL (Zhang et al. 2022c,a), i.e, federated adversarial training (FAT) (Zizzo et al. 2020; Hong et al. 2021; Shah
et al. 2021; Chen, Zhang, and Lyu 2022; Chen et al. 2022a).
(Zizzo et al. 2020) and (Hong et al. 2021) proposed to conduct adversarial training (AT) on a proportion of clients but
conduct plain training on other clients. (Shah et al. 2021)
investigated the impact of local training rounds in FAT. Nevertheless, these methods all ignore the issue that the clean
accuracy of federated adversarial training is very low.
To further show the problems of federated adversarial
training, we first begin with the comparison between the
plainly-trained models and AT-trained (Madry et al. 2017)
models in both the IID (Independent and Identically Distributed) and non-IID FL settings, measured by clean accuracy Acln and robust accuracy Arob , respectively. We show
the test accuracy of plain training and adversarial training
(AT) on CIFAR10 dataset under both IID and non-IID FL
settings in Fig. 1 (left sub-figure). We summarize some valuable observations as follows: 1) Compared with the plainlytrained models, AT-trained models achieve a lower accuracy,
which indicates that directly adopting adversarial training in
FL can hurt Acln ; 2) Acln drops heavily for both the plainlytrained models and AT-trained models under non-IID distribution, which is exactly the challenge that typical federated
learning with heterogeneous data encountered (Zhao et al.
2018); 3) The performance of AT-trained models with nonIID data distribution decrease significantly compared with
IID data distribution. Motivated by these observations, we
focus on improving both adversarial robustness and clean
accuracy of adversarial training in FL, i.e., we aim to increase Acln while keeping Arob as high as possible.
To achieve this goal, in this paper, we investigate the impact of decision boundary, which can greatly influence the
performance of the model in FAT. Specifically, 1) we apply
adversarial training with a re-weighting strategy in local update to get a better Arob . Our method takes the limited data
of each client into account, those samples that are close to/far from the decision boundary are assigned larger/smaller
weight. 2) Moreover, since the global model in FL has a

In Federated Learning (FL), models are as fragile as centrally
trained models against adversarial examples. However, the
adversarial robustness of federated learning remains largely
unexplored. This paper casts light on the challenge of adversarial robustness of federated learning. To facilitate a better
understanding of the adversarial vulnerability of the existing FL methods, we conduct comprehensive robustness evaluations on various attacks and adversarial training methods.
Moreover, we reveal the negative impacts induced by directly
adopting adversarial training in FL, which seriously hurts the
test accuracy, especially in non-IID settings. In this work, we
propose a novel algorithm called Decision Boundary based
Federated Adversarial Training (DBFAT), which consists of
two components (local re-weighting and global regularization) to improve both accuracy and robustness of FL systems. Extensive experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate that DBFAT consistently outperforms other baselines
under both IID and non-IID settings.

Introduction
Nowadays, end devices are generating massive amounts of
potentially sensitive user data, raising practical concerns
over security and privacy. Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017) emerges as a privacy-aware learning
paradigm that allows multiple clients to collaboratively train
neural networks without revealing their raw data. Recently,
FL has attracted increasing attention from different areas, including medical image analysis (Liu et al. 2021a; Chen et al.
2021b), recommender systems (Liang, Pan, and Ming 2021;
Liu et al. 2021b), natural language processing (Zhu et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2021), etc.
Prior studies have demonstrated that neural networks
are vulnerable to evasion attacks by adversarial examples (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014) during inference time. The goal of inference-time adversarial attack (Li
et al. 2021a; Chen et al. 2022c; Zhang et al. 2022b; Chen
et al. 2022b) is to damage the global model by adding a carefully generated imperceptible perturbation on the test examples. As shown in Table 1, federated models are as fragile to
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Equal contribution. Work done during Jie Zhang’s internship
at Tencent Youtu Lab and partly done at Sony AI.
‡
Corresponding author.

11245

