The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Unsupervised Cross-Domain Rumor Detection with Contrastive Learning and
Cross-Attention
Hongyan Ran, Caiyan Jia*
School of Computer and Information Technology & Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China
{hongyran,cyjia}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Massive rumors usually appear along with breaking news or
trending topics, seriously hindering the truth. Existing rumor detection methods are mostly focused on the same domain, thus have poor performance in cross-domain scenarios due to domain shift. In this work, we propose an endto-end instance-wise and prototype-wise contrastive learning
model with cross-attention mechanism for cross-domain rumor detection. The model not only performs cross-domain
feature alignment, but also enforces target samples to align
with the corresponding prototypes of a given source domain.
Since target labels in a target domain are unavailable, we use
a clustering-based approach with carefully initialized centers
by a batch of source domain samples to produce pseudo labels. Moreover, we use a cross-attention mechanism on a pair
of source data and target data with the same labels to learn
domain-invariant representations. Because the samples in a
domain pair tend to express similar semantic patterns especially on the people’s attitudes (e.g., supporting or denying)
towards the same category of rumors, the discrepancy between a pair of source domain and target domain will be decreased. We conduct experiments on four groups of crossdomain datasets and show that our proposed model achieves
state-of-the-art performance.

Figure 1: An illustration example of unsupervised crossdomain rumor detection.

practical application value to detect rumors in an efficient
way on social media platforms.
To solve the problem, various rumor detection methods
have been proposed including traditional detection models
and deep learning detection models. The traditional works
mostly utilize hand-crafted features to perform rumor detection (Castillo, Mendoza, and Poblete 2011; Kwon et al.
2013; Ma et al. 2015; Jin et al. 2017). The deep learningbased methods exploit the content of rumors to automatically detect rumors. These methods are developed from
the original methods which view the textual information of
source posts and user responses or user profiles as time series (Ma et al. 2016; Yu et al. 2017; Ma, Gao, and Wong
2019; Ma et al. 2021), to the propagation structure-based
methods which model rumor content and related responses
as a tree structure to learn rumor representations (Ma, Gao,
and Wong 2018; Bian et al. 2020; Khoo et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2021b), and finally to the multi-resource heterogeneous
aggregation methods (Huang et al. 2020; Ran et al. 2022;
Min et al. 2022) which achieve the best detection performance.
However, these methods mostly detect rumors under indomain conditions. In practical scenarios, the real-world
news platforms release various claims in different domains
everyday, and newly emergent and time-critical domain
events are difficult to acquire sufficient labeled data in time.
If we directly use the verified posts of history domains to
train these models and test them on the newly emergent domain data, we will get poor performance due to the domain
shift. We take PPA-WAE model (Zhang et al. 2021b) as an
example to verify its performance on cross-domain settings.
Since PHEME (Zubiaga et al. 2015) dataset contains two domain events including ‘terrorist’ events and ‘gossip’ events,

Introduction
Nowadays, with the rapid development of social media
which has evolved into the primary source of news, more
and more people are spending more time on social media platforms expressing what they see and hear, especially
when it comes to hot topics or breaking events1 . This creates a hotbed for the rumor subsisting and inspires the rumor publishers to make numerous rumors for their purposes.
For instance, as rumors about the COVID-19 pandemic era
spread rapidly, around 800 deaths, 5,000 hospitalizations,
and 60 permanent injuries were recorded due to false claims
that household bleach was an effective panacea for the virus
(Coleman 2020). There are still many such rumors on social media, if not identified in time, sensational rumors may
cause social panic during emergency events, and threaten the
internet’s credibility and trustworthiness. Thus, it has highly
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://user.guancha.cn/main/content?id=710205

13510

