The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Breaking Immutable: Information-Coupled
Prototype Elaboration for Few-Shot Object Detection
Xiaonan Lu1,2,3,4 , Wenhui Diao1,2,3,4 * , Yongqiang Mao1,2,3,4 , Junxi Li1,2,3,4 , Peijin Wang1,2 ,
Xian Sun1,2,3,4 , Kun Fu1,2,3,4
1
Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Key Laboratory of Network Information System Technology (NIST), Aerospace Information Research Institute
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Electronic, Electrical and Communication Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{luxiaonan19, maoyongqiang19, lijunxi191, wangpeijin17}@mails.ucas.ac.cn
{diaowh, sunxian}@aircas.ac.cn, kunfuiecas@gmail.com

2

Abstract
Few-shot object detection, expecting detectors to detect novel
classes with a few instances, has made conspicuous progress.
However, the prototypes extracted by existing meta-learning
based methods still suffer from insufficient representative information and lack awareness of query images, which cannot
be adaptively tailored to different query images. Firstly, only
the support images are involved for extracting prototypes,
resulting in scarce perceptual information of query images.
Secondly, all pixels of all support images are treated equally
when aggregating features into prototype vectors, thus the
salient objects are overwhelmed by the cluttered background.
In this paper, we propose an Information-Coupled Prototype
Elaboration (ICPE) method to generate specific and representative prototypes for each query image. Concretely, a conditional information coupling module is introduced to couple
information from the query branch to the support branch,
strengthening the query-perceptual information in support
features. Besides, we design a prototype dynamic aggregation
module that dynamically adjusts intra-image and inter-image
aggregation weights to highlight the salient information useful for detecting query images. Experimental results on both
Pascal VOC and MS COCO demonstrate that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance in almost all settings.
Code will be available at: https://github.com/lxn96/ICPE.

Figure 1: Prototype extraction in meta-learning methods. (a)
Prototypes extracted in previous works lack perceptual information of query images. And averagely aggregating features makes the salient information overwhelmed. (b) In our
work, a conditional information coupling module strengthens query-perceptual information. And we design a prototype dynamic aggregation module consisting of intra- and
inter-image dynamic aggregation mechanisms (Intra-DAM,
Inter-DAM) to consolidate salient information of prototypes.

Introduction
Object detection has witnessed significant progress by deep
learning (Ren et al. 2015; Redmon et al. 2016; Lin et al.
2017b; Carion et al. 2020). However, most detectors require
abundant labeled data for training and impracticably generalize to new tasks with a few images. In contrast, humans
can observe novel objects with limited instances. Thus, fewshot object detection (FSOD) is proposed to bridge the gap
between deep learning and human learning systems.
FSOD assists in improving the performance on novel
classes with a few labeled images by learning knowledge on
base classes with abundant data. Some methods (Chen et al.

2018; Wang et al. 2020) transfer the knowledge from base
dataset to novel dataset. Still, they are sensitive to the difference between datasets and may produce negative transfer
when the difference is obvious. Other methods (Hsieh et al.
2019; Yan et al. 2019; Li et al. 2021) achieve remarkable performance based on meta-learning. They simulate few-shot
scenes and construct episodes consisting of support sets and
query sets. The annotated support sets are used to generate
prototypes, then the objects in query sets are detected based

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1844

