The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Composite Multi-Attention Framework for Intraoperative Hypotension Early
Warning
Feng Lu* 1 , Wei Li* 2 , Zhiqiang Zhou* 3 , Cheng Song1 , Yifei Sun1 , Yuwei Zhang1 , Yufei Ren3 ,
Xiaofei Liao1 , Hai Jin1 , Ailin Luo3 , Albert Y. Zomaya2
1

National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System, Services Computing Technology and System
Lab, Cluster and Grid Computing Lab, School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, China
2
The Australia-China Joint Research Centre for Energy Informatics and Demand Response Technologies, Centre for
Distributed and High Performance Computing, School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Australia
3
Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{lufeng,songch,zhangyuwei,sunyifei,xfliao,hjin}@hust.edu.cn, {weiwilson.li,albert.zomaya}@sydney.edu.au,
{zqzhou,yfren,alluo}@tjh.tjmu.edu.cn
Abstract

Many efforts have been devoted to developing artificial
intelligence solutions to provide IOH warnings throughout
the perioperative period. In (Lee et al. 2021), the authors
studied the performance of deep learning models on arterial
pressure prediction and IOH early warning using invasive
and non-invasive blood pressure readings. The results suggest that invasive blood pressure readings better predict IOH
events via gaining continuous arterial pressure values (a.k.a.
beat-to-beat blood pressure) from arterial waveform analysis. Invasive blood pressure monitoring is a well-developed
and widely used technology in the intensive care unit and
the operating rooms. The invasive monitoring involves the
insertion of a catheter into a suitable artery and then displaying the numerical readings of systolic, diastolic, and mean
arterial pressure (MAP) on a monitor. To our knowledge,
(Hatib et al. 2018; Wijnberge et al. 2020) developed the hypotension prediction index algorithm using invasive arterial
waveform and some other features to yield the best-known
IOH prediction results. It is a shame that multiple factors
in practice still limit the clinical use of invasive blood pressure monitoring. The typical medical concerns of invasive
blood pressure monitoring include potential infection risk,
local thrombosis, and drugs entering the arterial line to form
crystals and thus causing catastrophic limb ischemia. In addition, the high cost of the monitoring equipment and its replacement parts, and stable electrical supply further hamper its appeal in many settings. Non-invasive and minimally
invasive blood pressure monitoring techniques have gained
increasing attention these days to serve as a viable alternative for patients. Limited by the techniques, the quality of
the blood pressure readings from these alternatives is not yet
comparable to the invasive solution.

Intraoperative hypotension (IOH) events warning plays a crucial role in preventing postoperative complications, such as
postoperative delirium and mortality. Despite significant efforts, two fundamental problems limit its wide clinical use.
The well-established IOH event warning systems are often
built on proprietary medical devices that may not be available in all hospitals. The warnings are also triggered mainly
through a predefined IOH event that might not be suitable for
all patients. This work proposes a composite multi-attention
(CMA) framework to tackle these problems by conducting
short-term predictions on user-definable IOH events using vital signals in a low sampling rate with demographic characteristics. Our framework leverages a multi-modal fusion network to make four vital signals and three demographic characteristics as input modalities. For each modality, a multiattention mechanism is used for feature extraction for better model training. Experiments on two large-scale real-world
datasets show that our method can achieve up to 94.1% accuracy on IOH events early warning while the signals sampling
rate is reduced by 3000 times. Our proposal CMA can achieve
a mean absolute error of 4.48 mm Hg in the most challenging
15-minute mean arterial pressure prediction task and the error
reduction by 42.9% compared to existing solutions.

Introduction
Intraoperative hypotension (IOH) events are closely associated with many postoperative complications, such as a sharp
increase in mortality, myocardial injury, acute kidney damage, postoperative delirium, and other neurological complications (Salmasi et al. 2017). Early warning of IOH events
throughout the perioperative period is an effective means to
prevent postoperative complications. It enables clinicians to
act proactively from the usual reactive responses to hypotensive events before the consequences are seen (Davies et al.
2020; Asai et al. 2019).

Another challenge is that most existing early warning
studies on intraoperative hypotension are designed for a specific definition of IOH. Once the IOH is defined, the data
will be used to train the model according to this specific definition. When a new IOH definition needs to be used, the
adoption cost is exceedingly high as the model is required to
be reconstructed again from scratch. In (Inada et al. 2021),

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14374

