The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Weather2vec: Representation Learning for Causal Inference with Non-local
Confounding in Air Pollution and Climate Studies
Mauricio Tec1 * , James G. Scott2,3 , Corwin M. Zigler2
1

Department of Biostatistics, Harvard University
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin
3
Department of Information, Risk, and Operations Management, The University of Texas at Austin
mauriciogtec@hsph.harvard.edu, james.scott@mccombs.utexas.edu, cory.zigler@austin.utexas.edu
2

Abstract

effects in environmental studies where meteorological processes are known confounders, aiming to contribute to the
development of new flexible machine learning tools to assess the causal effect of policies and climate-related events
on health-relevant outcomes: a task which has been recently
identified by Rolnick et al. (2022) as a pressing outstanding
challenge for tackling the effects of climate change.
Two applications will be discussed in detail. The first
application follows an earlier analysis by Papadogeorgou,
Choirat, and Zigler (2019), who estimated the air quality
impact of power plant emissions controls. This case study
evaluates the method’s ability to reduce NLC under sparsely
observed treatments (in combination with with propensity
matching methods (Rubin 2005)). The second application is
in meteorological detrending (Wells et al. 2021), and uses
weather2vec to deconvolve climate variability from policy
changes when characterizing long-term air quality trends.
These two examples are accompanied by a simulation study
comparing alternative adjustments to account for NLC.
In summary, this article has three aims:
1. Provide a rigorous characterization of NLC using the
potential outcomes framework, clarifying some connections with causal interference.
2. Expand the library of NN methods in causal inference by
proposing a U-net as a viable model to account for NLC
in conjunction with standard causal inference tools.
3. Establish a promising research direction for addressing
NLC in scientific studies of air pollution exposure – in
which NLC is a common problem (driven by meteorology) for which widely applicable tools are lacking.
We investigate two mechanisms to obtain the representations: one supervised, and one self-supervised. The supervised one formally links the representation of NLC to the
balancing property of propensity (and prognostic) scores in
the causal inference literature (Rubin 2008; Hansen 2008).
This approach requires that the outcome and treatment are
densely available throughout the covariates’ grid. By contrast, the self-supervised approach first learns representations encoding neighboring covariate information into a lowdimensional vector, which can subsequently be included as
confounders in downstream causal analyses when the outcomes and treatments are sparsely observed on the grid.
Mathematical proofs of all the propositions in the paper, details of the experiments, and additional explanations

Estimating the causal effects of a spatially-varying intervention on a spatially-varying outcome may be subject to nonlocal confounding (NLC), a phenomenon that can bias estimates when the treatments and outcomes of a given unit are
dictated in part by the covariates of other nearby units. In particular, NLC is a challenge for evaluating the effects of environmental policies and climate events on health-related outcomes such as air pollution exposure. This paper first formalizes NLC using the potential outcomes framework, providing
a comparison with the related phenomenon of causal interference. Then, it proposes a broadly applicable framework,
termed weather2vec, that uses the theory of balancing scores
to learn representations of non-local information into a scalar
or vector defined for each observational unit, which is subsequently used to adjust for confounding in conjunction with
causal inference methods. The framework is evaluated in a
simulation study and two case studies on air pollution where
the weather is an (inherently regional) known confounder.

Introduction
Causal effects of spatially-varying exposures on spatiallyvarying outcomes may be subject to non-local confounding (NLC), which occurs when the treatments and outcomes
for a given unit are affected by covariates of other nearby
units (Cohen-Cole and Fletcher 2008; Florax and Folmer
1992; Chaix, Leal, and Evans 2010; Elhorst 2010). In simple cases, NLC can be resolved using simple summaries of
non-local data, such as the averages of the covariates over
pre-specified neighborhoods. But in many realistic settings,
NLC is caused by the complex interaction of spatial factors,
and thus it cannot be resolved using simple ad hoc summaries of neighboring covariates. For such scenarios, we
propose weather2vec, a framework that uses a U-net (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015) to learn representations
that encode NLC information and can be used in conjunction
with standard causal inference tools. The method is broadly
applicable to settings where the covariates are available over
a grid of spatial units, and where the outcome and treatment
are observed in some subset of the grid.
The name weather2vec stems from its motivation to address limitations in current methods for estimating causal
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14504

