The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Global Video Scene Segmentation with Context-Aware Transformer
Yang Yang1,2,3 * , Yurui Huang1† , Weili Guo1 , Baohua Xu4 , Dingyin Xia4
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
MIIT Key Lab. of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, NUAA
3
State Key Lab. for Novel Software Technology, NJU
4
HUAWEI CBG Edu AI Lab
{yyang, huangyurui, wlguo}@njust.edu.cn, {xubaohua1, xiadingyin}@huawei.com
2

Abstract

lize the interested scenes to retrieve movies with similar
themes; video platforms can advertise based on the segmentation point to obtain higher revenue. Compared with locating a shot directly using visual cues (Cotsaces, Nikolaidis,
and Pitas 2006) (here shot represents a set of visually continuous frames over an uninterrupted period of time), scene
segmentation is a more challenging task, that aims to find the
temporal locations of scene with complex temporal structure
and semantic information (here scene denotes a sequence of
shots to describe a semantically associated story).
Despite the great progress in temporal localization, most
existing approaches usually focus on localizing certain action from short videos (Lin et al. 2019, 2018; Long et al.
2020), these methods usually pre-define a list of categories
that are visually distinguishable (Rao et al. 2020). However,
scene segmentation poses significantly more difficult challenges: 1) Coarse-grained labels. The input video has only
binary boundary labels, without the fine-grained content categories for each scene as action recognition. 2) High-order
coherence. Scene segmentation needs to group the shots by
considering extracted high-order information, i.e., semantical coherence, rather than simple visual continuity. To address these challenges, unsupervised approaches (Baraldi,
Grana, and Cucchiara 2015; Chasanis, Likas, and Galatsanos 2009) were firstly developed, which detected the
boundary with pairwise similarity comparison or nearest
shots clustering. Nevertheless, their performance is relatively low considering the unsupervised setting. Furthermore, (Rao et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021; Das and Das 2020)
introduced the scene boundary label for supervised prediction with contextual shots within the sliding window. However, these methods are limited to using labeled data, without
considering the unlabeled videos. Therefore, self-supervised
approaches (Chen et al. 2020; Roh et al. 2021) are widely
researched by learning effectiveness representation without
relying on costly ground-truth annotations. Therefore, the
self-supervised learning methods (Chen et al. 2021; Mun
et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2022a) have been designed to employ
the pre-training protocols for learning spatio-temporal patterns in video scenes. However, in current self-supervised
methods, the strategy of pretext task designs and high-level
contextual representation modeling are not well addressed.
Therefore, in this paper, we develop a Context-Aware
Transformer (CAT), which takes advantage of the princi-

Videos such as movies or TV episodes usually need to divide
the long storyline into cohesive units, i.e., scenes, to facilitate the understanding of video semantics. The key challenge
lies in finding the boundaries of scenes by comprehensively
considering the complex temporal structure and semantic information. To this end, we introduce a novel Context-Aware
Transformer (CAT) with a self-supervised learning framework to learn high-quality shot representations, for generating well-bounded scenes. More specifically, we design the
CAT with local-global self-attentions, which can effectively
consider both the long-term and short-term context to improve the shot encoding. For training the CAT, we adopt the
self-supervised learning schema. Firstly, we leverage shotto-scene level pretext tasks to facilitate the pre-training with
pseudo boundary, which guides CAT to learn the discriminative shot representations that maximize intra-scene similarity and inter-scene discrimination in an unsupervised manner.
Then, we transfer contextual representations for fine-tuning
the CAT with supervised data, which encourages CAT to accurately detect the boundary for scene segmentation. As a result, CAT is able to learn the context-aware shot representations and provides global guidance for scene segmentation.
Our empirical analyses show that CAT can achieve state-ofthe-art performance when conducting the scene segmentation
task on the MovieNet dataset, e.g., offering 2.15 improvements on AP.

Introduction
With the development of internet, a significantly increasing
number of videos have been produced and stored. In order
to reduce manual costs and improve efficiency, intelligent
video understanding has received extensive attention and researches (Yang et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2020). A fundamental
aspect of video semantic understanding is scene segmentation (i.e., scene boundary detection) (Rao et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021), which
plays an important role in facilitating downstream tasks. For
example, students can quickly locate knowledge points according to the segmented educational videos; users can uti* corresponding authors.
†
work is done during the internship at HUAWEI CBG Edu AI
Lab
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3206

