The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Quantum Multi-Armed Bandits and Stochastic Linear Bandits Enjoy
Logarithmic Regrets*
Zongqi Wan1,2 , Zhijie Zhang†3 , Tongyang Li4,5 , Jialin Zhang1,2 , Xiaoming Sun1,2
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Center for Applied Mathematics of Fujian Province, School of Mathematics and Statistics, Fuzhou University
4
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University
5
School of Computer Science, Peking University
wanzongqi20s@ict.ac.cn, zzhang@fzu.edu.cn, tongyangli@pku.edu.cn, zhangjialin@ict.ac.cn, sunxiaoming@ict.ac.cn

t = 1, 2, . . . , T , the learner chooses an arm it and receives a
reward yt , a random variable drawn from the reward distribution of it . Denote the best arm with the largest expected
reward to be i∗ . The goal is to minimize the cumulative regret with respect to the best arm i∗ over T rounds:

Abstract
Multi-arm bandit (MAB) and stochastic linear bandit (SLB)
are important models in reinforcement learning, and it is wellknown that classical
algorithms for bandits with time horizon
√
T suffer Ω( T ) regret. In this paper, we study MAB and
SLB with quantum reward oracles and propose quantum algorithms for both models with O(poly(log T )) regrets, exponentially improving the dependence in terms of T . To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first provable quantum speedup
for regrets of bandit problems and in general exploitation in
reinforcement learning. Compared to previous literature on
quantum exploration algorithms for MAB and reinforcement
learning, our quantum input model is simpler and only assumes quantum oracles for each individual arm.

R(T ) =

T
X

(µ(i∗ ) − µ(it )) .

(1)

t=1

In the stochastic linear bandit (SLB) problem, the learner
can play actions from a fixed action set A ⊆ Rd . There is
an unknown parameter θ∗ ∈ Rd which determines the mean
reward of each action1 . The expected reward of action x is
µ(x) = x> θ∗ ∈ [0, 1]. It is often assumed that the action x
and the θ∗ have bounded L2 -norm. That is, for some parameters L, S > 0,

Introduction

kxk2 ≤ L for all x ∈ A, and kθ∗ k2 ≤ S.

Bandits are a fundamental model in reinforcement learning applied to problems where an agent has a fixed set of
choices and the goal is to maximize its gain, while each
choice’s properties are only partially known at the time
of allocation but may become better understood as iterations continue (Lattimore and Szepesvári 2020; Sutton and
Barto 2018). Bandits exemplify the exploration-exploitation
tradeoff where exploration aims to find the best choice and
exploitation aims to obtain as many rewards as possible.
Bandits have wide applications in machine learning, operations research, engineering, and many other areas (Chapelle,
Manavoglu, and Rosales 2014; Lei, Tewari, and Murphy
2017; Silver et al. 2016; Villar, Bowden, and Wason 2015).
In this paper, we investigate two important bandit models: multi-armed bandits and stochastic linear bandits. In the
multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem, there are n arms where
each arm i ∈ [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n} is associated with an unknown reward distribution. We denote the expected reward
of arm i as µ(i) ∈ [0, 1]. MAB has T rounds. At round

(2)

Let x∗ = argmaxx∈A x> θ∗ be the action with the largest
expected reward. Same as MAB, SLB also has T rounds. In
round t, the learner chooses an action xt ∈ A and observes
some realization of the reward yt . The goal is again to minimize the cumulative regret
R(T ) =

T
X

(x∗ − xt )> θ∗ .

(3)

t=1

Regarding the assumption on the reward distributions for
both settings, a common assumption is σ-sub-Gaussian.
Suppose y is a random reward of some action x, then for
any α ∈ R, the noise η = y − µ(x)has zero mean and
satisfies E[exp(αX)] ≤ exp α2 σ 2 /2 . In this paper, we
consider the bounded value assumption and the bounded
variance assumption. The bounded value assumption requires all rewards to be in a bounded interval, and without loss of generality, we assume that the reward is in [0, 1].
The bounded variance assumption requires the variances of
all reward distributions to have a universal upper bound
σ 2 . Note that the bounded value assumption is more strict

* The

missing proofs in this paper can be found in
arXiv:2205.14988
†
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

10087

The “action” is the same as “arm” throughout the paper.

