The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FedALA: Adaptive Local Aggregation for Personalized Federated Learning
Jianqing Zhang1 , Yang Hua2 , Hao Wang3 , Tao Song1 , Zhengui Xue1 , Ruhui Ma1 * , Haibing Guan1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Queen’s University Belfast
3
Louisiana State University
{tsingz, songt333, zhenguixue, ruhuima, hbguan}@sjtu.edu.cn, Y.Hua@qub.ac.uk, haowang@lsu.edu
Abstract

Tran, and Nguyen 2020) and Ditto (Li et al. 2021a), and (3)
methods that learn local models with personalized (local)
aggregation, including FedAMP (Huang et al. 2021), FedPHP (Li et al. 2021b), FedFomo (Zhang et al. 2020), APPLE (Luo and Wu 2021) and PartialFed (Sun et al. 2021).
pFL methods in Category (1) and (2) take all the information in the global model for local initialization, i.e., initializing the local model before local training in each iteration. However, only the desired information that improves
the quality of the local model is beneficial for the client. The
global model has poor generalization ability since it has desired and undesired information for an individual client simultaneously. Thus, pFL methods in Category (3) intend to
capture the desired information in the global model through
personalized aggregation.
However, pFL methods in Category (3) still have shortcomings. FedAMP/FedPHP performs personalized aggregation on the server/clients without considering the local
objective. FedFomo/APPLE downloads other client models
and locally aggregates them with the approximated/learned
aggregating weights on each client. All the parameters in one
client model are assigned with the same weight, i.e., modellevel weight. Besides, downloading client models among
clients causes high communication overhead in each iteration and also has privacy concerns since the data from
other clients can be recovered through these client models (Zhu, Liu, and Han 2019). In addition, FedFomo/APPLE also requires feeding data forward in the downloaded
client models to obtain the aggregating weights, which introduces additional computation overhead. PartialFed locally
learns aggregation strategies to select the parameters in the
global model or the local model. Still, the layer-level and
binary selection cannot precisely capture the desired information in the global model. Furthermore, PartialFed uses
non-overlapping samples to learn the local model and the
strategy, so it can hardly learn a strategy that fully satisfies
the local objective. Due to the significant modification of
the learning process in FedAvg, the personalized aggregation process in these methods cannot be directly applied to
most existing FL methods.
To precisely capture the desired information in the downloaded global model for each client without additional
communication overhead in each iteration, we propose a
novel pFL method Federated learning with Adaptive Local

A key challenge in federated learning (FL) is the statistical heterogeneity that impairs the generalization of the
global model on each client. To address this, we propose a
method Federated learning with Adaptive Local Aggregation
(FedALA) by capturing the desired information in the global
model for client models in personalized FL. The key component of FedALA is an Adaptive Local Aggregation (ALA)
module, which can adaptively aggregate the downloaded
global model and local model towards the local objective on
each client to initialize the local model before training in each
iteration. To evaluate the effectiveness of FedALA, we conduct extensive experiments with five benchmark datasets in
computer vision and natural language processing domains.
FedALA outperforms eleven state-of-the-art baselines by up
to 3.27% in test accuracy. Furthermore, we also apply ALA
module to other federated learning methods and achieve up
to 24.19% improvement in test accuracy. Code is available at
https://github.com/TsingZ0/FedALA.

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) can leverage distributed user data
while preserving privacy by iteratively downloading models, training models locally on the clients, uploading models,
and aggregating models on the server. A key challenge in
FL is statistical heterogeneity, e.g., the not independent and
identically distributed (Non-IID) and unbalanced data across
clients. This kind of data makes it hard to obtain a global
model that generalizes to each client (McMahan et al. 2017;
Reisizadeh et al. 2020; T Dinh, Tran, and Nguyen 2020).
Personalized FL (pFL) methods have been proposed to
tackle statistical heterogeneity in FL. Unlike traditional FL
that seeks a high-quality global model via distributed training across clients, e.g., FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017), pFL
methods are proposed to prioritize the training of a local
model for each client. Recent pFL studies on model aggregation on the server can be classified into three categories: (1)
methods that learn a single global model and fine-tune it, including Per-FedAvg (Fallah, Mokhtari, and Ozdaglar 2020)
and FedRep (Collins et al. 2021), (2) methods that learn additional personalized models, including pFedMe (T Dinh,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11237

