The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

LeNo: Adversarial Robust Salient Object Detection Networks with Learnable
Noise
He Wang1,2 , Lin Wan1 , He Tang1 *
1

2

School of Software Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{hew, linwan, hetang}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Pixel-wise prediction with deep neural network has become
an effective paradigm for salient object detection (SOD) and
achieved remarkable performance. However, very few SOD
models are robust against adversarial attacks which are visually imperceptible for human visual attention. The previous work robust saliency (ROSA) shuffles the pre-segmented
superpixels and then refines the coarse saliency map by the
densely connected conditional random field (CRF). Different
from ROSA that relies on various pre- and post-processings,
this paper proposes a light-weight Learnable Noise (LeNo)
to defend adversarial attacks for SOD models. LeNo preserves accuracy of SOD models on both adversarial and clean
images, as well as inference speed. In general, LeNo consists of a simple shallow noise and noise estimation that embedded in the encoder and decoder of arbitrary SOD networks respectively. Inspired by the center prior of human
visual attention mechanism, we initialize the shallow noise
with a cross-shaped gaussian distribution for better defense
against adversarial attacks. Instead of adding additional network components for post-processing, the proposed noise estimation modifies only one channel of the decoder. With the
deeply-supervised noise-decoupled training on state-of-theart RGB and RGB-D SOD networks, LeNo outperforms previous works not only on adversarial images but also on clean
images, which contributes stronger robustness for SOD. Our
code is available at https://github.com/ssecv/LeNo.

Figure 1: SOD adversarial defense comparison. (a) Original GateNet without any defense. (b) ROSA defense which
adds three components to the front, middle and back of the
network respectively. (c) The proposed LeNo defense, it embeds a lightweight learnable shallow noise and noise estimation and balances the performance of the clean image and
adversarial image.

Introduction
The progresses of deep neural networks (DNNs) have significantly promoted the development of down-stream computer vision tasks such as image recognition (He et al. 2016),
semantic segmentation (Chen et al. 2017), object detection
(Ren et al. 2015) and salient object detection (Zhao et al.
2020). These data-driven models are usually trained with
extensive input images and the annotations. Previous stuides (Che et al. 2021) and (Li, Li, and Yu 2019) have shown
that the saliency detection networks are fragile to adversarial attacks and the performance significantly decreases with
even imperceptible perturbations. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the
SOD network fails to detect the salient object of input image with adversarial perturbations, even if the salient object

of the adversarial image is still obvious and can be easily
distinguished from the background. As shown in Table 1,
without modifying the ground truth annotations, under adversarial attacks, GateNet (Zhao et al. 2020) obtains only
.2741 Fβ on ECSSD dataset and BBSNet (Fan et al. 2020f)
obtains only .3397 Fβ on NJU2K dataset, the Fβ drops by
.6697 and .5677 respectively. This phenomenon indicates
that state-of-the-art SOD models are easy to be fooled by
adversarial attacks, even with the clean auxiliary depth map.
The robustness of SOD models seriously concerns the security and perception gap between human and neural networks,
because human visual system is hard to recognize the adversarial perturbations of the input image.
As shown in Fig. 1(b), recent study ROSA (Li, Li,
and Yu 2019) has proposed a robust salient object detec-

* The corresponding author is He Tang.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2537

