The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Toward Robust Uncertainty Estimation with Random Activation Functions
Yana Stoyanova, Soroush Ghandi, Maryam Tavakol
Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
y.stoyanova@student.tue.nl, s.ghandi@tue.nl, m.tavakol@tue.nl

Abstract

certain in most cases, which has to be addressed to increase
their transparency, trustworthiness, and reliability.
In the machine learning literature, uncertainty is usually decomposed into two different types, namely aleatoric
uncertainty and epistemic uncertainty (Kiureghian and
Ditlevsen 2009). Aleatoric uncertainty, aka data uncertainty,
refers to the inherent uncertainty that stems from the data
itself, e.g., noise. On the other hand, epistemic uncertainty,
also called model uncertainty, is the type of uncertainty that
occurs due to the lack of sufficient data. While data uncertainty cannot be alleviated, model uncertainty can be addressed by e.g., acquiring more data. Let σ 2a and σ 2e denote the aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties, respectively.
Since the distinction between the two is imprecise to some
degree (Sullivan 2015), we focus on the predictive (total)
uncertainty, which is defined as the sum of the two

Deep neural networks are in the limelight of machine learning with their excellent performance in many data-driven applications. However, they can lead to inaccurate predictions
when queried in out-of-distribution data points, which can
have detrimental effects especially in sensitive domains, such
as healthcare and transportation, where erroneous predictions
can be very costly and/or dangerous. Subsequently, quantifying the uncertainty of the output of a neural network is often
leveraged to evaluate the confidence of its predictions, and
ensemble models have proved to be effective in measuring
the uncertainty by utilizing the variance of predictions over a
pool of models. In this paper, we propose a novel approach
for uncertainty quantification via ensembles, called Random
Activation Functions (RAFs) Ensemble, that aims at improving the ensemble diversity toward a more robust estimation,
by accommodating each neural network with a different (random) activation function. Extensive empirical study demonstrates that RAFs Ensemble outperforms state-of-the-art ensemble uncertainty quantification methods on both synthetic
and real-world datasets in a series of regression tasks.

σ 2p = σ 2a + σ 2e .

(1)

Accordingly, the approaches developed for uncertainty estimation can be categorized into three groups: Bayesian UQ
methods, ensemble UQ methods, and a combination of both,
i.e., Bayesian ensemble UQ (Abdar et al. 2021). In this paper, we focus on ensemble UQ techniques, either Bayesian
or non-Bayesian, as this group is less explored compared to
the solely Bayesian techniques. An ensemble model aggregates the predictions of multiple individual base-learners (or
ensemble members), which in our case are neural networks
(NNs), and the empirical variance of their predictions gives
an approximate measure of uncertainty. The idea behind this
heuristic is highly intuitive: the more the base-learners disagree on the outcome, the more uncertain they are. Therefore, the goal of ensemble members is to have a great level
of disagreement (variability) in the areas where little or no
data is available, and to have a high level of agreement in
regions with abundance of data (Pearce et al. 2018).
In this paper, we propose a novel method, called Random Activation Functions Ensemble (RAFs Ensemble), for
a more robust uncertainty estimation in (deep) neural networks. RAFs Ensemble is developed on top of Anchored
Ensemble technique, proposed by (Pearce et al. 2018), however, instead of initializing each NN member in the ensemble
with the same activation function, the NNs in RAFs Ensemble are accommodated with different (random) activation
functions in the hidden layers. This simple, yet crucial, mod-

Introduction
Recent advances in deep neural networks have demonstrated
remarkable performance in a wide variety of applications,
ranging from recommendation systems and improving user
experience to natural language processing and speech recognition (Abiodun et al. 2018). Nevertheless, blindly relying on the outcome of these models can have harmful effects, especially in high-stake domains such as healthcare
and autonomous driving, as models can provide inaccurate predictions when queried in out-of-distribution data
points (Amodei et al. 2016). Consequently, correctly quantifying the uncertainty of models’ predictions is an admissible mechanism to distinguish where a model can or cannot
be trusted, and thus, increases the transparency of models
about their capabilities and limitations (Abdar et al. 2021).
Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) is important for a variety
of reasons. For instance, in order to preserve the model’s
credibility, it is essential to report and communicate the encountered uncertainties regularly (Volodina and Challenor
2021). Additionally, models’ predictions are inevitably unCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15152

