The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DASH: A Distributed and Parallelizable Algorithm for Size-Constrained
Submodular Maximization
Tonmoy Dey1 , Yixin Chen2 , Alan Kuhnle2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Florida State University
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M University
tdey@fsu.edu, chen777@tamu.edu, kuhnle@tamu.com

Challenges from Big Data. Data from different sources and
modalities are growing at an unprecedented rate. Such massive data sets are often too large to fit on a single machine
and call for techniques that can work on data that is distributed over many machines. The MapReduce (MR) model
is a formalization of distributed computation into MapReduce rounds of communication between machines. A dataset
of size n is distributed on ` machines, each with memory to
hold at most Ψ elements of the ground set. The total memory
of the machines is constrained to be Ψ·` = O(n). After each
round of computation, a machine may send O(Ψ) amount of
data to other machines. We assume ` ≤ n1−c for some constant c ≥ 1/2.

Abstract
MapReduce (MR) algorithms for maximizing monotone,
submodular functions subject to a cardinality constraint
(SMCC) are currently restricted to the use of the linearadaptive (non-parallelizable) algorithm GREEDY. Lowadaptive algorithms do not satisfy the requirements of these
distributed MR frameworks, thereby limiting their performance. We study the SMCC problem in a distributed setting and propose the first MR algorithms with sublinear adaptive complexity. Our algorithms, R-DASH, T-DASH and GDASH provide 0.316 − ε, 3/8 − ε, and 1 − 1/e − ε approximation ratios, respectively, with nearly optimal adaptive complexity and nearly linear time complexity. Additionally, we
provide a framework to increase, under some mild assumptions, the maximum permissible cardinality constraint from
O(n/`2 ) of prior MR algorithms to O(n/`), where n is the
data size and ` is the number of machines; under a stronger
condition on the objective function, we increase the maximum constraint value to n. Finally, we provide empirical evidence to demonstrate that our sublinear-adaptive, distributed
algorithms provide orders of magnitude faster runtime compared to current state-of-the-art distributed algorithms.

1

MapReduce Algorithms for SMCC. Motivated by the
growing data size, extensive effort has been made to develop
distributed algorithms for SMCC using the MapReduce
(MR) framework, e.g. Mirzasoleiman et al. (2013); Mirrokni
and Zadimoghaddam (2015); Barbosa et al. (2016); Kazemi
et al. (2021) (see Table 1). The proposed distributed algorithms of Barbosa et al. (2015) and Barbosa et al. (2016) provide a way to utilize a given centralized, approximation algorithm A LG in a distributed setting, where A LG is executed
on the distributed data over a constant number of MR rounds
to yield a constant approximation. In order for their theoretical guarantees to hold, A LG must satisfy a consistency property (formally defined in Property 1). The standard greedy
GREEDY algorithm (Nemhauser, Wolsey, and Fisher 1978)
and the continuous greedy algorithm (Calinescu et al. 2007)
are the only known algorithms to satisfy this property and
achieve constant approximation in a distributed setting.

Introduction

Submodular maximization has become an important problem in data mining and machine learning with real world
applications ranging from influence and revenue maximization in social networks to more complex tasks such as image and video summarization. A submodular function captures the diminishing gain property of adding an element to
a set that decreases with increase in size of the set. Formally, a non-negative set function f : 2N → R+ is submodular iff for all sets A ⊆ B ⊆ N and x ∈ N \B,
f (A ∪ x) − f (A) ≥ f (B ∪ x) − f (B). The submodular
function is monotone if f (A) ≤ f (B) for all A ⊆ B. In this
paper, we study the following optimization problem for submodular optimization under cardinality constraint (SMCC):
O ← arg max f (S); subject to |S| ≤ k
(1)

Parallelizable (Adaptive) Algorithms for SMCC. Recently, parallelizable algorithms for SMCC in the adaptive
complexity model have been extensively studied (Balkanski, Rubinstein, and Singer 2019b; Ene and Nguyen 2019;
Fahrbach, Mirrokni, and Zadimoghaddam 2019; Chekuri
and Quanrud 2019; Balkanski and Singer 2018; Breuer,
Balkanski, and Singer 2019; Balkanski, Rubinstein, and
Singer 2019a; Chen, Dey, and Kuhnle 2021; Kuhnle
2021b,a; Kazemi et al. 2019). In this model, queries to
the objective function f are organized into as few adaptive
rounds as possible; within each adaptive round, the function queries are independent and thus may be arbitrarily parallelized. Several algorithms have been proposed that are

S⊆N

Classical results of Nemhauser, Wolsey, and Fisher (1978);
Nemhauser and Wolsey (1978) show that a standard greedy
algorithm achieves optimal approximation ratio of 1 − 1/e.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3941

