The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Deep Attentive Model for Knowledge Tracing
Xinping Wang, Liangyu Chen* , Min Zhang
East China Normal University
lychen@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

Therefore, RNN-based methods, such as DKT [Piech
et al. 2015], are explored to solve the problem of knowledge tracing more automatically without excessive manual
effort. However, similar to applying RNN in recommendation problems [Zhou et al. 2018a], it still exists some limitations for knowledge tracing problems. Different from the
text sequence in the NLP task, the historical behavior sequences of students are not strictly continuous (e.g., a student may do some exercises online, and then complete the
school assignments in private), which leads to the potential
discontinuous behavior in the input sequence.
DNN-based methods, such as NCDM [Wang et al. 2020]
and CDGK [Wang et al. 2021], are then designed for knowledge tracing. In these models, a student and related exercises are mapped into feature vectors based on the student’s
performance at the current time step. However, these models have two limitations: (1) Since the DNN model is not as
easy to handle sequence type data as the RNN model, the existed DNN-based methods do not consider the impact of the
historical sequence of students and exercises on the prediction results. (2) Although the historical sequence is critical
in knowledge tracing, the exercises that students have completed may involve some knowledge concepts, not all knowledge concepts. Therefore, the past behavior will make different contributions to predict the current exercise. As shown in
Figure 1, the knowledge tracing model predicts the answer
of current exercise according to the historical sequence and
attention intensity.
In this paper, we present a novel model DAKTN for
knowledge tracing with consideration of the effort of historical behavior sequences. DAKTN applies a designed pooling
layer, which can map the historical behavior sequence into
a fixed-length feature vector. Also, considering the second
limitation mentioned above, DAKTN adaptively calculates
the feature vector according to the candidate student and related exercise, by introducing an activation unit to pay attention on the historical sequence. In summary, our key contributions are listed as follows.

Knowledge Tracing (KT) is a crucial task in the field of online education, since it aims to predict students’ performance
on exercises based on their learning history. One typical solution for knowledge tracing is to combine the classic models in
educational psychology, such as Item Response Theory (IRT)
and Cognitive Diagnosis (CD), with Deep Neural Networks
(DNN) technologies. In this solution, a student and related
exercises are mapped into feature vectors based on the student’s performance at the current time step, however, it does
not consider the impact of historical behavior sequences, and
the relationships between historical sequences and students.
In this paper, we develop DAKTN, a novel model which assimilates the historical sequences to tackle this challenge for
better knowledge tracing. To be specific, we apply a pooling layer to incorporate the student behavior sequence in the
embedding layer. After that, we further design a local activation unit, which can adaptively calculate the representation
vectors by taking the relevance of historical sequences into
consideration with respect to candidate student and exercises.
Through experimental results on three real-world datasets,
DAKTN significantly outperforms state-of-the-art baseline
models. We also present the reasonableness of DAKTN by
ablation testing.

Introduction
With the development of the online education system,
knowledge tracing (KT), has become an important task in
educational psychology, where it aims to predict whether a
student can answer an exercise correctly according to his (or
her) learning history [VanLehn 1988]. The results of knowledge tracing can enable a number of applications such as exercise recommendation [Tang et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2018c]
and adaptive learning [Liu et al. 2019].
Approaches have been proposed for knowledge tracing
can be categorized as traditional methods, RNN-based methods and DNN-based methods. The traditional methods, such
as IRT [Embretson and Reise 2004] and KTM [Vie and
Kashima 2019], rely on a designed interaction function and
statistical methods (e.g., maximum likelihood estimation).
However, these methods often require professional expertise
and manual labelling.

• We point out the limit of DNN-based methods for knowledge tracing without historical behavior sequences and
design a novel Deep Attentive Model for Knowledge
Tracing (DAKTN). DAKTN applies a designed pooling
layer, which can consider the historical behavior information in the knowledge tracing model.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10192

