The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DACOM: Learning Delay-Aware Communication for Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning
Tingting Yuan1 * , Hwei-Ming Chung2,3 , Jie Yuan4 , Xiaoming Fu1
1

University of Göttingen
2
University of Oslo
3
NOOT Tech. Co., Ltd.
4
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
tingting.yuan@cs.uni-goettingen.de, hmc@noot.ai, yuanjie@bupt.edu.cn, fu@cs.uni-goettingen.de
Abstract

lead to collisions between a vehicle and another vehicle, bicyclist, or pedestrian. Agent communication for information exchange is expected to be a desirable alternative to
overcome this challenge by improving cooperation between
agents. However, the improvement is prevalently limited in
practice due to the limitations and overheads of communication channels (e.g., limited bandwidth and communication
delay) (Zhu, Dastani, and Wang 2022).
Most of the literature has been devoted to designing an
effective communication model for multi-agent cooperation
to improve the gains of communication, but the impacts of
dynamic communication channels and communication overheads (e.g., delays) have been largely ignored. Firstly, bandwidth constraints are considered in existing works (Mao
et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2019) by scheduling communication,
which learns to select agents to share information under limited and constant bandwidth. However, in practical scenarios, the communication abilities (e.g., bitrate) of agents are
heterogeneous and dynamic due to the variability of communication channels. For instance, in wireless networks (Agiwal, Roy, and Saxena 2016), agents’ bitrates are related to
the allocated bandwidth and the signal-to-interference-plusnoise ratio (SINR), which vary according to the distance
from agents to the access points. Secondly, the communication delay can interfere with the cooperation between agents
by introducing delays in action-making (Chen et al. 2021)
and uncertainty on the arrival time of information. Previous
work (Kim et al. 2019) prevents endless waiting by setting
a predefined and constant bound for the waiting time, but it
may restrain potential cooperation if it is set too short and
conversely may cause meaningless waiting. Therefore, such
a constant timer is inflexible and cannot be adapted to the
dynamics in the communication networks.
To improve agent cooperation, each agent should determine not only whether it is worth waiting but also how long
it can wait, taking into account the state of the communication channel. Motivated by this, this paper proposes a
delay-aware multi-agent communication model (DACOM)
to realize efficient communication by scheduling the waiting
time of communication that is adaptive to dynamic network
states. DACOM aims to achieve a good trade-off between
the benefits of communication and the costs of delayed response due to waiting for messages. To this end, we introduce TimeNet, a novel component in DACOM, to determine

Communication is supposed to improve multi-agent collaboration and overall performance in cooperative Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). However, such improvements
are prevalently limited in practice since most existing communication schemes ignore communication overheads (e.g.,
communication delays). In this paper, we demonstrate that
ignoring communication delays has detrimental effects on
collaborations, especially in delay-sensitive tasks such as autonomous driving. To mitigate this impact, we design a delayaware multi-agent communication model (DACOM) to adapt
communication to delays. Specifically, DACOM introduces
a component, TimeNet, that is responsible for adjusting the
waiting time of an agent to receive messages from other
agents such that the uncertainty associated with delay can be
addressed. Our experiments reveal that DACOM has a nonnegligible performance improvement over other mechanisms
by making a better trade-off between the benefits of communication and the costs of waiting for messages.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Arulkumaran et al. 2017) enables an agent to interact with an environment, and the agent
improves its policy iteratively by learning from observations
to achieve a given goal. RL, with a single agent to decide
the behavior of all entities, faces various challenges, such
as scalability (Yan et al. 2021) and privacy issues (Yuan,
Chung, and Fu 2022). To this end, the extension from singleagent RL to multi-agent RL (MARL) (Hernandez-Leal, Kartal, and Taylor 2019) is favorable. MARL (Hernandez-Leal,
Kartal, and Taylor 2019) has been widely used in various tasks, such as real-time resource allocation (Yuan et al.
2020, 2023), smart grid control (Chung et al. 2020), and autonomous driving (Kiran et al. 2021).
A major challenge in deploying MARL to solve cooperative tasks is that the partial observation of agents hinders
collaboration due to the uncertainty and incompleteness in
observing and the non-stationary behavior (Sukhbaatar, Fergus et al. 2016; Zhang, Yang, and Başar 2021). For example, blind spots in autonomous driving can be deadly and
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11763

