The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Actionness Inconsistency-Guided Contrastive Learning for Weakly-Supervised
Temporal Action Localization
Zhilin Li, Zilei Wang* , Qinying Liu
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
lizhilin@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn, lydyc@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

Classaware
Classagnostic

Weakly-supervised temporal action localization (WTAL)
aims to detect action instances given only video-level labels. To address the challenge, recent methods commonly
employ a two-branch framework, consisting of a class-aware
branch and a class-agnostic branch. In principle, the two
branches are supposed to produce the same actionness activation. However, we observe that there are actually many inconsistent activation regions. These inconsistent regions usually contain some challenging segments whose semantic information (action or background) is ambiguous. In this work,
we propose a novel Actionness Inconsistency-guided Contrastive Learning (AICL) method which utilizes the consistent segments to boost the representation learning of the inconsistent segments. Specifically, we first define the consistent and inconsistent segments by comparing the predictions
of two branches and then construct positive and negative
pairs between consistent segments and inconsistent segments
for contrastive learning. In addition, to avoid the trivial case
where there is no consistent sample, we introduce an action
consistency constraint to control the difference between the
two branches. We conduct extensive experiments on THUMOS14, ActivityNet v1.2, and ActivityNet v1.3 datasets, and
the results show the effectiveness of AICL with state-of-theart performance. Our code is available at https://github.com/
lizhilin-ustc/AAAI2023-AICL.

GT
①

②

Scene-related Error
④

⑤

③

Action-related Error
⑥

Classaware
Classagnostic
GT

Figure 1: Illustration of the “CliffDiving” action scores for
the class-agnostic and class-aware branches. Curves represent segment-wise activation scores.

classifier is trained using the video-level annotations of action categories. Using the classifier, we can obtain a sequence of class logits or predictions, i.e., class activation sequence (CAS). However, the learned CAS is usually noisy
due to the lack of frame-level annotations.
To this end, recent methods (Lee, Uh, and Byun 2020;
Huang, Wang, and Li 2021; Ma et al. 2021; Qu et al. 2021)
typically employ a two-branch structure, which is comprised
by a class-aware branch and a class-agnostic branch. The
class-aware branch uses multi-instance learning and videolevel labels to learn category-specific T-CAS, while the
class-agnostic branch focuses on the general action in the
video. By digging into these two branches, we find that the
two branches do not always activate the same regions. To
be specific, there are mainly two types of cases that account for the differences. The first type is the error related
to scene information. For example, in Figure 1, ④ and ⑤
are non-action regions but contain scene information (such

Introduction
Temporal action localization is a task to localize the start and
end timestamps of action instances and recognize their categories. In recent years, many works (Nawhal and Mori 2021;
Zhao et al. 2017; Zhai et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2022) put effort into a fully-supervised manner and gain great achievements. However, these fully-supervised methods require extensive manual segment-level annotations. Different from
the fully-supervised method, the weakly-supervised method
only needs video-level labels for training, that is, each video
only needs to give the action category that appears in it.
Meanwhile, weakly-supervised methods can avoid noise in
frame-level annotations. Most of the existing methods use
a multi-instance learning mechanism, where a video-level
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1513

