The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AlphaRoute: Large-Scale Coordinated Route Planning
via Monte Carlo Tree Search
Guiyang Luo 1, 2 * , Yantao Wang1 * , Hui Zhang3 , Quan Yuan1, 2† , Jinglin Li1
1

State Key Laboratory Of Networking And Switching Technology (Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications)
2
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks (Xidian University)
3
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
Abstract

indirect economic losses caused by traffic jams to American
car owners reach 300 billion, with an average of 1400 per
driver. How to reduce traffic congestion is the main problem faced by the governments in many countries (Luo et al.
2022b).
Recent years have witnessed significant attention being
attracted to traffic congestion, from both academia and industry (Dai et al. 2022). Municipalities continually invest
in road infrastructure construction and maintenance to increase supply, although controversies on whether more roads
alleviate congestion persist, i.e., Braess’s Paradox (Frank
1981), which shows that adding capacity to a network can
sometimes actually slow down the traffic (Çolak, Lima, and
González 2016). Other efforts to reduce congestion aim to
decrease driving demand by promoting alternative travel
modes (Zhou et al. 2021), high occupancy driving lanes, carpooling (Gollapudi, Kollias, and Panigrahi 2019), congestion pricing (Chen et al. 2020), etc. However, these methods
would bring about inconvenience to drivers and travelers.
Recently, drivers are increasingly leveraging real-time information through GPS devices and online routing tools
(e.g., Google maps) to move faster using vehicular networks (Luo et al. 2022a, 2018, 2021). This trend offers a
new tool to guide drivers to make choices for the benefit
of the city, thus creating a more optimal traffic configuration (Su et al. 2022). Consequently, coordinated route planning (CRP) stands out as a promising and popular way to
overcome the traffic congestion problem, i.e. considering the
whole system welfare and assigning routes to users in such
a way that the congestion problem is solved or, at least, kept
at a minimum level (Morandi 2021).

This paper proposes AlphaRoute, an AlphaGo inspired algorithm for coordinating large-scale routes, built upon graph attention reinforcement learning and Monte Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS). We first partition the road network into regions and
model large-scale coordinated route planning as a Markov
game, where each partitioned region is treated as a player instead of each driver. Then, AlphaRoute applies a bilevel optimization framework, consisting of several region planners
and a global planner, where the region planner coordinates
the route choices for vehicles located in the region and generates several strategies, and the global planner evaluates the
combination of strategies. AlphaRoute is built on graph attention network for evaluating each state and MCTS algorithm
for dynamically visiting and simulating the future state for
narrowing down the search space. AlphaRoute is capable of
1) bridging user fairness and system efficiency, 2) achieving
higher search efficiency by alleviating the curse of dimensionality problems, and 3) making an effective and informed
route planning by simulating over the future to capture traffic dynamics. Comprehensive experiments are conducted on
two real-world road networks as compared with several baselines to evaluate the performance, and results show that AlphaRoute achieves the lowest travel time, and is efficient and
effective for coordinating large-scale routes and alleviating
the traffic congestion problem. The code will be publicly
available.

Introduction
With the emerging trend towards urbanization and the rapid
development of urban transportation, traffic congestion is
becoming a serious and one of the most urgent and vexing
problems in metropolitan areas (Liang et al. 2022; Luo et al.
2022c; Zhang et al. 2022). Travelers complain about traffic
congestion because it adds to their travel times a delay that
can be used for other activities. For society and the environment, traffic congestion means more energy and money
consumption, and increased greenhouse gas emission and air
pollution (Zhou et al. 2017). Taking Beijing as an example,
the average daily congestion duration in 2017 was 2.6 hours,
while it was only 0.9 hours in 2009. The estimated direct or

Related Works and Challenges
However, coordinating large-scale routes is challenging due
to the following challenges.
1. A huge gap between the user equilibrium and the system optimum. The well-known Wardropian principles,
i.e., the user equilibrium (UE) and the system optimum
(SO), are fundamental objectives for CRP (Zhang, Liu,
and Waller 2019). UE guarantees fairness among users,
in which each user chooses the most convenient path selfishly. When UE is reached, all users sharing the same origin and destination will experience the same travel time.
SO involves overall efficiency, which is a system-wide

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12058

