The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Estimating Regression Predictive Distributions with Sample Networks
Ali Harakeh1, 2, * , Jordan Sir Kwang Hu3, 4 , Naiqing Guan4 , Steven Waslander3, 4 , Liam Paull1, 2
1

Mila - Quebec AI Institute
2
Université de Montréal
3
University of Toronto Institute for Aerospace Studies
4
University of Toronto

Abstract
Estimating the uncertainty in deep neural network predictions
is crucial for many real-world applications. A common approach to model uncertainty is to choose a parametric distribution and fit the data to it using maximum likelihood estimation. The chosen parametric form can be a poor fit to the datagenerating distribution, resulting in unreliable uncertainty estimates. In this work, we propose SampleNet, a flexible and
scalable architecture for modeling uncertainty that avoids
specifying a parametric form on the output distribution. SampleNets do so by defining an empirical distribution using samples that are learned with the Energy Score and regularized
with the Sinkhorn Divergence. SampleNets are shown to be
able to well-fit a wide range of distributions and to outperform baselines on large-scale real-world regression tasks.

1

Figure 1: Left: Samples (blue) from a variance network (βNLL) (Seitzer et al. 2022) fails to fit multimodal data (orange). Right: SampleNet produces well-fitted samples.
et al. 2019) results in a poor approximation of the predictive distribution; we can not expect a neural network to accurately fit multimodal data using an ill-fitting parametric
model, even on toy examples (figure 1).
Summary of contributions. First, we present SampleNet, a simple and scalable neural network architecture
that represents a predictive distribution with samples, avoiding the need to choose a particular parametric distribution
when modeling predictive uncertainty. Second, we propose
to regularize SampleNet by minimizing an optimal transport
(OT) cost with respect to a data prior. Our regularization allows us to avoid overfitting while retaining the ability to encourage the predictive distribution to approximate a scaled
instance of the prior if needed. Third, we empirically show
that SampleNets outperform baselines on real-world multimodal data, standard regression benchmarks, and monocular
depth prediction.

Introduction

Capturing uncertainty in predictions is a crucial ability for
machine learning models to be safely used in decisionmaking systems. Predictive uncertainty is commonly modeled by predicting a probability distribution over the output
variable conditioned on the input (Hüllermeier and Waegeman 2021). In this paper, we tackle the problem of predicting probability distributions for regression tasks using deep
neural networks.
The most common approach for predicting probability
distributions assumes the regression target to follow a particular parametric distribution (Gal and Ghahramani 2016;
Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017; Kendall and
Gal 2017; Skafte, Jørgensen, and Hauberg 2019; Liu et al.
2019; Seitzer et al. 2022), and uses a neural network to learn
its parameters. Such assumptions on the particular form of
the predictive distribution limit the modeling capacity of
these methods and lead to poor performance when the chosen distribution is a poor fit for the data being modeled.
This problem is exacerbated by the difficulty in choosing
the best parametric distributions for complex, multidimensional real-world data. As an example, using a unimodal
Gaussian distribution to model the inherently multimodal
movement trajectory of the vehicle at an intersection (Cui

2

Related Work

Uncertainty can originate from two inherently different
sources (Hüllermeier and Waegeman 2021), epistemic
uncertainty which is caused by the lack of knowledge
about the best model parameters, and aleatoric uncertainty which is caused by the inherent randomness in
the underlying process being modeled. Variance networks (Nix and Weigend 1994) model aleatoric uncertainty
by learning the parameters of a heteroscedastic Gaussian
predictive distribution using the negative log-likelihood
(NLL) loss. Variance networks have been improved to
capture epistemic uncertainty by using them as members
of ensembles (Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell
2017) or by combining them with dropout (Kendall and

* ali.harakeh@mila.quebec

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7830

