The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fixed-Weight Difference Target Propagation
Tatsukichi Shibuya1 , Nakamasa Inoue1 , Rei Kawakami1 , Ikuro Sato1,2
1

Tokyo Institute of Technology
2
Denso IT Laboratory
shibuya.t.ad@m.titech.ac.jp, inoue@c.titech.ac.jp, reikawa@sc.e.titech.ac.jp, isato@c.titech.ac.jp

Abstract

processes (i.e., the feedback process does not require the activation used in the feedforward process), while the brain
requires symmetric operations. Although there are ongoing
research efforts to connect the brain and BP (Lillicrap et al.
2020), many researchers seek less inconsistent yet practical
algorithms of network training (Lillicrap et al. 2016; Bengio 2014; Lee et al. 2015; Bengio 2020; Meulemans et al.
2020; Ahmad, van Gerven, and Ambrogioni 2020; Scellier
and Bengio 2017) because biologically plausible algorithms
that may bridge the gap between neuroscience and computer
science are believed to enhance machine learning.
Feedback alignment (FA) (Lillicrap et al. 2016) was proposed to resolve the weight transport problem by using fixed
random weights for error propagation. It is worth noting that
FA has been shown to outperform BP on real datasets, although the results are somewhat outdated (Nøkland 2016;
Crafton et al. 2019).
Target propagation (TP) (Bengio 2014; LeCun 1986) has
been proposed as a NN training algorithm that can circumvent the inconsistencies 1) and 2). The main idea of TP is
to define target values for hidden neurons in each layer in a
way that the target values (not the error) are backpropagated
from the output layer down to the first hidden layer, using
the same activation function used in the feedforward process. The feedback network, which does not share parameters with the feedforward network, is trained so that each
layer becomes an approximated inverse of the corresponding
layer of the feedforward network, and the parameters of the
feedforward network are updated to achieve the layer-wise
target. In TP, the feedback network ideally realizes layerwise autoencoders with the feedforward network, but in reality, it often ends up with imperfect autoencoders, which
could cause optimization problems (Lee et al. 2015; Meulemans et al. 2020). Among the methods that alleviate such
small discrepancies (Lee et al. 2015; Bengio 2020), difference target propagation (DTP) (Lee et al. 2015) introduces
linear correction terms to the feedback process and significantly improved the recognition performance of TP.
However, while the formalism of DTP to compute layerwise targets with a feedback network is theoretically sound,
training the feedback network is often demanding in the following aspects: a) Synchronous training of the feedforward
and feedback networks often requires careful hyperparameter tuning (Bartunov et al. 2018). b) Training of the feedback

Target Propagation (TP) is a biologically more plausible algorithm than the error backpropagation (BP) to train deep networks, and improving the practicality of TP is an open issue.
TP methods require the feedforward and feedback networks
to form layer-wise autoencoders for propagating the target
values generated at the output layer. However, this causes
certain drawbacks; e.g., careful hyperparameter tuning is required to synchronize the feedforward and feedback training,
and frequent updates of the feedback path are usually needed
more than that of the feedforward path. Learning of the feedforward and feedback networks is sufficient to make TP methods capable of training, but is having these layer-wise autoencoders a necessary condition for TP to work? We answer this
question by presenting Fixed-Weight Difference Target Propagation (FW-DTP) that keeps the feedback weights constant
during training. We confirmed that this simple method, which
naturally resolves the abovementioned problems of TP, can
still deliver informative target values to hidden layers for a
given task; indeed, FW-DTP consistently achieves higher test
performance than a baseline, the Difference Target Propagation (DTP), on four classification datasets. We also present a
novel propagation architecture that explains the exact form of
the feedback function of DTP to analyze FW-DTP. Our code
is available at https://github.com/TatsukichiShibuya/FixedWeight-Difference-Target-Propagation.

Introduction
Artificial Neural Networks (NNs) were introduced to model
the information processing in the neural circuits of the brain
(McCulloch and Pitts 1943; Rosenblatt 1958). The error
backpropagation (BP) has been the most widely used algorithm to optimize parameters of multi-layer NNs with gradient descent (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams 1986), but the
lack of consistency with neuroscientific findings has been
pointed out (Crick 1989; Glorot and Bengio 2010). In particular, the inconsistencies include that 1) in BP, the feedback
path is the reversal of the feedforward path in a way that
the same synaptic weight parameters are used (a.k.a. weight
transport problem (Grossberg 1987)), while the brain most
likely uses different sets of parameters in the feedforward
and feedback processes; 2) in BP, the layer-to-layer operations are asymmetric between feedforward and feedback
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9811

