The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improving Robust Fairness via Balance Adversarial Training
Chunyu Sun1 , Chenye Xu1 , Chengyuan Yao1 , Siyuan Liang2 , Yichao Wu1 , Ding Liang1 ,
Xianglong Liu3, 4, 5 , Aishan Liu 5 *
1
SenseTime Research
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
4
Institute of Dataspace, Hefei, Anhui, China
5
NLSDE, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{sunchunyu,xuchenye,yaochengyuan,wuyichao,liangding}@sensetime.com,
liangsiyuan@iie.ac.cn, {xlliu, liuaishan}@buaa.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Adversarial training (AT) methods are effective against adversarial attacks, yet they introduce severe disparity of accuracy
and robustness between different classes, known as the robust fairness problem. Previously proposed Fair Robust Learning (FRL) adaptively reweights different classes to improve
fairness. However, the performance of the better-performed
classes decreases, leading to a strong performance drop. In this
paper, we observed two unfair phenomena during adversarial
training: different difficulties in generating adversarial examples from each class (source-class fairness) and disparate target
class tendencies when generating adversarial examples (targetclass fairness). From the observations, we propose Balance Adversarial Training (BAT) to address the robust fairness problem.
Regarding source-class fairness, we adjust the attack strength
and difficulties of each class to generate samples near the decision boundary for easier and fairer model learning; considering target-class fairness, by introducing a uniform distribution
constraint, we encourage the adversarial example generation
process for each class with a fair tendency. Extensive experiments conducted on multiple datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100,
and ImageNette) demonstrate that our BAT can significantly
outperform other baselines in mitigating the robust fairness
problem (+5-10% on the worst class accuracy)(Our codes can
be found at https://github.com/silvercherry/Improving-RobustFairness-via-Balance-Adversarial-Training).

(a) Clean accuracy

(b) Robust accuracy

Figure 1: AT suffers from robust fairness problem where
adversarially trained models make a severe disparity in accuracy and robustness among different classes compared to the
standard training. FRL improves the previously poor performance classes, but other classes are decreased.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Szegedy et al. 2014; Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2015a) which fool model predictions by adding
imperceptible perturbations to natural examples. To defend
against adversarial attacks, many defense techniques are designed (Xie et al. 2019; Cohen, Rosenfeld, and Kolter 2019;
Jeong and Shin 2020). In particular, adversarial training
(Madry et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019) that injects adversarial examples during training has been proved to be the
most effective methods against adversarial attacks.
However, adversarial training suffers from the robust fairness problem, where the adversarially trained models make a
**Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15161

severe disparity in accuracy and robustness among different
classes (Xu et al. 2021). For example, an adversarially trained
ResNet-18 model on CIFAR-10 has significantly lower clean
and robust accuracy on class cat than other classes; in contrast, each class has a similar accuracy during the standard
training (see Figure 1). This phenomenon is firstly defined by
(Xu et al. 2021) and further theoretically justified by studying
a binary classification task under a Gaussian mixture distribution. To mitigate the robust fairness problem, they proposed
Fair-Robust-Learning (FRL), which adaptively re-weights
each class during training to balance the performance of each
class. However, at a closer inspection, we found that this robust fairness is achieved by reducing the performance of other
previously better performed classes, leading to a reduction in
both clean and robust accuracy (Figure 1).
In this paper, we conjecture that the mechanisms of the
adversarial example generation process during adversarial
training are related to the robust fairness problem, which cannot be mitigated by a class re-weighting scheme. More specifically, we found two key observations that are fundamental
to the robust fairness during AT as (1) source-class fairness:
samples from different classes have different difficulties and
require different perturbation budgets for adversarial example generation; (2) target-class fairness: the targets of the
generated adversarial examples are biased and yield a clear
tendency towards specified classes. Motivated by the above
observation, we propose the Balance Adversarial Training

