The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Bayesian Cross-Modal Alignment Learning
for Few-Shot Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Lin Zhu, Xinbing Wang, Chenghu Zhou, Nanyang Ye*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
zhulin sjtu@sjtu.edu.cn, xwang8@sjtu.edu.cn, zhouchsjtu@gmail.com, ynylincoln@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advances in large pre-trained models showed promising results in few-shot learning. However, their generalization ability on two-dimensional Out-of-Distribution (OoD)
data, i.e., correlation shift and diversity shift, has not been
thoroughly investigated. Researches have shown that even
with a significant amount of training data, few methods can
achieve better performance than the standard empirical risk
minimization method (ERM) in OoD generalization. This
few-shot OoD generalization dilemma emerges as a challenging direction in deep neural network generalization research, where the performance suffers from overfitting on
few-shot examples and OoD generalization errors. In this
paper, leveraging a broader supervision source, we explore
a novel Bayesian cross-modal image-text alignment learning method (Bayes-CAL) to address this issue. Specifically,
the model is designed as only text representations are finetuned via a Bayesian modelling approach with gradient orthogonalization loss and invariant risk minimization (IRM)
loss. The Bayesian approach is essentially introduced to avoid
overfitting the base classes observed during training and improve generalization to broader unseen classes. The dedicated
loss is introduced to achieve better image-text alignment by
disentangling the causal and non-casual parts of image features. Numerical experiments demonstrate that Bayes-CAL
achieved state-of-the-art OoD generalization performances
on two-dimensional distribution shifts. Moreover, compared
with CLIP-like models, Bayes-CAL yields more stable generalization performances on unseen classes. Our code is available at https://github.com/LinLLLL/BayesCAL.

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed Bayesian cross-modal
alignment learning paradigms. To avoid overfitting on the
few-shot training samples, φ(t) is modelled by a variational
distribution q(φ(t) ) to approximate its posterior distribution.

source and target datasets (Chen et al. 2019; Guo et al.
2020). This domain shift issue commonly exists in real scenarios, especially in the few-shot setting. For example, it is
difficult to construct large training datasets for rare species,
there can be huge differences between the training and test
environments due to the large randomness of the few-shot
setting.
To address this domain shift problem, i.e., training and
test data access different conditional distributions, there
have been plenty of methods proposed to achieve domain
generalization in few-shot learning scenarios(Tseng et al.
2020; Liu et al. 2021; Liang et al. 2021; Zhou and Tan
2021). However, most of these studies focused on this issue without considering the different characteristics of distribution shifts between training and test domains. In this
paper, we consider a more practical setting of few-shot Outof-Distribution (OoD) generalization, focusing on the fewshot image recognition task of generalizing under two major types of distribution shifts (as described in OoD-Bench
(Ye et al. 2021)). Specifically, models usually have access to
multi-domain ”K-shot N-way” training samples of OoD data

.

Introduction
Few-shot learning is an emerging research topic that aims
to generalize from only a few training samples (Wang et al.
2020). Despite the success of recent few-shot learning methods on independent and identically distributed (I.I.D) settings (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Rusu et al. 2018;
Sung et al. 2018; Vuorio et al. 2019; Fan et al. 2021), these
few-shot learning methods would suffer significant performance drop in the presence of domain differences between
* Corresponding author. The full Appendix is available on
Arxiv.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11461

