The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learn More for Food Recognition via Progressive Self-Distillation
Yaohui Zhu1 * , Linhu Liu2 * , Jiang Tian2
1

School of Artifical Intelligance, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 10875, China
2
AI Lab, Lenovo Research, Beijing, China
yaohui.zhu@bnu.edu.cn, {liulh7, tianjiang1}@lenovo.com

Abstract
Food recognition has a wide range of applications, such as
health-aware recommendation and self-service restaurants.
Most previous methods of food recognition firstly locate informative regions in some weakly-supervised manners and
then aggregate their features. However, location errors of informative regions limit the effectiveness of these methods to
some extent. Instead of locating multiple regions, we propose
a Progressive Self-Distillation (PSD) method, which progressively enhances the ability of network to mine more details
for food recognition. The training of PSD simultaneously
contains multiple self-distillations, in which a teacher network and a student network share the same embedding network. Since the student network receives a modified image
from its teacher network by masking some informative regions, the teacher network outputs stronger semantic representations than the student network. Guided by such teacher
network with stronger semantics, the student network is encouraged to mine more useful regions from the modified image by enhancing its own ability. The ability of the teacher
network is also enhanced with the shared embedding network. By using progressive training, the teacher network incrementally improves its ability to mine more discriminative
regions. In inference phase, only the teacher network is used
without the help of the student network. Extensive experiments on three datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed method and state-of-the-art performance.

Part-fixed Fine-grained Images (Barn Swallow)

Food Images (Greek Salad)

Figure 1: Some fine-grained bird images and food images.
There may be three discriminative regions in ‘Barn Swallow’ (see bounding boxes), while ‘Greek Salad’ contains
lots of similar regions, each of which is possibly discriminative. Therefore, we think that food images have more informative regions than part-fixed fine-grained images.

which firstly locates informative regions in some weaklysupervised manners, and then aggregates features of these
regions. Although these methods achieve promising performance, they possibly suffer from location errors of those
informative regions, leading to the limited effectiveness to
some extent.
In comparison with part-fixed fine-grained images such
as birds, food images include a variety of similar ingredients
stacked together. As shown in Figure 1, there are some semantic parts (e.g., head and claw) in ‘Barn Swallow’, while
lots of sliced material (e.g., cucumbers and cheese), fruit and
vegetable are stacked together in ‘Greek Salad’. An intuitive hypothesis is that food images have more informative
regions than part-fixed fine-grained images. However, it is
challenging to capture so many informative regions under
the existing training mechanism of vanilla networks, since
training these regions together can not effectively learn each
of them.
In this paper, we propose a self-boosting training mechanism, called Progressive Self-Distillation (PSD), to learn

Introduction
Food is a necessity of human life and the foundation of
human experience. As a basic research in food field, food
recognition has a wide range of applications such as visual
food choice (Chen et al. 2020a), health-aware recommendation (Nag, Pandey, and Jain 2017) and self-service restaurants (Aguilar et al. 2018).
Food recognition belongs to fine-grained recognition,
which refers to the task of distinguishing subordinate categories, such as birds, dogs and cars. Most previous methods of food recognition (Martinel and Foresti 2018; Jianing et al. 2019; Min et al. 2020, 2019; Wang et al. 2022)
mainly follow the key solution of fine-grained recognition,
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3879

