The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Machine with Short-Term, Episodic, and Semantic Memory Systems
Taewoon Kim1 , Michael Cochez1 , Vincent François-Lavet1 , Mark Neerincx2 , Piek Vossen1
1

Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Technische Universiteit Delft
{t.kim, m.cochez, vincent.francoislavet, p.t.j.m.vossen}@vu.nl, m.a.neerincx@tudelft.nl
2

Abstract

virtual assistants can retrieve relevant information (often
harvested from the Internet) and answer factual and commonsense questions (i.e., those probing for semantic knowledge). However, these systems will not remember what they
did yesterday (i.e., episodic memory). This is because they
were not designed to answer such questions.
Consider, for example, a robot deployed to a nursery
home whose job is to remind the elderly to take their pills
every day. If such robot can successfully remember when
and where it has seen them taking the pills, by observing the
environment, it is a great help to them. However, it is not
feasible for an agent to encode and store every observation
as an episodic memory, as memory capacity is bounded. If
the information is no longer stored, the agent can use commonsense knowledge (semantic memory) and say “You left
your pills in the cabinet”.
Motivated by this type of examples, we have modeled an
agent that has both semantic and episodic memory systems.
The agent interacts with the environment and answers questions to maximize its reward. To make it more realistic, our
agent can only partially observe the environment and hence
it needs a memory system to be able to answer. Our hypothesis is that if it has two explicit memory systems, rather than
one, it can answer the questions more successfully.
Knowledge graphs (KG) model data in the form of a
graph, where entities are linked with directed relations. This
way of representing data is not only readable / writable by
both humans and machines, but also deductive and inductive reasoning can be performed. Moreover, once we convert them into knowledge graph embeddings (KGE), we can
take advantage of neural networks to solve various problems (Hogan et al. 2022).
Although KGs can be built by experts with their domain
knowledge, they are more powerful when they are open and
crowdsourced, since they can take advantage of collective
human knowledge. Wikidata (Vrandečić and Krötzsch 2014)
and ConceptNet (Speer, Chin, and Havasi 2017) are some of
the examples. ConceptNet tries to capture the meanings of
the words, resulting in capturing common sense knowledge
(e.g., (laptop, AtLocation, desk)). We used part
of their knowledge graph for our experiments.
Reinforcement learning (RL) has become increasingly
popular over the past few years (Arulkumaran et al. 2017).
Deep Q-learning (Mnih et al. 2013), an RL that uses deep

Inspired by the cognitive science theory of the explicit human memory systems, we have modeled an agent with shortterm, episodic, and semantic memory systems, each of which
is modeled with a knowledge graph. To evaluate this system and analyze the behavior of this agent, we designed and
released our own reinforcement learning agent environment,
“the Room”, where an agent has to learn how to encode, store,
and retrieve memories to maximize its return by answering
questions. We show that our deep Q-learning based agent successfully learns whether a short-term memory should be forgotten, or rather be stored in the episodic or semantic memory
systems. Our experiments indicate that an agent with humanlike memory systems can outperform an agent without this
memory structure in the environment.

1

Introduction

The cognitive science theory suggests that humans have an
explicit memory system, which is composed of semantic and
episodic memory systems (Tulving 1983, 1985; Tulving and
Thomson 1973). Semantic memory deals with general world
knowledge, while episodic deals with one’s personal memory. For example, when asked: “Where are laptops usually
located?”, you might be able to answer: “On a desk”, if you
have successfully encoded and stored a relevant memory.
However, you are unlikely able to recall when and where
such memory (or knowledge) got to be stored in your memory system. Nonetheless, you were able to retrieve it. This is
because this type of memory is semantic. Semantic memory
contains (general) factual knowledge without momentary or
time-bound information (i.e., where and when the event occurred). Let’s consider another question: “Where is Alice’s
laptop?” and let us assume that you have observed where Alice’s laptop was. To answer this question, one revisits when
and where this memory was encoded and stored. Retrieval
of such a memory is the reconstruction process of the event.
This type of memory is called episodic. These are more individual to you than semantic memories, include information
about personal experiences, and often have an affective connotation.
Nowadays, machines have become reasonably good at answering factual knowledge questions. Search engines and
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

48

