The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Text to Point Cloud Localization with Relation-Enhanced Transformer
Guangzhi Wang1 , Hehe Fan2 , Mohan Kankanhalli2
1

Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
guangzhi.wang@u.nus.edu, hehe.fan@nus.edu.sg, mohan@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Automatically localizing a position based on a few natural
language instructions is essential for future robots to communicate and collaborate with humans. To approach this goal,
we focus on the text-to-point-cloud cross-modal localization
problem. Given a textual query, it aims to identify the described location from city-scale point clouds. The task involves two challenges. 1) In city-scale point clouds, similar
ambient instances may exist in several locations. Searching
each location in a huge point cloud with only instances as
guidance may lead to less discriminative signals and incorrect results. 2) In textual descriptions, the hints are provided
separately. In this case, the relations among those hints are
not explicitly described, leading to the difficulties of learning relations. To overcome these two challenges, we propose
a unified Relation-Enhanced Transformer (RET) to improve
representation discriminability for both point cloud and natural language queries. The core of the proposed RET is a
novel Relation-enhanced Self-Attention (RSA) mechanism,
which explicitly encodes instance (hint)-wise relations for the
two modalities. Moreover, we propose a fine-grained crossmodal matching method to further refine the location predictions in a subsequent instance-hint matching stage. Experimental results on the KITTI360Pose dataset demonstrate that
our approach surpasses the previous state-of-the-art method
by large margins.

Localization

Textual Query
Heading to a place:
[hint1] east of a dark-green terrain.
[hint2] south of a gray road.
[hint3] west of a dark-green traffic sign.
[hint4] south of a green terrain.

Figure 1: Illustration of the text to point cloud localization
task. Given a textual query, which usually contains several
independent hints, the goal is to localize the point of interest
in a huge city-scale point cloud.

effective large-scale point cloud understanding. Considering
the difficulties, an existing method (Kolmet et al. 2022) first
divides a city-wide point cloud into several cells, and then
solves this task in a Coarse-to-Fine manner.
The goal of the ‘coarse’ stage is to find out the target
cell that contains the queried location according to the given
natural language descriptions. In this stage, the instances
included in point cloud cells and those mentioned in language descriptions are mainly used for text-to-point-cloud
retrieval based on their types, without considering their relations. In the ‘fine’ stage, each object in the textual query is
matched with an in-cell point cloud instance, whereby a target location will be predicted from each hint. This pioneering method sets up a significant starting point for tackling
the challenging task. However, it fails to consider the intrinsic relations in both stages, resulting in sub-optimal performance.
For the coarse stage, because similar ambient instances
may exist in several cells, performing retrieval based on only
the cell-contained and query-related instance types without
considering their relations may lead to low discriminabil-

Introduction
Understanding natural language instructions in the 3D real
world is a fundamental skill for future artificial intelligence
assistants to collaborate with humans. In this paper, we focus on the outdoor environment and study the task of natural
language-based localization from city-scale point clouds. As
shown in Figure 1, given a linguistic description of a position, which contains several hints, the goal of the task is to
find out the target location from a large-scale point cloud.
This task can effectively help mobile robots, such as selfdriving cars and autonomous drones, cooperate with humans
to coordinate actions and plan their trajectories. By understanding the destination from natural language instructions,
it reduces the human effort required for manual operation.
However, this task is intrinsically challenging. Precise localization requires both correct language interpretation and
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2501

