The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Human-Instructed Deep Hierarchical Generative Learning
for Automated Urban Planning
Dongjie Wang1 , Lingfei Wu2 , Denghui Zhang3 , Jingbo Zhou4 , Leilei Sun5 , Yanjie Fu1 *
1

University of Central Florida
2
Pinterest
3
Rutgers University
4
Baidu Research
5
Beihang University
wangdongjie@knights.ucf.edu, lwu@email.wm.edu, dhzhangai@gamil.com,
zhoujingbo@baidu.com, leileisun@buaa.edu.cn, yanjie.fu@ucf.edu
Abstract
The essential task of urban planning is to generate the optimal land-use configuration of a target area. However, traditional urban planning is time-consuming and labor-intensive.
Deep generative learning gives us hope that we can automate this planning process and come up with the ideal urban
plans. While remarkable achievements have been obtained,
they have exhibited limitations in lacking awareness of: 1) the
hierarchical dependencies between functional zones and spatial grids; 2) the peer dependencies among functional zones;
and 3) human regulations to ensure the usability of generated configurations. To address these limitations, we develop
a novel human-instructed deep hierarchical generative model.
We rethink the urban planning generative task from a unique
functionality perspective, where we summarize planning requirements into different functionality projections for better
urban plan generation. To this end, we develop a three-stage
generation process from a target area to zones to grids. The
first stage is to label the grids of a target area with latent functionalities to discover functional zones. The second stage is
to perceive the planning requirements to form urban functionality projections. We propose a novel module: functionalizer to project the embedding of human instructions and
geospatial contexts to the zone-level plan to obtain such projections. Each projection includes the information of land-use
portfolios and the structural dependencies across spatial grids
in terms of a specific urban function. The third stage is to
leverage multi-attentions to model the zone-zone peer dependencies of the functionality projections to generate grid-level
land-use configurations. Finally, we present extensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework.

Urban
Planner

Rough Sketch of
Urban Planning

Detailed Urban
Planning Solution

Analogy

Traffic

Education

Park

Restaurant
Commercial

Automated Urban
Planner

Urban Functional Zones
(Zone Level Planning)

Land-use Configurations
(Grid Level Planning)

Figure 1: The automated urban planner can mimic the
workflow of urban experts by first generating zone-level
planning and then refining it to grid-level planning.

geo-social, urban and mobile data provide us with a new
data-driven perspective to re-investigate urban planning.
There are considerable existing works related to automated urban planning (Wang et al. 2021a; Shen et al. 2020;
Ye, Du, and Ye 2021; Wang et al. 2021b). For example,
motivated by the remarkable success of deep image generation, (Wang et al. 2020) proposes a land-use configuration
generation framework, namely LUCGAN, which can generate a land-use configuration automatically for an empty
geographical area based on surrounding contexts. While
the existing works have achieved promising results, there
are still several limitations: 1) hierarchical relationships between high-level urban functional zones and the detailed urban planning scheme are ignored; 2)mutual dependencies
and influences among the planning of different subareas are
omitted. 3) human instructions from planning experts, such
as safety level, greening rate, volume rate, and etc, cannot
be perceived by model;
Therefore, in this paper, we study the research problem of
how to employ deep models to make automated urban plan-

Introduction
Urban planning is vital for building up a sustainable and
vigorous community. As a complicated and time-consuming
task, traditional practice heavily depends on experts’ personal experiences. The variance among urban planners may
result in biases and implausible solutions. Thanks to the explosive development of deep learning and internet-of-things,
the handful of methodologies and ubiquitously available
* Contact Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4660

