The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multi-Action Dialog Policy Learning from Logged User Feedback
Shuo Zhang1 , Junzhou Zhao1 * , Pinghui Wang1 * , Tianxiang Wang1 ,
Zi Liang1 , Jing Tao1 , Yi Huang2 , Junlan Feng2
1

MOE KLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, P. R. China
2
JIUTIAN Team, China Mobile Research
{zs412082986, liangzid}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {junzhou.zhao, phwang, jtao}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn,
2673021501@qq.com, {huangyi, fengjunlan}@chinamobile.com
Dialog Actions

Abstract

Inform choices
Recommend name

Multi-action dialog policy, which generates multiple atomic
dialog actions per turn, has been widely applied in taskoriented dialog systems to provide expressive and efficient
system responses. Existing policy models usually imitate action combinations from the labeled multi-action dialog examples. Due to data limitations, they generalize poorly toward unseen dialog flows. While reinforcement learningbased methods are proposed to incorporate the service ratings from real users and user simulators as external supervision signals, they suffer from sparse and less credible dialoglevel rewards. To cope with this problem, we explore to improve multi-action dialog policy learning with explicit and
implicit turn-level user feedback received for historical predictions (i.e., logged user feedback) that are cost-efficient to
collect and faithful to real-world scenarios. The task is challenging since the logged user feedback provides only partial
label feedback limited to the particular historical dialog actions predicted by the agent. To fully exploit such feedback
information, we propose BanditMatch, which addresses the
task from a feedback-enhanced semi-supervised learning perspective with a hybrid objective of semi-supervised learning
and bandit learning. BanditMatch integrates pseudo-labeling
methods to better explore the action space through constructing full label feedback. Extensive experiments show that
our BanditMatch outperforms the state-of-the-art methods
by generating more concise and informative responses. The
source code and the appendix of this paper can be obtained
from https://github.com/ShuoZhangXJTU/BanditMatch.

1

There are 4 available restaurants.
Would you like to try Peking Duck?

User
Feedback

Can I get the phone number of the restaurant?
Inform address
Request more

The restaurant is located at 17 hills road city.
Anything else I can help you with?
No, I asked for the phone number!

Figure 1: Example dialog fragment under multi-action dialog policy. Failing to generate a proper dialog action combination can trigger negative user feedback.

methods that imitate action combinations from labeled dialog examples (Shu et al. 2019; Jhunjhunwala, Bryant, and
Shah 2020; Li, Kiseleva, and de Rijke 2020). However, the
complex action combinations can exponentially enlarge the
output space. SL-based models trained on limited training
corpus alone do not generalize well to real-world dialog
flows (Jhunjhunwala, Bryant, and Shah 2020).
Some reinforcement learning (RL) methods are proposed
to address the above issue by learning through interacting
with real users while suffer from sparse and unstable reward
signals (Takanobu, Zhu, and Huang 2019; Li et al. 2020).
The reward, which users rate at the end of the dialog, is too
expensive to collect and can be unreliable due to the existence of malicious users (Horton 2016). While user simulators are proposed to replace real users, they require tons of
human work to build and suffer from the discrepancy with
real users. To cope with this problem, we propose to improve MADPL with the logged user feedback received for
each system response during online interactions, such as explicit turndowns (e.g., “No, I asked for Chinese food!”) and
implicit behaviors of retries and interruptions (see Fig. 1).
The logged positive and negative user feedback, known as
“bandit feedback”, is cost-efficient to collect and faithful
to real-world scenarios, and has been widely exploited in
various applications such as machine translation (Kreutzer
et al. 2018) and spoken language understanding (Falke and
Lehnen 2021).
MADPL from logged user feedback is challenging since
the feedback provides only partial information limited to
the particular dialog actions predicted during historical in-

Introduction

Dialog policy, which takes the response by deciding the
next system action, is critical in task-oriented dialog systems as it determines service quality (Zhang et al. 2020).
To further strengthen the expressive power of the agent,
recent works have investigated multi-action dialog policy
learning (MADPL), which simultaneously generates multiple actions as the current system response (Shu et al. 2019;
Jhunjhunwala, Bryant, and Shah 2020; Zhang et al. 2022).
MADPL is usually formulated as a multi-label classification
problem and thus solved by supervised learning (SL) based
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13976

