The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Geometry-Aware Network for Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation
Yinghong Liao1,2∗ , Wending Zhou1,2∗ , Xu Yan1,2 , Zhen Li2,1† , Yizhou Yu3 , Shuguang Cui2,1
1

The Future Network of Intelligence Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
2
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong
{yinghongliao@link., lizhen@}cuhk.edu.cn

Target Domain

Source Domain

Abstract

Source Image

Measuring and alleviating the discrepancies between the synthetic (source) and real scene (target) data is the core issue for domain adaptive semantic segmentation. Though recent works have introduced depth information in the source
domain to reinforce the geometric and semantic knowledge
transfer, they cannot extract the intrinsic 3D information of
objects, including positions and shapes, merely based on 2D
estimated depth. In this work, we propose a novel GeometryAware Network for Domain Adaptation (GANDA), leveraging more compact 3D geometric point cloud representations to shrink the domain gaps. In particular, we first utilize the auxiliary depth supervision from the source domain
to obtain the depth prediction in the target domain to accomplish structure-texture disentanglement. Beyond depth
estimation, we explicitly exploit 3D topology on the point
clouds generated from RGB-D images for further coordinatecolor disentanglement and pseudo-labels refinement in the
target domain. Moreover, to improve the 2D classifier in
the target domain, we perform domain-invariant geometric adaptation from source to target and unify the 2D semantic and 3D geometric segmentation results in two domains. Note that our GANDA is plug-and-play in any existing UDA framework. Qualitative and quantitative results
demonstrate that our model outperforms state-of-the-arts on
GTA5→Cityscapes and SYNTHIA→Cityscapes.

Source RGBD Image

Target Image

Target Pseudo RGBD Image

Target Label

Target Pseudo Point Cloud

Adapt

Source Point Cloud

Source Label

Image-Only Adaptation

Source

Geometry-Aware Adaptation

(a)

E

D

G

Disentanglement of
Domain
Structure & Adaptation
Specific Space
Source Structure Features
Target Structure Features
Source Texture Features
Target Texture Features

Source Depth

Target

(b)

Transformation
Pixel (a, b)

Disentanglement

Point (x, y, z, r, g, b)

Color

Point (x, y, z)

Target Depth
Source Domain Flow
Target Domain Flow

Segmentation
Label (l)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) Illustrations of the traditional image-only
adaptation and our proposed geometry-aware adaptation.
Geometry-aware adaptation only utilizes the depths in the
source domain and leverages the domain-invariant geometric information in the point cloud transformed from RGB-D
images. (b) The disentanglement of structural features in the
depth-aware domain adaptation. (c) The disentanglement of
spatial coordinates and RGB colors in the 3D points transformed from 2D pixels. Zoom in for better view.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation has obtained admirable progress owing to the success of deep learning in computer vision.
However, the pixel-level annotations on large-scale image
data require time-consuming and laborious manual work.
To overcome this challenge, the synthetic datasets whose
photo-realistic images and annotations are automatically
generated via computer graphics, e.g., GTA5 (Richter et al.
2016) and SYNTHIA (Ros et al. 2016), are leveraged to explore training on the synthetic images instead of real-scene
ones (synthetic-to-real). Nevertheless, the model trained on
synthetic data exhibits poor generalization on real-world
images, i.e., the domain discrepancy occurs. The discrep-

ancy lies in the differences between the synthetic and realscene data, e.g., the contrast, lighting, object shape, and surface textures. Therefore, an effective Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (UDA) model, where the target annotations are
not provided, is needed.
Instead of aligning the domain distributions that may generate sub-optimal solutions (Yang et al. 2020b; Vu et al.
2019a), the recent UDA works (Zhang et al. 2021; Hoyer,
Dai, and Van Gool 2022a,b) adopt self-training to exploit the
target information: first predicting pseudo labels based on

∗

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8755

