The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Video Compression Artifact Reduction by Fusing Motion Compensation and
Global Context in a Swin-CNN Based Parallel Architecture
Xinjian Zhang1,2 , Su Yang1,2 * , Wuyang Luo1,2 , Longwen Gao3 , Weishan Zhang 4
1

School of Computer Science, Fudan University
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
3
Bilibili
4
Department of Software Engineering, China University of Petroleum (East China)
{zhangxj17, suyang, wyluo18}@fudan.edu.cn, gaolongwen@bilibili.com, zhangws@upc.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Video Compression Artifact Reduction aims to reduce the
artifacts caused by video compression algorithms and improve the quality of compressed video frames. The critical
challenge in this task is to make use of the redundant highquality information in compressed frames for compensation
as much as possible. Two important possible compensations:
Motion compensation and global context, are not comprehensively considered in previous works, leading to inferior
results. The key idea of this paper is to fuse the motion
compensation and global context together to gain more compensation information to improve the quality of compressed
videos. Here, we propose a novel Spatio-Temporal Compensation Fusion (STCF) framework with the Parallel SwinCNN Fusion (PSCF) block, which can simultaneously learn
and merge the motion compensation and global context to reduce the video compression artifacts. Specifically, a temporal
self-attention strategy based on shifted windows is developed
to capture the global context in an efficient way, for which
we use the Swin transformer layer in the PSCF block. Moreover, an additional Ada-CNN layer is applied in the PSCF
block to extract the motion compensation. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed STCF framework outperforms the state-of-the-art methods up to 0.23dB (27% improvement) on the MFQEv2 dataset.

1

Target Frame

Target Motion Relevant
Patch
Patch

Neighboring Frame

Global Context Relevant Patches

Figure 1: A patch with artifacts (the blue one) can be compensated with motion relevant or time line related patches on
account of the redundancy existing in the two dimensions,
which are marked as green and yellow, respectively.
such as video grounding (Zhang et al. 2020a; Liu et al.
2021a) and video summarization (Zhu et al. 2020; Apostolidis et al. 2021). Consequently, video compression artifact reduction has emerged as an important research topic in
computer vision.
In recent years, deep neural networks have achieved significant performance improvement in video compression artifact reduction. These works roughly fall into two types:
Motion compensation based (Yang et al. 2018b; Xue et al.
2019; Guan et al. 2019; Deng et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2019;
Zhao, Xu, and Zhou 2021) and global context based (Lu
et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2019; Hou, Zhao, and Wang 2021).
In detail, motion compensation of a target patch uses the information extracted from motion relevant patch, as shown
in Figure 1. The motion relevant patch is always explored
by optical flow or other motion alignment methods. For instance, MFQE1.0 (Yang et al. 2018b) and MFQE2.0 (Guan
et al. 2019) adopt a widely used temporal fusion scheme
that incorporates dense optical flow for motion compensation. To improve the poor result of the optical flow estimation algorithm on distorted video frames, STDF (Deng et al.
2020) employs the deformable convolution (Zhu et al. 2019)
to capture the motion compensation among multiple neighboring frames. RFDA (Zhao, Xu, and Zhou 2021) extends
the STDF with recursive fusion and deformable spatiotemporal attention modules to model the motion compensation
within a long temporal range. Unlike motion compensation,

Introduction

With the development of video-based applications, video
data have gradually become dominating digital network
traffic (Hoang and Zhou 2021). To tackle the huge space
cost and limited bandwidth in video data storage and
transmission, lossy video compression algorithms, such as
H.264/AVC (Wiegand et al. 2003) and H.265/HEVC (Sullivan et al. 2012), are widely used to compress video data.
However, lossy video compression can also lead to various compression artifacts such as blocking, blurring, ringing, edge/texture floating, and jerkiness (Zeng et al. 2014;
Deng et al. 2020). Such undesirable compression artifacts
severely affect the quality of experience (QoE). Furthermore, these distorted contents in the compressed video also
reduce the performance of downstream video-based tasks,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3489

