The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Graph Fusion Approach for Cross-Lingual Machine Reading Comprehension
Zenan Xu1∗ , Linjun Shou2 , Jian Pei3 , Ming Gong2 ,
Qinliang Su1,4† , Xiaojun Quan1 , and Daxin Jiang2†
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Microsoft Search Technology Center Asia (STCA), Beijing, China
3
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University
4
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou, China
xuzn@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {suqliang, quanxj3}@mail.sysu.edu.cn
{lisho,migon,djiang}@microsoft.com, jpei@cs.sfu.ca
Abstract

high-quality annotated data in resource-rich languages (i.e.,
the source languages) to low-resource languages (i.e., the
target languages) (Schuster et al. 2019). For example, several methods (Zhu et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2020; Liang et al.
2020) translate training data in English to target languages,
and use the translated data to train the cross-lingual MRC
models. Some other methods (Cui et al. 2019; Fang et al.
2021) translate test cases in a target language to English,
and use the representation of the translated cases in English
to enhance the representations of the original test cases.

Although great progress has been made for Machine Reading Comprehension (MRC) in English, scaling out to a large
number of languages remains a huge challenge due to the lack
of large amounts of annotated training data in non-English
languages. To address this challenge, some recent efforts of
cross-lingual MRC employ machine translation to transfer
knowledge from English to other languages, through either
explicit alignment or implicit attention. For effective knowledge transition, it is beneficial to leverage both semantic and
syntactic information. However, the existing methods fail to
explicitly incorporate syntax information in model learning.
Consequently, the models are not robust to errors in alignment and noises in attention. In this work, we propose a novel
approach, which jointly models the cross-lingual alignment
information and the mono-lingual syntax information using
a graph. We develop a series of algorithms, including graph
construction, learning, and pre-training. The experiments on
two benchmark datasets for cross-lingual MRC show that our
approach outperforms all strong baselines, which verifies the
effectiveness of syntax information for cross-lingual MRC.

For effective knowledge transfer across languages, both
semantic and syntactic information is highly valuable and
thus should be well represented. However, all previous
translation-based approaches carry over knowledge across
languages only through unstructured texts, where semantic and syntactic information is implicitly represented and
complicatedly entangled. To represent the correlation among
words in different languages, previous works either build
translation alignments or learn attention matrices. However,
it is very challenging to learn the connection across languages solely relying on texts. As admitted by previous studies, misalignments often happen and badly hurt model performance (Xu, Haider, and Mansour 2020; Li et al. 2020; Pei
et al. 2020). Moreover, deep learning models may pay attention to less relevant words in long text (Zhang et al. 2020).

Introduction
Machine Reading Comprehension (MRC) (Rajpurkar et al.
2016; Joshi et al. 2017), which aims to improve the ability of machines to read and understand human texts, is
a challenging task in Natural Language Understanding
(NLU) (Rajpurkar et al. 2016; Shou et al. 2020; Dai et al.
2022). Various large-scale human-annotated corpora, such
as SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016), have greatly advanced
the progress in the MRC task (Seo et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2018;
Devlin et al. 2019). However, those large-scale humanannotated datasets are mostly in resource-rich languages,
such as English. For most languages in the world, there is,
however, scarce annotated data for MRC, which limits the
corresponding MRC performance (Chen et al. 2022).
To tackle the challenge of data scarcity in low-resource
languages, recent attempts in cross-lingual NLU adopt machine translation to transfer the knowledge learned from the

Can we use syntax information explicitly to enhance
knowledge transfer across languages and improve crosslingual MRC? In this paper, we tackle this challenge. Figure 1 shows a motivating example. Suppose the source training example is in English: the question is “Where are egg
tubes found inside of an insect?”, and the answer “ovaries”
is in the sentence “The ovaries are made up of a number
of egg tubes . . . ” After the English example is translated
into German, the corresponding answer “Eierstöcke” in “Die
Eierstöcke bestehen aus einer Anzahl von Eierröhrchen . . . ”
is not correctly identified due to misalignment by an off-theshelf alignment tool GIZA++ (Och and Ney 2003). Checking many cases manually, we find misalignments commonly
happen in complex sentence structures (e.g., involving passive voice where word orders are different from usual) and
usages of rare words (e.g., “ovaries” and “Eierstöcke” belong to the domain of biology). In such cases, syntax in-

∗

Work is done during internship at Microsoft.
D. Jiang and Q. Su are the corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

13861

