The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Predicting Temporal Sets with Simplified Fully Connected Networks
Le Yu, Zihang Liu, Tongyu Zhu* , Leilei Sun, Bowen Du, Weifeng Lv
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China
{yule,lzhmark,zhutongyu,leileisun,dubowen,lwf}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

next-period set could help people make better decisions (Hu
and He 2019; Sun et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2020, 2022).
In recent years, a number of efforts have been made on
temporal sets prediction. A part of the approaches followed
a two-step strategy by first obtaining the representations
of sets via pooling operations or matrix factorization, and
then learning the temporal dependencies in user behaviors
based on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) or the attention mechanism (Yu et al. 2016; Hu and He 2019; Shi et al.
2021). Another part of the methods additionally learned on
elements. Sun et al. (2020) presented a Transformer-based
dual sequential network to learn the element-level and setlevel representations for each user. Yu et al. (2020) first
constructed a sequence of element snapshots according to
their co-occurrence and then learned on the snapshots by
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), the attention mechanism
and the gating mechanism. Yu et al. (2022) connected the
sequences of different users by a temporal graph and devised an element-guided message aggregation mechanism
with the usage of temporal information.
Existing methods for temporal sets prediction are usually designed with complicated modules, such as RNNs,
the attention or gating mechanism, and GNNs. Although
these methods have achieved remarkable performance, they
inevitably introduce more trainable parameters and incur
higher computational costs. As shown in Table 1, the theoretical space and time complexity of the existing methods
are expensive in most cases. Moreover, in the temporal sets
prediction problem, each element is only associated with
an identifier (ID) without given semantic features. Therefore, the nonlinear activation function involved in previous
models might become helpless or even harmful to the performance, which has been observed in the fields of graph
learning (Wu et al. 2019) and recommender systems (He
et al. 2020). The above phenomena motivate us to consider
whether it is necessary to design sophisticated components
with the nonlinear activation for temporal sets prediction.
In this paper, we propose a succinct architecture that is
solely built on Simplified Fully Connected Networks for
Temporal Sets Prediction (SFCNTSP) to bring both effectiveness and efficiency together1 . Our approach first em-

Given a sequence of sets, where each set contains an arbitrary number of elements, temporal sets prediction aims to
predict which elements will appear in the subsequent set. Existing methods for temporal sets prediction are developed on
sophisticated components (e.g., recurrent neural networks, attention or gating mechanisms, and graph neural networks),
which inevitably increase the model complexity due to more
trainable parameters and higher computational costs. Moreover, the involved nonlinear activation may contribute little
or even degrade the performance. In this paper, we present
a succinct architecture that is solely built on the Simplified
Fully Connected Networks (SFCNs) for temporal sets prediction to bring both effectiveness and efficiency together.
In particular, given a user’s sequence of sets, we employ
SFCNs to derive representations of the user by learning interset temporal dependencies, intra-set element relationships,
and intra-embedding channel correlations. Two families of
general functions are introduced to preserve the permutationinvariant property of each set and the permutation-equivariant
property of elements in each set. Moreover, we design a user
representations adaptive fusing module to aggregate user representations according to each element for improving the prediction performance. Experiments on four benchmarks show
the superiority of our approach over the state-of-the-art under
both transductive and inductive settings. We also theoretically
and empirically demonstrate that our model has lower space
and time complexity than baselines. Codes and datasets are
available at https://github.com/yule-BUAA/SFCNTSP.

Introduction
Temporal sets can be defined as a sequence of sets, where
each set has a timestamp and includes an arbitrary number
of elements (Benson, Kumar, and Tomkins 2018). In practice, when customers purchase baskets of products (Rendle,
Freudenthaler, and Schmidt-Thieme 2010; Yu et al. 2016),
patients take medical prescriptions (Baytas et al. 2017; Jin
et al. 2018), students select courses (Lin et al. 2017) or travelers choose attractions (Zhu et al. 2021) based on the historical behaviors, they all deal with temporal sets. Making
accurate predictions of which elements will appear in the
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We name a single linear fully connected layer as the Simplified
Fully Connected Network (SFCN) in this paper.

4835

