The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PolarFormer: Multi-Camera 3D Object Detection with Polar Transformer
Yanqin Jiang1,4 * , Li Zhang2† , Zhenwei Miao5 , Xiatian Zhu6 , Jin Gao1,4 ,
Weimin Hu1,4,7 , Yu-Gang Jiang3
1

NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Data Science, Fudan University
3
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Alibaba DAMO Academy
6
Surrey Institute for People-Centred Artificial Intelligence, CVSSP, University of Surrey
7
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
jiangyanqin2021@ia.ac.cn, {lizhangfd, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn,
zhenwei.mzw@alibaba-inc.com, xiatian.zhu@surrey.ac.uk, {jin.gao, wmhu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

leveraged (Philion and Fidler 2020), which however is not
only expensive in computation but error prone. To bypass
depth inference, more recent methods (Wang et al. 2022b;
Li et al. 2022b) exploit query-based 2D detection (Carion
et al. 2020) to learn a set of sparse and virtual embedding
for multi-camera 3D object detection, yet incapable of effectively modeling the geometry structure among objects.
Typically, the canonical Cartesian coordinate system with
perpendicular axis is adopted in either 2D (Zhou, Wang,
and Krähenbühl 2019; Wang et al. 2021) or 3D (Wang et al.
2022b; Li et al. 2022b) space. This is largely restricted by
convolution based models used. In contrast, the physical
world perceived under each camera in the ego car’s perspective is in shape of wedge intrinsic to the camera imaging geometry with radical non-perpendicular axis (Figure
5). Bearing this imaging property in mind, we conjugate
that the Polar coordinate system should be more appropriate and natural than the often adopted Cartesian counterpart for 3D object detection. Indeed, the Polar coordinate
has been exploited in a few LiDAR-based 3D perception
methods (Zhang et al. 2020; Bewley et al. 2020; RapoportLavie and Raviv 2021; Zhu et al. 2021). However, they are
limited algorithmically due to the adoption of convolutional
networks restricted to rectangular grid structure and local receptive fields.

3D object detection in autonomous driving aims to reason
“what” and “where” the objects of interest present in a 3D
world. Following the conventional wisdom of previous 2D
object detection, existing methods often adopt the canonical
Cartesian coordinate system with perpendicular axis. However, we conjugate that this does not fit the nature of the ego
car’s perspective, as each onboard camera perceives the world
in shape of wedge intrinsic to the imaging geometry with radical (non-perpendicular) axis. Hence, in this paper we advocate the exploitation of the Polar coordinate system and propose a new Polar Transformer (PolarFormer) for more accurate 3D object detection in the bird’s-eye-view (BEV) taking
as input only multi-camera 2D images. Specifically, we design a cross-attention based Polar detection head without restriction to the shape of input structure to deal with irregular
Polar grids. For tackling the unconstrained object scale variations along Polar’s distance dimension, we further introduce a
multi-scale Polar representation learning strategy. As a result,
our model can make best use of the Polar representation rasterized via attending to the corresponding image observation
in a sequence-to-sequence fashion subject to the geometric
constraints. Thorough experiments on the nuScenes dataset
demonstrate that our PolarFormer outperforms significantly
state-of-the-art 3D object detection alternatives.

Introduction

Motivated by the aforementioned insights, in this work
a novel Polar Transformer (PolarFormer) model for multicamera 3D object detection in a Polar coordinate system is
introduced (Figure 3). Specifically, we first learn the representation of polar rays corresponding to image regions in a
sequence-to-sequence cross-attention formulation. Then we
rasterize a BEV Polar representation consisting of a set of
Polar rays evenly distributed around 360 degrees. To deal
with irregular Polar grids as suffered by conventional LiDAR based solutions (Zhang et al. 2020; Bewley et al. 2020;
Rapoport-Lavie and Raviv 2021; Zhu et al. 2021), we propose a cross-attention based decoder head design without restriction to the shape of input structure. For tackling the challenge of unconstrained object scale variation along Polar’s

3D object detection is an enabling capability of autonomous
driving in unconstrained real-world scenes (Wang et al.
2022b, 2021). It aims to predict the location, dimension and
orientation of individual objects of interest in a 3D world.
Despite favourable cost advantages, multi-camera based 3D
object detection (Wang et al. 2021, 2022a,b; Zhou, Wang,
and Krähenbühl 2019) remains particularly challenging. To
obtain 3D representation, dense depth estimation is often
* Work done while at Fudan University.
†
Li Zhang (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1042

