The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

POEM: Polarization of Embeddings for Domain-Invariant Representations
Sang-Yeong Jo, Sung Whan Yoon*
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Republic of Korea
jsy7058@unist.ac.kr, shyoon8@unist.ac.kr

Abstract

to obtain domain-invariant knowledge. First of all, various
algorithmic approaches have been proposed to minimize
the divergence measurements across domains, such as the
contrastive loss for alignment of in-class features from domains (Motiian et al. 2017; Dou et al. 2019), the KullbackLeibler divergence (Kullback and Leibler 1951; Dou et al.
2019), and the maximum mean discrepancy between domains (Gretton et al. 2012; Li et al. 2018b). Another branch
of approaches tries to utilize domain-specific information
to learn domain-invariant representation via the employment of per-domain embedding network (Bousmalis et al.
2016) and domain classifiers (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015).
Also, multi-task self-supervised learning (Albuquerque et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2020; Carlucci et al. 2019), optimizationbased meta-learning (Li et al. 2018a; Dou et al. 2019), and
ensemble learning (Arpit et al. 2022; Mancini et al. 2018;
Zhou et al. 2021a) are shown to enhance the model robustness across domain shifts. On the other hand, another group
of algorithms pursues to erase domain-related spurious factors in input space, such as the texture of images (Wang et al.
2019) or sensitive features in representation space (Huang
et al. 2020) to obtain domain-invariant features.
In the surge of various DG approaches to suppress discrepancy between domains, a work of (Gulrajani and LopezPaz 2021) reveals that, when a model is carefully trained,
Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) of (Vapnik 1998),
which is probably the simplest approach for training across
multiple domains, outperforms the existing complicated DG
methods. After the surprising findings, many researchers
have turned attention to developing particular optimizers
that make models robust, rather than employing explicit
ways to find domain-invariant representation. For instance,
recent approaches beat many prior works by combining
ERM with model averaging methods for seeking flatter minima in loss landscape (Izmailov et al. 2018; Cha et al. 2021).
In addition, a very recent work of (Cha et al. 2022) maximizes the mutual information between a DG model and a
pretrained oracle representation, rather than adopting a particular way to make the DG model more domain-invariant.
To the best of our knowledge, most of the existing DG
methods aim to discard domain-specific information to reduce the divergence of representations between different domains or indirectly utilize domain-specific information to facilitate the acquisition of domain-invariant representations.

Handling out-of-distribution samples is a long-lasting challenge for deep visual models. In particular, domain generalization (DG) is one of the most relevant tasks that aims to
train a model with a generalization capability on novel domains. Most existing DG approaches share the same philosophy to minimize the discrepancy between domains by finding the domain-invariant representations. On the contrary,
our proposed method called POEM acquires a strong DG
capability by learning domain-invariant and domain-specific
representations and polarizing them. Specifically, POEM cotrains category-classifying and domain-classifying embeddings while regularizing them to be orthogonal via minimizing the cosine-similarity between their features, i.e., the polarization of embeddings. The clear separation of embeddings
suppresses domain-specific features in the domain-invariant
embeddings. The concept of POEM shows a unique direction to enhance the domain robustness of representations that
brings considerable and consistent performance gains when
combined with existing DG methods. Extensive simulation
results in popular DG benchmarks with the PACS, VLCS, OfficeHome, TerraIncognita, and DomainNet datasets show that
POEM indeed facilitates the category-classifying embedding
to be more domain-invariant.

Introduction
Despite the immense effort dedicated during the past decade,
enhancing deep models to acquire a strong generalization
capability on novel data distribution remains a daunting
challenge. For computer vision, particularly, the distributional shift of the image domain between the train and test
sets, known as domain shift, provokes significant performance degradation of deep visual models. Domain generalization (DG), the task of interest here, pursues developing
algorithmic methods to overcome the domain shift. Specifically, the DG task assumes that an image classification
model is trained on the data from source domains, such as
photos, sketches, cartoons, etc., then the model is tested on
the target domains which are not shown in the training phase.
To overcome the domain shift problem, most of the existing DG approaches are built upon the philosophy of minimizing the discrepancy across source domains, which aims
* Sung Whan Yoon is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8150

