The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Commitment Games with Conditional Information Disclosure
Anthony DiGiovanni* , Jesse Clifton*
Center on Long-Term Risk, London, UK
{anthony.digiovanni, jesse.clifton}@longtermrisk.org

Abstract

Because private information is so ubiquitous in real strategic interactions, resolving these cases of inefficiency is a
fundamental open problem. Inefficiencies due to private information will be increasingly observed in machine learning, as machine learning is used to train agents in complex
multi-agent environments featuring private information, such
as negotiation. For example, Lewis et al. (2017) found that
when an agent was trained with reinforcement learning on
negotiations under incomplete information, it failed to reach
an agreement with humans more frequently than a humanimitative model did.
But greater ability to make commitments and share
private information can open up more efficient equilibria.
Computer systems could be much better than humans at
making their internal workings legible to other agents, and
at making sophisticated conditional commitments. More
mutually beneficial outcomes could also be facilitated by
new technologies like smart contracts (Varian 2010). This
makes the game theory of interactions between agents with
these abilities important for the understanding of Cooperative
AI — in particular, for developing an ideal standard of
multi-agent decision making with future technologies. An
extreme example of the power of greater transparency
and commitment ability is Tennenholtz (2004)’s “program
equilibrium” solution to the one-shot Prisoner’s Dilemma.
The players in Tennenholtz’s “program game” version of
the Prisoner’s Dilemma submit computer programs to play
on their behalf, which can condition their outputs on each
other’s source code. Then a pair of programs with the source
code ‘‘If counterpart’s source code == my
source code: Cooperate; Else: Defect’’
form an equilibrium of mutual cooperation.
In this spirit, we are interested in exploring the kinds of
cooperation that can be achieved by agents who are capable
of extreme mutual transparency and credible commitment.
We can think of this as giving an upper bound on the ability of
advanced artificially intelligent agents, or humans equipped
with advanced technology for commitment and transparency,
to achieve efficient outcomes. While such abilities are inaccessible to current systems, identifying sufficient conditions
for cooperation under private information provides directions
for future research and development, in order to avoid failures
of cooperation. These are our main contributions:

The conditional commitment abilities of mutually transparent
computer agents have been studied in previous work on commitment games and program equilibrium. This literature has
shown how these abilities can help resolve Prisoner’s Dilemmas and other failures of cooperation in complete information
settings. But inefficiencies due to private information have
been neglected thus far in this literature, despite the fact that
these problems are pervasive and might also be addressed
by greater mutual transparency. In this work, we introduce a
framework for commitment games with a new kind of conditional commitment device, which agents can use to conditionally disclose private information. We prove a folk theorem
for this setting that provides sufficient conditions for ex post
efficiency, and thus represents a model of ideal cooperation
between agents without a third-party mediator. Further, extending previous work on program equilibrium, we develop
an implementation of conditional information disclosure. We
show that this implementation forms program ϵ-Bayesian Nash
equilibria corresponding to the Bayesian Nash equilibria of
these commitment games.

Introduction
What are the upper limits on the ability of rational, selfinterested agents to cooperate? As autonomous systems become increasingly responsible for important decisions, including in interactions with other agents, the study of “Cooperative AI” (Dafoe et al. 2020) will potentially help ensure these decisions result in cooperation. It is well-known
that game-theoretically rational behavior — which will potentially be more descriptive of the decision-making of advanced computer agents than humans — can result in imperfect cooperation, in the sense of inefficient outcomes.
Some famous examples are the Prisoner’s Dilemma and the
Myerson-Satterthwaite impossibility of efficient bargaining
under incomplete information (Myerson and Satterthwaite
1983). Fearon (1995) explores “rationalist” explanations for
war (i.e., situations in which war occurs in equilibrium);
these include Prisoner’s Dilemma-style inability to credibly
commit to peaceful alternatives to war, as well as incentives
to misrepresent private information (e.g., military strength).
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. We develop a new class of games in which players can
5616

