The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fast Counterfactual Inference for History-Based Reinforcement Learning
Haichuan Gao1 , Tianren Zhang1 , Zhile Yang2 ,
Yuqing Guo1 , Jinsheng Ren1 , Shangqi Guo1,3 * , Feng Chen1,4∗
1

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
School of Computing, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK
3
Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
LSBDPA Beijing Key Laboratory, Beijing, China
{ghc18, zhang-tr19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, sczy@leeds.ac.uk, {gyq18, rjs17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
shangqi guo@foxmail.com, chenfeng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Environment:

Abstract

0.5

Incorporating sequence-to-sequence models into history-based
Reinforcement Learning (RL) provides a general way to extend RL to partially-observable tasks. This method compresses
history spaces according to the correlations between historical
observations and the rewards. However, they do not adjust
for the confounding correlations caused by data sampling
and assign high beliefs to uninformative historical observations, leading to limited compression of history spaces. Counterfactual Inference (CI), which estimates causal effects by
single-variable intervention, is a promising way to adjust for
confounding. However, it is computationally infeasible to directly apply the single-variable intervention to a huge number
of historical observations. This paper proposes to perform CI
on observation sub-spaces instead of single observations and
develop a coarse-to-fine CI algorithm, called Tree-based History Counterfactual Inference (T-HCI), to reduce the number
of interventions exponentially. We show that T-HCI is computationally feasible in practice and brings significant sample
efficiency gains in various challenging partially-observable
tasks, including Maze, BabyAI, and robot manipulation tasks.

0.5

0.8

0.1
0.2
0.9

p(Open): 0.5
p(Open|

):

Close

do-calculus:
Observation

0.5

Open

…

0.5

= 0.88× p(Open|do(

do Open
Close

calculus

Time

)): 0.5×1+0.5× = 0.5√

Figure 1: Key-to-door example. The high correlation on TV
caused by sampling can be eliminated by do-calculus which
separates confounders (key and ball).

It is promising to mine the historical observations with
causality using Counterfactual Inference (CI) (Pearl 2013)
to eliminate confounding correlations caused by data sampling. Consider the key-to-door example shown in Figure 1,
whether the agent can open the door only depends on whether
the key is collected. However, if the current sampling policy
is that when the agent starts from the key, the agent tends
to pass through the TV, then the TV will have a high correlation with opening the door, i.e., p(Open | TV) = 0.88.
This is because the effect estimation is influenced by the confounding correlation between Key and TV. This confounding can be eliminated by do-calculus (Pearl 2013) which
separates the variables (key and ball) that may cause confounding (i.e., the backdoor variables following backdoor
adjustment formula (Pearl 2009)) and estimates the causal effect of TV by integrating the probabilities of Open, resulting
in p(Open | do(TV)) = 0.5. Since historical observations
with causality are often relatively sparse, mining them by CI
can greatly compress history spaces.
Prior researchers perform CI on Markovian RL tasks for
feature selection (Zhang et al. 2021; Tomar et al. 2021) or
credit assignment (Mesnard et al. 2021), where the states
are Markovian. However, for history-based RL, we should
intervene for each non-Markovian observation-and-time combination ot and estimate its causal effect. CI estimates causal
effects by single variable intervention, leading to high computational complexity due to the large scale of historical
observations.
This paper proposes to perform CI on observation sub-

Introduction
Integrating historical observations into states provides a
general way to scale up Reinforcement Learning (RL) to
partially-observable tasks (Majeed and Hutter 2018). Nevertheless, a core problem in this setting is that the large scale of
history spaces (Joelle, Geoffrey, and Thrun 2003; Smith and
Simmons 2005) leads to sample-inefficient policy learning.
Prior works encode historical observations into hidden states
by sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) models (Graves et al.
2016; Hausknecht and Stone 2015; Parisotto et al. 2020).
Seq2seq models assign high beliefs on the historical observations of high correlations with learning signals and attenuate
those with low correlation (Zhu et al. 2018b; Ramos et al.
2021; Zhang et al. 2022b). However, they do not adjust for
confounding correlations, i.e., the high correlation of uninformative historical observations induced by the biases in data
sampling, which limits their compression capability.
* Corresponding authors: Shangqi Guo and Feng Chen
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7613

