The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

An Improved Approximation Algorithm for Wage Determination and Online Task
Allocation in Crowd-Sourcing
Yuya Hikima, Yasunori Akagi, Hideaki Kim, Taichi Asami
NTT Human Informatics Laboratories, NTT Corporation,
1-1 Hikari-no-oka, Yokosuka-Shi, Kanagawa, 239-0847, Japan
yuya.hikima@gmail.com, {yasunori.akagi.cu, hideaki.kin.cn, taichi.asami.ka}@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract

Zhao et al. 2019) and (b) wage determination for each
worker (Singer and Mittal 2013; Mao et al. 2013). For goal
(a), proper worker-task matching directly impacts the profits
of task holders due to the diversity of tasks and workers; the
quality of a translation task’s outcome for a given language
varies with the matched worker’s level of familiarity with the
language. For goal (b), in order to solve a set of tasks within
a certain period of time, it is necessary to offer appropriate
wages to workers to encourage them to undertake the task;
if the deadline is close, it is necessary to offer high wages to
encourage many workers to join in the task.
Recently, joint optimization of task assignment and wage
determination has been tackled (Hikima et al. 2022, 2021).
This is because offering different wages to each worker considering the assignment leads to more efficient matching,
which reduces the task remaining and improves the quality
of task outcomes. For example, a platformer can reduce a
surplus of difficult tasks by attracting highly skilled workers
with higher wages. The quality of certain tasks’ outcomes
can be improved by raising wages for suitable workers and
allocating the tasks to them.
Although the joint optimization of task assignment and
wage determination is important, existing methods cannot
discover profitable solutions in practical crowd-sourcing operations. (Hikima et al. 2022) tackles an optimization problem for online matching and price (including wage) optimization so as to obtain larger profits for platformers. The
problem can deal with reusable/non-reusable resources, including not only tasks in crowd-sourcing but also taxis in
ride-sharing platforms. However, in compensation for being
applicable to a wide range of resource types, the method of
(Hikima et al. 2022) has a low approximation ratio (1/2approximation ratio). Moreover, it empirically outputs solutions with low objective values for problems with nonreusable resources, such as tasks in crowd-sourcing platforms (see Section 2.1). (Hikima et al. 2021) also jointly
optimizes price (including wage) and matching to obtain
greater profits in matching platforms. However, because the
optimization is performed separately for each period split
from a time horizon, the platformer’s profits are reduced in
the long run.
To obtain profitable solutions in practical crowd-sourcing
operations, we propose a new approximation algorithm for
joint optimization of wages and online task assignment in

Crowd-sourcing has attracted much attention due to its growing importance to society, and numerous studies have been
conducted on task allocation and wage determination. Recent works have focused on optimizing task allocation and
workers’ wages, simultaneously. However, existing methods
do not provide good solutions for real-world crowd-sourcing
platforms due to the low approximation ratio or myopic problem settings. We tackle an optimization problem for wage
determination and online √
task allocation in crowd-sourcing
and propose a fast 1 − 1/ k + 3-approximation algorithm,
where k is the minimum of tasks’ budgets (numbers of possible assignments). This approximation ratio is greater than or
equal to the existing method. The proposed method reduces
the tackled problem to a non-convex multi-period continuous
optimization problem by approximating the objective function. Then, the method transforms the reduced problem into a
minimum convex cost flow problem, which is a well-known
combinatorial optimization problem, and solves it by the capacity scaling algorithm. Synthetic experiments and simulation experiments using real crowd-sourcing data show that
the proposed method solves the problem faster and outputs
higher objective values than existing methods.

1.

Introduction

Crowd-sourcing platforms have attained an important position in current society by offering task holders the means
to undertake enormous tasks while providing workers with
mass employment opportunities. Crowd-sourcing platforms
offer a wide variety of tasks, such as checking the relevance
of a topic to a web page (Buckley, Lease, and Smucker 2010)
or translating a paragraph from German into English (Ho
and Vaughan 2012), and the workers have different skills,
such as familiarity with a specific topic or proficiency in a
certain language (Fan et al. 2015). The task holders want
to solve their set of tasks within a certain period of time at
small payments (Singer and Mittal 2013).1
Under the above situation, many studies have been conducted on (a) worker-task matching (Ho and Vaughan 2012;
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Codes of our experiments, the proof of Lemma 1, and related
work on online matching can be found in https://github.com/YuyaHikima/AAAI2023-An-Improved-Approximation-Algorithm-forWage-Determination-and-Online-Task-Allocation.

3977

