The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Tree-Structured Trajectory Encoding for Vision-and-Language Navigation
Xinzhe Zhou1 , Yadong Mu* 1,2
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{zhouxinzhe1023, myd}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

w1

Over the past few years, the research on vision-and-language
navigation (VLN) has made tremendous progress. Many previous works attempted to improve the performance from different aspects like training strategy, data augmentation, pretraining, etc. This work focuses on a rarely-explored aspect in VLN, namely the trajectory organization and encoding during the navigation. Most of existing state-of-the-art
VLN models adopt a vanilla sequential strategy for encoding the trajectories. Such strategy takes the whole trajectory
as a single sequence to estimate the current state, no matter whether the agent moved smoothly or perhaps made mistakes and backtracked in the past. We show that the sequential encoding may largely lose this kind of fine-grained structure in the trajectory, which could hamper the later state estimation and decision making. In order to solve this problem, this work proposes a novel tree-structured trajectory encoding strategy. The whole trajectory is organized as a tree
rooted from the starting position, and encoded using our TreeTransformer module to fully extract the fine-grained historical information. Besides, as the spatial topology could be
easily embedded in the trajectory tree, we further design a
tree-based action space to allow the agent making long-range
error-correction in one decision. We implement the holistic agent based on cross-modal transformer and train it with
a newly-proposed Tree-nDTW reward. On the benchmark
dataset R2R, our model achieves a surpassing success rate
(SR) of 68% on val-unseen and 66% on test. We further conduct extensive ablation studies and analyses to provide more insights for the effectiveness our designs.

a
1

Sequential
Encoding
a

b

b

d

Tree-structured
Encoding

4 2 3

a

c

b

wL

Language Processing Module

RNN / Transformer

b

d
5
e

c

Instruction
w2 w3 …

e

Decision Making Module
Visual Processing Module
a1

a2

a3

…

at

at+1

Trajectory

(b)

c
d

e

Tree-Transformer

(a)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) An illustrative example comparing previous
sequential strategy with our tree-structured strategy for encoding trajectory. (b) The structure of a typical VLN agent
today. (c) The results of manually imposing error-andcorrections of various steps at the beginning for different
models.

Since its proposal, the field of VLN has witnessed continuous progress from different aspects (Anderson et al. 2018b;
Fried et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019; Hong et al. 2021; Chen
et al. 2021). Fig. 1(b) depicts the structure of a typical VLN
model today. It mainly consists of three parts: the Language
Processing Module processes the instruction, the Visual Processing Module encodes the historical and current visual observations (a.k.a., the trajectory), and the Decision Making
Module aggregates the two modalities for the final decision (i.e., selecting the next navigable position). Although
the model detail varies in previous works, we notice that
their trajectory encoding strategies have mostly followed a
similar paradigm–to encode the whole trajectory as a single sequence using sequential models like LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) or transformer (Vaswani et al.
2017). Some exceptions like EGP (Deng, Narasimhan, and
Russakovsky 2020) or SSM (Wang et al. 2021) maintain
a graphical representation of the visited environments, but
they still resort to sequentially encoding the trajectory to estimate the current state.

Introduction
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) is a growing field
that combines vision-and-language learning with embodied
decision process (Anderson et al. 2018b). The task requires
an embodied agent (robot) to move along an expected path
specified by a natural language instruction in some environment. Generally, the agent should understand the instruction
and perceive its surroundings through a first-person RGB
camera, and then sequentially decides its next move. The
potential applications include domestic service, emergency
rescue, etc.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3814

