The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MultiSpider: Towards Benchmarking Multilingual Text-to-SQL Semantic Parsing
Longxu Dou1 , Yan Gao2 , Mingyang Pan1 , Dingzirui Wang1 ,
Wanxiang Che1 , Dechen Zhan1 , Jian-Guang Lou2
1

Harbin Institute of Technology
2
Microsoft Research Asia
{lxdou, mypan, dzrwang, car}@ir.hit.edu.cn, dechen@hit.edu.cn,
{yan.gao, jlou}@microsoft.com
Abstract

Lang.

Question

Return the record companies of orchestras,
sorted descending by the years in which they
were founded.
Geben Sie die Plattenfirmen von Orchestern
German zurück, absteigend sortiert nach den Jahren
ihrer Gründung.
Listez les maisons de disques des orchestres,
French triées par ordre décroissant des années de
leur création.
¿Cuáles son las compañías discográficas de
Spanish las orquestas en orden descendente de años
de fundación?
返回按创立年份降序排列的乐团唱片公司
Chinese
的名称。
創設年の降順でオーケストラのレコード
Japanese
会社を並べる。
Liệt kê các công ty thu âm của các dàn nhạc
Vietnam theo thứ tự giảm dần về năm mà từng công
ty được thành lập .

Text-to-SQL semantic parsing is an important NLP task,
which greatly facilitates the interaction between users and
the database and becomes the key component in many humancomputer interaction systems. Much recent progress in text-toSQL has been driven by large-scale datasets, but most of them
are centered on English. In this work, we present M ULTI S PI DER, the largest multilingual text-to-SQL dataset which covers
seven languages (English, German, French, Spanish, Japanese,
Chinese, and Vietnamese). Upon M ULTI S PIDER, we further
identify the lexical and structural challenges of text-to-SQL
(caused by specific language properties and dialect sayings)
and their intensity across different languages. Experimental
results under three typical settings (zero-shot, monolingual
and multilingual) reveal a 6.1% absolute drop in accuracy in
non-English languages. Qualitative and quantitative analyses
are conducted to understand the reason for the performance
drop of each language. Besides the dataset, we also propose
a simple schema augmentation framework SAV E (SchemaAugmentation-with-Verification), which significantly boosts
the overall performance by about 1.8% and closes the 29.5%
performance gap across languages.

English

Schema with
Augmentation
year of founded
{established year,
the year of foundation}
Gründungsjahr
{jahr der grundlage,
jahr der gründung}
année de fondation
{année de creation}
año de fundación
{Año Establecido,
año de creación}
成立年份
{创立之年, 建立之年}
創設年
{創業年, 設立年}
năm thành lập
{năm sáng tạo}

SELECT Record_Company FROM orchestra ORDER BY Year_of_Founded DESC
SELECT 唱片公司 FROM 管弦乐队 ORDER BY 成立年份 DESC

Figure 1: Examples of M ULTI S PIDER.

1

Introduction

Text-to-SQL semantic parsing is the task of mapping natural
language sentences into executable SQL database queries,
which serves as an important component in many natural
language interface systems such as question answering and
task-oriented dialogue. Despite the substantial number of
systems (Yin and Neubig 2018; Guo et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2020; Scholak, Schucher, and Bahdanau 2021) and benchmarks (Yu et al. 2018, 2019a,b; Guo et al. 2021) for textto-SQL, most of them are predominantly built in English,
excluding this powerful tool’s accessibility to non-English
speakers. The reason for this limitation lies in the serious
lack of high-quality multilingual text-to-SQL datasets.
Several works attempted to extend to new languages, but
currently available multilingual text-to-SQL datasets only
support four languages (English, Chinese, and Vietnamese
and Portuguese) (Yu et al. 2018; Min and Zhang 2019;
Tuan Nguyen, Dao, and Nguyen 2020; José and Cozman
2021), which hinders the study of multilingual text-to-SQL
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12745

across a broad spectrum of language distances. Besides the
language coverage, the existing multilingual datasets also
suffer from the following limitations: (1) low-quality: unnatural or inaccurate translations; (2) in-completed translation:
the database of Chinese-Spider and Portuguese-Spider are
not translated and kept in English. These limitations will inevitably lead to a limited multilingual system. To advance
multilingual text-to-SQL, in this paper, we present M UL TI S PIDER , the largest and high-quality multilingual textto-SQL dataset, which covers seven main-stream languages
(Sec 2.1). Figure 1 lists one example across seven languages
including both question and schema. To ensure the dataset
quality, we first identify five typical translation mistakes during constructing a multilingual text-to-SQL dataset(Sec 2.2),
then we carefully organize the construction pipeline consisting of multi-round translation and validation (Sec 2.3). Most
importantly, we take into account of the specific language
properties to make the question more natural and realistic.
Besides high-quality, M ULTI S PIDER is quite challenging
in multilingual text-to-SQL. Concretely, we explore the lex-

