The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Combining Slow and Fast:
Complementary Filtering for Dynamics Learning
Katharina Ensinger1,2 , Sebastian Ziesche1 , Barbara Rakitsch1 ,
Michael Tiemann1 , Sebastian Trimpe2
1
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany
Institute for Data Science in Mechanical Engineering, RWTH Aachen University
katharina.ensinger@bosch.com, firstname.surname@de.bosch.com, trimpe@dsme.rwth-aachen.de
2

Abstract

behavior and therefore produce accurate short-term predictions. However, the errors accumulate over time leading to
deteriorated long-term behavior (Zhou et al. 2018).
To obtain reliable prediction behavior on each time scale,
we propose to decompose the problem into two components. In particular, we aim to combine two separate models,
where one component reliably predicts the long-term behavior, while the other adds short-term details, thus combining
the strengths of each component. Interpreted in the frequency
domain, one model tackles the low-frequency components
while the other tackles the high-frequency parts.
Combining high and low-frequency information from different signals or models is well-known from control engineering or signal processing tasks. One typical example is tilt estimation in robotics, where accelerometer and gyroscope data
are often available simultaneously (Trimpe and D’Andrea
2010; Geist et al. 2022). On one hand, the gyroscope provides position estimates that are precise on the short-term
but due to integration in each time step, accumulating errors cause a drift on the long-term. On the other hand, the
accelerometer-based position estimates are long-term stable,
but considerably noisy and thus not reliable on the shortterm. Interpreted in the frequency domain, the gyroscope is
more reliable on high frequencies, whereas the accelerometer
is more reliable on low frequencies. Therefore, a high-pass
filter is applied to the gyroscope measurements, whereas a
low-pass filter is applied to the accelerometer measurements.
Both filtered components are subsequently combined in a new
complementary filtered signal that is able to approximate the
actual position more accurately.
Here, we adopt the concept of complementary filter pairs
to our task to fuse models with contrastive properties. In general, a complementary filter pair consists of a high-pass filter
H and a low-pass filter L, where the filters map signals to
signals. Depending on the specific filter, certain frequencies
are eliminated while others pass. Intuitively the joint information of both filters in a complementary filter pair covers
the whole frequency domain. Thus, the key concept that we
leverage here is the decomposition of a signal y = (yn )N
n=0
into a high-pass filter component H(y) and a low-pass filter
component L(y) via
y = H(y) + L(y).
(3)
Based on the decomposition, we propose to address H(y)
and L(y) by different models that are reliable on their specific

Modeling an unknown dynamical system is crucial in order to
predict the future behavior of the system. A standard approach
is training recurrent models on measurement data. While these
models typically provide exact short-term predictions, accumulating errors yield deteriorated long-term behavior. In contrast,
models with reliable long-term predictions can often be obtained, either by training a robust but less detailed model, or
by leveraging physics-based simulations. In both cases, inaccuracies in the models yield a lack of short-time details. Thus,
different models with contrastive properties on different time
horizons are available. This observation immediately raises
the question: Can we obtain predictions that combine the best
of both worlds? Inspired by sensor fusion tasks, we interpret
the problem in the frequency domain and leverage classical
methods from signal processing, in particular complementary
filters. This filtering technique combines two signals by applying a high-pass filter to one signal, and low-pass filtering the
other. Essentially, the high-pass filter extracts high-frequencies,
whereas the low-pass filter extracts low frequencies. Applying
this concept to dynamics model learning enables the construction of models that yield accurate long- and short-term
predictions. Here, we propose two methods, one being purely
learning-based and the other one being a hybrid model that
requires an additional physics-based simulator.

1

Introduction
N

Many physical processes (xn )n=0 with xn ∈ RDx can be
described via a discrete-time dynamical system
xn+1 = f (xn ).

(1)

Typically, it is not possible to measure the whole state-space
of the system (1), but a function of the states corrupted by
noise ŷn can, for example, be measured by sensors
yn = g(xn ) = Cxn ,
ŷn = yn + n , with n ∼ N (0, σ 2 )

(2)

and C ∈ RDy ×Dx . Our general interest is to make accurate
predictions for the observable components yn in Eq. (2). One
possible way to address this problem is training a recurrent
model on the noisy measurements ŷn in Eq. (2). Learningbased methods are often able to accurately reflect the system’s
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7476

