The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Continual Variational Autoencoder via
Continual Generative Knowledge Distillation
Fei Ye and Adrian G. Bors
Department of Computer Science, University of York, York YO10 5GH, UK
fy689@york.ac.uk, adrian.bors@york.ac.uk

Abstract
Humans and other living beings have the ability of short and
long-term memorization during their entire lifespan. However, most existing Continual Learning (CL) methods can
only account for short-term information when training on infinite streams of data. In this paper, we develop a new unsupervised continual learning framework consisting of two
memory systems using Variational Autoencoders (VAEs). We
develop a Short-Term Memory (STM), and a parameterised
scalable memory implemented by a Teacher model aiming
to preserve the long-term information. To incrementally enrich the Teacher’s knowledge during training, we propose the
Knowledge Incremental Assimilation Mechanism (KIAM),
which evaluates the knowledge similarity between the STM
and the already accumulated information as signals to expand the Teacher’s capacity. Then we train a VAE as a Student module and propose a new Knowledge Distillation (KD)
approach that gradually transfers generative knowledge from
the Teacher to the Student module. To ensure the quality and
diversity of knowledge in KD, we propose a new expert pruning approach that selectively removes the Teacher’s redundant parameters, associated with unnecessary experts which
have learnt overlapping information with other experts. This
mechanism further reduces the complexity of the Teacher’s
module while ensuring the diversity of knowledge for the
KD procedure. We show theoretically and empirically that
the proposed framework can train a statistically diversified
Teacher module for continual VAE learning which is applicable to learning infinite data streams.

Figure 1: The learning procedure of the proposed framework
where we omit the updating of the memory for the sake of
simplification. During the training, we optimize the current
teacher component and the student module using the adversarial and VAE loss, respectively. We then check the model
expansion and perform expert pruning.

lifelong generative modelling (Ramapuram, Gregorova, and
Kalousis 2017; Ye and Bors 2020a) and consider a more
sophisticated learning scenario, called the Task-Free Continual Learning (TFCL) (Aljundi, Kelchtermans, and Tuytelaars 2019), which would not require the task identity during the training and testing. One popular way to reduce forgetting in TFCL is the replay-based approach, which either manages a fixed-capacity memory buffer (De Lange
and Tuytelaars 2021; Jin et al. 2021) or trains a generator
(Shin et al. 2017) which then can be used to reproduce the
data through a generative replay mechanism. The former approach requires a suitable sample selection criterion that selectively stores incoming samples into the memory to relieve
forgetting (Aljundi et al. 2019b; De Lange and Tuytelaars
2021) while the latter aims to train a powerful generator that
produces high-quality generative replay samples, which are
statistically consistent with the training sets (Ye and Bors
2020a). However, these approaches rely on a single memory system, which is not scalable for learning infinite data
streams due to their limited memory capacity, while also requiring frequent retraining (Ye and Bors 2020a).
Recently, the Dynamic Expansion Model (DEM) (Lee
et al. 2020; Rao et al. 2019) has shown promising results

Introduction
The continuous acquisition and learning of new concepts
from a dynamically evolving environment is a fundamental function for an artificial intelligent system. Modern
deep learning models have already outperformed humans
in learning certain single tasks (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015), but would suffer dramatic performance degeneration when attempting to learn a sequence of different data
domains. The phenomenon of such a performance degeneration is referred in AI as “catastrophic forgetting”.
Existing work on continual learning mainly focuses on
the classification task and requires knowledge of the task
information during training. In this work, we focus on the
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10918

