The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

RePreM: Representation Pre-training with Masked Model for
Reinforcement Learning
Yuanying Cai1 , Chuheng Zhang2 , Wei Shen3 , Xuyun Zhang4 , Wenjie Ruan4,5 , Longbo Huang1 *
1

IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
3
Hulu, Beijing, China
4
Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
5
University of Exeter, Exeter, UK
cai-yy16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, chuhengzhang@microsoft.com, longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

2020; Grill et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020], they are relatively
underexplored in RL. The main benefit of pre-trained representations is that they can be used for sample-efficient learning for various downstream tasks such as dynamics prediction, transfer learning, and reinforcement learning with different algorithms and different reward functions.
However, existing methods that generate pre-trained representations suffer from the following limitations: 1) They
are algorithmically complex. Some of these methods, especially those based on self-supervised learning, rely on handcrafted data augmentation that needs specific domain knowledge [see e.g., Stooke et al. 2021; Schwarzer et al. 2021],
while others are based on the world model and require additional networks to model latent transition or reward functions [see e.g., Seo et al. 2022]. 2) We find that, although
several techniques, such as goal-conditioned RL [Schwarzer
et al. 2021] and RSSM [Hafner et al. 2019b], are designed
to encourage representations to incorporate the information
over the multi-step dynamics in the future, previous methods
cannot predict long-term dynamics accurately, which limits
their performance (see our later experiments).
Recently, sequence modeling (mostly with Transformer)
has achieved great success in RL [Chen et al. 2021; Janner, Li, and Levine 2021]. This approach can avoid algorithmic sophistication by following the RvS (RL via supervised
learning) paradigm [Emmons et al. 2021] and extract longterm information more effectively by learning the whole sequence. However, most previous work on sequence modeling for RL focuses on the offline RL setting [Chen et al.
2021; Janner, Li, and Levine 2021; Reed et al. 2022; Furuta, Matsuo, and Gu 2021; Akhmetov et al. 2022; Xu et al.
2022], where the agent’s performance is limited by the quality of the offline datasets. There are two exceptions [Zheng,
Zhang, and Grover 2022; Lee et al. 2022] that fine-tune the
models pre-trained from offline datasets. However, these two
methods use the full pre-trained model instead of the representation, which limits the variety of applicable downstream
tasks.
To effectively learn presentations that offer flexibility to downstreaming RL tasks, we propose RePreM
(Representation Pre-training with Masked Model) that pretrains the encoder to predict the masked states or actions in

Inspired by the recent success of sequence modeling in RL
and the use of masked language model for pre-training, we
propose a masked model for pre-training in RL, RePreM
(Representation Pre-training with Masked Model), which
trains the encoder combined with transformer blocks to predict the masked states or actions in a trajectory. RePreM is
simple but effective compared to existing representation pretraining methods in RL. It avoids algorithmic sophistication
(such as data augmentation or estimating multiple models)
with sequence modeling and generates a representation that
captures long-term dynamics well. Empirically, we demonstrate the effectiveness of RePreM in various tasks, including
dynamic prediction, transfer learning, and sample-efficient
RL with both value-based and actor-critic methods. Moreover, we show that RePreM scales well with dataset size,
dataset quality, and the scale of the encoder, which indicates
its potential towards big RL models.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved great success in
solving various decision-making tasks [Mnih et al. 2015;
Silver et al. 2016; Arulkumaran, Cully, and Togelius 2019;
Jumper et al. 2021]. Yet, the sample inefficiency issue [Tsividis et al. 2017] and the overfitting problem [Zhang et al.
2018] impede its further application to real-world scenarios. In contrast, humans can typically learn more efficiently
and robustly than current RL algorithms. The gap is resulted
from the fact that existing RL algorithms usually start learning tabula rasa without any prior knowledge [Schwarzer
et al. 2021; Hutsebaut-Buysse, Mets, and Latré 2020]. As
a result, it requires a large number of samples to learn meaningful representations [Dubey et al. 2018; Lake et al. 2017].
In this paper, we consider learning state representations that incorporate rich knowledge by unsupervised pretraining from offline datasets. While unsupervised pretraining methods have achieved great success in natural language processing (NLP) [Devlin et al. 2018; Brown et al.
2020] and computer vision (CV) [Henaff 2020; He et al.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6879

