The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Now We’re Talking: Better Deliberation Groups through Submodular Optimization
Jake Barrett1 , Kobi Gal1,2 , Paul Gölz3 , Rose M. Hong3 , and Ariel D. Procaccia3
1
University of Edinburgh,
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev,
3
Harvard University
j.t.l.barrett@sms.ed.ac.uk, kgal@exseed.ed.ac.uk, goelz@seas.harvard.edu, rosehong@college.harvard.edu,
arielpro@seas.harvard.edu
2

Abstract

unteers is put together, and the assembly is randomly selected
from this pool. The assembly is required to be representative
of the population in terms of features like gender, ethnicity,
age, and education, but the pool of volunteers is typically
unrepresentative of the population due to self-selection bias.
In a series of papers, Flanigan et al. (2021a, 2020); Flanigan,
Kehne, and Procaccia (2021) develop an algorithmic framework for randomly selecting citizens’ assemblies in a way
that is representative, fair to volunteers, and transparent.
In the second phase of the process, the assembly discusses
the issues at hand and reaches conclusions that inform policy
making. This discussion, known as deliberation, is what enables an assembly composed of laypeople to reach judicious
recommendations on a complex issue. Though deliberation
lies at the heart of a citizens’ assembly’s purpose, almost no
work so far supports deliberation through algorithms, computation, or AI. Deliberation in a citizens’ assembly takes place
over a number of sessions, where in each session, participants
are divided into discussion groups, which we refer to as tables. For example, the Citizens’ Assembly of Scotland, which
was convened by the Scottish Government in 2019–2020, ran
over 16 sessions spread across 8 weekends; in each session,
the 104 participants were divided across 12 tables.
This work arises out of a collaboration with the Sortition Foundation — a nonprofit organization which facilitates
dozens of citizens’ assemblies worldwide every year — on
the design and implementation of algorithms for managing
deliberation. One problem that our contacts brought up is
scheduling the assignment of participants to tables, which we
address in this paper. The practitioners’ primary goal is to
find a schedule that, over the course of the process, allows participants to exchange ideas with as many other participants as
possible. In addition, tables must be demographically diverse;
in the Citizens’ Assembly of Scotland, they were diversified
based on political view, age, and gender.
Currently, the Sortition Foundation as well as other nonprofits use a heuristic algorithm called G ROUP S ELECT (Verpoort 2020) to allocate tables, developed by the Sortition
Foundation. Internally, this algorithm optimizes the objective
of maximizing the number of pairs of participants who meet
at least once, assigning no value to subsequent meetings. We
see two shortcoming with this current approach: First, as we
show in Section 6, G ROUP S ELECT performs quite poorly
in terms of its chosen objective. Second, the objective itself

Citizens’ assemblies are groups of randomly selected constituents who are tasked with providing recommendations on
policy questions. Assembly members form their recommendations through a sequence of discussions in small groups
(deliberation), in which group members exchange arguments
and experiences. We seek to support this process through optimization, by studying how to assign participants to discussion
groups over multiple sessions, in a way that maximizes interaction between participants and satisfies diversity constraints
within each group. Since repeated meetings between a given
pair of participants have diminishing marginal returns, we
capture interaction through a submodular function, which is
approximately optimized by a greedy algorithm making calls
to an ILP solver. This framework supports different submodular objective functions, and we identify sensible options, but
we also show it is not necessary to commit to a particular
choice: Our main theoretical result is a (practically efficient)
algorithm that simultaneously approximates every possible objective function of the form we are interested in. Experiments
with data from real citizens’ assemblies demonstrate that our
approach substantially outperforms the heuristic algorithm
currently used by practitioners.

1

Introduction

Can deliberation among groups of randomly selected people revitalize democracy? A growing number of political
theorists, activists, and even politicians believe so (Fishkin
2018; Landemore 2020; Van Reybrouck 2016) and have been
putting this idea into practice. In the last decade, hundreds
of citizens’ assemblies (also known as deliberative polls or
minipublics) have been convened by civil society and by local and national governments (OECD 2020). Recently, these
assemblies have become more numerous and higher profile:
Citizens’ assemblies established in 2016 and 2019 in Ireland,
for example, have led to national referenda and, in turn, to
major constitutional changes. As another example, France
has embraced this paradigm at different levels of government (Landemore 2020); in particular, the recommendations
of the Citizens Convention for Climate, established in 2019,
have given rise to significant new legislation.
On a high level, the process of organizing a citizens’ assembly consists of two phases. In the first phase, a pool of volCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5490

