The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ReGANIE: Rectifying GAN Inversion Errors for Accurate Real Image Editing
Bingchuan Li, Tianxiang Ma, Peng Zhang, Miao Hua, Wei Liu, Qian He, Zili Yi*
ByteDance Ltd, Beijing, China
{libingchuan, matianxiang.724, liuwei.jikun, zhangpeng.ucas, heqian, huamiao, yizili}@bytedance.com

Abstract
The StyleGAN family succeed in high-fidelity image generation and allow for flexible and plausible editing of generated
images by manipulating the semantic-rich latent style space.
However, projecting a real image into its latent space encounters an inherent trade-off between inversion quality and editability. Existing encoder-based or optimization-based StyleGAN inversion methods attempt to mitigate the trade-off but
see limited performance. To fundamentally resolve this problem, we propose a novel two-phase framework by designating two separate networks to tackle editing and reconstruction respectively, instead of balancing the two. Specifically,
in Phase I, a W-space-oriented StyleGAN inversion network
is trained and used to perform image inversion and editing, which assures the editability but sacrifices reconstruction
quality. In Phase II, a carefully designed rectifying network
is utilized to rectify the inversion errors and perform ideal
reconstruction. Experimental results show that our approach
yields near-perfect reconstructions without sacrificing the editability, thus allowing accurate manipulation of real images.
Further, we evaluate the performance of our rectifying network, and see great generalizability towards unseen manipulation types and out-of-domain images.

Figure 1: The image reconstruction and attribute editing results with our approach, compared with the baseline results
(Tov et al. 2021) (second column).
Recent investigations have attempted to improve reconstruction quality while maintaining the editability. These
methods mainly fall into three streams. The first stream
is encoder-based (Tov et al. 2021; Alaluf, Patashnik, and
Cohen-Or 2021b; Dinh et al. 2022; Alaluf et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2022) that optimizes the design of image encoders for
improved reconstruction while keeping the StyleGAN generator fixed. The pioneering work is e4e (Tov et al. 2021),
whose encoder is carefully designed to embed an image
to the W space. Following this work, an iterative strategy
(Alaluf, Patashnik, and Cohen-Or 2021b; Alaluf et al. 2022)
to search the W code for better reconstruction is proposed,
with the cost of increased inference time though. However,
the embedding accuracy of these methods is far from being
perfect. The second stream (Roich et al. 2022) is to fix the
latent code and fine-tune the generator for better reconstruction. As the initial latent space is changed during optimization, the editability is weakened. In addition, the optimization process is time-consuming, typically two or three orders of magnitude more inference time than encoder-based
methods. The third stream seeks to achieve near-perfect reconstructions by introducing spatial dimensions to the latent space (Kim et al. 2021), which makes the embedding
more accurate but limits the editability to “in-place” and
semantic-implicit manipulation. That means, global editing

Introduction
As one of the flagship unconditional GANs, StyleGAN
(Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019) and its advanced versions
(Karras et al. 2020b,a, 2021) are able to achieve high-fidelity
image generation, but also facilitate the semantic editing
in latent space. For example, some researchers (Shen et al.
2020; Wu, Lischinski, and Shechtman 2021; Patashnik et al.
2021; et al. 2021a; Tewari et al. 2020) seek to control the
attributes of generated images by manipulating the W or
S latent space of StyleGAN. These methods attempt to enhance the semantic interpretability of the latent space, thus
allowing the editing of the generated images. However, the
real photograph needs to be embedded to StyleGAN’s latent
space to facilitate the editing (Abdal, Qin, and Wonka 2020;
et al. 2021b), which is prone to noticeable GAN inversion errors and long-tail information loss (Abdal, Qin, and Wonka
2020; et al. 2021b).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1269

