The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Synchronization and Diversity of Solutions
Emmanuel Arrighi1 , Henning Fernau2 , Mateus de Oliveira Oliveira1,3 , Petra Wolf 1,2
1

University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
2
University of Trier, Trier, Germany
3
Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden
emmanuel.arrighi@uib.no, oliveira@dsv.su.se, mail@wolfp.net, fernau@uni-trier.de

For instance, it is NP-hard to determine whether a given
DFA A has a synchronizing word that belongs to the regular language ab∗ a (Fernau et al. 2019), or whose length is
bounded by a given integer (Rystsov 1980; Eppstein 1990).
Diversity of solutions is a trend that has been calling
substantial attention of the artificial intelligence community
during the past years (Hebrard et al. 2005; Baste et al. 2019;
Petit and Trapp 2019; Baste et al. 2020; Fomin et al. 2020;
Ingmar et al. 2020; Arrighi et al. 2021). The goal is to find
not a single solution to a given combinatorial problem, but
rather a small set of solutions being sufficiently diverse from
each other. One of the motivations for this framework is that
it can be applied in situations where certain side constraints
are difficult, or even impossible to formalize. In this case,
the user can select a solution that she deems to be best for
her application at hand. Intuitively, the diversity requirement
tells us that the solutions that are given as an output are a reasonable representative of the space of solutions.1 Also, small
sets of solutions make sense because one does not want to
overwhelm the user with an excessive number of solutions.
While for many combinatorial problems, notions of solution diversity based on the Hamming distance between pairs
of solutions are sufficient, in the context of synchronization,
these notions are not so appropriate. First, distinct solutions
may have distinct length, and it is not clear how positions
should be aligned in order to define an appropriate notion of
Hamming distance. Additionally, even strings of the same
size that are very similar to each other may have very large
Hamming distance. For instance, the Hamming distance between the string w = abab...ab = (ab)n and the string
w′ = baba...ba = (ba)n is 2n, while w can be transformed
into w′ with two modifications: first delete the first symbol
of w and then append the symbol a to the resulting string.
We circumvent this issue by basing our diversity measure
on the notion of string edit distance (Wagner and Fischer
1974; Levenshtein 1966). This is a well studied metric for
strings with nice properties and applications in a wide variety of fields (Bunke and Csirik 1995; Lyras, Sgarbas, and
Fakotakis 2007; Chua, Marsland, and Guesgen 2011).
Another issue is that sets of solutions in which any two of
them are far apart from each other may still not capture solu-

Abstract
A central computational problem in the realm of automata
theory is the problem of determining whether a finite automaton A has a synchronizing word. This problem has found applications in a variety of subfields of artificial intelligence,
including planning, robotics, and multi-agent systems. In this
work, we study this problem within the framework of diversity of solutions, an up-and-coming trend in the field of artificial intelligence where the goal is to compute a set of solutions that are sufficiently distinct from one another.
We define a notion of diversity of solutions that is suitable
for contexts were solutions are strings that may have distinct
lengths. Using our notion of diversity, we show that for each
fixed r ∈ N, each fixed finite automaton A, and each finite
automaton B given at the input, the problem of determining
the existence of a diverse set {w1 , w2 , . . . , wr } ⊆ L(B) of
words that are synchronizing for A can be solved in polynomial time. Finally, we generalize this result to the realm of
conformant planning, where the goal is to devise plans that
achieve a goal irrespectively of initial conditions and of nondeterminism that may occur during their execution.

1

Introduction

A word w is said to be synchronizing for a deterministic finite automaton (DFA) A if there is some state q of
A such that any state q ′ is sent to q by w. This concept
has found numerous applications across several subfields
of computer science and artificial intelligence, such as circuit testing (Hennie 1964; Kohavi and Jha 2009; Sandberg
2005), multi-agent systems (Chapman and Mesbahi 2014;
Chevalier, Hendrickx, and Jungers 2015), robotics (Natarajan 1986), game theory (Maubert 2009), among others.
The most central problem in the field of synchronization
is the one to determine whether a given DFA has a synchronizing word. Note that this problem can be decided in polynomial time (Starke 1966). Nevertheless, in several applications, one is interested in finding a synchronizing word satisfying certain additional constraints (Fernau et al. 2019; Wolf
2020; Türker and Yenigün 2015). Here, the complexity landscape of the problem changes drastically: even the problem
of determining the existence of a synchronizing word satisfying certain additional regularity constraints is NP-hard.

1
See (Sayin 2000; Vaz et al. 2015; Demirovic and Schwind
2020) for further discussions.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11516

