The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

General Acyclicity and Cyclicity Notions for the Disjunctive Skolem Chase
Lukas Gerlach1 , David Carral2
1
2

Knowledge-Based Systems Group, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany
LIRMM, Inria, University of Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France
lukas.gerlach@tu-dresden.de, david.carral@inria.fr

Abstract

sufficient conditions for non-termination. In this paper, we
focus on the skolem chase variant (Marnette 2009), which
makes use of skolem terms that are used to satisfy existential restrictions when computing a universal model set.
While acyclicity notions for rule sets without disjunctions
have been around for a while (Fagin et al. 2005; Marnette
2009; Krötzsch and Rudolph 2011; Cuenca Grau et al. 2013;
Baget et al. 2014; Karimi, Zhang, and You 2021), the first
acyclicity notions for disjunctive rule sets were proposed
fairly recently (Carral, Dragoste, and Krötzsch 2017). In
their work, Carral, Dragoste, and Krötzsch extended modelfaithful acyclicity (MFA)2 for the disjunctive setting and developed the first cyclicity notion for the (disjunctive) skolem
chase, named model-faithful cyclicity (MFC). To the best of
our knowledge, these are the only existing (a)cyclicity notions for non-deterministic rule sets.
We have empirically verified that MFA and MFC are quite
effective at determining (non-)termination of rule sets without disjunctions: Using both notions, we are able to establish (non-)termination of around 99% of the deterministic
rule sets in our evaluation; we present these results in an extended technical report (Gerlach and Carral 2023). However,
in the presence of disjunctions, we could only establish the
termination status of around 67% of the considered rule sets
using MFA and MFC; see Section 5.
Our main goal is thus clear: We aim to develop general (a)cyclicity notions that can be used to determine chase
(non-)termination of most real-world rule sets with disjunctions. More precisely, our contributions are as follows:
• In Sections 3 and 4, we present our novel (a)cyclicity notions, respectively. Moreover, we study the complexity of
checking if a rule set is (a)cyclic and the complexity of
solving BCQ entailment over KBs with acyclic rule sets.
• In Section 5, we empirically show that MFA and MFC
are significantly less general than our novel conditions,
which allow us to establish (non-)termination of many of
the (non-deterministic) rule sets in our test suite.
• In Sections 6 and 7, we discuss related research and elaborate on possible follow-up work, respectively.
There is a technical report (Gerlach and Carral 2023) online with full proofs and further empirical results.

The disjunctive skolem chase is a sound, complete, and potentially non-terminating procedure for solving boolean conjunctive query entailment over knowledge bases of disjunctive existential rules. We develop novel acyclicity and cyclicity notions for this procedure; that is, we develop sufficient conditions to determine chase termination and nontermination. Our empirical evaluation shows that our novel
notions are significantly more general than existing criteria.

1

Introduction

Solving query entailment over knowledge bases (KBs) of
disjunctive existential rules is a relevant decision problem,
which is readily defined as follows:
• Input: a set R of disjunctive existential rules, a set F of
facts, and a boolean conjunctive query (BCQ) γ.
• Output: yes iff γ is a logical consequence of the KB
⟨R, F⟩ under standard first-order semantics.1
One approach to solve BCQ entailment in practice is to
apply the disjunctive skolem chase (Bourhis et al. 2016),
which is a materialization procedure that aims to compute a
finite universal model set for an input KB. If fully computed,
this model set can then be used to solve query entailment: a
BCQ γ is a logical consequence of a KB K iff γ is satisfied
by every model in a universal model set of K iff γ is satisfied
by every model in the output of the chase on input K.
Because the chase is sound and complete for BCQ entailment, and this problem is undecidable (Beeri and Vardi
1981); the chase does not terminate on all inputs. Even
worse, we cannot decide if this procedure terminates on a
given input (Gogacz and Marcinkowski 2014; Grahne and
Onet 2018). Hence, the best one can do is to study acyclicity notions; that is, sufficient conditions that confirm chase
termination. In our context, acyclicity notions are sufficient
conditions that characterize terminating rule sets: A rule set
R is terminating if the chase terminates on every KB of the
form ⟨R, F⟩. To know if our acyclicity notions are as general as they can be, we also study cyclicity notions; that is,
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Rules, facts, and BCQs are first-order logic formulas, which
we formally define in the following section.

2
MFA was originally introduced in (Cuenca Grau et al. 2013) as
a very general skolem acyclicity notion for deterministic rule sets.

6372

