The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Exploring Self-Distillation Based Relational Reasoning Training for
Document-Level Relation Extraction
Liang Zhang1,2 , Jinsong Su1,2* , Zijun Min1,2 , Zhongjian Miao1,2 , Qingguo Hu1,2
Biao Fu1,2 , Xiaodong Shi1,2 , Yidong Chen1,2*
1

2

School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
Key Laboratory of Digital Protection and Intelligent Processing of Intangible Cultural Heritage
of Fujian and Taiwan (Xiamen University), Ministry of Culture and Tourism, China
lzhang@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {jssu,ydchen}@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract

Document-level relation extraction (RE) aims to extract relational triples from a document. One of its primary challenges is to predict implicit relations between entities, which
are not explicitly expressed in the document but can usually
be extracted through relational reasoning. Previous methods
mainly implicitly model relational reasoning through the interaction among entities or entity pairs. However, they suffer from two deficiencies: 1) they often consider only one
reasoning pattern, of which coverage on relational triples is
limited; 2) they do not explicitly model the process of relational reasoning. In this paper, to deal with the first problem, we propose a document-level RE model with a reasoning module that contains a core unit, the reasoning multihead self-attention unit. This unit is a variant of the conventional multi-head self-attention and utilizes four attention
heads to model four common reasoning patterns, respectively,
which can cover more relational triples than previous methods. Then, to address the second issue, we propose a selfdistillation training framework, which contains two branches
sharing parameters. In the first branch, we first randomly
mask some entity pair feature vectors in the document, and
then train our reasoning module to infer their relations by exploiting the feature information of other related entity pairs.
By doing so, we can explicitly model the process of relational reasoning. However, because the additional masking
operation is not used during testing, it causes an input gap
between training and testing scenarios, which would hurt the
model performance. To reduce this gap, we perform conventional supervised training without masking operation in
the second branch and utilize Kullback-Leibler divergence
loss to minimize the difference between the predictions of
the two branches. Finally, we conduct comprehensive experiments on three benchmark datasets, of which experimental results demonstrate that our model consistently outperforms all competitive baselines. Our source code is available
at https://github.com/DeepLearnXMU/DocRE-SD.

Figure 1: An example with two reasoning patterns from the
DocRED dataset. ei denotes an arbitrary entity in the document. In the box at the bottom, the left relational triples
are clearly expressed in the document, while the right ones
are not explicitly expressed but can be inferred via different reasoning patterns. The arrow in the middle indicates the
reasoning patterns used to infer the right relational triple.
could benefit many downstream applications, e.g., question answering (Dong et al. 2015) and information retrieval
(Wang et al. 2017), many efforts have been devoted to the
studies of relation extraction (RE), which aims at automatically extracting relational triples from plain text. In this aspect, previous studies focus primarily on sentence-level RE,
where both considered subject and object entities are located
within the same sentence (Zhang, Qi, and Manning 2018;
Baldini Soares et al. 2019). However, the performance of
sentence-level RE models are often unsatisfactory in practice since abundant of relational facts are expressed by multiple sentences (Yao et al. 2019). Therefore, many recent
studies (Xu et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2021) have shifted their
attention to document-level RE that leverages the whole input document to extract relational triples.
However, one of the primary challenges of documentlevel RE is to predict implicit relations between entities.
Usually, these relations are not explicitly expressed in the

Introduction
Human knowledge can be efficiently expressed and stored
in the form of relational triple (es , r, eo ), where es and eo
are subject and object entities, respectively, and r represents
the relation between them. Since these structured knowledge
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13967

