The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On the Calibration and Uncertainty with Pólya-Gamma Augmentation for
Dialog Retrieval Models
Tong Ye1,2 , Shijing Si1 , Jianzong Wang1, * , Ning Cheng1 , Zhitao Li1 , Jing Xiao1
1

2

Ping An Technology (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd.
University of Science and Technology of China
jzwang@188.com

Abstract
Deep neural retrieval models have amply demonstrated their
power but estimating the reliability of their predictions remains challenging. Most dialog response retrieval models output a single score for a response on how relevant it is to a
given question. However, the bad calibration of deep neural
network results in various uncertainty for the single score
such that the unreliable predictions always misinform user
decisions. To investigate these issues, we present an efficient
calibration and uncertainty estimation framework PG-DRR for
dialog response retrieval models which adds a Gaussian Process layer to a deterministic deep neural network and recovers
conjugacy for tractable posterior inference by Pólya-Gamma
augmentation. Finally, PG-DRR achieves the lowest empirical calibration error (ECE) in the in-domain datasets and
the distributional shift task while keeping R10@1 and MAP
performance.

Introduction
Dialog response retrieval models based on deep neural networks have shown impressive results on multiple benchmarks
(Gu et al. 2020; Lu et al. 2020; Whang et al. 2021). However, the predictions from these models always fail to provide
appropriate answers when deploying into real-world applications. For example, popular dialog agents always show
users with incorrect predictions if questions fall outside of
the training distribution, which could mislead their decisions.
Therefore, an ideal model should abstain when they are likely
to be error. The simplest solution is to provide the corresponding confidence estimation so that predictions with low
confidence can be abstained. This problem is also defined
as Model Calibration: making sure the confidence of the
prediction is well correlated with the actual probabilities of
correctness.
Generally, retrieval-based dialog models consider their estimation of a response’s relevance as a deterministic score,
which can be subject to over confidence issues, i.e. are badly
calibrated (Guo et al. 2017). Existing works usually quantify
this uncertainty over predictions through a distribution of possible scores to achieve calibration (Cohen et al. 2021). Specifically, the mean of the distribution represents the model’s pre* Corresponding author: Jianzong Wang.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13923

diction while its corresponding variance captures the model’s
uncertainty. Consequently, a high variance could imply that
the model is not sure of the prediction and should abstain,
even if it is rated among the top hits.
Two of the principled methods to calculate the predicted
uncertainty for a dialog model are Deep Ensemble and
Bayesian methods. Bayesian methods (Cohen et al. 2021)
place a prior distribution over model parameters and Deep
Ensemble (Penha and Hauff 2021) usually trains independently multiple models. They are challenging to implement at
the industrial scale due to their high inference cost and huge
memory requirements. This inspires us to investigate principled approaches that only need a determinate deep neural
network for high quality uncertainty estimation.
Gaussian processes (GPs) (Rasmussen 2003) are flexible models that perform well in varieties of tasks. Different
from existing works, GPs belong to non-parametric Bayesian
approaches, which only need to learn a few hyperparameters. When combined with Gaussian likelihoods, GPs obtain
closed form expressions for the predictive and posterior distributions (Snell and Zemel 2021), which alleviate the computational defects of Bayesian methods with cubic scaled
examples. Moreover, GPs are easily combined with a single
deep neural network without training independently multiple models. However, the GPs are challenging to scale to
large datasets for classification, this is partially due to the
fact that the target variable’s categorical distribution leads to
a non-Gaussian posterior and we can not obtain the marginal
likelihood in a closed form. An especially intriguing family
of methods is adding additional Pólya-Gamma variables to
the GPs model (Polson, Scott, and Windle 2013) to recover
it when the original model is marginalized out.
In this study, we are committed to investigating a simple
and efficient approach PG-DRR by combining Pólya-Gamma
Augmentation for calibrating Dialog Response Retrieval models. Specifically, we add a neural Gaussian process layer to a
deterministic deep neural network to achieve better calibration. Importantly, we use the Pólya-Gamma (PG) augmentation to recover conjugacy for tractable posterior inference and
use Gibbs sampling to collect samples from the posterior in
order to improve the parameters of the mean and covariance
functions. Besides, we theoretically verified why PG-DRR
can be calibrated. The significant contributions of this paper
are as follows:

