The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FedGS: Federated Graph-Based Sampling with Arbitrary Client Availability
Zheng Wang1 , Xiaoliang Fan1, * , Jianzhong Qi2 , Haibing Jin1 , Peizhen Yang1 ,
Siqi Shen1 , Cheng Wang1
1

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
2
School of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
zwang@stu.xmu.edu.cn,
fanxiaoliang@xmu.edu.cn, jianzhong.qi@unimelb.edu.au, {jinhaibing, yangpz}@stu.xmu.edu.cn,
{siqishen,cwang}@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract
While federated learning has shown strong results in optimizing a machine learning model without direct access to
the original data, its performance may be hindered by intermittent client availability which slows down the convergence and biases the final learned model. There are significant
challenges to achieve both stable and bias-free training under arbitrary client availability. To address these challenges,
we propose a framework named Federated Graph-based Sampling (F ED GS), to stabilize the global model update and
mitigate the long-term bias given arbitrary client availability simultaneously. First, we model the data correlations of
clients with a Data-Distribution-Dependency Graph (3DG)
that helps keep the sampled clients data apart from each other,
which is theoretically shown to improve the approximation
to the optimal model update. Second, constrained by the fardistance in data distribution of the sampled clients, we further minimize the variance of the numbers of times that the
clients are sampled, to mitigate long-term bias. To validate
the effectiveness of F ED GS, we conduct experiments on three
datasets under a comprehensive set of seven client availability
modes. Our experimental results confirm F ED GS’s advantage
in both enabling a fair client-sampling scheme and improving
the model performance under arbitrary client availability. Our
code is available at https://github.com/WwZzz/FedGS.

Figure 1: A motivating example: there are significant challenges to achieving both stable model updates and bias-free
training with the intermittent client availability in FL.

Huang et al. 2020). They show that selecting clients without
considering whether the clients are active will lead to unbounded waiting times and poor response rates. As a result,
they sample only the active clients to guarantee immediate
client availability (Gu et al. 2021; Cho, Wang, and Joshi
2020). For example, in Fig. 1, the server will not sample
the inactive Client A and Client B at Round t − 1.
However, enabling both stable model updates and biasfree training under arbitrary client availability (i.e., without
any assumption on when each client will become available)
poses significant challenges which have not been addressed.
On one hand, the model is improved on the data distributions of the sampled clients at each round, which might
lead to the detriment of the data specificity of non-sampled
clients (Fraboni et al. 2021). For example, in Fig. 1, fairselection (Huang et al. 2020) tries to guarantee the least sampled times for each client (and hence it is “fair”). While mitigating the long-term bias, it will ignore the data of the red
type at Round t+1, since it only considers the balance of the
sampled frequency of clients. This fails to observe the data
heterogeneity across the clients and leads to instability of the
model update due to the absence of the gradients computed
on the “red” data. On the other hand, the global models

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) enables various data owners to collaboratively train a model without sharing their own data
(McMahan et al. 2017). In a FL system, there is a server that
broadcasts a global model to clients and then aggregates the
local models from them to update the global model. Such a
distributed optimization may cause prohibitive communication costs due to the unavailability of clients (Gu et al. 2021).
As an early solution to this problem, (McMahan et al.
2017) propose to uniformly sample a random subset of
clients without replacement to join the training process. (Li
et al. 2020) sample clients in proportion to their data sizes
with replacement to obtain an unbiased estimator of update.
More recently, some works take the client availability into
account when sampling clients (Yan et al. 2020; Gu et al.
2021; Balakrishnan et al. 2021; Cho, Wang, and Joshi 2020;
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10271

