The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DPText-DETR: Towards Better Scene Text Detection with Dynamic Points in
Transformer
Maoyuan Ye1 , Jing Zhang2 , Shanshan Zhao3 , Juhua Liu1 * , Bo Du4 * , Dacheng Tao3,2
1

Research Center for Graphic Communication, Printing and Packaging, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University
2
The University of Sydney
3
JD Explore Academy
4
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of Computer
Science and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University
{yemaoyuan, liujuhua, dubo}@whu.edu.cn, jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au, {sshan.zhao00, dacheng.tao}@gmail.com
Learnable Control Point Content Queries

Abstract
Box Proposal

Recently, Transformer-based methods, which predict polygon points or Bezier curve control points for localizing
texts, are popular in scene text detection. However, these
methods built upon detection transformer framework might
achieve sub-optimal training efficiency and performance due
to coarse positional query modeling. In addition, the point
label form exploited in previous works implies the reading
order of humans, which impedes the detection robustness
from our observation. To address these challenges, this paper
proposes a concise Dynamic Point Text DEtection TRansformer network, termed DPText-DETR. In detail, DPTextDETR directly leverages explicit point coordinates to generate position queries and dynamically updates them in a
progressive way. Moreover, to improve the spatial inductive
bias of non-local self-attention in Transformer, we present an
Enhanced Factorized Self-Attention module which provides
point queries within each instance with circular shape guidance. Furthermore, we design a simple yet effective positional
label form to tackle the side effect of the previous form. To
further evaluate the impact of different label forms on the
detection robustness in real-world scenario, we establish an
Inverse-Text test set containing 500 manually labeled images.
Extensive experiments prove the high training efficiency, robustness, and state-of-the-art performance of our method on
popular benchmarks. The code and the Inverse-Text test set
are available at https://github.com/ymy-k/DPText-DETR.

(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑤, ℎ)

Add

Composite Queries

Positional Queries (identical and obscure)
Learnable Control Point Content Queries
Box Proposal

Point
Sampling

(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑤, ℎ)

Add

Ours

Composite Queries

Positional Queries (diverse and explicit)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: (a) Comparison of coarse (top) and our explicit
(bottom) positional query modeling. (b) The original label
implies the reading order of humans. (c) The original label
induces the detector to implicitly learn the reading order, resulting in some flaws, such as false positives. Green points
are the predicted start points of clockwise reading order. (d)
The detector cannot learn the reading order well even with
extensive rotation augmentation.

Introduction
Text reading and understanding have aroused increasing research interest in the computer vision community (Liao et al.
2021; Liao et al. 2020a; Liu et al. 2020b, 2021a; Zhang et al.
2020; Singh et al. 2019; He et al. 2022; Du et al. 2022; Liu
et al. 2020a; Qiao et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2021), due to the
wide range of practical applications, such as autonomous
driving (Zhang and Tao 2020). To achieve it, as a prerequisite, scene text detection has been studied extensively. However, the distinction of scene text, e.g., complex styles and
arbitrary shapes make detection remain challenging.

Recently, DETR (Carion et al. 2020) introduces Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) to object detection, forming
a concise and seminal end-to-end framework. Following
DETR, lots of works (Zhu et al. 2020; Dai et al. 2021b;
Wang et al. 2021; Meng et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2022) further improve the training convergence and
performance. For example, DAB-DETR (Liu et al. 2022) offers insights on the query which can be formed by a content
part and a positional part, and proves that the positional part
is essential for the training convergence. However, the above
detection transformers predicting axis-aligned boxes fall
short in handling arbitrary-shape scene texts. In response,

* Corresponding author. This work was done during Maoyuan
Ye’s internship at JD Explore Academy.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3241

