The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Noise-Induced Reward Functions for Surpassing Demonstrations in
Imitation Learning
Liangyu Huo, Zulin Wang, Mai Xu*
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University
37 Xueyuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing, P.R. China, 100191
{huoliangyu, wzulin, maixu}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

specific knowledge. Previous methods for learning betterthan-demonstration (BD) policies either require extra handcrafted reward signals or a human supervisor to score the
agent during the training stage (Brown et al. 2019; Christiano et al. 2017). To overcome these issues, we propose an
innovative BD method of imitation learning without additional information in this paper.
Recent research has advanced BD methods from the perspective of introducing perturbation in the action space
(Brown, Goo, and Niekum 2020; Chen, Paleja, and Gombolay 2020a), matching demonstrations with different discount
factors (Tao and Cao 2020), or learning intrinsic reward
signals via curiosity-driven state exploration (Yu, Lyu, and
Tsang 2020). Nevertheless, our method regards the suboptimality of demonstrations as an inaccurate estimation of the
reward function due to the demonstrator’s limited attention,
inaccurate cognition, and observation error (Zheng, Liu, and
Ni 2014). This starting point is inspired by the concept of
bounded rationality in economics (McKelvey and Palfrey
1995), which has also been investigated in interactive RL research (Faulkner, Short, and Thomaz 2020). Moreover, most
above BD methods are heuristic and lack theoretical discussion. In contrast, we theoretically analyze the rationale behind our method and propose a feasible training framework.
In this paper, we analyze the suboptimality of demonstrations from the perspective of perturbed reward functions and
then propose a BD method called LEarning Rewards from
suboptimal demonstrations with weighted Preference learning (LERP). First, we formulate the generation of suboptimal demonstrations as additive noise on the reward function. Then, an analytical expression of the suboptimal policy
is derived under the Gumbel noise distribution. We further
elaborate on an upper bound of the expected accumulated
reward gap under different noise coefficients and propose
a sufficient condition to achieve BD performance. Consequently, a modified preference learning algorithm is developed to infer the noise-induced reward, building on an existing BD method (Brown, Goo, and Niekum 2020). With the
aforementioned upper bound interpretation, the difference of
injected noise coefficients (Brown, Goo, and Niekum 2020)
is quantitatively utilized to correct the preference objective
function. The revised expression of the loss function can be
considered as an importance sampling technique.
Our experiment comprehensively evaluates the proposed

Imitation learning (IL) has recently shown impressive performance in training a reinforcement learning agent with human
demonstrations, eliminating the difficulty of designing elaborate reward functions in complex environments. However,
most IL methods work under the assumption of the optimality of the demonstrations and thus cannot learn policies to
surpass the demonstrators. Some methods have been investigated to obtain better-than-demonstration (BD) performance
with inner human feedback or preference labels. In this paper, we propose a method to learn rewards from suboptimal
demonstrations via a weighted preference learning technique
(LERP). Specifically, we first formulate the suboptimality of
demonstrations as the inaccurate estimation of rewards. The
inaccuracy is modeled with a reward noise random variable
following the Gumbel distribution. Moreover, we derive an
upper bound of the expected return with different noise coefficients and propose a theorem to surpass the demonstrations. Unlike existing literature, our analysis does not depend on the linear reward constraint. Consequently, we develop a BD model with a weighted preference learning technique. Experimental results on continuous control and highdimensional discrete control tasks show the superiority of our
LERP method over other state-of-the-art BD methods.

Introduction
For the past few years, imitation learning (IL) has shown
excellent performance in various real-world applications,
such as robot manipulation and autonomous control systems (Barakova and Vanderelst 2011). Unlike reinforcement learning (RL), IL methods train an agent from human
demonstrations, neglecting the constraint of preprogrammed
reward signals. The gamut of IL research can be roughly
classified into two branches: behavioral cloning (BC) and inverse reinforcement learning (IRL). A fundamental assumption in most IL methods is that the demonstration is optimal (Ho and Ermon 2016; Peng et al. 2019). These methods aim to mimic the demonstrator’s behavior and typically
find policies whose performance is upper bounded by the
demonstrator. However, access to high-quality expert data
is expensive in real-world scenarios such as robotics learning, where the demonstrator is expected to have domain* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7953

