The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Disentangled CVAEs with Contrastive Learning for Explainable Recommendation
Linlin Wang1 * , Zefeng Cai1 , Gerard de Melo2 , Zhu Cao3 , Liang He1
1
East China Normal University
Hasso Plattner Institute, University of Potsdam
3
East China University of Science and Technology
{llwang,lhe}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, oklen@foxmail.com, gdm@demelo.org, caozhu55@gmail.com
2

Abstract

traits and attributes of users and items (Cao et al. 2018).
An underlying reason is that previous models are insensitive to the ID strings and typically fail to extract sufficient
evidence as generative signals from such opaque inputs (Li,
Zhang, and Chen 2021b). This problem is particularly pronounced for neural network-based architectures that directly
embed input user and item IDs in a similar way as normal
words, given that such IDs occur only infrequently and are
easily regarded as out-of-vocabulary tokens. Hence, previous models struggle to capture specific features behind users
and items identified with IDs, instead delivering generic and
often identical explanations (underlined in Fig. 1) for different user–item pairs. It can be observed that the quality of
generated explanations from NETE (Li, Zhang, and Chen
2020) and PETER (Li, Zhang, and Chen 2021b), two previous state-of-the-art models, is far from satisfactory compared with the ground-truth reference.
In fact, the key to explanation generation is to recognize
essential characteristics of user–item pairs (Ma et al. 2019).
Yet, it is non-trivial for models to acquire better representations and thereby guarantee diversity when merely considering opaque ID strings for users and items. Conventional encoder–decoder approaches learn hidden representations from the inputs alone. To capture supplemental signals, several prior studies extend the encoder–decoder architecture by designing additional modules or introducing auxiliary tasks. For example, the NETE model relies on a neural template-based framework to incorporate feature-specific
details, however at the expense of a severely restricted diversity and expressivity of the generated explanations. The PETER model exploits a Transformer-based architecture with
context prediction to interpret IDs, which however entails a
heavy dependency on auxiliary tasks.
A promising choice to overcome these drawbacks and ensure the informativeness of generated explanations is the
use of conditional variational autoencoders (CVAEs), which
leverage sampled latent variables to capture underlying semantics and further guide the learning process towards diverse generation with an extra condition (Sohn, Yan, and Lee
2015). Still, to align the CVAE-based architecture with our
expectations, considerable modifications are required, particularly when the user and item IDs are opaque identifiers
that are challenging to interpret. Since there is a sizeable
semantic gap between input IDs and the corresponding tex-

Modern recommender systems are increasingly expected to
provide informative explanations that enable users to understand the reason for particular recommendations. However,
previous methods struggle to interpret the input IDs of user–
item pairs in real-world datasets, failing to extract adequate
characteristics for controllable generation. To address this
issue, we propose disentangled conditional variational autoencoders (CVAEs) for explainable recommendation, which
leverage disentangled latent preference factors and guide the
explanation generation with the refined condition of CVAEs
via a self-regularization contrastive learning loss. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our method generates highquality explanations and achieves new state-of-the-art results
in diverse domains.

Introduction
Due to the high demand for increasing users’ trust, recommender systems are often expected to provide informative
explanations to better reveal why particular items are selected for recommendation (Wang et al. 2018a,b; Chen et al.
2019). Real-world explanations for recommendations can be
presented in various forms (Zhang and Chen 2020). In this
paper, we focus on post-hoc explanations that are expressed
in natural language. As depicted in Fig. 1, our task requires
a model to interpret the given user ID, item ID, and rating
score from recommender systems, and thereafter generate
appropriate textual explanations.

Figure 1: An example of explanation generation
However, most existing approaches tend to generate
generic explanations that seldom account for the particular
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13691

