The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FlowFace: Semantic Flow-Guided Shape-Aware Face Swapping
Hao Zeng1 , Wei Zhang1 , Changjie Fan1 , Tangjie Lv1 , Suzhen Wang1 ,
Zhimeng Zhang1 , Bowen Ma1 , Lincheng Li1 , Yu Ding1,3, * , Xin Yu2
1

Virtual Human Group, Netease Fuxi AI Lab
2
University of Technology Sydney
3
Zhejiang University
zenghao1110@gmail.com, {zhengwei05, fanchangjie, hzlvtangjie, wangsuzhen,
zhangzhimeng, mabowen01, lilincheng, dingyu01}@corp.netease.com, xin.yu@uts.edu.au
Abstract

transferring. Facial shape transferring is still a challenge for
authentic face swapping.
To solve the shape transferring problem, we propose a
semantic flow-guided two-stage framework, dubbed FlowFace. Unlike existing methods, FlowFace is a shape-aware
face swapping network. In a nutshell, we first present a face
reshaping network to warp the target face referring to the
source face shape at the first stage. Then, we employ a face
swapping network to transfer the inner facial features to the
reshaped target face.
Our face reshaping network addresses the shape outline
discrepancy between the source face and the target face.
Specifically, we use a 3D face reconstruction model (i.e.,
3DMM (Blanz and Vetter 1999)) to obtain shape coefficients
of the source and target faces and then project the obtained
3D shapes to 2D facial landmarks. To accurately warp the
target face, we need to obtain dense motion between the
source and the target faces. Subsequently, we design a semantic guided generator to transform the sparse 2D facial
landmarks into the dense flow. The estimated flow, called semantic flow, will be exploited to warp the target face shape
explicitly in a pixel-wise manner. In addition, we propose a
semantic-guided discriminator to enforce our face reshaping
network to produce accurate semantic flow.
After reshaping the target face, we introduce a face swapping network for transferring the inner facial features of the
source face to the target ones. Prior works usually use a face
recognition model to extract the identity embedding of the
source face and then transfer it to the target face. We argue
this would lose some personalized appearances during transferring because the identity embedding is often trained under
discriminative tasks and thus may ignore intra-class variations (Kim, Lee, and Zhang 2022). Thus, we opt to employ
a pre-trained masked autoencoder (MAE) (He et al. 2022)
to extract facial features that better capture facial appearances and identity information. Moreover, unlike prior arts
that widely employ AdaIN (Liu et al. 2017b) to infuse the
source identity embedding to the target face, we develop a
cross-attention fusion module to adaptively fuse the source
and target features. In doing so, we achieve better face swapping performance.
Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments validate the effectiveness of our FlowFace on in-the-wild faces

In this work, we propose a semantic flow-guided two-stage
framework for shape-aware face swapping, namely FlowFace. Unlike most previous methods that focus on transferring the source inner facial features but neglect facial contours, our FlowFace can transfer both of them to a target face,
thus leading to more realistic face swapping. Concretely, our
FlowFace consists of a face reshaping network and a face
swapping network. The face reshaping network addresses the
shape outline differences between the source and target faces.
It first estimates a semantic flow (i.e., face shape differences)
between the source and the target face, and then explicitly
warps the target face shape with the estimated semantic flow.
After reshaping, the face swapping network generates inner
facial features that exhibit the identity of the source face.
We employ a pre-trained face masked autoencoder (MAE)
to extract facial features from both the source face and the
target face. In contrast to previous methods that use identity
embedding to preserve identity information, the features extracted by our encoder can better capture facial appearances
and identity information. Then, we develop a cross-attention
fusion module to adaptively fuse inner facial features from
the source face with the target facial attributes, thus leading to
better identity preservation. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments on in-the-wild faces demonstrate that our
FlowFace outperforms the state-of-the-art significantly.

Introduction
Face swapping refers to transferring the identity information of a source face to a target face while maintaining the
attributes (e.g., expression, pose, hair, lighting, and background) of the target. It has attracted many interests due to
its wide applications, such as portrait reenactment, film production, and virtual reality.
Recent works (Li et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020; Xu et al.
2021; Li et al. 2021) have made great efforts to achieve
promising face swapping results. However, these methods
often focus on inner facial feature transferring but neglect
facial contour reshaping. We observe that facial contours
also carry the identity information of a person, but few efforts (Wang et al. 2021) have been made on facial contours
* Yu Ding is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3367

