The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Semi-supervised Credit Card Fraud Detection via
Attribute-Driven Graph Representation
Sheng Xiang1 , Mingzhi Zhu2 , Dawei Cheng2,3 * , Enxia Li1 ,
Ruihui Zhao4 , Yi Ouyang4 , Ling Chen1 , Yefeng Zheng4
1

Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
4
Tencent Jarvis Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{sheng.xiang, ling.chen}@uts.edu.au, mz3379@nyu.edu, dcheng@tongji.edu.cn,
enxia.li@student.uts.edu.au, zachary@ruri.waseda.jp, {yiouyang, yefengzheng}@tencent.com
Abstract

Credit card fraud incurs a considerable cost for both cardholders and issuing banks. Contemporary methods apply machine learning-based classifiers to detect fraudulent behavior from labeled transaction records. But labeled data are
usually a small proportion of billions of real transactions
due to expensive labeling costs, which implies that they do
not well exploit many natural features from unlabeled data.
Therefore, we propose a semi-supervised graph neural network for fraud detection. Specifically, we leverage transaction records to construct a temporal transaction graph, which
is composed of temporal transactions (nodes) and interactions (edges) among them. Then we pass messages among the
nodes through a Gated Temporal Attention Network (GTAN)
to learn the transaction representation. We further model the
fraud patterns through risk propagation among transactions.
The extensive experiments are conducted on a real-world
transaction dataset and two publicly available fraud detection datasets. The result shows that our proposed method,
namely GTAN, outperforms other state-of-the-art baselines
on three fraud detection datasets. Semi-supervised experiments demonstrate the excellent fraud detection performance
of our model with only a tiny proportion of labeled data.

Figure 1: The illustration of typical credit card fraud detection process. The detection system of card issuer assesses
each transaction with an online predictive model once it has
passed account checking.
transaction according to specific rules such as card blacklists
and budget checking. However, criminals will also obtain
the knowledge of vulnerabilities from the response of the
pre-designed rule system, thus invalidating the original system. To solve the invalidation problem, the predictive model
is designed to automatically detect fraud patterns and produces a fraud risk score. Domain experts then can thereby
focus on the high-risk transactions.
State-of-the-art. In the literature, many existing predictive
models have been extensively studied to deal with fraud
transactions (e.g., (Patidar, Sharma et al. 2011; Fu et al.
2016)), which can be classified into two categories: (1) Rulebased methods directly generate sophisticated rules by domain experts to identify the suspicious transactions. For instance, authors in (Seeja and Zareapoor 2014) proposed an
association rule method for mining frequent fraud rules; (2)
Machine learning-based methods learn static models by exploring large amounts of historical data. For example, authors in (Fiore et al. 2017) extracted features based on neural
networks and built supervised classifiers for detecting fraudulent transactions. Recently, graph machine learning-based
methods have been proposed (Wang et al. 2019a) where the
transactions are modeled as a graph, and the advanced graph
embedding techniques are deployed.

Introduction
The great losses caused by financial fraud have attracted
continuous attention from academia, industry, and regulatory agencies. For instance, as reported in (AlFalahi and
Nobanee 2019; Máté et al. 2019), financial fraud detection
plays a critical role to support the sustainable economic
growth. However, fraudulent behaviors against online payments, such as illegal card swiping, have caused property
losses to online payment users (Bhattacharyya et al. 2011b).
An important line of research in financial fraud detection
is credit card fraud detection, where credit card fraud is a
general term for the unauthorized use of funds in a transaction, typically by means of a credit or debit card (Bhattacharyya et al. 2011a). Figure 1 shows a typical fraud detection framework deployed in the commercial system (Cheng
et al. 2020a). A direct way to detect fraud is to match each
* Corresponding Author is Dawei Cheng.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14557

