The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Generalized Confidence Constraints
Guillaume Perez1 , Steve Malalel2 , Gael Glorian1 , Victor Jung2 , Alexandre Papadopoulos1 , Marie
Pelleau2 , Wijnand Suijlen1 , Jean-Charles Régin2 , Arnaud Lallouet1
1

2

Huawei Technologie, Boulogne-Billancourt, France
Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, Sophia Antipolis, France
guillaume.perez06@gmail.com,

Abstract

2020; Mercier-Aubin et al. 2020). In such setting, the chance
constrained problem is usually defined as follow:

In robust optimization, finding a solution that solely respects
the constraints is not enough. Usually, the uncertainty and unknown parameters of the model are represented by random
variables. In such conditions, a good solution is a solution
robust to most-likely assignments of these random variables.
Recently, the Confidence constraint has been introduced by
Mercier-Aubin et al. in order to enforce this type of robustness in constraint programming. Unfortunately, it is restricted
to a conjunction of binary inequalities
In this paper, we generalize the Confidence constraint to any
constraint and propose an implementation based on Multivalued Decision Diagrams (MDDs). The Confidence constraint is defined over a vector of random variables. For a
given constraint C, and given a threshold, the Confidence
constraint ensures that the probability for C to be satisfied by
a sample of the random variables is greater than the threshold.
We propose to use MDDs to represent the constraints on the
random variables. MDDs are an efficient tool for representing
combinatorial constraints, thanks to their exponential compression power. Here, both random and decision variables are
stored in the MDD, and propagation rules are proposed for
removing values of decision variables that cannot lead to robust solutions. Furthermore, for several constraints, we show
that decision variables can be omitted from the MDD because
lighter filtering algorithms are sufficient. This leads to gain
an exponential factor in the MDD size. The experimental results obtained on a chemical deliveries problem in factories –
where the chemicals consumption are uncertain – shows the
efficiency of the proposed approach.

F (X)
minimize
r
X∈N

subject to

Pr[f (X, Y )] ≥ γ

(1)

Where X are decision variables, Y are random variables,
F is an objective function, and f represents the constraints’
satisfiability. The main difference with problem definitions
that do not involve random variables is that P r returns the
probability that the constraints will be satisfied, given the
assignment of the decision variables.
In the context of constraint programming, optimization
under probability, confidence or statistical constraints is becoming standard (Pachet et al. 2015; Pesant 2015; Perez and
Régin 2017; Perez, Rappazzo, and Gomes 2018; Hooker
2022; Latour et al. 2022). At the beginning of this century stochastic constraint programming has been defined
(Walsh 2002). Some problems involving Confidence constraints, coined ”chance constraints” at that time (Rossi et al.
2008; Hnich et al. 2012), Markov or probability distribution constraints (Perez and Régin 2017a) have already been
solved. Until recently the Confidence constraint lacked a
generic filtering algorithm. A first attempt had been made in
2015 (Rossi et al. 2015). In 2020, some filtering algorithms
(Mercier-Aubin et al. 2020) were finally presented but they
can handle only conjunction of binary inequality constraints.
We propose to generalize the definition of the Confidence constraint to any constraint as in problem definition (1). Given X, Y , γ, and a constraint C, the Confidence(X, Y, C, γ) constraint ensures that the probability of
C(X, Y ) to be satisfied by Y given X is greater than γ.
Consider any assignment p of the decision variables. Let
Tp be the set of all valid assignments of random variables of
C(p, Y ). The constraint ensures that p is aPvalid assignment
of the decision variables if and only if t∈Tp p(t) ≥ γ.
In the general case, summing all the possible tuples is intractable, hence approximate sampling methods are often
used to represent confidence (Calafiore and Campi 2005).
We propose to use a multi-valued decision diagram (MDD)
to represent the underlined constraints, and propose exact
filtering algorithms for the Confidence constraint.
Multi-valued decision diagrams (MDDs) are a generic
representation tool used to represent any constraint (Cheng
and Yap 2010; Perez and Régin 2015; Bergman et al. 2016).

Introduction
Stochastic optimization is a class of problem where uncertainty is present (Powell 2019; Charnes and Cooper 1959).
Such problems are present in different domains, and are already part of constraint programming modeling languages
(Rendl, Tack, and Stuckey 2014). Optimization and satisfaction problems involving random variables and searching
for robust solutions are ubiquitous in modern continuous
flux applications. Vehicle sharing, organ transplant, textile
manufactures, and deliveries are just a few of the many industrial areas where robust optimization is necessary (Lin,
Janak, and Floudas 2004; Parra et al. 2005; Kargar et al.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4078

