The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Neighbor Contrastive Learning on Learnable Graph Augmentation
Xiao Shen1, Dewang Sun1, Shirui Pan2, Xi Zhou1, Laurence T. Yang1,3

Hainan University
Griffith University
3
St. Francis Xavier University
shenxiaocam@163.com, dwsun@hainanu.edu.cn, s.pan@griffith.edu.au, xzhou@hainanu.edu.cn, ltyang@hainanu.edu.cn
1

2

Abstract

Contrastive learning (CL) is one of the most representative self-supervised learning techniques that can reduce the
reliance on manual labels. CL has demonstrated unprecedented performance on unsupervised representation learning in computer vision (CV) (Zhu et al. 2020) and natural
language processing (NLP) (Aberdam et al. 2021). Inspired
by the development of CL, recently, tremendous endeavors
have been devoted to graph contrastive learning (GCL)
(Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020; Zhu et al. 2020; Xia et al.
2022a; Xia et al. 2022b; Zheng et al. 2022), which couple
GNNs with CL to learn robust representations from unlabeled graphs.
Most existing GCL methods adopt a similar paradigm.
Firstly, they employ various graph augmentation strategies,
such as node dropping (You et al. 2020), edge perturbation
(Zhu et al. 2020), attribute masking (Zhu et al. 2021), subgraph (Yang et al. 2022) and graph diffusion (Hassani and
Khasahmadi 2020), to generate several graph augmented
views with discrepancy. Secondly, they apply the contrastive losses widely utilized in CV, such as InfoNCE (Van den
Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018), normalized temperature-scaled
cross-entropy (NT-Xent) (Zhu et al. 2020), Jensen-Shannon
Divergence (JSD) (Nowozin, Cseke, and Tomioka 2016)
and Triplet loss (Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015)
to extract the common core information between different
augmented views, according to the InfoMax (Linsker 1988)
principle. Despite the prosperous development of GCL,
there are some drawbacks in the standard paradigm, in terms
of graph augmentations and contrastive objectives.
The theoretical and empirical analysis in CL showed that
good augmented views should be diverse while keeping the
task-relevant information intact (Tian et al. 2020). However,
the existing handcraft graph augmentation strategies, which
randomly perturb graph topology, would fail to keep the
task-relevant information intact. For example, dropping an
important edge can heavily damage the graph topology that
are highly related to downstream tasks and consequently
cause the low quality of graph embeddings (Zhu et al. 2021).
In addition, owing to the diverse nature of graph data, there

Recent years, graph contrastive learning (GCL), which aims
to learn representations from unlabeled graphs, has made
great progress. However, the existing GCL methods mostly
adopt human-designed graph augmentations, which are sensitive to various graph datasets. In addition, the contrastive
losses originally developed in computer vision have been directly applied to graph data, where the neighboring nodes are
regarded as negatives and consequently pushed far apart from
the anchor. However, this is contradictory with the homophily assumption of networks that connected nodes often belong
to the same class and should be close to each other. In this
work, we propose an end-to-end automatic GCL method,
named NCLA to apply neighbor contrastive learning on
learnable graph augmentation. Several graph augmented
views with adaptive topology are automatically learned by
the multi-head graph attention mechanism, which can be
compatible with various graph datasets without prior domain
knowledge. In addition, a neighbor contrastive loss is devised
to allow multiple positives per anchor by taking network topology as the supervised signals. Both augmentations and
embeddings are learned end-to-end in the proposed NCLA.
Extensive experiments on the benchmark datasets demonstrate that NCLA yields the state-of-the-art node classification performance on self-supervised GCL and even exceeds
the supervised ones, when the labels are extremely limited.
Our code is released at https://github.com/shenxiaocam/NCLA.

Introduction
Over the past several years, graph neural networks (GNNs)
have attracted great attention due to their outstanding performance in various graph mining tasks, such as node classification (Kipf and Welling 2017), link prediction (Shen
and Chung 2020) and graph classification (Hamilton, Ying,
and Leskovec 2017). Most existing GNNs are trained in a
supervised manner which heavily relies on a large amount
of well-annotated labels. However, in the real-world applications, it is often resource-expensive and time-consuming
to collect abundant labeled graph structured data (Shen et al.
2020a; Shen et al. 2020b; Shen, Mao, and Chung 2020; Wu
et al. 2020; Dai et al. 2022).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9782

