The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CRAFT: Camera-Radar 3D Object Detection
with Spatio-Contextual Fusion Transformer
Youngseok Kim1 , Sanmin Kim1 , Jun Won Choi2 , Dongsuk Kum1
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
2
Hanyang University
{youngseok.kim, sanmin.kim, dskum}@kaist.ac.kr, junwchoi@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract

Size &
Cost

Camera and radar sensors have significant advantages in cost,
reliability, and maintenance compared to LiDAR. Existing fusion methods often fuse the outputs of single modalities at the
result-level, called the late fusion strategy. This can benefit
from using off-the-shelf single sensor detection algorithms,
but late fusion cannot fully exploit the complementary properties of sensors, thus having limited performance despite the
huge potential of camera-radar fusion. Here we propose a
novel proposal-level early fusion approach that effectively exploits both spatial and contextual properties of camera and
radar for 3D object detection. Our fusion framework first associates image proposal with radar points in the polar coordinate system to efficiently handle the discrepancy between the
coordinate system and spatial properties. Using this as a first
stage, following consecutive cross-attention based feature fusion layers adaptively exchange spatio-contextual information between camera and radar, leading to a robust and attentive fusion. Our camera-radar fusion approach achieves the
state-of-the-art 41.1% mAP and 52.3% NDS on the nuScenes
test set, which is 8.7 and 10.8 points higher than the cameraonly baseline, as well as yielding competitive performance on
the LiDAR method.

1

Camera

Illumination
Robustness

Semantic
Info.

Velocity
Info.

Radar

Weather Robustness

3D
Depth
Info.

Resolution
Detection Range

LiDAR

Camera + Radar

Figure 1: Sensor characteristics of camera, radar, and LiDAR. Camera-radar fusion has high potential considering
spatially and contextually complementary properties.

ever, late fusion strategies that rely on heuristics and postprocessing techniques suffer from performance-reliability
trade-offs, especially when two sensor predictions disagree;
thus, late fusion cannot exploit the full potential of each sensor. In contrast, a learning-based early fusion strategy that
fuses the intermediate information of each sensor at an early
stage has much higher potential, but it requires an in-depth
understanding of each sensor’s characteristics to find the
“optimal” way to fuse.
However, it is non-trivial to develop early fusion for camera and radar due to the unique characteristics of each sensor, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Camera-LiDAR early fusion
methods, which are relatively well-studied, fuse point-wise
features (Vora et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2020) by associating image pixel with projected LiDAR point or fuse image
and LiDAR proposal features (Ku et al. 2018) by extracting a region of interests (RoIs) with RoIPool (Ren et al.
2015). However, adapting camera-LiDAR fusion methods
for camera-radar is unsuitable since those strategies are established by accurate LiDAR measurement (±2cm), but
radar has low accuracy and measurement ambiguities. Due
to the nature of the radar mechanism, the radar has high
resolution and accuracy in the radial direction (0.4m and
±0.1m), which is measured by Fast Fourier Transformation
FFT. Meanwhile, the azimuthal measurement obtained by
digital beamforming using multiple receive antennas (Johnson and Dudgeon 1992) is inaccurate (4.5◦ and ±1◦ , approximately 4m and ±1m at 50m distance). Measurement

Introduction

3D object detection is an essential task for autonomous driving as well as mobile robots. Thanks to the low-cost, highreliability, and low-maintenance of camera and radar sensors, they are already deployed to a large number of mass
production vehicles for active safety systems. Moreover, the
rich semantic information of the camera and long-range detection with weather condition robustness of radar are essential attributes that LiDAR cannot provide. Nevertheless,
learning-based camera-radar 3D object detection (Lim et al.
2019; Kim, Choi, and Kum 2020; Nabati and Qi 2021) for
autonomous driving has not been thoroughly explored.
Existing camera-radar fusion methods often use a late fusion strategy that fuses detection-level outputs of separated
camera and radar detection algorithms with heuristic logic.
Such methods can have the benefit of exploiting the offthe-shelf detection algorithms that are independently developed by automotive suppliers as modular components. HowCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1160

