The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Flora: Dual-Frequency LOss-Compensated ReAl-Time
Monocular 3D Video Reconstruction
Likang Wang1 , Yue Gong3 , Qirui Wang3 , Kaixuan Zhou4,5 , Lei Chen1,2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Data Science and Analytics Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
Distributed and Parallel Software Lab, Huawei Technologies
4
Riemann Lab, Huawei Technologies
5
Fundamental Software Innovation Lab, Huawei Technologies
lwangcg@connect.ust.hk, gongyue1@huawei.com, wangqirui1@huawei.com,
zhoukaixuan2@huawei.com, leichen@cse.ust.hk
Abstract

In this work, we propose a real-time monocular 3D video
reconstruction approach named Flora for reconstructing delicate and complete 3D scenes from RGB video sequences
in an end-to-end manner. Specifically, we introduce a novel
method with two main contributions. Firstly, the proposed
feature aggregation module retains both color and reliability in a dual-frequency form. Secondly, the loss compensation module solves missing structure by correcting
losses for falsely pruned voxels. The dual-frequency feature aggregation module enhances reconstruction quality
in both precision and recall, and the loss compensation
module benefits the recall. Notably, both proposed contributions achieve great results with negligible inferencing
overhead. Our state-of-the-art experimental results on realworld datasets demonstrate Flora’s leading performance in
both effectiveness and efficiency. The code is available at
https://github.com/NoOneUST/Flora.

1

Figure 1: Defects of existing methods. Current SOTA (NeuralRecon by Sun et al.) loses structures, while our method
leads to complete reconstructions. For example, the windows disappear in the current SOTA and even the ground
truth from depth sensors. On the contrary, these windows
are intact in our model.

Introduction
natural language (Devlin et al. 2019; Brown et al. 2020),
computer vision (Wang and Chen 2023b; Zhang et al. 2022;
Li et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023), and graph mining (Liu
et al. 2022a,b, 2023d). Specifically, the existing approaches
can generally be divided into depth-map-based and volumebased. The former genre (e.g., DeepVideoMVS by Duzceker
et al.; Wang and Chen) first predicts depth maps from different views and then separately fuses depth predictions to generate the 3D representation (e.g., meshes and point clouds).
In contrast, the latter (e.g., NeuralRecon by Sun et al.) first
maps feature from different views to a common 3D space,
then based on which a 3D representation is directly predicted in an end-to-end manner. Typically, the latter is superior in the synthesized quality (F-score) of the final 3D
model (mesh) because it directly optimizes the 3D representation (e.g., signed distance function).

3D dense reconstruction has been one of the most fundamental ways to model the real world for the past decades and
is becoming more and more crucial due to its fundamental
place in robotics and virtual reality (VR). As real-life applications for 3D reconstruction develop, diverse technical requirements for 3D reconstruction emerge. For instance, the
3D reconstruction based on images or videos has become
a mainstream solution for its usage of the most accessible,
low-cost, and convenient sensor, the camera. Furthermore,
the demand for real-time reconstruction was also becoming
intense as many applications such as robotic navigation, virtual reality, and augmented reality(AR) need a real-time response. However, achieving real-time performance while retaining decent reconstruction quality has been challenging.

1.1

Taxonomy of Reconstruction Methods

Most RGB-based real-time 3D reconstruction methods are
based on deep neural networks (Zeng et al. 2022, 2023;
Zhang et al. 2023; Liang et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022c) because of their remarkable success in various tasks, including

1.2

Taxonomy of Real-time Reconstruction

Real-time volumetric methods (e.g., NeuralRecon) usually
split video frames into fragments. Afterward, multi-scale
feature maps are extracted from each fragment to enable hierarchical reconstruction. At each scale, the model maps all
the extracted 2D feature maps into a common 3D space and

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2599

