The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SplitNet: A Reinforcement Learning Based Sequence Splitting Method for the
MinMax Multiple Travelling Salesman Problem
Hebin Liang1 * , Yi Ma1 * , Zilin Cao1 , Tianyang Liu1 , Fei Ni1 , Zhigang Li1 , Jianye Hao1,2†
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
{lianghebin, mayi, zilin24, liutianyang, fei ni, scs lzg, jianye.hao}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

exploration of natural resources, the equitable distribution of
workload for each vehicle is important.
After decades of development, many methods for routing problems have emerged both in OR and ML communities. Conventional methods for solving MinMax mTSP
mainly resort to various heuristic algorithms. Popular commercial solvers include Gurobi (Gurobi 2020) and CPLEX
(IBM 2018). Evolutionary algorithm, also called genetic
algorithm, is also used to solve mTSP (Carter and Ragsdale 2006). Lin-kernighan-helsgaun solver (LKH) (Helsgaun 2000), an advanced heuristic solver, implements an
outstanding local search heuristic that benefits from the variable depth search. LKH3 (Helsgaun 2017), the extension of
LKH, is proposed to solve TSP with additional constraints
such as mTSP and can obtain approximated optimal or even
optimal results on many benchmark instances. OR-Tools
(Google 2012) tends to seek approximated optimal solutions
on large-scale mTSP with relatively fast speed. (Lupoaie
et al. 2019) proposed an algorithm SOM based on metaheuristic algorithms and is combined with self-organizing
map. Most of these conventional methods either compute expensively or perform terribly when solving MinMax mTSP,
especially when the scale of problems is enormous. In addition, it cannot be ignored that these conventional heuristic
algorithms usually rely on domain knowledge and the rules
should be manually constructed, which could be of limited
generalizability.
With the development of deep Reinforcement Learning
(RL), many methods for solving routing problems based on
deep learning have been proposed in recent years. (Bello
et al. 2016; Kool, Van Hoof, and Welling 2018; Xin et al.
2021a; Gao et al. 2020; Chen and Tian 2019; Li, Yan, and
Wu 2021; Xin et al. 2021b; Duan et al. 2020; Fu, Qiu, and
Zha 2021; Kwon et al. 2020; Zong et al. 2022; Kool et al.
2022; Vidal 2022) are examples that use learning methods to solve VRP, a typical routing problem. As for the
MinMax mTSP, to the best of our knowledge, there are
three RL-based algorithms. (Hu, Yao, and Lee 2020) designed a clustering method to solve the MinMax mTSP. It
assigns nodes to different clusters with distributed policy
networks, and uses meta-heuristic methods to obtain the single TSP solutions of each cluster. (Cao, Sun, and Sartoretti
2021) proposed a constructive policy, i.e., Decentralized
Attention-based Neural Network (DAN) based on Trans-

MinMax Multiple Travelling Salesman Problem (mTSP) is
an important class of combinatorial optimization problems
with many practical applications, of which the goal is to minimize the longest tour of all vehicles. Due to its high computational complexity, existing methods for solving this problem cannot obtain a solution of satisfactory quality with fast
speed, especially when the scale of the problem is large. In
this paper, we propose a learning-based method named SplitNet to transform the single TSP solutions into the MinMax
mTSP solutions of the same instances. Specifically, we generate single TSP solution sequences and split them into mTSP
subsequences using an attention-based model trained by reinforcement learning. We also design a decision region for the
splitting policy, which significantly reduces the policy action
space on instances of various scales and thus improves the
generalization ability of SplitNet. The experimental results
show that SplitNet generalizes well and outperforms existing
learning-based baselines and Google OR-Tools on widelyused random datasets of different scales and public datasets
with fast solving speed.

Introduction
Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP) is a classical NP-Hard
problem. Given a list of nodes and the distances between
each pair of nodes, a vehicle is required to find the shortest route that starts from a specified origin node, visits each
node exactly once, and returns to the origin node (Jünger,
Reinelt, and Rinaldi 1995). As an important variant of TSP,
the multiple Travelling Salesman Problem (mTSP) requires
multiple vehicles to visit every node under the same constraints of TSP, making the problem more complicated.
Compared with TSP of only one vehicle (single TSP), mTSP
is more widely applicable in practical scenarios. MinMax is
a typical optimization objective of mTSP aiming to minimize the longest travelling distance of all vehicles. It is of
more practical significance since it is related to balancing
the workload, which is important in various scheduling and
routing problems. For example, in rescue applications, it’s
desired to find people in danger as soon as possible by dispatching humans and vehicles efficiently. In the scenario of
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8720

