The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Progressive Bayesian Inference for Scribble-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Chuanwei Zhou, Chunyan Xu* , Zhen Cui
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education,
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China.
{cwzhou, cyx, zhen.cui}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

segmentation resorts to arbitrarily drawn lines to train a satisfactory segmentation model. The scribbles are much easier
to obtain and provide sparse annotations which could indicate the rough location of the semantic regions to guide the
segmenter learning.

The scribble-supervised semantic segmentation is an important
yet challenging task in the field of computer vision. To deal
with the pixel-wise sparse annotation problem, we propose
a Progressive Bayesian Inference (PBI) framework to boost
the performance of the scribble-supervised semantic segmentation, which can effectively infer the semantic distribution
of these unlabeled pixels to guide the optimization of the segmentation network. The PBI dynamically improves the model
learning from two aspects: the Bayesian inference module (i.e.,
semantic distribution learning) and the pixel-wise segmenter
(i.e., model updating). Specifically, we effectively infer the semantic probability distribution of these unlabeled pixels with
our designed Bayesian inference module, where its guidance
is estimated through the Bayesian expectation maximization
under the situation of partially observed data. The segmenter
can be progressively improved under the joint guidance of
the original scribble information and the learned semantic
distribution. The segmenter optimization and semantic distribution promotion are encapsulated into a unified architecture
where they could improve each other with mutual evolution
in a progressive fashion. Comprehensive evaluations of several benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and
superiority of our proposed PBI when compared with other
state-of-the-art methods applied to the scribble-supervised
semantic segmentation task.

The scribble-supervised semantic segmentation task is
formed as interactive segmentation in the early stage, and
it is usually solved by utilizing graphical models to build
inter-pixel or inter-region relationships to expand the scribbles towards those unknown regions (Rother, Kolmogorov,
and Blake 2004; Grady 2006). When it comes to the neural
network era, some methods attempt to combine graphical
models and deep neural networks to produce better segmentation. Pan et al. perform a random walk process in the deep
features to decrease the representation uncertainty to produce more confident segmentation. NormalCut (Tang et al.
2018a) and KernelCut (Tang et al. 2018b) utilize the graph
cuts to build extra regularization terms to constrain the segmenter learning for more stable segmentation results. The
graphical methods demand specific designs for certain scenarios and they are hard to deploy in practical applications.
In addition, BPG (Wang et al. 2019) introduces a pre-trained
edge detection network to provide complementary boundary
supervision to regulate the segmenter learning, but it will
inevitably introduce extra information from other datasets.
Despite directly relying on the original scribbles to supervise
the network update, other works resort to inferring pseudo
labels in the unlabeled regions to mine more supervision
signals. ScribbleSup (Lin et al. 2016) generates pseudo labels in the whole image by jointly considering the scribbles
and prediction probabilities to solve a CRF (Lin et al. 2016)
optimization objective. RAWKS (Vernaza and Chandraker
2017) develops a random walk process to generate pseudo
labels in the unlabeled regions to train a better segmenter by
utilizing the hitting probabilities as label transmission matrices. A2GNN (Zhang et al. 2021b) introduces a graph neural
network to learn to expand the supervision signals from the
scribbles to unlabeled regions. PSI (Xu et al. 2021b) learns
adaptive thresholds with a network module imposed on the
features and probabilities to generate the pseudo labels. All
existing pseudo-label methods only utilize the prediction uncertainties of those unlabeled pixels to generate hard pseudo
labels, but they give insufficient consideration to the feature
distribution correlations of the labeled and unlabeled regions

Introduction
Semantic segmentation, which refers to achieving accurate
dense pixel-wise class prediction of an image, is a fundamental computer vision task (Krähenbühl and Koltun 2011;
Chen et al. 2017). It serves many other tasks such as multitask learning (Cui et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2020), intelligent
diagnostic (Falk et al. 2019), video segmentation (Xu et al.
2021a; Zhou et al. 2021) etc. For now, great progress has
been achieved due to the rapid development of deep segmentation networks. However, sufficient training of deep
networks requires a great amount of fully annotated segmentation masks, which suffer great labeling burdens for
pixel-wise annotations. Towards relieving the heavy reliance
on highly costly annotations, scribble-supervised semantic
* Chunyan Xu is the corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3751

