The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Bidding Graph Games with Partially-Observable Budgets
Guy Avni1 , Ismäel Jecker2 , Ðord̄e Žikelić3
1

University of Haifa
University of Warsaw
3
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)
2

Abstract

first-price bidding only the higher bidder pays the bid and in
all-pay bidding both players pay their bids. Who is the recipient: in Richman bidding (named after David Richman)
payments are made to the other player and in poorman bidding payments are made to the “bank”, i.e., the bid is lost. As
a rule of thumb, bidding games under all-pay and poorman
bidding are respectively technically more challenging than
first-price and Richman bidding. More on this later. In terms
of applications, however, we argue below that poorman bidding is often the more appropriate bidding mechanism.

Two-player zero-sum graph games are a central model, which
proceeds as follows. A token is placed on a vertex of a graph,
and the two players move it to produce an infinite play, which
determines the winner or payoff of the game. Traditionally,
the players alternate turns in moving the token. In bidding
games, however, the players have budgets and in each turn,
an auction (bidding) determines which player moves the token. So far, bidding games have only been studied as fullinformation games. In this work we initiate the study of
partial-information bidding games: we study bidding games
in which a player’s initial budget is drawn from a known
probability distribution. We show that while for some bidding mechanisms and objectives, it is straightforward to adapt
the results from the full-information setting to the partialinformation setting, for others, the analysis is significantly
more challenging, requires new techniques, and gives rise to
interesting results. Specifically, we study games with meanpayoff objectives in combination with poorman bidding. We
construct optimal strategies for a partially-informed player
who plays against a fully-informed adversary. We show that,
somewhat surprisingly, the value under pure strategies does
not necessarily exist in such games.

Applications. A central application of graph games is reactive synthesis (Pnueli and Rosner 1989): given a specification, the goal is to construct a controller that ensures correct
behavior in an adversarial environment. Synthesis is solved
by constructing a turn-based parity game in which Player 1
is associated with the controller and Player 2 with the environment, and searching for a winning Player 1 strategy.
Bidding games extend the modeling capabilities of graph
games. For example, they model ongoing and stateful auctions in which budgets do not contribute to the players’ utilities. Advertising campaigns are one such setting: the goal is
to maximize visibility using a pre-allocated advertising budget. By modeling this setting as a bidding game and solving for Player 1, we obtain a bidding strategy with guarantees against any opponent1 . Maximizing visibility can be expressed as a mean-payoff objective (defined below).
All-pay poorman bidding is particularly appealing since
it constitutes a dynamic version of the well-known Colonel
Blotto games (Borel 1921). Rather than thinking of the budgets as money, we think of them as resources at the disposal
of the players, like time or energy. Then, deciding how much
to bid represents the effort that a player invests in a competition, e.g., investing time to prepare for a job interview, where
the player that invests more wins the competition.

Introduction
We consider two-player zero-sum graph games; a fundamental model with applications, e.g., in multi-agent systems
(Alur, Henzinger, and Kupferman 2002). A graph game is
played on a finite directed graph as follows. A token is
placed on a vertex and the players move it throughout the
graph to produce an infinite path, which determines the payoff of the game. Traditional graph games are turn-based: the
players alternate turns in moving the token.
Bidding games (Lazarus et al. 1996, 1999) are graph
games in which an “auction” (bidding) determines which
player moves the token in each turn. The concrete bidding
mechanisms that we consider proceed as follows. In each
turn, both players simultaneously submit bids, where a bid
is legal if it does not exceed the available budget. The higher
bidder “wins” the bidding and moves the token. The mechanisms differ in their payment schemes, which are classified according to two orthogonal properties. Who pays: in

Prior work – full-information bidding games. The central quantity in bidding games is the initial ratio between
the players’ budgets. Formally, for i ∈ {1, 2}, let Bi be
Player i’s initial budget. Then, Player 1’s initial ratio is
B1 /(B1 +B2 ). A random-turn game (Peres et al. 2009) with
parameter p ∈ [0, 1] is similar to a bidding game only that in1
A worst-case modelling assumes that the other bidders cooperate against Player 1.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5464

