The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Unfooling Perturbation-Based Post Hoc Explainers
Zachariah Carmichael, Walter J. Scheirer
University of Notre Dame
zcarmich@nd.edu, walter.scheirer@nd.edu

Abstract

All of this naturally leads to the question: how can we
audit opaque algorithms? Post hoc explanation methods offer a way of understanding black box decision-making processes by estimating the influence of each variable on the decision value. Unfortunately, there is a medley of incentives
that may motivate an organization to withhold this information, whether it is financial, political, personal, or otherwise.
Indeed, these explainers are demonstrably deceivable (Slack
et al. 2020; Baniecki 2022) — if an organization is aware
that its algorithms are under scrutiny, it is capable of falsifying how its algorithms operate. This begs the question —
how do we know that the auditee is complying faithfully?
In this work, we explore the problem of employing
perturbation-based post hoc explainers to audit black box
algorithms. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
paper to address the aforementioned questions and provide
a solution. We explore a multi-faceted problem setting in
which the auditor needs to ascertain that the algorithms of
an organization: 1) do not violate regulations or laws in their
decision-making processes and 2) do not adversarially mask
said processes. Our contributions are as follows:
• We formalize real-world adversarial attack and defense
models for the auditing of black box algorithms with
perturbation-based post hoc explainers. We then formalize the general defense problem against adversarial attacks on explainers, as well as against the pragmatic
scaffolding-based adversarial attack on explainers (Slack
et al. 2020).
• We propose a novel unsupervised conditional anomaly detection algorithm based on k-nearest neighbors: KNN-CAD.
• We propose adversarial detection and defense algorithms
for perturbation-based explainers based on any conditional anomaly detector: CAD-Detect and CAD-Defend,
respectively.
• Our approach is evaluated on several high-stakes realworld data sets for the popular perturbation-based explainers, LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016) and
SHAP (Lundberg and Lee 2017). We demonstrate that the
detection and defense approaches using KNN-CAD are capable of detecting whether black box models are adversarially concealing the features used in their decision-making
processes. Furthermore, we show that our method exposes
the features that the adversaries attempted to mask, mitigating the scaffolding-based attack.

Monumental advancements in artificial intelligence (AI) have
lured the interest of doctors, lenders, judges, and other professionals. While these high-stakes decision-makers are optimistic about the technology, those familiar with AI systems are wary about the lack of transparency of its decisionmaking processes. Perturbation-based post hoc explainers offer a model agnostic means of interpreting these systems
while only requiring query-level access. However, recent
work demonstrates that these explainers can be fooled adversarially. This discovery has adverse implications for auditors, regulators, and other sentinels. With this in mind, several natural questions arise – how can we audit these black
box systems? And how can we ascertain that the auditee
is complying with the audit in good faith? In this work,
we rigorously formalize this problem and devise a defense
against adversarial attacks on perturbation-based explainers.
We propose algorithms for the detection (CAD-Detect)
and defense (CAD-Defend) of these attacks, which are
aided by our novel conditional anomaly detection approach,
KNN-CAD. We demonstrate that our approach successfully
detects whether a black box system adversarially conceals its
decision-making process and mitigates the adversarial attack
on real-world data for the prevalent explainers, LIME and
SHAP. The code for this work is available at https://github.
com/craymichael/unfooling.

Introduction
As a result of the many recent advancements in artificial
intelligence (AI), a significant interest in the technology
has developed from high-stakes decision-makers in industries such as medicine, finance, and the legal system (Lipton 2018; Miller and Brown 2018; Rudin 2019). However,
many modern AI systems are black boxes, obscuring undesirable biases and hiding their deficiencies (Szegedy et al.
2014; Hendrycks et al. 2021; Lipton 2018). This has resulted in unexpected consequences when these systems are
deployed in the real world (O’Neil 2016; Buolamwini and
Gebru 2018; McGregor 2021). Accordingly, regulatory and
legal ordinance has been proposed and implemented (EU
and Parliament 2016; U.S.-EU TTC 2022; European Commission 2021).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6925

