The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

EffConv: Efficient Learning of Kernel Sizes for Convolution Layers of CNNs
Alireza Ganjdanesh, Shangqian Gao, Heng Huang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA
{alireza.ganjdanesh, shg84, heng.huang}@pitt.edu

Abstract

high-accuracy architectures is a complex task involving numerous hyperparameters. One of the critical design choices
that directly affects the model’s performance is the size of
the kernels for convolutional layers.
A prominent design for CNNs is to use numerous layers of blocks with predetermined kernel sizes. (Simonyan
and Zisserman 2015; Szegedy et al. 2016; He et al. 2016;
Ding et al. 2022). However, by doing so, the network’s
predictions are not differentiable w.r.t kernel sizes. Thus,
finding the optimal setting for them (given a desired number of parameters) becomes a hyperparameter tuning problem that can be solved using cross-validation, casting it as
a constrained discrete optimization problem, or leveraging
heuristic design tricks. Cross-validation gets infeasible as
the number of combinations grows exponentially w.r.t number of layers and possible kernel sizes. The constrained optimization problem should be solved with techniques such
as Neural Architecture Search (NAS) (Zoph and Le 2017)
that require powerful computational resources that may not
be available for low-resourced applications. Although using
heuristic tricks (Ding et al. 2022; Dollár, Singh, and Girshick
2021; Liu et al. 2022b) to design kernel sizes has shown remarkable results, their intuitions are mainly based on an architecture’s performance on ImageNet (Russakovsky et al.
2015), which is shown does not necessarily translate to a
more effective model on other domains, with even negative
correlations between the metrics (Tuggener, Schmidhuber,
and Stadelmann 2021; Girish et al. 2022) in some cases.
Learning a model’s kernel sizes jointly with its weights
during training is a promising direction to overcome the
mentioned challenges. A group of methods take a set of basis functions (e.g., Delta-Diracs (Dai et al. 2017) or Gaussian
functions (Pintea et al. 2021)) and learn dilation factors for
these functions to alter a kernel size. However, dilation limits
the learned kernels’ bandwidth and hurts the model’s performance. Recently, FlexConv (Romero et al. 2022a) proposed
to learn high-bandwidth kernels by defining them as a product of a predicted kernel by a neural network (MLP) and a
Gaussian kernel with learnable parameters. For each convolution layer, its corresponding MLP predicts a kernel with
the same spatial dimensions as the input image. Then, the
predicted kernel is multiplied by the Gaussian kernel. Finally, the resulting kernel is cropped according to a threshold. Nevertheless, doing so has several key drawbacks. First,

Determining kernel sizes of a CNN model is a crucial and
non-trivial design choice and significantly impacts its performance. The majority of kernel size design methods rely
on complex heuristic tricks or leverage neural architecture
search that requires extreme computational resources. Thus,
learning kernel sizes, using methods such as modeling kernels
as a combination of basis functions, jointly with the model
weights has been proposed as a workaround. However, previous methods cannot achieve satisfactory results or are inefficient for large-scale datasets. To fill this gap, we design
a novel efficient kernel size learning method in which a size
predictor model learns to predict optimal kernel sizes for a
classifier given a desired number of parameters. It does so
in collaboration with a kernel predictor model that predicts
the weights of the kernels - given kernel sizes predicted by
the size predictor - to minimize the training objective, and
both models are trained end-to-end. Our method only needs
a small fraction of the training epochs of the original CNN
to train these two models and find proper kernel sizes for it.
Thus, it offers an efficient and effective solution for the kernel
size learning problem. Our extensive experiments on MNIST,
CIFAR-10, STL-10, and ImageNet-32 demonstrate that our
method can achieve the best training time vs. accuracy tradeoff compared to previous kernel size learning methods and
significantly outperform them on challenging datasets such
as STL-10 and ImageNet-32. Our implementations are available at https://github.com/Alii-Ganjj/EffConv.

Introduction
Convolutional neural network (CNNs) have consistently
shown top performance in image classification tasks in the
last decade (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan and Zisserman 2015; Szegedy et al. 2016; He et al.
2016; Liu et al. 2022b). They consist of multiple layers of
convolution operators with learnable weights that, combined
with pooling layers and strided convolutions, downsample
an input image gradually. Such a design blended with normalization and nonlinear layers enables them to make an information bottleneck to extract low-resolution task-relevant
information from high-resolution low-level details such as
pixels’ intensities. Despite their success, developing new
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7604

