The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

NQE: N-ary Query Embedding for Complex Query Answering over
Hyper-Relational Knowledge Graphs
Haoran Luo1 , Haihong E1 * , Yuhao Yang2 , Gengxian Zhou1 ,
Yikai Guo3 , Tianyu Yao1 , Zichen Tang1 , Xueyuan Lin1 , Kaiyang Wan1
1

School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
2
School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Institute of Computer Technology and Application, Beijing, China
{luohaoran, ehaihong}@bupt.edu.cn, yangyuhao818@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

qualifiers

Complex query answering (CQA) is an essential task for
multi-hop and logical reasoning on knowledge graphs (KGs).
Currently, most approaches are limited to queries among binary relational facts and pay less attention to n-ary facts
(n≥2) containing more than two entities, which are more
prevalent in the real world. Moreover, previous CQA methods
can only make predictions for a few given types of queries
and cannot be flexibly extended to more complex logical
queries, which significantly limits their applications. To overcome these challenges, in this work, we propose a novel Nary Query Embedding (NQE) model for CQA over hyperrelational knowledge graphs (HKGs), which include massive
n-ary facts. The NQE utilizes a dual-heterogeneous Transformer encoder and fuzzy logic theory to satisfy all n-ary
FOL queries, including existential quantifiers (∃), conjunction (∧), disjunction (∨), and negation (¬). We also propose
a parallel processing algorithm that can train or predict arbitrary n-ary FOL queries in a single batch, regardless of the
kind of each query, with good flexibility and extensibility. In
addition, we generate a new CQA dataset WD50K-NFOL,
including diverse n-ary FOL queries over WD50K. Experimental results on WD50K-NFOL and other standard CQA
datasets show that NQE is the state-of-the-art CQA method
over HKGs with good generalization capability. Our code and
dataset are publicly available.

1

anchor node target node

anchor node

target node

n-1 anchor nodes

target node

(a) Triple-based 1p Query (b) Hyper-relational 1p Query (c) N-ary 1p Query

Figure 1: The difference between (a) triple-based 1p query,
(b) hyper-relational 1p query, and (c) n-ary 1p query, three
one-hop (1p) queries.

nary relational facts in the form of triples (subject, relation,
object), as in Figure 1(a).
In modern large-scale KGs, e.g., Wikidata (Vrandecic and
Krötzsch 2014) and Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008), in addition to binary relational facts, n-ary facts (n ≥ 2) are
also abundant, which have a novel hyper-relational representation of one primary triple plus n-2 attribute-value qualifiers ((s, r, o), {(ai : vi )}n−2
i=1 ) (Rosso, Yang, and CudréMauroux 2020). For instance, a real-world fact, “Micheal
Jackson received Grammy Award for Song of the Year for
work of We are the World.”, can be described as a 3-ary
fact ((Micheal Jackson, award received, Grammy Award for
Song of the Year), {( for work: We are the World )}). Based
on this representation, StarQE (Alivanistos et al. 2022) extends triple-based queries to hyper-relational queries by introducing qualifiers information into the relations of triples
as in Figure 1(b), which is the only approach currently attempting to solve the CQA problem for hyper-relational
knowledge graphs (HKGs).
Despite this, there are still three main challenges with
CQA over HKGs. (1) N-ary fact queries. Previous methods could only introduce qualifiers into binary relational fact
queries and query the tail entities, but not those entities in
the n-ary facts, such as those in the qualifiers, which limits the scope of the n-ary fact query. (2) Complex logical
queries over HKGs. Since HKGs have a unique structure,
previous approaches can only handle existential quantifiers
(∃) and conjunction (∧) by directed acyclic graphs (DAGs)
using message passing and fusion of nodes. Nevertheless,
it still cannot define complex logical queries such as disjunction (∨) and negation (¬) in first-order logic (FOL). (3)
Diversity of query types. There are many possibilities for
complex logical queries of n-ary facts due to uncertainties in

Introduction

Complex query answering (CQA) is essential for multihop and logical reasoning over Knowledge Graphs (KGs).
Traditional CQA methods obtain answers through graph
database query languages such as SPARQL, for which challenges remain, such as high time complexity and missing
edges. To tackle these challenges, some approaches based on
query embedding (QE) (Hamilton et al. 2018; Ren, Hu, and
Leskovec 2020; Ren and Leskovec 2020; Arakelyan et al.
2021; Zhang et al. 2021; Lin et al. 2022; Chen, Hu, and
Sun 2022) propose to embed queries and entities into the
same latent space according to computational graphs, obtaining query answers by computing similarity scores. However, most QE approaches are limited to queries among bi* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4543

