The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AdaBoost.C2: Boosting Classifiers Chains for Multi-Label Classification
Jiaxuan Li, Xiaoyan Zhu* , Jiayin Wang
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
lijiaxuan@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, zhu.xy@xjtu.edu.cn, wangjiayin@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

2020); however, their loss functions are decomposable to labels and neglect the label correlation (Dembczyński et al.
2012). To address this issue, novel frameworks available to
nondecomposable loss function are further proposed (Amit,
Dekel, and Singer 2007; Rapp et al. 2020). And some researchers (Dembczynski, Kotlowski, and Hüllermeier 2012;
Jung and Tewari 2018) employ the ranking relation between
labels to construct loss function. Nonetheless, the loss functions in aforementioned works only measure the comprehensive performance of a learner on all labels, so the multiple
single-label learners contained in each base classifier always
share same weight, which fails to consider the different abilities of a base classifier for different labels.
Classifiers Chain (CC) (Read et al. 2009) takes another
approach to improve BR. In CC, a chain of classifiers is
constructed for different labels, where the prediction information of preceding classifiers can be utilized by subsequent ones and thus the label correlation is considered. However, CC incorporates the error propagation problem (Senge,
Coz, and Hüllermeier 2014), that is, the errors produced in
the front may propagate down the chain and cause further
errors. Many methods propose to address this problem by
heuristically providing a good chain order (Kajdanowicz and
Kazienko 2013; Jun et al. 2019). As an optimal order is hard
to find, some ensemble methods (Read et al. 2011; Trajdos
and Kurzynski 2019), instead, provide an ensemble of CC
learners in different orders to avoid the uncertainty of a single order. Unfortunately, so far, the error propagation problem, together with the chain order issue, have not been well
solved (Read et al. 2021).
In this paper, we propose a novel method named AdaBoost.C2, which absorbs the advantages of AdaBoost and
CC, and further eliminates the defects of the two methods.
First, a multi-path AdaBoost framework is proposed to fully
consider the difference between multiple labels. For each label, a succession of single-label learners is organized into a
boosting classifier, and the loss of each single-label learner
is taken to determine its weight as well as the data distribution in next iteration. Since multiple boosting processes are
asynchronously moved and stopped, each boosting classifier is able to fit distinct label in the maximum extent, and
the time complexity of the multi-label model is reduced.
Second, in each iteration, CC method is taken to construct
base classifiers, which effectively considers the correlation

During the last decades, multi-label classification (MLC) has
attracted the attention of more and more researchers due
to its wide real-world applications. Many boosting methods
for MLC have been proposed and achieved great successes.
However, these methods only extend existing boosting frameworks to MLC and take loss functions in multi-label version
to guide the iteration. These loss functions generally give a
comprehensive evaluation on the label set entirety, and thus
the characteristics of different labels are ignored. In this paper, we propose a multi-path AdaBoost framework specific
to MLC, where each boosting path is established for distinct
label and the combination of them is able to provide a maximum optimization to Hamming Loss. In each iteration, classifiers chain is taken as the base classifier to strengthen the
connection between multiple AdaBoost paths and exploit the
label correlation. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction
Multi-label classification (MLC) deals with the problem
where each instance could belong to multiple labels simultaneously. In recent decades, quantities of algorithms have
been proposed to address this problem. The most straightforward MLC method is Binary Relevance (BR) (Boutell
et al. 2004), where the multi-label problem is partitioned
into multiple single-label problems and each of them can be
addressed by a binary classification algorithm. BR has the
advantages of simplicity and extensibility; however, it never
considers the correlation between labels and has a limited
performance.
Adaptive Boosting (AdaBoost) (Freund and Schapire
1997) is an effective approach to iteratively combine a committee of weak hypotheses to a strong one, and has been well
received in various fields (Ferreira and Figueiredo 2012).
AdaBoost.MH (Schapire and Singer 2000) first extends AdaBoost to MLC, where BR is taken to induce base classifiers and Hamming Loss is employed as the loss function.
Then, such scheme is widely used and improved by many
algorithms (Johnson and Cipolla 2005; Wang et al. 2019;
Zhang and Jung 2020; Zhang, Ramaswamy, and Agarwal
* indicates the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8580

