The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Good Helper Is around You: Attention-Driven Masked Image Modeling
Zhengqi Liu1 , Jie Gui* 1,2 , Hao Luo3
1

Southeast University, Nanjing, China
Purple Mountain Laboratories, China
3
Alibaba group, China
{lzq oscar, guijie}@seu.edu.cn, michuan.lh@alibaba-inc.com
2

Abstract
It has been witnessed that masked image modeling (MIM)
has shown a huge potential in self-supervised learning in
the past year. Benefiting from the universal backbone vision transformer, MIM learns self-supervised visual representations through masking a part of patches of the image
while attempting to recover the missing pixels. Most previous works mask patches of the image randomly, which underutilizes the semantic information that is beneficial to visual representation learning. On the other hand, due to the
large size of the backbone, most previous works have to
spend much time on pre-training. In this paper, we propose
Attention-driven Masking and Throwing Strategy (AMT),
which could solve both problems above. We first leverage the
self-attention mechanism to obtain the semantic information
of the image during the training process automatically without using any supervised methods. Masking strategy can be
guided by that information to mask areas selectively, which
is helpful for representation learning. Moreover, a redundant
patch throwing strategy is proposed, which makes learning
more efficient. As a plug-and-play module for masked image modeling, AMT improves the linear probing accuracy of
MAE by 2.9% ∼ 5.9% on CIFAR-10/100, STL-10, Tiny
ImageNet, and ImageNet-1K, and obtains an improved performance with respect to fine-tuning accuracy of MAE and
SimMIM. Moreover, this design also achieves superior performance on downstream detection and segmentation tasks.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: The motivation of AMT. (a) is the original image. (b)-(d) are visualizations for the self-attention of the
[CLS] token on the heads of the last layer following DINO,
which denotes the results of different masking and throwing
schemes based on MAE. (b) by random masking strategy, (c)
by attention-driven masking strategy, and (d) by attentiondriven masking and throwing strategy. (d) has the most focused attention on the object and the least attention on the
background.

to provide the self-supervised signal, which has achieved a
promising performance. With proper masking strategy, MIM
shows the powerful capability of learning general visual representations.
Masking strategy is so important for MIM that many
works attempt to explore different masking strategies to get
a better performance. Several ways are tried to mask a portion of the image (He et al. 2022; Wei et al. 2022), including
random masking, block-wise masking, and grid-wise masking. SimMIM applies diverse masked patch sizes and aims
at finding the most appropriate size for masking. Besides
the way of masking, most approaches mentioned above have
studied the impact of the masking ratio. Impressively, MIM
methods get excellent performance with high masking ratio
(e.g., 75% for MAE, 60% for SimMIM).
Though random masking could serve as a strong strategy
for MIM, several obvious problems are required to resolve.
As shown in Fig. 1b, random masking is prone to make attention dispersed on the whole image and not sufficiently
focused on the object. This makes the model waste attention
on meaningless background and learn weaker representations consequently. In addition, MIM usually needs numerous computing resources to pretrain, which is unacceptable
to consume such resources in certain conditions.
Aiming to address both issues above, we propose
Attention-driven Masking and Throwing Strategy

Introduction
Due to the superior ability to learn the representation of a
large number of unlabeled images, self-supervised learning
(SSL) has attracted much attention in the computer vision
community. Inspired by masked language modeling (MLM)
in the language domain (Brown et al. 2020; Devlin et al.
2019), masked image modeling (MIM) has demonstrated its
significant potential in several vision tasks (e.g., classification, object detection, and segmentation) (Lin et al. 2014;
Gupta, Dollar, and Girshick 2019). There are state-of-theart works using MIM that have emerged in the past year,
including BEiT (Bao, Dong, and Wei 2022), MAE (He et al.
2022), SimMIM (Xie et al. 2022), and MaskFeat (Wei et al.
2022). These methods recover masked patches of images
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1799

