The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

WIERT: Web Information Extraction via Render Tree
Zimeng Li1 * , Bo Shao2 , Linjun Shou2 , Ming Gong2 , Gen Li2 , Daxin Jiang2†
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Microsoft STCA
zimengli@buaa.edu.cn, {bo.shao,lisho,migon,geli,djiang}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Web information extraction (WIE) is a fundamental problem
in web document understanding, with a significant impact on
various applications. Visual information plays a crucial role
in WIE tasks as the nodes containing relevant information
are often visually distinct, such as being in a larger font size
or having a brighter color, from the other nodes. However,
rendering visual information of a web page can be computationally expensive. Previous works have mainly focused on
the Document Object Model (DOM) tree, which lacks visual information. To efficiently exploit visual information,
we propose leveraging the render tree, which combines the
DOM tree and Cascading Style Sheets Object Model (CSSOM) tree, and contains not only content and layout information but also rich visual information at a little additional
acquisition cost compared to the DOM tree. In this paper, we
present WIERT, a method that effectively utilizes the render
tree of a web page based on a pretrained language model. We
evaluate WIERT on the Klarna product page dataset, a manually labeled dataset of renderable e-commerce web pages,
demonstrating its effectiveness and robustness.

Figure 1: Comparison between rendering with CSS files and
without CSS files. The web page segment is selected from
the WebSRC dataset(Chen et al. 2021b).

Introduction
The rapid development of the internet has resulted in the
creation of an enormous amount of information in the form
of web pages. Extracting information from web pages is a
long-standing problem in web document understanding(Hao
et al. 2011; Lin et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022; Hwang et al.
2020) and plays an important role in various fields such as
knowledge base construction(Lockard, Shiralkar, and Dong
2019; Xie et al. 2021), retrieval systems(Zhang and Vines
2004), question answering(Chen et al. 2021a), recommender
systems(Leksin and Nikolenko 2013) and self-driving web
browsers(Iki and Aizawa 2022).
A typical web page consists of various web documents,
such as HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and resource files like images. Each of these documents has different formats and
serves distinct roles in determining the overall semantics of
the web page. CSS files contribute to the rendering process

and appearance of a web page, and their absence can lead to
difficulties in web page understanding.
Web page information extraction (WIE) involves extracting informative attributes from a given web page, which can
be predetermined or unspecified. Attribute extraction, which
involves extracting information such as university names,
addresses, and phone numbers from university introduction
pages, is a common form of WIE. Unlike information extraction from plain text documents, WIE involves understanding the complex layout and semantic information of
web pages. This paper focuses on addressing the problem
of attribute extraction from web pages.
Previous works have attempted to solve the WIE problem, with wrapper induction and its variants being classical methods for this task. However, these methods are difficult to generalize to unseen domains and are sensitive to
page layout changes, limiting their performance on complex
WIE tasks due to the small scale of annotated labeled data.
Recent deep learning-based methods have significantly improved WIE performance, leveraging pre-trained language
models from large scale unsupervised data to model DOM

* Work done when the first author was an intern at Microsoft

STCA.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13166

