The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Second-Order Attentive Context for Efficient Correspondence Pruning
Xinyi Ye, Weiyue Zhao, Hao Lu, Zhiguo Cao∗
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education School of
Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{xinyiye,zhaoweiyue,hlu,zgcao}@hust.edu.cn

65%

Abstract

95%

80%

Correspondence pruning aims to search consistent correspondences (inliers) from a set of putative correspondences. It is
challenging because of the disorganized spatial distribution of
numerous outliers, especially when putative correspondences
are largely dominated by outliers. It is more challenging to
ensure effectiveness while maintaining efficiency. In this paper, we propose an effective and efficient method for correspondence pruning. Inspired by the success of attentive context in correspondence problems, we first extend the attentive context to the first-order attentive context and then introduce the idea of attention in attention (ANA) to model
second-order attentive context for correspondence pruning.
Compared with first-order attention that focuses on featureconsistent context, second-order attention dedicates to attention weights itself and provides an additional source to
encode consistent context from the attention map. For efficiency, we derive two approximate formulations for the naive
implementation of second-order attention to optimize the cubic complexity to linear complexity, such that second-order
attention can be used with negligible computational overheads. We further implement our formulations in a secondorder context layer and then incorporate the layer in an ANA
block. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method is
effective and efficient in pruning outliers, especially in highoutlier-ratio cases. Compared with the state-of-the-art correspondence pruning approach LMCNet, our method runs 14
times faster while maintaining a competitive accuracy.

Outlier ratios

Input

OANet

Ours

Figure 1: Imbalanced putative correspondences. Given a set
of correspondences (1st column) with increased outlier ratios
(from top to bottom, 65%, 80%, and 95%), OANet loses efficacy gradually and fails to reject mass outliers(red), while
our method keeps(3rd column) a high accuracy.

(or consistency filtering) is by default used as a postprocessing procedure to identify consistent correspondences (inliers) (Bian et al. 2017; Ma et al. 2019; Yi et al. 2018).
Recently, deep models (Yi et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2020;
Zhang et al. 2019) are proposed as a plug-in to prune outliers
and report promising results. Unfortunately, as outlier ratios
increase, they lose efficacy (Liu et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2021)
and even identify outliers as inliers (Fig. 1, 2nd column). Liu
et al. (Liu et al. 2021) propose LMCNet that leverages the
motion coherence to distinguish correspondences with discriminative eigenvectors. However, when the singular value
decomposition deals with a large matrix, it can be computationally expensive: For correspondence pruning, the size of
a matrix used to model point-to-point relation is often larger
than 103 × 103 and thus leads to one-order-of-magnitude
extra inference time. This may be problematic when facing
practical applications, especially the real-time ones. Here we
explore how to tackle the correspondence pruning problem
both effectively and efficiently.
In correspondence pruning, a fundamental problem is how
to distinguish inliers from outliers. Previous works (Zhang
et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2020) believe inliers are consistent
in both local and global context so that local-global context is encoded to help to distinguish inliers from outliers.
However, Zhao et al. (Zhao et al. 2019) points out local context would be unstable due to randomly distributed outliers.
Global context suffers from the same affliction because inliers would be submerged in massive outliers. This results in

Introduction
Finding correspondences is a fundamental problem in
many computer vision tasks, such as structure-frommotion (Schönberger and Frahm 2016), inpainting (Zhou
et al. 2021), and simultaneous location and mapping (MurArtal, Montiel, and Tardós 2015). However, correspondences searched with existing detector-based descriptors (DeTone, Malisiewicz, and Rabinovich 2018; Mishchuk
et al. 2017; Lowe 2004; Rublee et al. 2011; Ono et al. 2018)
abound with outliers (Fig. 1,1st column). To prevent outliers
from disturbing downstream tasks, correspondence pruning
*Corresponding author
Code will be available at https://github.com/DIVE128/ANANet
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3250

