The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improving Robotic Tactile Localization Super-resolution via Spatiotemporal
Continuity Learning and Overlapping Air Chambers
Xuyang Li1 , Yipu Zhang1 , Xuemei Xie1, 2 * , Jiawei Li1 , Guangming Shi1, 3
1

Xidian University, Xi’an, 710071, China
Pazhou Lab, Huangpu, 510555, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518055, China
{xylee, ypzhang 0, jiawei li}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, xmxie@mail.xidian.edu.cn, gmshi@xidian.edu.cn
2

A

Abstract
Human hand has amazing super-resolution ability in sensing the force and position of contact and this ability can
be strengthened by practice. Inspired by this, we propose a
method for robotic tactile super-resolution enhancement by
learning spatiotemporal continuity of contact position and a
tactile sensor composed of overlapping air chambers. Each
overlapping air chamber is constructed of soft material and
seals the barometer inside to mimic adapting receptors of human skin. Each barometer obtains the global receptive field
of the contact surface with the pressure propagation in the
hyperelastic seal overlapping air chambers. Neural networks
with causal convolution are employed to resolve the pressure
data sampled by barometers and to predict the contact position. The temporal consistency of spatial position contributes
to the accuracy and stability of positioning. We obtain an average super-resolution (SR) factor of over 2500 with only four
physical sensing nodes on the rubber surface (0.1 mm in the
best case on 38×26 mm2 ), which outperforms the state-ofthe-art. The effect of time series length on the location prediction accuracy of causal convolution is quantitatively analyzed in this article. We show that robots can accomplish
challenging tasks such as haptic trajectory following, adaptive grasping, and human-robot interaction with the tactile
sensor. This research provides new insight into tactile superresolution sensing and could be beneficial to various applications in the robotics field.

①
RAII

RAI

②

SAI

SAII

③

Skin
structure

Tactile
sensor

y

Flexible surface
Overlapping air chambers
Barometer
Printed circuit board

y

B

Writing on surface

Networks with
casual convolution

Tactile trajectory

Figure 1: Illustration of the tactile sensor. A depicts the human skin structure and the soft tactile sensor with a flexible
surface. B shows working principle of the tactile sensor and
super-resolution localization results. The air pressure data in
the four air chambers generated by the surface deformation
are sent into the neural networks with causal convolution to
predict the contact location. We visualized the predictions.

Introduction
Human skin has both high-precision force sensing and contact location super-resolution (SR) capabilities (Abraira and
Ginty 2013). With tactile sensing, the human hand is able to
perform delicate manipulation tasks. Remarkable progress
has been made in tactile sensing while achieving fine tactile
feedback for robot hands remains a major challenge. One of
the main reasons is that artificial hands lack skin-comparable
tactile sensors, which are flexible and stable with low complexity and high resolution. Human skin is able to perceive
tactile stimulus at a spatial resolution higher than the average spacing between mechanoreceptors in the finger, for
it mainly consists of four types of mechanoreceptors (SA-I,
SA-II, RA-I, RA-II) (Abraira and Ginty 2013). The SA-I and

SA-II refer to slow-adapting receptors and RA-I and RA-II
refer to rapid-adapting receptors. The four types of adapting receptors responses are differentiated to various contact
sizes and frequencies.
Tactile sensing is important for manipulators and skins
of robots in unstructured environments. The tactile superresolution with high localization accuracy is obtained by
modeling the receptive fields of sensors. Based on a variety of transduction principles, many artificial tactile sensors
have been proposed, including using capacitance (Lepora
et al. 2015; Boutry et al. 2018; Lee et al. 2011), resistance
(Park et al. 2015; Zou et al. 2018; Mu et al. 2018; Ma et al.
2015; Sun et al. 2019; Kang, Lee, and Kim 2014; Zhang
et al. 2018; Kim et al. 2021), optics (Ward-Cherrier et al.
2018; Palli et al. 2014; Yuan, Dong, and Adelson 2017),

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6192

