The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Beyond ADMM: A Unified Client-Variance-Reduced Adaptive Federated
Learning Framework
Shuai Wang1 , Yanqing Xu2 , Zhiguo Wang3 , Tsung-Hui Chang2 * , Tony Q. S. Quek1 , Defeng Sun4
1

Information Systems Technology and Design, Singapore University of Technology and Design, 487372 Singapore
2
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518172, China
3
College of Mathematics, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610064, China
4
Department of Applied Mathematics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
shuaiwang@link.cuhk.edu.cn, xuyanqing@cuhk.edu.cn, wangzhiguo@scu.edu.cn, changtsunghui@cuhk.edu.cn,
tonyquek@sutd.edu.sg, defeng.sun@polyu.edu.hk
Abstract

As a novel distributed learning paradigm, federated learning
(FL) faces serious challenges in dealing with massive clients
with heterogeneous data distribution and computation and
communication resources. Various client-variance-reduction
schemes and client sampling strategies have been respectively
introduced to improve the robustness of FL. Among others,
primal-dual algorithms such as the alternating direction of
method multipliers (ADMM) have been found being resilient
to data distribution and outperform most of the primal-only
FL algorithms. However, the reason behind remains a mystery still. In this paper, we firstly reveal the fact that the federated ADMM is essentially a client-variance-reduced algorithm. While this explains the inherent robustness of federated
ADMM, the vanilla version of it lacks the ability to be adaptive
to the degree of client heterogeneity. Besides, the global model
at the server under client sampling is biased which slows down
the practical convergence. To go beyond ADMM, we propose a
novel primal-dual FL algorithm, termed FedVRA, that allows
one to adaptively control the variance-reduction level and biasness of the global model. In addition, FedVRA unifies several
representative FL algorithms in the sense that they are either
special instances of FedVRA or are close to it. Extensions of
FedVRA to semi/un-supervised learning are also presented.
Experiments based on (semi-)supervised image classification
tasks demonstrate superiority of FedVRA over the existing
schemes in learning scenarios with massive heterogeneous
clients and client sampling.

1

Introduction

As a local-privacy-aware distributed paradigm, federated
learning (FL) recently has drawn significant attention in the
distributed machine learning (ML) community (Kǒnecný,
McMahan, and Ramage 2015). In a typical FL setting, a central server coordinates N distributed clients to jointly solve
the following learning problem:
min f (x) ,
x

N
X

ωi fi (x),

where fi (x) is the (possibly non-convex) local cost function and ωi is the weight coefficient associated with client i.
Different from traditional distributed learning (Chang et al.
2020), FL faces numerous challenges such as limited communication resources, and data heterogeneity and system heterogeneity over massive clients (Yang et al. 2019; Kǒnecný
et al. 2016). Many FL algorithms including the popular FedAvg (Li et al. 2020b; McMahan et al. 2017) adopt the partial
client participation (PCP) strategy using client sampling and
local stochastic gradient descent (local SGD) (Stich 2019) to
overcome the network congestion problem and improve the
communication efficiency. However, FedAvg is inefficient
in dealing with data heterogeneity and system heterogeneity
where the clients have non-i.i.d. local datasets and have varied computational capabilities, respectively (Li et al. 2020a).
On one hand, the presence of non-i.i.d. data would cause the
client drift issue which degrades the algorithm convergence
performance and can even lead to model divergence (Li et al.
2020b; Karimireddy et al. 2020). On the other hand, heterogeneity in the computational speeds results in large variations
in the number of local updates performed by each client (i.e.,
heterogeneous local updates (HLU)), which leads to solution
bias and convergence slowdown (Wang et al. 2020). In addition, under PCP, many of the FL algorithms require unbiased
client sampling, otherwise the global model at the server is
biased and the algorithm cannot converge to a proper solution
(Cho, Wang, and Joshi 2022).
To address the data heterogeneity issue, client-variancereduction (CVR) schemes such as VRL-SGD (Liang et al.
2020) and SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al. 2020) have been
proposed. They identified the inter-client variance 1 caused by
non-i.i.d. data as the main reason for the client drift issue and
attempted to alleviate it. Specifically, in the CVR schemes,
control variates are introduced to perturb the local stochastic
gradient (SG) so as to approximate the global SG (which
assumes data samples are drawn from all client’s data in the
1
If the local data of all clients have an identical distribution, then
all local stochastic gradients (SGs) have the same mean and it is
equal to the global SG. However, when local data have different
distributions, there is a gap between the local SGs and global SG,
which is called inter-client variance. Such a notion is widely used in
the FL literature.

(1)

i=1

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10175

