The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MGTANet: Encoding Sequential LiDAR Points Using Long Short-Term
Motion-Guided Temporal Attention for 3D Object Detection
Junho Koh* , Junhyung Lee* , Youngwoo Lee, Jaekyum Kim, Jun Won Choi†
Hanyang University
{jhkoh, junhyunglee, youngwoolee, jkkim}@spa.hanyang.ac.kr, junwchoi@hanyang.ac.kr

𝒏

Abstract
Most scanning LiDAR sensors generate a sequence of point
clouds in real-time. While conventional 3D object detectors use a set of unordered LiDAR points acquired over a
fixed time interval, recent studies have revealed that substantial performance improvement can be achieved by exploiting
the spatio-temporal context present in a sequence of LiDAR
point sets. In this paper, we propose a novel 3D object detection architecture, which can encode LiDAR point cloud sequences acquired by multiple successive scans. The encoding
process of the point cloud sequence is performed on two different time scales. We first design a short-term motion-aware
voxel feature encoding that captures the short-term temporal
changes of point clouds driven by the motion of objects in
each voxel. We also propose long-term motion-guided bird’s
eye view (BEV) feature enhancement that adaptively aligns
and aggregates the BEV feature maps obtained by the shortterm voxel encoding by utilizing the dynamic motion context inferred from the sequence of the feature maps. The
experiments conducted on the public nuScenes benchmark
demonstrate that the proposed 3D object detector offers significant improvements in performance compared to the baseline methods and that it sets a state-of-the-art performance
for certain 3D object detection categories. Code is available
at https://github.com/HYjhkoh/MGTANet.git

𝑵

𝑵−𝟒

𝑵−𝟗

𝑵=𝟏

𝑵 = 𝟏𝟎

<Scan index>

(a)

Ego vehicle

Dynamic object

Static object

𝒕 − 𝟏 Frame

𝒕 Frame

(b)

Figure 1: Visualization of (a) LiDAR points acquired over
multiple scans (1 scan versus 10 scans) and (b) bird’s-eyeview (BEV) feature maps obtained from the adjacent frames.

Introduction

through continuous scanning. However, existing 3D object
detection methods do not utilize the temporal distribution of
sequential LiDAR points, leaving room for improving the
detection performance.
In the literature, there exist numerous relevant studies.
Similar problems have been considered in video object detection, which detects objects using multiple adjacent video
frames (Feichtenhofer, Pinz, and Zisserman 2017; Zhu et al.
2017; Wang et al. 2018a; Deng et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2019;
Guo et al. 2019; Kim et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2020c; Koh
et al. 2021). The primary interest of these studies focused on
enhancing visual features using a sequence of video frames.
Recently, this study has been extended to LiDAR-based 3D
object detection (Huang et al. 2020; Yin et al. 2020; Yuan
et al. 2021; Emmerichs, Pinggera, and Ommer 2021; Yang
et al. 2021). In this study, the 3D object detectors that consume the temporal sequence of point clouds are called 3D
object detection with point cloud sequence (3D-PCS). Several 3D-PCS methods have employed various sequence en-

3D object detectors detect, localize, and classify objects in a
3D coordinate system. Notably, 3D object detection is essential in various robotic and autonomous driving applications.
Accordingly, to date, various LiDAR-based 3D object detectors have been proposed (Yan, Mao, and Li 2018; Lang et al.
2019; Zhou and Tuzel 2018; Deng et al. 2020; Shi, Wang,
and Li 2019; Yang et al. 2020; Shi and Rajkumar 2020; Chen
et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019; Shi et al. 2020; He et al. 2020).
In these works, 3D object detection was performed based on
a single set of LiDAR point clouds acquired from a fixed
number of laser scans. The point data in each set are unordered, and only the geometrical distributions of points are
used to extract the features. In several robotics applications,
LiDAR sensors stream point cloud sequences in real time
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1179

