The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Experimental Observations of the Topology of
Convolutional Neural Network Activations*
Emilie Purvine1† , Davis Brown1 , Brett Jefferson1 , Cliff Joslyn1 , Brenda Praggastis1 ,
Archit Rathore2 , Madelyn Shapiro1 , Bei Wang2 , Youjia Zhou2
1
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Scientific Computing and Imaging (SCI) Institute and School of Computing, University of Utah
{emilie.purvine, davis.brown, brett.jefferson, cliff.joslyn, brenda.praggastis, madelyn.shapiro}@pnnl.gov,
architrathore1@gmail.com, {beiwang, zhou325}@sci.utah.edu
2

Abstract

et al. 2017), or reconstruct idealized input images for each
output class (Mahendran and Vedaldi 2015; Wei et al. 2015).
There are even tools that try to impose human concepts on
the DL model (Kim et al. 2018). The complexity and dependencies present within these trained models demand methods in explainable DL that can summarize complex data
without losing critical structures, producing features of internal representations that are both stable and persistent with
respect to changing inputs and noise, and significant with respect to representing meaningful features of the input data.
Topological data analysis (TDA) is an emerging field
that bridges algebraic topology and computational data science. One of the hallmarks of TDA is its ability to provide
compact, noise-robust representations of complex structures
within data. These are exactly the kind of representations
that are needed in the DL space where different training runs
or noisy input data may result in slightly different hidden
activations but in no change in the ultimate classification. In
other well-documented cases, slight changes in input, perhaps unseen to the human eye, result in misclassifications.
We believe TDA can help us understand these cases as well
by recognizing changes in the compact representations of
the complex structures of hidden activation layers.
In this paper, we build upon others’ recent work in using TDA to understand various aspects of machine learning
(ML) and DL models. We provide experimental results that
show how a topological viewpoint of hidden-layer activations can summarize and compare the complex structures
within them and how the conclusions align with our human
understanding of the image classification task. We begin by
providing some preliminaries on CNNs and TDA and summarize related work. We then show our experiments, which
use two tools from TDA: persistent homology and mapper.
Finally, we conclude with a discussion and our directions for
future work.

Topological data analysis (TDA) is a branch of computational mathematics, bridging algebraic topology and data science, that provides compact, noise-robust representations of
complex structures. Deep neural networks (DNNs) learn millions of parameters associated with a series of transformations defined by the model architecture, resulting in highdimensional, difficult-to-interpret internal representations of
input data. As DNNs become more ubiquitous across multiple sectors of our society, there is increasing recognition
that mathematical methods are needed to aid analysts, researchers, and practitioners in understanding and interpreting
how these models’ internal representations relate to the final
classification. In this paper, we apply cutting edge techniques
from TDA with the goal of gaining insight into the interpretability of convolutional neural networks used for image
classification. We use two common TDA approaches to explore several methods for modeling hidden-layer activations
as high-dimensional point clouds, and provide experimental
evidence that these point clouds capture valuable structural
information about the model’s process. First, we demonstrate
that a distance metric based on persistent homology can be
used to quantify meaningful differences between layers, and
we discuss these distances in the broader context of existing
representational similarity metrics for neural network interpretability. Second, we show that a mapper graph can provide semantic insight into how these models organize hierarchical class knowledge at each layer. These observations
demonstrate that TDA is a useful tool to help deep learning
practitioners unlock the hidden structures of their models.

Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are a class of deep
learning (DL) models that have been widely used for image
classification tasks with great success, but the reasoning behind their decisions is often difficult to determine. Recent
work has established an active field of explainable DL to
tackle this problem. There are tools that highlight areas of
the images most influential to the classification (Selvaraju

Preliminaries
Convolutional Neural Networks

* Version including technical appendix can be found on ArXiv.

CNNs are a type of deep neural network that respects the
spatial information existing in the input data. They use
shared weights to provide translation invariant measures of

†

Primary; all other authors listed in alphabetical order
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9470

