The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Coordinate Descent Methods for DC Minimization:
Optimality Conditions and Global Convergence
Ganzhao Yuan
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
yuangzh@pcl.ac.cn

Pn

i=1 hi (xi ). Typical examples of h(x) include the bound
constrained function and the `1 norm function. (iii) g(·) is
convex and its associated proximal operator:

Abstract
Difference-of-Convex (DC) minimization, referring to the
problem of minimizing the difference of two convex functions, has been found rich applications in statistical learning
and studied extensively for decades. However, existing methods are primarily based on multi-stage convex relaxation, only
leading to weak optimality of critical points. This paper proposes a coordinate descent method for minimizing a class of
DC functions based on sequential nonconvex approximation.
Our approach iteratively solves a nonconvex one-dimensional
subproblem globally, and it is guaranteed to converge to a
coordinate-wise stationary point. We prove that this new optimality condition is always stronger than the standard critical
point condition and directional point condition under a mild
locally bounded nonconvexity assumption. For comparisons,
we also include a naive variant of coordinate descent methods based on sequential convex approximation in our study.
When the objective function satisfies a globally bounded nonconvexity assumption and Luo-Tseng error bound assumption,
coordinate descent methods achieve Q-linear convergence rate.
Also, for many applications of interest, we show that the nonconvex one-dimensional subproblem can be computed exactly
and efficiently using a breakpoint searching method. Finally,
we have conducted extensive experiments on several statistical
learning tasks to show the superiority of our approach.

1

min p(η) ,
η∈R

Introduction

This paper mainly focuses on the following DC minimization
problem (‘,’ means define):
x̄ ∈ arg minn F (x) , f (x) + h(x) − g(x).
x∈R

(1)

Throughout this paper, we make the following assumptions
on Problem (1). (i) f (·) is convex and continuously differentiable, and its gradient is coordinate-wise Lipschitz continuous with constant ci ≥ 0 that (Nesterov 2012; Beck and
Tetruashvili 2013):
ci
f (x + ηei ) ≤ f (x) + h∇f (x), ηei ) + kηei k22
(2)
2
∀x, η, i = 1, ..., n. Here c ∈ Rn , and ei ∈ Rn is an indicator
vector with one on the i-th entry and zero everywhere else.
(ii) h(·) is convex and coordinate-wise separable with h(x) =
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11034

a 2
η + bη + hi (x + ηei ) − g(x + ηei ),
2

(3)

can be computed exactly and efficiently for given a ∈ R+ ,
b ∈ R and i ∈ {1, ..., n}. We remark that g(·) is neither necessarily differentiable nor coordinate-wise separable, and typical examples of g(x) are the `p norm function g(x) = kAxkp with p = {1, 2, ∞}, the RELU function g(x)P= k max(0, Ax)k1 , and the top-s norm function
s
g(x) = i=1 |x[i] |. Here A ∈ Rm×n is an arbitrary given
matrix and x[i] denotes the ith largest component of x in
magnitude. (iv) F (x) only takes finite values.
DC programming. DC Programming/minimization is an
extension of convex maximization over a convex set (Tao
and An 1997; Thi and Dinh 2018). It is closely related to
the concave-convex procedure and alternating minimization
in the literature. The class of DC functions is very broad,
and it includes many important classes of nonconvex functions, such as twice continuously differentiable function on
compact convex set and multivariate polynomial functions
(Ahmadi and Hall 2018). DC programs have been mainly
considered in global optimization and some algorithms have
been proposed to find global solutions to such problem (Horst
and Thoai 1999; Horst and Tuy 2013). Recent developments
on DC programming primarily focus on designing local solution methods for some specific DC programming problems.
For example, proximal bundle DC methods (Joki et al. 2017),
double bundle DC methods (Joki et al. 2018), inertial proximal methods (Maingé and Moudafi 2008), and enhanced
proximal methods (Lu and Zhou 2019) have been proposed.
DC programming has been applied to solve a variety of statistical learning tasks, such as sparse PCA (Sriperumbudur, Torres, and Lanckriet 2007; Beck and Teboulle 2021), variable
selection (Gotoh, Takeda, and Tono 2018; Gong et al. 2013),
single source localization (Beck and Hallak 2020), positiveunlabeled learning (Kiryo et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2019), and
deep Boltzmann machines (Nitanda and Suzuki 2017).
Coordinate descent methods. Coordinate Descent (CD)
is a popular method for solving large-scale optimization problems. Advantages of this method are that compared with the
full gradient descent method, it enjoys faster convergence

