The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Positive Distribution Pollution: Rethinking Positive Unlabeled Learning from a
Unified Perspective
Qianqiao Liang1 , Mengying Zhu1 * , Yan Wang2 , Xiuyuan Wang1 , Wanjia Zhao1 , Mengyuan Yang1 ,
Hua Wei3 , Bing Han3 , Xiaolin Zheng1
1

College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, China
School of Computing, Macquarie University, Australia
3
MYbank, Ant Group, China
{liangqq, mengyingzhu, xiuyuanwang, wanjiaZhao, yangmy412, xlzheng}@zju.edu.cn
yan.wang@mq.edu.au, {shuhu.wh, hanbing.hanbing}@antgroup.com
2

Abstract

Problem Definition. (P1) Data imbalance refers to the
phenomenon that the available labeled data is far less than
the unlabeled data. Note that the very few labels of positive data often originate from an extremely imbalanced class
ratio, so class imbalance should also be considered in this
problem. (P2) Selection bias refers to the phenomenon that
the selected labeled data is biased and can not represent all
positive data. (P3) Prior agnostic refers to the phenomenon
that the class prior (Jain et al. 2020) in hindsight is unknown.
Existing PU learning studies address these problems from
different perspectives. Firstly, from the perspective of investigating data features, existing methods extract additional
positive data (Hu et al. 2021) or its features (Na et al. 2020)
used for mitigating the selection bias or data imbalance
problems. In addition, from the perspective of samples selection mechanisms, existing methods address the data imbalance problem by oversampling the positive data (Su, Chen,
and Xu 2021; Hu et al. 2021), which, however, becomes unnecessary data repetitions when the data itself is selected
with bias. Both the above two perspectives rely on the input of class prior, which is agnostic in real practice. To address this problem, some methods look into the perspective of data’s intrinsic properties for class prior estimation
(Bekker and Davis 2018; Jain et al. 2020). However, their
estimations tend to be collapsed unless the selection bias and
data imbalance problems are well addressed. Overall, each
of these perspectives addresses partial problems and lacks a
unified understanding of all the three problems.
In this paper, we rethink the above problems and raise a
question: Whether there exists a unified perspective for addressing these challenging problems simultaneously?
Motivating Example. To answer this question, we take a
real loan scenario in a bank as an example, aiming to gain
deeper insights into the generality of these challenging problems. Figures 1(a) and (b) depict the characteristics and procedure of the loan scenario. Obviously, this is a typical PU
learning scenario. In the loan procedures, the bank experts
first detect high-risk loan requests before they become defaulted (Positive Labeled, PL) according to their expertise,
and only offer loans to the remaining requests (Unlabeled,
U). Subsequently, some of the loans will be detected after
they have defaulted (Positive Unlabeled, PU), and some will
maintain benign (Negative, N). In Figure 1(c), we depict the

Positive Unlabeled (PU) learning, which has a wide range of
applications, is becoming increasingly prevalent. However, it
suffers from problems such as data imbalance, selection bias,
and prior agnostic in real scenarios. Existing studies focus
on addressing part of these problems, which fail to provide a
unified perspective to understand these problems. In this paper, we first rethink these problems by analyzing a typical PU
scenario and come up with an insightful point of view that
all these problems are inherently connected to one problem,
i.e., positive distribution pollution, which refers to the inaccuracy in estimating positive data distribution under very little
labeled data. Then, inspired by this insight, we devise a variational model named CoVPU, which addresses all three problems in a unified perspective by targeting the positive distribution pollution problem. CoVPU not only accurately separates
the positive data from the unlabeled data based on discrete
normalizing flows, but also effectively approximates the positive distribution based on our derived unbiased rebalanced
risk estimator and supervises the approximation based on a
novel prior-free variational loss. Rigorous theoretical analysis proves the convergence of CoVPU to an optimal Bayesian
classifier. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority
of CoVPU over the state-of-the-art PU learning methods under these problems.

Introduction
Positive Unlabeled (PU) learning has attracted great attention in recent years, which is widely used in scenarios
such as information retrieval (Dupret and Piwowarski 2008),
anomaly detection (Pang, Shen, and van den Hengel 2019)
and disease diagnosis (Chen et al. 2020b). PU learning refers
to a binary classification task that only part of the samples
from the positive class is labeled while the remaining harddistinguished positive samples and the samples from the
negative class are unlabeled. In real practice, some challenging problems, e.g., data imbalance, selection bias, and prior
agnostic, remain unsolved, which reduces the performance
of PU learning. Therefore, it is necessary to address these
challenging problems for effective PU learning in practice.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8737

