The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

VIDM: Video Implicit Diffusion Models
Kangfu Mei, Vishal Patel
Johns Hopkins University
https://kfmei.page/vidm/

Abstract

into the content and motion vectors at generation and discriminated coherently by the discriminators. While these
GAN-based methods can model plausible moving objects
and scenes, a better video generation model should be able
to model the distribution of internal spatial and temporal
changes with regards to the video content.
Different from GANs, diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein
et al. 2015; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) that model the
probability directly have emerged as the new state-of-theart generative models, and they have been shown to outperform GANs in various generation tasks (Dhariwal and
Nichol 2021). By learning to reverse the diffusion process
that adds noise to data in finite successive steps, diffusion models can gradually map a Gaussian distribution to
the probability distribution corresponding to a real complex
high-dimensional dataset. In its denoising process, conditional features like class labels of data can be applied to
the network for specializing its sampling process. By appropriately using conditional features, diffusion models have
shown impressive performance in various applications, e.g.,
image debluring (Whang et al. 2022) that conditions on the
image residual, high-resolution image generation (Ho et al.
2022a) that conditions on the low-resolution images, and image editing (Choi et al. 2021) that conditions on the style.
With more expressive conditional features like CLIP embeddings, diffusion models like DALLE-2 (Ramesh et al. 2022)
are capable of generating highly creative images with impressive photorealism. But the condition mechanism in diffusion models is non-trivial and requires careful design to
improve the quality of the generated images.
We assume that the subspace of a real video can be represented as a subspace of the video content, and the video motion is then generated by traversing point on the video content subspace. Accurately modeling the content subspace increases the realism of frames, while accurately modeling the
subspace of the trajectory regarding the video content can
produce continuous and smooth video. Thus a better video
generation model should own delicate modulation capability
for simulating both the trajectory and realistic content.
Following this idea, we propose to model the video content and motion with two diffusion models separately. The
first video frame is generated by the content generator. Subsequently, the motion generator generates the next video
frame based on the latent map of the first frame and the

Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful generative
method for synthesizing high-quality and diverse set of images. In this paper, we propose a video generation method
based on diffusion models, where the effects of motion are
modeled in an implicit condition manner, i.e. one can sample plausible video motions according to the latent feature of
frames. We improve the quality of the generated videos by
proposing multiple strategies such as sampling space truncation, robustness penalty, and positional group normalization. Various experiments are conducted on datasets consisting of videos with different resolutions and different number of frames. Results show that the proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art generative adversarial networkbased methods by a significant margin in terms of FVD scores
as well as perceptible visual quality.

Introduction
Image generation has gained significant traction since the
introduction of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al. 2014). In these methods, the idea is to
generate new images that conform to the training data distribution. Following the success of image synthesis, video generation has also gained significant attention. Various video
generation methods have been proposed in the literature
including GAN-based methods (Vondrick, Pirsiavash, and
Torralba 2016; Saito, Matsumoto, and Saito 2017; Tulyakov
et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2022), Autoregressive models (Weissenborn, Täckström, and Uszkoreit 2020), and Time-series
models (Tian et al. 2021a; Skorokhodov, Tulyakov, and Elhoseiny 2022). An advantage of some of these generative
models is that they can learn to synthesize high-quality
videos without requiring any labels. These generative models have been shown to be beneficial in various high-level
recognition tasks (Srivastava, Mansimov, and Salakhudinov
2015; Vondrick, Pirsiavash, and Torralba 2016).
A GAN-based video generation model was proposed by
Vondrick, Pirsiavash, and Torralba (2016), which makes use
of a spatio-temporal convolutional architecture and untangles the scene’s foreground from the background. Another
work proposed by Tulyakov et al. (2018) is a continuoustime video generator. In this method, a video is decomposed
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9117

