The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On the Cost of Demographic Parity in Influence Maximization
Ruben Becker1 , Gianlorenzo D’Angelo2 , Sajjad Ghobadi2
1

Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Italy
Gran Sasso Science Institute, L’Aquila, Italy
rubensimon.becker@unive.it, gianlorenzo.dangelo@gssi.it, sajjad.ghobadi@gssi.it
2

Abstract

efficiently through a network. More precisely, given a social
network and a probabilistic model on how information propagates through it, the main addressed question has been the
following: Which seed set of size at most k (an input parameter) to target such that the expected number of nodes that
obtain the information is maximized, when the information
spreads from the chosen seed set? This problem, called influence maximization, has received a lot of attention by computer science researchers in diverse communities, including
algorithms (e.g. (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2015; Borgs
et al. 2014; Sadeh, Cohen, and Kaplan 2020)), artificial intelligence (e.g. (Wilder et al. 2018a; Yadav et al. 2018; Becker
et al. 2020)), and data and graph mining (e.g. (Cohen et al.
2014; Tang, Xiao, and Shi 2014; Tang, Shi, and Xiao 2015;
Chen and Teng 2017; Wu et al. 2019)). As a result the problem is well understood from many perspectives, among them
theoretical complexity, approximation algorithms, adaptivity, and practically efficient implementations.
As access to information via social networks may have a
big impact on our life, see, e.g. (Banerjee et al. 2013), researchers have taken also fairness issues with respect to information spread into account, see the related work below
for a non-exhaustive list. In these works, the social network
is composed of individuals or groups of individuals (called
communities) and the goal is to provide similar information
access to all of them. In other words, the focus is not restricted to the efficiency of the information spread, but rather
on assuring that each of the communities gets its fair share of
information (or coverage). Here, an essential question arises,
namely: What do we mean by fair? There is a large variety of
fairness notions (Barocas, Hardt, and Narayanan 2019) and
in fact different notions have been investigated also in this
scope, with the most common one being the maximin criterion (Tsang et al. 2019; Fish et al. 2019; Becker et al. 2022).
Here, the goal is to develop algorithms that maximize the
minimum coverage of any community or individual (the special case of singleton communities). In some works, where
the focus is on communities, this notion is also referred to
as group fairness or demographic parity. What all three previously mentioned works, have in common however is that
they consider fairness as a measure to be optimized, namely
via maximizing the minimum coverage.
This raises, however, a conceptual question. When maximizing the minimum coverage, we may still end up in a

Modeling and shaping how information spreads through a
network is a major research topic in network analysis. While
initially the focus has been mostly on efficiency, recently fairness criteria have been taken into account in this setting. Most
work has focused on the maximin criterion however, and thus
still different groups can receive very different shares of information. In this work we propose to consider fairness as a
notion to be guaranteed by an algorithm rather than as a criterion to be maximized. To this end, we propose three optimization problems that aim at maximizing the overall spread
while enforcing strict levels of demographic parity fairness
via constraints (either ex-post or ex-ante). The level of fairness hence becomes a user choice rather than a property to
be observed upon output. We study this setting from various
perspectives. First, we prove that the cost of introducing demographic parity can be high in terms of both overall spread
and computational complexity, i.e., the price of fairness may
be unbounded for all three problems and optimal solutions are
hard to compute, in some case even approximately or when
fairness constraints may be violated. For one of our problems,
we still design an algorithm with both constant approximation
factor and fairness violation. We also give two heuristics that
allow the user to choose the tolerated fairness violation. By
means of an extensive experimental study, we show that our
algorithms perform well in practice, that is, they achieve the
best demographic parity fairness values. For certain instances
we additionally even obtain an overall spread comparable to
the most efficient algorithms that come without any fairness
guarantee, indicating that the empirical price of fairness may
actually be small when using our algorithms.

Introduction
The internet and particularly online social networks play a
central role in how people acquire information nowadays,
be it information about political, social, financial, or cultural matters. Several research fields, including mathematics, physics, and computer science, have found interest in
analyzing how information spreads through networks. Besides abstractions to (probabilistically) model information
spread, the main contributions of computer science in this
context have been algorithmic ones. Among them, probably
most importantly, the question on how to spread information
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14110

