The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

The Implicit Regularization of Momentum Gradient Descent in Overparametrized
Models
∗

Li Wang1 , Zhiguo Fu1, Yingcong Zhou1 , Zili Yan2
1

School of Computer Science and Information Technology & KLAS, Northeast Normal University, China
2
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Beihua University, China
wangl024@nenu.edu.cn, zycong0821@163.com, mathyanzili@163.com, fuzg432@nenu.edu.cn

Abstract

Lacoste-Julien 2019; Li et al. 2021). For example, (Arora,
Cohen, and Hazan 2018) claims increasing depth can speed
up optimization. Based on this work,(Arora et al. 2019)
find that adding depth to a matrix factorization enhances an
implicit tendency towards low-rank solutions. Additionally, (Gissin, Shalev-Shwartz, and Daniely 2019) shows that
a depth-2 model requires exponentially small initialization
for incremental learning to occur, while deeper models only
require the initialization to be polynomially small. Our work
deals with a simple setting, allowing us to explore that how
depth effect the implicit regularization of optimization.
In this paper, we aim to characterize the implicit regularization of MGD (Polyak 1964), which is one of the most
popular optimization algorithms in practice because of its ability to accelerate learning, especially for the cases of high
curvature, small but consistent gradients, or noisy gradients.
Many other variants and improvements of MGD have been
developed in (Cyrus et al. 2018; Lin, Li, and Fang 2020;
Even et al. 2021), and their convergence behaviors have been
analyzed. It has been empirically observed that MGD and
its variants (e.g., Nesterov) perform well in deep learning.
However, there is a lack of theoretical discussions to uncover how MGD affects generalization performance, which is
our consideration in the present paper.
An important way to explore the implicit regularization
of optimization is to compare the optimization paths with the
explicit regularization paths. Recently, (Suggala, Prasad, and
Ravikumar 2018; Ali, Kolter, and Tibshirani 2019) showed
how the optimization path of GD is (point-wise) closely connected to an explicit `2 regularization. In a similar idea, (Ali, Dobriban, and Tibshirani 2020) studied the implicit regularization of stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Furthermore, (Zou et al. 2021) showed that the generalization performance of SGD is always no worse than that of ridge
regression in a wide range of overparameterized problems. More results can be found in (Steinerberger 2021; Smith
et al. 2021; Sheng and Ali 2022).
In the present paper, for the depth N = 1, we firstly study the implicit regularization of MGD by comparing its
path to the path of ridge for the least squares problems. Note
that MGD is a second-order iteration essentially, so the corresponding continuous-time form MGF is a second-order differential equation. We find the analytical solution of MGF
by the singular value decomposition of the data matrix. But

The study of the implicit regularization induced by gradientbased optimization in deep learning is a long-standing pursuit. In the present paper, we characterize the implicit regularization of momentum gradient descent (MGD) in the
continuous-time view, so-called momentum gradient flow
(MGF). We show that the components of weight vector are
learned for a deep linear neural networks at different evolution rates, and this evolution gap increases with the depth.
Firstly, we show that if the depth equals one, the evolution
gap between the weight vector components is linear, which is
consistent with the performance of ridge. In particular, we establish a tight coupling between MGF and ridge for the least
squares regression. In detail, we show that when the regularization parameter of ridge is inversely proportional to the
square of the time parameter of MGF, the risk of MGF is no
more than 1.54 times that of ridge, and their relative Bayesian
risks are almost indistinguishable. Secondly, if the model becomes deeper, i.e. the depth is greater than or equal to 2,
the evolution gap becomes more significant, which implies
an implicit bias towards sparse solutions. The numerical experiments strongly support our theoretical results.

Introduction
The central question of deep learning, how neural networks generalize, still eludes full theoretical understanding. Recently, it has been shown that optimization may be a key
to understanding the generalization mystery of deep learning (Zhang et al. 2016). This finding, along with a series
of studies (Gunasekar et al. 2018; Soudry et al. 2018; Vardi and Shamir 2021; Zhang et al. 2021), suggest that while
the hypothesis space itself is extremely complex, the search
strategy of optimization favors certain structured solution as
if some explicit regularization term appeared in its objective. This preference of optimization is called the implicit
regularization of optimization and how to characterize it has
developed as an open problem in deep learning theories.
Recent results state that increasing the depth of the neural
networks will modify the learning rule of optimization and
enhances the implicit regularization of optimization (Vaskevicius, Kanade, and Rebeschini 2019; Gidel, Bach, and
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10149

