The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Zero-Shot Face-Based Voice Conversion: Bottleneck-Free Speech Disentanglement
in the Real-World Scenario
Shao-En Weng, Hong-Han Shuai, Wen-Huang Cheng
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
anita4213.ee09@nycu.edu.tw, hhshuai@nycu.edu.tw, whcheng@nycu.edu.tw

Abstract

bottleneck should be chosen carefully, as should the VQbased method. With cycle-consistent training, style diversity
is bounded by the training domain. However, most research
studies are based on laboratory data, which is quite different
from speech in the real-world scenario. There is still a gap
between research and real-world application.
In addition, we argue that there should be other ways, in
addition to voice, to control the style of speech, such as the
face. Therefore, in this work, we focus on the synthesis of
speech from a given facial image. That is, a face-based voice
conversion (Lu et al. 2021). Face-based VC can be applied
in numerous applications. For example, for movie or animation dubbing, the face of the character can help to generate a
more suitable voice matching audiences’ minds; for personal
audio assistance, one can change the voice by giving a facial
image without collecting the vocal records. Meanwhile, not
only is it an interesting topic, but it is also an important issue
for how to deal with the cross-modal problem.
To perform face-based voice conversion, there are two
challenges: face-speech transformation and learning how to
use the in-the-wild data. First of all, since the face-speech
transformation is cross-domain learning, there is some redundant facial information for voice, i.e., winking or face
angle, etc. This information perturbs the mapping process
from the facial to the acoustic domain, so the model tends to
synthesize a general voice for each utterance to give the optimal result. Second, existing datasets that contain face and
speech are in-the-wild datasets, that is, not recorded in a laboratory environment and not with expert record equipment.
These data include some background noise or echo and thus
are of lower quality than the clean dataset. Moreover, unlike
the clean data recorded in the specific corpus, in-the-wild
data do not contain duplicate sentences and have various accents. These also make it difficult to train voice conversion
with in-the-wild data or for real-world applications.
To solve these problems, FaceVC (Lu et al. 2021) proposed a three-stage model. Models are based on the backbone of AutoVC (Qian et al. 2019), which is trained by providing a suitable size of content embedding for the decoder
to limit the received information; therefore, it can disentangle speech. This technique is called bottleneck adjustment.
With this skill, a good disentanglement of the speech can
convert the voice. For high-quality data synthesis, FaceVC
trains its model on clean and in-the-wild datasets, respec-

Often a face has a voice. Appearance sometimes has a strong
relationship with one’s voice. In this work, we study how
a face can be converted to a voice, which is a face-based
voice conversion. Since there is no clean dataset that contains face and speech, voice conversion faces difficult learning and low-quality problems caused by background noise or
echo. Too much redundant information for face-to-voice also
causes synthesis of a general style of speech. Furthermore,
previous work tried to disentangle speech with bottleneck
adjustment. However, it is hard to decide on the size of the
bottleneck. Therefore, we propose a bottleneck-free strategy
for speech disentanglement. To avoid synthesizing the general style of speech, we utilize framewise facial embedding. It
applied adversarial learning with a multi-scale discriminator
for the model to achieve better quality. In addition, the selfattention module is added to focus on content-related features
for in-the-wild data. Quantitative experiments show that our
method outperforms previous work.

Introduction
Voice conversion (VC) (Qian et al. 2019; Kaneko and
Kameoka 2018; Chen et al. 2021; Lin et al. 2021) changes
the voice characteristics of a source speaker to a target
speaker while conserving linguistic information. To do the
conversion, how to disentangle the acoustic and linguistic information is a thorny problem. Once having a good disentangle strategy, the model can generate a high quality of speech
from the given utterance and style. A successful VC can
be applied to various fields, such as personal electrical support as an audio assistant (Lu et al. 2021), entertainment usage for dubbing (Mukhneri, Wijayanto, and Hadiyoso 2020),
and industrial applications for voice changers, etc.
With the advancement of deep learning, a recent line of
study focuses on solving the VC task using data-driven approaches (Sisman et al. 2021). Some works use the bottleneck strategy (Qian et al. 2019; Lu et al. 2021), vector quantization (VQ) (Wu, Chen, and Lee 2020), cycleconsistent generative adversarial network (Kaneko and
Kameoka 2018), instance normalization (Chen et al. 2021),
etc. They are eager to find a good solution for speech disentanglement. With the bottleneck method, the size of the
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13718

