The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

LWSIS: LiDAR-Guided Weakly Supervised Instance Segmentation for
Autonomous Driving
Xiang Li1 * , Junbo Yin1 * , Botian Shi2 , Yikang Li2 , Ruigang Yang3 , Jianbing Shen4†
1

School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Inceptio
4
SKL-IOTSC, CIS, University of Macau
{lixianggoing, yinjunbocn}@gmail.com

Abstract
Image instance segmentation is a fundamental research topic
in autonomous driving, which is crucial for scene understanding and road safety. Advanced learning-based approaches often rely on the costly 2D mask annotations for training. In
this paper, we present a more artful framework, LiDARguided Weakly Supervised Instance Segmentation (LWSIS),
which leverages the off-the-shelf 3D data, i.e., Point Cloud,
together with the 3D boxes, as natural weak supervisions for
training the 2D image instance segmentation models. Our
LWSIS not only exploits the complementary information in
multimodal data during training, but also significantly reduces the annotation cost of the dense 2D masks. In detail, LWSIS consists of two crucial modules, Point Label Assignment (PLA) and Graph-based Consistency Regularization (GCR). The former module aims to automatically assign the 3D point cloud as 2D point-wise labels, while the
latter further refines the predictions by enforcing geometry
and appearance consistency of the multimodal data. Moreover, we conduct a secondary instance segmentation annotation on the nuScenes, named nuInsSeg, to encourage further
research on multimodal perception tasks. Extensive experiments on the nuInsSeg, as well as the large-scale Waymo,
show that LWSIS can substantially improve existing weakly
supervised segmentation models by only involving 3D data
during training. Additionally, LWSIS can also be incorporated
into 3D object detectors like PointPainting to boost the 3D detection performance for free. The code and dataset are available at https://github.com/Serenos/LWSIS.

Figure 1: The basic idea of our LWSIS on nuInsSeg dataset.
The first row shows the raw point clouds, the second row
illustrates the assigned point label via the PLA module,
and the third row demonstrates the segmentation results.
Our LWSIS is trained without any mask annotations.
mask label. However, obtaining such fine-grained annotations can be very expensive and time-consuming, especially
for self-driving vehicles, which typically require millions
of training samples. In contrast, weakly supervised instance
segmentation (Tian et al. 2021; Lan et al. 2021; Cheng,
Parkhi, and Kirillov 2022; Lee et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021),
which tends to leverage cheaper and readily available annotations, has attracted increasing attention.
Several efforts have been made on the weakly supervised
instance segmentation by utilizing box-level (Song et al.
2019; Tian et al. 2021) and point-level (Bearman et al. 2016;
Cheng, Parkhi, and Kirillov 2022) annotations. However, all
these works focus on the single-modal weak supervision. In
fact, advanced self-driving vehicles are often equipped with
both LiDAR and camera sensors to accurately capture the
3D and 2D scenes. Therefore, a smart way is to inherit the
fruit of off-the-shelf LiDAR data and box annotations that
are available on most autonomous driving datasets (Geiger,
Lenz, and Urtasun 2012; Caesar et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2020),
as well as to explore the multimodal weak supervision. This
can largely save the annotation cost, eliminating the requirement of additional 2D mask-level annotations. Besides, by
mining the geometrical information in 3D point cloud, the
image segmentation results can be further improved. Our ba-

Introduction
Instance Segmentation (He et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2019;
Tian, Shen, and Chen 2020; Kirillov et al. 2020; Chen et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2021) aim to recognize distinct instances
of objects in an image by predicting pixel-level category and
instance identity, which has benefited a wide range of applications such as robotics and autonomous driving. Popular
image segmentation models (He et al. 2017; Tian, Shen, and
Chen 2020; Chen et al. 2017) are often trained by pixel-level
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author. Email: jianbingshen@um.edu.mo
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1433

