The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Dropout is NOT All You Need to Prevent Gradient Leakage
Daniel Scheliga1 , Patrick Mäder1,2 , Marco Seeland1
1

Technische Universität Ilmenau, Germany
Friedrich Schiller Universität Jena, Germany
daniel.scheliga@tu-ilmenau.de, patrick.maeder@tu-ilmenau.de, marco.seeland@tu-ilmenau.de
2

Abstract
Gradient inversion attacks on federated learning systems reconstruct client training data from exchanged gradient information. To defend against such attacks, a variety of defense
mechanisms were proposed. However, they usually lead to an
unacceptable trade-off between privacy and model utility. Recent observations suggest that dropout could mitigate gradient leakage and improve model utility if added to neural networks. Unfortunately, this phenomenon has not been systematically researched yet. In this work, we thoroughly analyze
the effect of dropout on iterative gradient inversion attacks.
We find that state of the art attacks are not able to reconstruct
the client data due to the stochasticity induced by dropout during model training. Nonetheless, we argue that dropout does
not offer reliable protection if the dropout induced stochasticity is adequately modeled during attack optimization. Consequently, we propose a novel Dropout Inversion Attack (DIA)
that jointly optimizes for client data and dropout masks to
approximate the stochastic client model. We conduct an extensive systematic evaluation of our attack on four seminal
model architectures and three image classification datasets
of increasing complexity. We find that our proposed attack
bypasses the protection seemingly induced by dropout and
reconstructs client data with high fidelity. Our work demonstrates that privacy inducing changes to model architectures
alone cannot be assumed to reliably protect from gradient
leakage and therefore should be combined with complementary defense mechanisms.

1

Original

No Dropout
IG

(a)

(b)

Dropout (p = 0.1)
IG
Ours

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Reconstructing data from gradients without and
with dropout. (a) Original image. (b) State of the art IG attack (Geiping et al. 2020) without dropout. (c) State of the
art IG attack (Geiping et al. 2020) with dropout. (d) Our proposed Dropout Inversion Attack with dropout.

dummy images so that their resulting dummy gradients
match the targeted client gradient.
Defense strategies to protect against such attacks are
based on: (1) adjustments to the training process, e.g. increasing the number of local training iterations or the batchsize (Wei et al. 2020), (2) changes to the input data, e.g.
perturbation or input encryption (Huang et al. 2020a,b), (3)
perturbation of exchanged gradient information, e.g. through
the addition of noise, compression or pruning (Bonawitz
et al. 2017; Jayaraman and Evans 2019; Zhu and Han 2020;
Sattler et al. 2020; Lyu 2021; Wei and Liu 2021), or (4)
application of specifically designed architectural features or
modules (Scheliga, Mäder, and Seeland 2022b,a; Sun et al.
2021). The use of most defense mechanisms, however, results in a trade-off between privacy and model utility (Dwork
and Roth 2013; Jayaraman and Evans 2019; Zhu and Han
2020; Wei et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2021; Scheliga, Mäder,
and Seeland 2022b,a).
Dropout is a regularization technique that aims to reduce
overfitting in deep neural networks (Hanson 1990; Hinton
et al. 2012). While the use of dropout can boost the performance of neural networks (Srivastava et al. 2014), recent
publications suggest that it could also protect shared gradients from gradient leakage (Wei et al. 2020; Zheng 2021).
Inspired by these observations, we show that the stochasticity introduced by dropout indeed protects shared gradients
from gradient leakage through iterative gradient inversion
attacks. However, we claim that this protection is only ap-

Introduction

Federated Learning strategies were designed to leverage the
collaborative use of distributed data to learn a common
machine learning model. Since training data is not shared
between participating clients, systemic privacy risks can
be mitigated (Kairouz et al. 2021). Recent work, however,
shows that the privacy of participating clients can be compromised by reconstructing sensitive data from gradients or
model states that are exchanged during the federated training. The most versatile reconstruction techniques are realized as iterative gradient inversion attacks (Zhu and Han
2020; Zhao, Mopuri, and Bilen 2020; Wei et al. 2020; Geiping et al. 2020; Yin et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2022; Hatamizadeh
et al. 2022). These attacks optimize randomly initialized
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9733

