The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Goal-Conditioned Generators of Deep Policies
Francesco Faccio1,2 * , Vincent Herrmann1 * , Aditya Ramesh1 , Louis Kirsch1 ,
Jürgen Schmidhuber1,2,3
1

The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA/USI/SUPSI, Lugano, Ticino, Switzerland
2
AI Initiative, KAUST, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
3
NNAISENSE, Lugano, Switzerland
{francesco, vincent.herrmann, aditya.ramesh, louis, juergen}@idsia.ch
Abstract

behavior would have been optimal if the command had been
r. Hence the agent’s parameters can be learned by maximizing the likelihood of the agent’s behavior, given command r.
Unfortunately, in the episodic setting, many behaviors may
satisfy the same command. Hence the function to be learned
may be highly multimodal, and a simple Gaussian maximum
likelihood approach may fail to capture the variability in the
data.1
To overcome this limitation, we introduce GoGePo, a novel
method for return-conditioned generation of policies evaluated in parameter space. First, we use a Fast Weight Programmer (FWP) (Schmidhuber 1992, 1993; Ha, Dai, and Le
2016) to generate the parameters of a desired policy, given
a “desired return” command. Then, we evaluate the policy
using a parameter-based value function (Faccio, Kirsch, and
Schmidhuber 2021). This allows for end-to-end optimization of the return-conditioned generator producing deep NN
policies by matching the commands (desired returns) to the
evaluated returns.
The paper is structured as follows: Section introduces
the MDP frameworks for action-based and parameter-based
methods; Section reviews the concept of Fast Weight Programmers; Section describes GoGePo including architectural
choices; Section evaluates our method on continuous control
tasks where it demonstrates competitive performance. Our
analysis shows how a single learned policy generator can produce policies yielding any desired return seen during training.
Finally, we discuss related and future work in Sections and .
Our implementations are publicly available2 .

Goal-conditioned Reinforcement Learning (RL) aims at learning optimal policies, given goals encoded in special command
inputs. Here we study goal-conditioned neural nets (NNs) that
learn to generate deep NN policies in form of context-specific
weight matrices, similar to Fast Weight Programmers and
other methods from the 1990s. Using context commands of
the form “generate a policy that achieves a desired expected
return,” our NN generators combine powerful exploration of
parameter space with generalization across commands to iteratively find better and better policies. A form of weight-sharing
HyperNetworks and policy embeddings scales our method to
generate deep NNs. Experiments show how a single learned
policy generator can produce policies that achieve any return
seen during training. Finally, we evaluate our algorithm on a
set of continuous control tasks where it exhibits competitive
performance. Our code is public.

Introduction
General reinforcement learning (RL) is about training agents
to execute action sequences that maximize cumulative rewards in possibly non-continuous, non-differentiable, partially observable environments (Kaelbling, Littman, and
Moore 1996; van Hasselt 2012; Schmidhuber 1990). Goalconditioned RL agents can learn to solve many different
tasks, where the present task is encoded by special command
inputs (Schmidhuber and Huber 1991; Schaul et al. 2015).
Many RL methods learn value functions (Sutton and Barto
2018) or estimate stochastic policy gradients (with possibly
high variance) (Williams 1992; Sutton et al. 1999). Upsidedown RL (UDRL) (Srivastava et al. 2019; Schmidhuber
2019) and related methods (Ghosh et al. 2019), however,
use supervised learning to train goal-conditioned RL agents.
UDRL agents receive command inputs of the form “act
in the environment and achieve a desired return within so
much time” (Schmidhuber 2019). Typically, hindsight learning (Andrychowicz et al. 2017; Rauber et al. 2018) is used
to transform the RL problem into the problem of predicting actions, given reward commands. This is quite powerful.
Consider a command-based agent interacting with an environment, given a random command c, and achieving return r. Its

Background
We
consider
a
Markov
Decision
Process
(MDP)
(Stratonovich
1960;
Puterman
2014)
M = (S, A, P, R, γ, µ0 ). At each time step t, an artificial agent observes a state st ∈ S, chooses an action
at ∈ A, obtains a reward rt = R(st , at ) and transitions
to a new state with probability P (st+1 |st , at ). The initial
state of the agent is chosen with probability µ0 . The
behavior of the agent is expressed through its stochastic
1

Note that in stochastic environments with episodic resets, certain UDRL variants will fail to maximize the probability of satisfying their commands (Štrupl et al. 2022).
2
https://github.com/IDSIA/GoGePo

* These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7503

