The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SEAT: Stable and Explainable Attention
Lijie Hu* ,1 , Yixin Liu* ,2 , Ninghao Liu3 , Mengdi Huai4 , Lichao Sun2 , Di Wang1,5,6
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
2
Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, USA
3
University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
4
Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA
5
Computational Bioscience Research Center
6
SDAIA-KAUST Center of Excellence in Data Science and Artificial Intelligence
{lijie.hu, di.wang}@kaust.edu.sa, {yila22, lis221}@lehigh.edu, ninghao.liu@uga.edu, mdhuai@iastate.edu
Abstract

Word Perturbation (N=2)

Attention mechanism has become a standard fixture in many
state-of-the-art natural language processing (NLP) models, not
only due to its outstanding performance, but also because it
provides plausible innate explanations for neural architectures.
However, recent studies show that attention is unstable against
randomness and perturbations during training or testing, such
as random seeds and slight perturbation of embeddings, which
impedes it from being a faithful explanation tool. Thus, a natural question is whether we can find an alternative to vanilla
attention, which is more stable and could keep the key characteristics of the explanation. In this paper, we provide a rigorous
definition of such an attention method named SEAT (Stable
and Explainable ATtention). Specifically, SEAT has the following three properties: (1) Its prediction distribution is close
to the prediction of the vanilla attention; (2) Its top-k indices
largely overlap with those of the vanilla attention; (3) It is robust w.r.t perturbations, i.e., any slight perturbation on SEAT
will not change the attention and prediction distribution too
much, which implicitly indicates that it is stable to randomness
and perturbations. Furthermore, we propose an optimization
method for obtaining SEAT, which could be considered as
revising the vanilla attention. Finally, through intensive experiments on various datasets, we compare our SEAT with other
baseline methods using RNN, BiLSTM and BERT architectures, with different evaluation metrics on model interpretation,
stability and accuracy. Results show that, besides preserving
the original explainability and model performance, SEAT is
more stable against input perturbations and training randomness, which indicates it is a more faithful explanation.

Figure 1: An example demonstrates the stability of prediction
and attention heat map trained with different methods under
word perturbation in the sentiment classification task. There
are four methods: Vanilla attention, Word-AT, Att-AT and our
SEAT. JSD and TVD are divergences to measure the stability
of explainability and prediction distribution (see Experiments
section for details). We use the closest synonyms to replace
the original word in sentence as word perturbation. N denotes
the number of replaced words. We can see explanation (heat
map) and prediction are changed in other methods.

Introduction
As deep neural networks have demonstrated great success
in various natural language processing (NLP) tasks (Otter,
Medina, and Kalita 2021), to establish trust further, how to
interpret these deep models are receiving increasing interest.
Recently, a number of interpretation techniques have been
developed to understand the decision of deep NLP models
(Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Vaswani et al. 2017;
Dong et al. 2019). Among them, attention mechanism has
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12907

become a near-ubiquitous component of modern NLP models. Different from post-hoc interpretation (Du, Liu, and Hu
2020), attention weights are often regarded as providing the
"inner workings" of models (Choi et al. 2016; Martins and
Astudillo 2016; Lei 2017). For instance, each entry of an
attention vector could point us to irrelevant information discarded by the neural network or to relevant elements (tokens)
of the input source that have been factored in (Galassi, Lippi,
and Torroni 2020).
Despite its wide adoption, attention mechanism has been
questioned as being a faithful interpretation. Specifically,
Wiegreffe and Pinter (2019) show that attention is unstable,
as different model initialization leads to different attention
distributions given the same input (see Fig. 3 in Appendix

