The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Energy-Motivated Equivariant Pretraining for 3D Molecular Graphs
Rui Jiao1,2 , Jiaqi Han1,2 , Wenbing Huang4,5, * , Yu Rong6 , Yang Liu1,2,3, *
1

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
4
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
5
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
6
Tencent AI Lab
{jiaor21,hanjq21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, hwenbing@126.com,
yu.rong@hotmail.com, liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

been proposed, ranging from generative-based models (Kipf
and Welling 2016; Hu et al. 2020a,b) to contrastive learning (Sun et al. 2020; Velickovic et al. 2019; You et al. 2020,
2021a; Sun et al. 2021).
In many applications, using and analyzing 3D geometry
is crucial and even indispensable; for instance, we need to
process 3D coordinates for energy prediction in MD simulation or protein-ligand docking. Owing to the fast development in data acquisition, it is now convenient to access largescale unlabeled molecules with rich 3D conformations (Axelrod and Gomez-Bombarelli 2022). It would be quite exciting if we could develop techniques to obtain pretrained
models from these unlabeled molecules for 3D tasks with
limited data. Nevertheless, existing self-supervised methods (Hu et al. 2020a; You et al. 2020; Rong et al. 2020)
are weak in leveraging the 3D geometry information. First,
from the input side, the backbone models they pretrain can
only process the input of 2D molecules without the consideration of 3D coordinates. As demonstrated by Schütt et al.
(2017), certain molecular properties (e.g. potential energy)
are closely related to the 3D structure with which they can
be better predicted. Second, for the output side, their pretraining tasks are not 3D-aware, making the knowledge they
discover less generalizable in 3D space. Recently, the study
by Liu et al. (2021) proposes to impose the 3D information
for pretraining; however, its goal is still limited to enhancing
2D models for 2D tasks.
In this paper, we investigate 3D molecular pretraining in
a complete and novel sense: using 3D backbone models, designing 3D-aware pretraining tasks, and targeting 3D downstream evaluations. However, this is not trivial by any means.
The challenges mainly stem from how to maintain the symmetry of our biological world—rotating/translating the 3D
conformation of a molecule does not change the law of its
behavior. Mathematically, we should make the backbone
E(3)-equivariant, and the pretraining loss E(3)-invariant,
where the group E(3) collects the transformations of rotations, reflections, and translations (Satorras, Hoogeboom,
and Welling 2021). Unfortunately, typical GNNs (Gilmer
et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2019) and 3D losses based on Euclidean
distance (Luo and Hu 2020) do not satisfy such constraints.

Pretraining molecular representation models without labels
is fundamental to various applications. Conventional methods mainly process 2D molecular graphs and focus solely on
2D tasks, making their pretrained models incapable of characterizing 3D geometry and thus defective for downstream
3D tasks. In this work, we tackle 3D molecular pretraining
in a complete and novel sense. In particular, we first propose
to adopt an equivariant energy-based model as the backbone
for pretraining, which enjoys the merits of fulfilling the symmetry of 3D space. Then we develop a node-level pretraining loss for force prediction, where we further exploit the
Riemann-Gaussian distribution to ensure the loss to be E(3)invariant, enabling more robustness. Moreover, a graph-level
noise scale prediction task is also leveraged to further promote the eventual performance. We evaluate our model pretrained from a large-scale 3D dataset GEOM-QM9 on two
challenging 3D benchmarks: MD17 and QM9. Experimental
results demonstrate the efficacy of our method against current
state-of-the-art pretraining approaches, and verify the validity
of our design for each proposed component. Code is available
at https://github.com/jiaor17/3D-EMGP.

Introduction
Learning informative molecular representation is a fundamental step for various downstream applications, including molecular property prediction (Gilmer et al. 2017;
Kearnes et al. 2016), virtual screening (Wallach, Dzamba,
and Heifets 2015; Zheng, Fan, and Mu 2019), and Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation (Chmiela et al. 2017). Recent
methods exploit Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Gilmer
et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2019) for their power in capturing the
topology of molecules, which yet is label-hungry and thus
powerless for real scenarios when molecular annotations are
unavailable. Therefore, the research attention has been paid
to the self-supervised pretraining paradigm, to construct the
surrogate task by exploring the intrinsic structure within unlabeled molecules. A variety of self-supervised works have
* Wenbing Huang and Yang Liu are the corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8096

