The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Scaling Marginalized Importance Sampling to High-Dimensional State-Spaces via
State Abstraction
Brahma S. Pavse, Josiah P. Hanna
University of Wisconsin – Madison
pavse@wisc.edu, jphanna@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of off-policy evaluation (OPE) in
reinforcement learning (RL), where the goal is to estimate
the performance of an evaluation policy, πe , using a fixed
dataset, D, collected by one or more policies that may be different from πe . Current OPE algorithms may produce poor
OPE estimates under policy distribution shift i.e., when the
probability of a particular state-action pair occurring under
πe is very different from the probability of that same pair
occurring in D. In this work, we propose to improve the accuracy of OPE estimators by projecting the high-dimensional
state-space into a low-dimensional state-space using concepts
from the state abstraction literature. Specifically, we consider
marginalized importance sampling (MIS) OPE algorithms
which compute state-action distribution correction ratios to
produce their OPE estimate. In the original ground statespace, these ratios may have high variance which may lead
to high variance OPE. However, we prove that in the lowerdimensional abstract state-space the ratios can have lower
variance resulting in lower variance OPE. We then highlight
the challenges that arise when estimating the abstract ratios
from data, identify sufficient conditions to overcome these issues, and present a minimax optimization problem whose solution yields these abstract ratios. Finally, our empirical evaluation on difficult, high-dimensional state-space OPE tasks
shows that the abstract ratios can make MIS OPE estimators
achieve lower mean-squared error and more robust to hyperparameter tuning than the ground ratios.

1

Figure 1: Left side: AntUMaze domain. Right side: Projecting high-dimensional ant into lower-dimensional pointmass.
The core OPE problem is to produce accurate policy value
estimates under policy distribution shift. This problem is
particularly difficult on tasks with high-dimensional statespaces (Voloshin et al. 2021; Fu et al. 2021). For example, consider the AntUMaze problem illustrated on the left
side of Figure 1. In this task, an ant-like robot with a highdimensional state representation moves in a U-shaped maze
and receives a reward only for reaching a specific 2D coordinate goal location. The state-space of this task includes
information such as 2D location, ant limb angles, torso orientation etc., resulting in a 29-dimensional state-space. The
OPE task is to evaluate the performance of a particular policy’s ability to take the ant to the 2D goal location using data
that may be collected by different policies. Policy distribution shift is common in this type of high-dimensional task
since the chances of different policies inducing similar limb
angles, torso orientations, paths traversed etc. are incredibly slim. Notice, however, that while different policies may
induce different body configurations, they may traverse similar 2D paths since all (successful) policies must move the
ant through roughly the same path to reach the goal. Moreover, the only critical information needed from the statespace to determine the ant’s per-step reward are its 2D coordinates. Motivated by this observation, we propose to improve the accuracy of OPE algorithms on high-dimensional
state-space tasks by projecting the high-dimensional statespace into a lower-dimensional space. This idea is illustrated

Introduction

One of the key challenges when applying reinforcement
learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 2018) to real-world tasks is
the problem of off-policy evaluation (OPE) (Fu et al. 2021;
Voloshin et al. 2021). The goal of OPE is to evaluate a policy
of interest by leveraging offline data generated by possibly
different policies. Solving the OPE problem would enable
us to estimate the performance of a potentially risky policy without having to actually deploy it. This capability is
especially important for sensitive real-world tasks such as
healthcare and autonomous driving.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9417

