The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DPAUC: Differentially Private AUC Computation in Federated Learning
Jiankai Sun1 , Xin Yang1 , Yuanshun Yao1 , Junyuan Xie2 , Di Wu2 , Chong Wang 3 *
1

ByteDance Inc.
ByteDance Ltd
3
Apple
{jiankai.sun, yangxin.yx, kevin.yao, junyuan.xie, di.wu }@bytedance.com, mr.chongwang@apple.com
2

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) has gained significant attention recently as a privacy-enhancing tool to jointly train a machine
learning model by multiple participants. The prior work on
FL has mostly studied how to protect label privacy during
model training. However, model evaluation in FL might also
lead to potential leakage of private label information. In this
work, we propose an evaluation algorithm that can accurately
compute the widely used AUC (area under the curve) metric
when using the label differential privacy (DP) in FL. Through
extensive experiments, we show our algorithms can compute
accurate AUCs compared to the ground truth. The code is available at https://github.com/bytedance/fedlearner/tree/master/
example/privacy/DPAUC.

Introduction
With increasing concerns over data privacy in machine learning, regulations like CCPA1 , HIPAA2 , and GDPR3 have been
introduced to regulate how data can be transmitted and used.
To address privacy concerns, federated learning (McMahan et al. 2017; Hanzely et al. 2020; Yuan and Ma 2020;
Ghosh et al. 2020) has become an increasingly popular tool
to enhance privacy by allowing training models without directly sharing their data. Depending on how data is split
across parties, FL can be mainly classified into two categories (Yang et al. 2019a): Horizontal Federated Learning (Geiping et al. 2020; Hamer, Mohri, and Suresh 2020;
Karimireddy et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020) and Vertical Federated Learning (Vepakomma et al. 2018a; Gupta and Raskar
2018; Abuadbba et al. 2020; Ceballos et al. 2020). In Horizontal FL (hFL), data is split by entity (e.g. a person), and
data entities owned by each party are disjointed from other
parties. In Vertical FL (vFL), a data entity is split into different attributes (e.g. features and labels of the same person),
and each party might own the same data entities but their different attributes. In this paper, we focus on the setting of hFL
which enables devices (i.e. mobile phones) to collaboratively
* Work was done when the author was working at ByteDance
Inc.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
California Consumer Privacy Act
2
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
3
General Data Protection Regulation, European Union

15170

learn a machine learning model (i.e. binary classifier) while
keeping all the training and testing data on the device.
Although raw data is not shared in federated learning, sensitive information may still be leaked when gradients and/or
model parameters are communicated between parties. In hFL,
(Zhu, Liu, and Han 2019) showed that an honest-but-curious
server can uncover the raw features and labels of a device by
knowing the model architecture, parameters, and communicated gradient of the loss on the device’s data. Based on their
techniques, (Zhao, Mopuri, and Bilen 2020) showed that the
ground truth label of an example can be extracted by exploiting the directions of the gradients of the weights connected
to the logits of different classes. Researchers have shown that
vFL can still leak data information indirectly. For example,
(Li et al. 2022) demonstrated that the gradient norms and
directions can leak label information in the two-party vFL
setting. However, the prior work on FL privacy mostly focuses on model training and there can also be privacy leaks
from model evaluation. Specifically, the private label information owned by clients/devices can be leaked to the server
when computing evaluation metrics in FL.
Previous work (Matthews and Harel 2013a) has shown
that releasing the actual ROC curves on a private test dataset
can allow an attacker with some prior knowledge of the
test dataset to recover some sensitive information about the
dataset. Some recent works(Chen et al. 2016; Stoddard, Chen,
and Machanavajjhala 2014) proposed to provide differential privacy (DP) for plotting and releasing ROC curves.
However, they have several challenges such as how to privately compute the true positive rate (TPR) and false positive rate (FPR) values and how many and what thresholds
to pick(Stoddard, Chen, and Machanavajjhala 2014). And
they are not designed and applicable for evaluating FL models. As the ground-truth labels often contain highly sensitive
information (e.g., whether a user has purchased (in online
advertising) or whether a user has a disease or not (in disease
prediction) (Vepakomma et al. 2018b; Li et al. 2022), it cannot be directly shared between clients and servers, and clients
and clients. Hence preventing the label leakage from the AUC
computation in the general setting of FL is challenging.
To address the challenge, we consider the area under the
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve as the target
AUC to evaluate the accuracy of a binary classifier. Since the
class label is often the most sensitive information in a predic-

