The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Language Model Pre-training on True Negatives
Zhuosheng Zhang1,2 , Hai Zhao1,2,* , Masao Utiyama3 , Eiichiro Sumita3
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction
and Cognitive Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT), Kyoto, Japan
zhangzs@sjtu.edu.cn, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn, {mutiyama,eiichiro.sumita}@nict.go.jp

Abstract

should predict those corrupted tokens during the pre-training
(Peters et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2019; Levine et al. 2021; Li and
Zhao 2021).1
Although existing studies have made progress in designing effective masking strategies (Sun et al. 2019; Joshi et al.
2020; Levine et al. 2021) and auxiliary objectives (Lan et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2020) for language model pre-training,
there is still a lack of attention on the quality of training
data. Discriminative PLM can be regarded as a kind of auto
denoising encoder on automatically corrupted texts. Thus, it
is critical to ensure the auto-constructed data is true enough.
Intuitively, a discriminative PLM learns to distinguish two
types of samples, positive (already existing original ones)
and negative (the corrupted ones from the auto constructing). Taking MLM as an example, a proportion of tokens in
sentences are corrupted, e.g., replaced with mask symbols,
which would affect the sentence structures, leading to the
loss of semantics and increasing the uncertainty of predictions. In extreme cases, such corrupted texts may be linguistically correct. However, the current PLMs simply consider
all corrupted texts as negative samples, so that the resulting
PLM has to be trained on such pseudo-negative data with
less efficiency and less robustness – suffers from the wasted
training time on meaningless data and the trained PLM may
be vulnerable to adversarial attacks like diversity distraction
and synonym substitution (Wang et al. 2021).
For each training instance, MLM only calculates labelwise matching between the prediction and the gold tokens
in the training process, thus inevitably suffering from the
issue of false negatives where the prediction is meaningful
but regarded as wrong cases, as examples shown in Table
1. We obverse that such cases appear in more than 7% of
the training examples (more details in Section 2). The issue is also observed in sequence generation tasks, which is
tied to the standard training criterion of maximum likelihood
estimation (MLE) that treats all incorrect predictions as being equally incorrect (Wieting et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020).

Discriminative pre-trained language models (PLMs) learn to
predict original texts from intentionally corrupted ones. Taking the former text as positive and the latter as negative samples, the PLM can be trained effectively for contextualized
representation. However, the training of such a type of PLMs
highly relies on the quality of the automatically constructed
samples. Existing PLMs simply treat all corrupted texts as
equal negative without any examination, which actually lets
the resulting model inevitably suffer from the false negative
issue where training is carried out on pseudo-negative data
and leads to less efficiency and less robustness in the resulting
PLMs. In this work, on the basis of defining the false negative issue in discriminative PLMs that has been ignored for a
long time, we design enhanced pre-training methods to counteract false negative predictions and encourage pre-training
language models on true negatives by correcting the harmful
gradient updates subject to false negative predictions. Experimental results on GLUE and SQuAD benchmarks show that
our counter-false-negative pre-training methods indeed bring
about better performance together with stronger robustness.

1

Introduction

Large-scale pre-trained language (PLM) models are playing
an important role in a wide variety of NLP tasks with their
impressive empirical performance (Radford et al. 2018; Peters et al. 2018; Devlin et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019; Lan
et al. 2020; Clark et al. 2020). So far, there comes two major categories of PLMs with regards to the output style, the
generative like GPT (Radford et al. 2018), which employ
a decoder for learning to predict a full sequence, and the
discriminative like BERT style of PLMs which learn to reconstruct the original uncorrupted text from the intentionally
corrupted ones (Raffel et al. 2020; Lewis et al. 2020). In this
work, we focus on the latter category of PLMs, typically
with denoising objectives (also known as masked language
modeling, MLM) (Liu et al. 2019; Joshi et al. 2020; Sun
et al. 2019). In a denoising objective, a certain percentage of
tokens in the input sentence are masked out, and the model

1
There are different classification standards for PLMs, i.e., output style and model architecture. For simplicity, our taxonomy follows Wang, Liu, and Zhang (2021), which is based on the output style. Note that PLMs can also be classified into three types
based on the model architecture: encoder-only, decoder-only and
encoder-decoder.

* Corresponding author. This paper was partially supported by

Key Projects of National Natural Science Foundation of China
(U1836222 and 61733011).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14002

