The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Circuit Minimization with QBF-Based Exact Synthesis
Franz-Xaver Reichl, Friedrich Slivovsky, Stefan Szeider
Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
{freichl,fs,sz}@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

assignments of inputs. This is either because a particular
combination of inputs can never arise in the context of the
larger circuit or because other signals mask the output. Exploiting such don’t cares can help to significantly reduce the
size of subcircuits (Savoj and Brayton 1990; Savoj 1992;
Mishchenko and Brayton 2005).
Don’t cares can be enumerated using a Boolean satisfiability (SAT) solver (Mishchenko and Brayton 2005) or (for
circuits with few inputs) by simulation. In subsequent resynthesis, the equivalence of the new implementation and the
original subcircuit is not required for don’t care assignments.
This approach is typically very efficient for single-output
subcircuits, and can be used to minimize multi-output subcircuits by considering one output gate and its exclusive circuitry at a time (Riener et al. 2022), but that does not exploit
the full implementation flexibility.

This paper presents a rewriting method for Boolean circuits
that minimizes small subcircuits with exact synthesis. Individual synthesis tasks are encoded as Quantified Boolean Formulas (QBFs) that capture the full flexibility for implementing multi-output subcircuits. This is in contrast to SAT-based
resynthesis, where “don’t cares” are computed for an individual gate, and replacements are confined to the circuitry used
exclusively by that gate. An implementation of our method
achieved substantial size reductions compared to state-of-theart methods across a wide range of benchmark circuits.

Introduction
Modern integrated circuits are so large and complex that
their design would be impossible without a significant degree of automation. This includes the automated improvement of circuits (logic optimization), and the automated creation of circuits from specifications (logic synthesis), which
jointly yield substantial reductions in the number of gates
and circuit depth (De Micheli 1994; Brayton, Hachtel, and
Sangiovanni-Vincentelli 1990).
Finding a small circuit implementing a given Boolean
function is computationally intractable,1 and exact synthesis, which yields provably optimal results, currently does not
scale beyond circuits of about 10 gates (Kojevnikov, Kulikov, and Yaroslavtsev 2009; Haaswijk et al. 2020). Exact methods can nevertheless be applied to large circuits
through so-called peephole optimization. This involves partitioning a circuit into small subcircuits amenable to exact minimization and replacing each subcircuit with a sizeoptimum implementation of its output function (Testa et al.
2020). Such an implementation can either be obtained from
a pre-computed database of optimal circuits for functions
with up to 5 input variables (Mishchenko, Chatterjee, and
Brayton 2006) or on-the-fly by exact synthesis for larger
subcircuits (Riener et al. 2019). Crucially, the new implementation need not be logically equivalent to the subcircuit
it replaces since its outputs may be irrelevant under certain

Contribution We introduce a new approach capable of
optimally resynthesizing multi-output subcircuits. Individual synthesis tasks are encoded as Quantified Boolean Formulas (QBFs) that fully capture implementational flexibility.
The encoding is succinct and handles don’t cares implicitly,
obviating the need for an explicit enumeration.
We use QBF-based resynthesis as a subroutine in an optimization algorithm that scales to circuits of up to several
thousand gates. A bespoke local selection strategy repeatedly identifies promising subcircuits for resynthesis. Each
synthesis task is encoded as a QBF and passed to an off-theshelf solver (Janota 2018). A time budget is allocated for
individual solver calls to keep overall running time within
reason. Since solving times increase with the size of the
overall circuit, this timeout is adjusted dynamically based
on previously observed running times. The entire circuit is
minimized at regular intervals by a sequence of fast logic
optimization techniques implemented in ABC (Brayton and
Mishchenko 2010). This not only further shrinks the circuit,
but also sets up new opportunities for exact resynthesis.
Results In an experimental evaluation, the minimization
strategy described above achieved substantial size reductions compared to state-of-the-art methods on the following
two sets of benchmarks:

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Curiously, the minimum circuit size problem is not known to
be NP-hard. In fact, an NP-hardness proof by a “simple” reduction
would settle open problems in computational complexity (Murray
and Williams 2017).

• The EPFL combinational benchmark suite was designed
to test logic optimization and synthesis tools (Amarú,
4087

