The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Simple Baseline for Multi-Camera 3D Object Detection
Yunpeng Zhang1 , Wenzhao Zheng2 , Zheng Zhu1 ,
Guan Huang1 , Jiwen Lu2 , Jie Zhou2
1

PhiGent Robotics
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
{yunpeng.zhang, guan.huang}@phigent.ai, zhengzhu@ieee.org,
zhengwz18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {lujiwen, jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

eras (Wang et al. 2021b; Huang et al. 2021), which are commonly available on modern self-driving vehicles as well as
provided in recently released driving datasets (Caesar et al.
2020; Sun et al. 2020b). To fully exploit the multi-view
images, DETR3D (Wang et al. 2021b) employs a set of
learned queries to adaptively integrate multi-scale features
by geometric projection. After the iterative processing, these
queries are decoded into a set of 3D bounding boxes. However, DETR3D suffers from slow convergence and requires
specialized pretraining to achieve promising performance.
In this paper, we present SimMOD, a simple baseline
for multi-camera 3D object detection, to serve as an effective and highly-extensible method to facilitate the development of multi-camera detection. SimMOD is formulated as
a two-stage propose-and-fuse framework, which is compatible with existing methods for monocular 3D object detection
and can also integrate information from multiple cameras.
Specifically, we first utilize the image encoder to construct
multi-scale feature maps for the multi-view images. The proposal head is then applied to distinguish the foreground objects and generate the sample-wise proposals with visual
features, initial 3D positions, and view-level-aware encodings. In addition to the essential branches like the foreground
classification and position estimation, we further incorporate
a series of auxiliary branches to predict various visual attributes during the training stage. These auxiliary branches
can significantly improve the learning of discriminative features. After the proposals are generated in every perspective
view, we transform all proposals into the uniform ego-car
coordinates and employ an iterative detection head to refine
these proposals. This process includes the inter-proposal attention mechanism for interactions and the geometry-based
feature sampling for aggregating multi-view information.
Finally, the refined proposals are used to generate the detection results, which are supervised by the set-based losses
to enable end-to-end predictions. Since the incomplete recall of generated proposals can hurt the bipartite matching,
we also propose two techniques to provide consistent supervision. As shown in Fig. 1, the sample-wise object proposals
can focus on the interested objects, while most queries from
DETR3D are scattered around the background regions.
With extensive experiments, we verify the effectiveness of
our proposed method on the nuScenes (Caesar et al. 2020)
dataset. Compared with the baseline DETR3D, SimMOD

3D object detection with surrounding cameras has been a
promising direction for autonomous driving. In this paper,
we present SimMOD, a Simple baseline for Multi-camera
Object Detection, to solve the problem. To incorporate multiview information as well as build upon previous efforts on
monocular 3D object detection, the framework is built on
sample-wise object proposals and designed to work in a twostage manner. First, we extract multi-scale features and generate the perspective object proposals on each monocular image. Second, the multi-view proposals are aggregated and
then iteratively refined with multi-view and multi-scale visual
features in the DETR3D-style. The refined proposals are endto-end decoded into the detection results. To further boost the
performance, we incorporate the auxiliary branches alongside
the proposal generation to enhance the feature learning. Also,
we design the methods of target filtering and teacher forcing
to promote the consistency of two-stage training. We conduct
extensive experiments on the 3D object detection benchmark
of nuScenes to demonstrate the effectiveness of SimMOD
and achieve competitive performance. Code will be available
at https://github.com/zhangyp15/SimMOD.

Introduction
The safety of self-driving vehicles strongly depends on an
accurate and comprehensive understanding of the surroundings. As the core task of 3D scene understanding, 3D object
detection aims to produce a 3D bounding box for each concerned object around the ego vehicle. Existing methods for
3D object detection usually rely on LiDAR sensors (Lang
et al. 2019; Shi, Wang, and Li 2019) or stereo cameras (Qin,
Wang, and Lu 2019; Sun et al. 2020a) to provide explicit
distance information, but the high cost of LiDAR and the
instability of stereo systems have hindered the practical application of autonomous driving. Therefore, monocular 3D
object detection has been considered a promising direction
and received extensive attention in recent years.
While most existing methods (Chen et al. 2016; Wang
et al. 2021a; Ma et al. 2021; Zhang, Lu, and Zhou 2021)
focus on generating 3D bounding boxes based on one single monocular image, it is undoubtedly beneficial to incorporate the information from multiple surrounding camCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3507

