The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

TrEP: Transformer-Based Evidential Prediction for
Pedestrian Intention with Uncertainty
Zhengming Zhang1 , Renran Tian2 , Zhengming Ding3
1

2

School of Industrial Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
Department of Computer Information Technology, Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis, Indiana, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA
zhan3988@purdue.edu, rtian@iupui.edu, zding1@tulane.edu
Abstract

A large number of studies have concentrated on modeling and predicting pedestrian behaviors, with various deep
learning techniques and benchmark data sets constructed in
the past few years (Chen and Tian 2021). In general, trajectory prediction represents the majority of pedestrian behavior modeling efforts. While traditional algorithms predict trajectory in a fixed bird eye view from mainly surveillance cameras (Xu, Piao, and Gao 2018; Zhang et al. 2019;
Shi et al. 2021; Ma, Karimpour, and Wu 2020; Liu et al.
2020b,c), many recent studies focus on the moving egocentric view in front of the vehicles to better serve the
needs of automated driving (Rasouli et al. 2019; Rasouli,
Rohani, and Luo 2021; Yagi et al. 2018; Chen, Tian, and
Ding 2021). Although recent trajectory prediction algorithms have achieved improved accuracies, inherent limitations prevent satisfying prediction accuracy in longer prediction horizon (Herman et al. 2021), including the behavior temporal dynamics, uncertainty related to the scene complexity, and accumulated position prediction errors over time
steps. Such limitations restrict the common trajectory prediction horizon to about 1-2 seconds.
A Limited trajectory prediction horizon may be sufficient
for automatic braking features focusing on last-second braking to improve safety, but cannot support efficient motion
planning for higher-level automatic cars to interact with
pedestrians smoothly. Some studies have shown that human drivers need at least 3 seconds of prediction horizon to
plan driving behaviors during pedestrian interactions (Herman et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022a, 2021b; Pang, Guo,
and Zhuang 2022), indicating a similar requirement for automatic driving algorithms. Also, in the case to detect the
out-of-ODD event and start the transition from automatic
control to manual driving, drivers need up to 20 seconds to
fully control the car given a sudden automatic driving failure
(Eriksson and Stanton 2017; Merat et al. 2014), which poses
high requirements of pedestrian behavior prediction horizon
as well to ensure driving safety.
Solutions are needed to address the limitations of pedestrian trajectory prediction. Besides some task-specific probabilistic behavior prediction metrics such as In-ROI Sensitivity (IRS) (Herman et al. 2021), many studies started to
focus on pedestrian intention prediction. The goal of intention prediction is to help identify crossing pedestrians (Fang
and López 2018), anticipating crossing timing (Zhang et al.

With rapid development in hardware (sensors and processors) and AI algorithms, automated driving techniques have
entered the public’s daily life and achieved great success in
supporting human driving performance. However, due to the
high contextual variations and temporal dynamics in pedestrian behaviors, the interaction between autonomous-driving
cars and pedestrians remains challenging, impeding the development of fully autonomous driving systems. This paper focuses on predicting pedestrian intention with a novel
transformer-based evidential prediction (TrEP) algorithm.
We develop a transformer module towards the temporal correlations among the input features within pedestrian video sequences and a deep evidential learning model to capture the
AI uncertainty under scene complexities. Experimental results on three popular pedestrian intent benchmarks have verified the effectiveness of our proposed model over the state-ofthe-art. The algorithm performance can be further boosted by
controlling the uncertainty level. We systematically compare
human disagreements with AI uncertainty to further evaluate
AI performance in confusing scenes. The code is released at
https://github.com/zzmonlyyou/TrEP.git.

Introduction
With the rapid progress in AI technologies, the numerous
successes in intelligent transportation systems have made
autonomous driving promising (Liu et al. 2022; Tang et al.
2023; Cui et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2021; Zeng et al. 2021).
These transformative technologies have the potential to fundamentally change daily life for everyone and create vast
social and individual benefits (Litman 2017). Mercedes has
recently begun selling their Level 3 self-driving system (defined by SAE International as Conditional Driving Automation) on their S-Class, marking a significant milestone as
higher-level automated driving techniques enter ordinary
people’s lives. However, while Level 2 and 3 automated systems can drive autonomously under human supervision and
within the Operational Design Domain (ODD), the main
challenge for fully automated cars to safely and efficiently
drive in urban settings remains interactions with pedestrians (Domeyer, Lee, and Toyoda 2020; Herman et al. 2021;
Zhang, Tian, and Duffy 2023).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3534

