The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Contrastive Identity-Aware Learning for Multi-Agent Value Decomposition
Shunyu Liu* , Yihe Zhou* , Jie Song† , Tongya Zheng, Kaixuan Chen,
Tongtian Zhu, Zunlei Feng, Mingli Song
Zhejiang University
liushunyu@zju.edu.cn, yihe zhou@zju.edu.cn, sjie@zju.edu.cn, tyzheng@zju.edu.cn, chenkx@zju.edu.cn,
raiden@zju.edu.cn, zunleifeng@zju.edu.cn, brooksong@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Joint Value

Value Decomposition (VD) aims to deduce the contributions
of agents for decentralized policies in the presence of only
global rewards, and has recently emerged as a powerful credit
assignment paradigm for tackling cooperative Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning (MARL) problems. One of the main
challenges in VD is to promote diverse behaviors among
agents, while existing methods directly encourage the diversity of learned agent networks with various strategies. However, we argue that these dedicated designs for agent networks
are still limited by the indistinguishable VD network, leading to homogeneous agent behaviors and thus downgrading
the cooperation capability. In this paper, we propose a novel
Contrastive Identity-Aware learning (CIA) method, explicitly
boosting the credit-level distinguishability of the VD network
to break the bottleneck of multi-agent diversity. Specifically,
our approach leverages contrastive learning to maximize the
mutual information between the temporal credits and identity
representations of different agents, encouraging the full expressiveness of credit assignment and further the emergence
of individualities. The algorithm implementation of the proposed CIA module is simple yet effective that can be readily
incorporated into various VD architectures. Experiments on
the SMAC benchmarks and across different VD backbones
demonstrate that the proposed method yields results superior
to the state-of-the-art counterparts. Our code is available at
https://github.com/liushunyu/CIA.

Value Decomposition Network
Credits
Values
Update

Ours

Credit

Credit
Update

Global State
Value

Value

Agent
Network

Agent
Network

Local History

Local History

Credit

Credit-Level
Distinguishability
Agent-Level Diversity
Agent

(a) Basic VD Paradigm

Agent

Agent

Others

(b) Ours v.s. Others

N
Figure 1: (a) Basic VD paradigm.
denotes the complex
network operator based on different VD methods, where
credits can be considered as the agent contributions. (b)
Comparing the credit-level distinguishability mechanism
with the agent-level diversity mechanism under the VD
paradigm. Credit-level distinguishability can promote agentlevel diversity, but not vice versa.

only based on their local histories in a decentralized way.
The decentralized policies with one shared network significantly reduce the number of learnable parameters and the
exponentially growing joint-action space to the linear complexity. Nevertheless, the CTDE framework still faces a critical challenge of credit assignment, i.e., how to deduce the
contributions of individual agents given only global rewards.
In recent years, Value Decomposition (VD) has emerged
as a promising credit assignment paradigm, which endows
agents with the ability to learn their own optimal policies
by decomposing the joint value function according to their
individual credits, as depicted in Figure 1(a). The seminal
work, VDN (Sunehag et al. 2018), additively factorizes the
team value function into individual agent-wise terms, imposing a strong constraint of credit equalization. QMIX (Rashid
et al. 2018) identifies that the full factorization of VDN is
not necessary and relaxes this additive constraint to a nonlinear combination, which enables the weighted credits for
per-agent values. Due to the superior performance of QMIX,
there have been many recent efforts to improve its represen-

Introduction
Cooperative Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL)
aims to jointly train multiple agents to achieve one common
goal, and has witnessed its unprecedented success in various applications, such as video games (Vinyals et al. 2019;
Jaderberg et al. 2019), traffic light systems (Wu et al. 2020),
and smart grid control (Yan and Xu 2020; Xu et al. 2020;
Wang et al. 2021b). To alleviate the partial observation constraint and the scalability problem in cooperative MARL, the
Centralized Training and Decentralized Execution (CTDE)
framework has attracted increasing attention (Lowe et al.
2017), where agents are granted access to additional global
information during centralized training and deliver actions
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11595

