The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Gradient Corner Pooling for Keypoint-Based Object Detection
Xuyang Li1 , Xuemei Xie1, 2 * , Mingxuan Yu1 , Jiakai Luo1 , Chengwei Rao1 , Guangming Shi1, 3
1

Xidian University, Xi’an, 710071, China.
Pazhou Lab, Huangpu, 510555, China.
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518055, China.
{xylee, mxuanyu, jkluo, cwrao}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, xmxie@mail.xidian.edu.cn, gmshi@xidian.edu.cn
2

A

Abstract
Detecting objects as multiple keypoints is an important approach in the anchor-free object detection methods while corner pooling is an effective feature encoding method for corner positioning. The corners of the bounding box are located
by summing the feature maps which are max-pooled in the x
and y directions respectively by corner pooling. In the unidirectional max pooling operation, the features of the densely
arranged objects of the same class are prone to occlusion. To
this end, we propose a method named Gradient Corner Pooling. The spatial distance information of objects on the feature map is encoded during the unidirectional pooling process, which effectively alleviates the occlusion of the homogeneous object features. Further, the computational complexity of gradient corner pooling is the same as traditional corner
pooling and hence it can be implemented efficiently. Gradient
corner pooling obtains consistent improvements for various
keypoint-based methods by directly replacing corner pooling. We verify the gradient corner pooling algorithm on the
dataset and in real scenarios, respectively. The networks with
gradient corner pooling located the corner points earlier in the
training process and achieve an average accuracy improvement of 0.2%-1.6% on the MS-COCO dataset. The detectors
with gradient corner pooling show better angle adaptability
for arrayed objects in the actual scene test.

(a) Gradient Corner Pooling

(b) Corner Pooling

B

0.0

0.6

0.8

1.0

Figure 1: A shows the detection result of an image in the
MS-COCO validation dataset. (a) is the detection result of
CornerNet-Saccade with gradient corner pooling (GCP). (b)
is the result of this detector with corner pooling. There is
a significant improvement in the performance of detecting
array-placed objects for keypoint-based detectors with GCP.
B is the illustration of top direction in the gradient corner
pooling, which encodes the distance in directional max pooling with the modulation factor α.

Introduction
Object detection is the foundation of a large number of vision tasks, such as automatic driving, scene understanding,
and video surveillance. According to the method that the
bounding box proposed, there are currently two mainstream
frameworks for object detection. One is the anchor-based
method. These methods generate a large number of candidate anchors according to certain image features or rules
and have the highest detection accuracy on object detection
datasets such as MS-COCO (Lin et al. 2014). The other is
the anchor-free method, represented by a series of papers
such as FCOS (Tian et al. 2019), CornerNet (Law and Deng
2018; Law et al. 2019), ExtremeNet (Zhou, Zhuo, and Krahenbuhl 2019), Objects as Points (Zhou, Wang, and Krahenbuhl 2019), RepPoints (Yang et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020),
CenterNet (Duan et al. 2019) and etc. Among these methods,

CornerNet (Law and Deng 2018) proposes a novel model,
which detects an object as a set of paired corner points. The
width and height of the bounding box of the object are directly calculated by the paired top-left and bottom-right corner points.
Corner pooling consists of max pooling in four directions:
top pooling, left pooling, bottom pooling, and right pooling.
The pooling results in the two directions are added respectively to obtain top-left pooling and bottom-right pooling.
This encoding method diverts the maximum points of the
object feature response on the feature map to the top-left and
bottom-right corners. However, max pooling in one direction leads to the occlusion in feature responses of objects of
the same class in this direction, which in turn makes corner
detection difficult. The essential reason is that max pooling
loses part of the spatial information on feature maps. Based
on the corner pooling, we propose gradient corner pooling

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1460

