The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Estimating Treatment Effects from Irregular Time Series Observations
with Hidden Confounders
Defu Cao* 1 , James Enouen* 1 , Yujing Wang2 , Xiangchen Song3 ,
Chuizheng Meng1 , Hao Niu4 , Yan Liu1
1

University of Southern California
2
Peking University
3
Carnegie Mellon University
4
KDDI Research, Inc.
{defucao, enouen, chuizhem, yanliu.cs}@usc.edu, yujwang@pku.edu.cn
xiangchensong@cmu.edu, ha-niu@kddi.com
Abstract

both interventions and stock returns. The reason is that even
a small number of existing factors (such as Small Minus Big
and High Minus Low) could significantly explain the crosssection of stock returns (D’Acunto et al. 2021). If we can
simulate such hidden confounders within a reasonable range,
we are able to obtain treatment estimates with reduced bias
and variance by making appropriate impact assumptions on
the relationship between treatments and outcomes (Wang
and Blei 2019).
Estimating ITE is an extremely challenging task in continuous time settings with hidden confounders. First, estimating
treatment effects in large-scale irregular and sparse time series still has considerable room for improvement as previous
works fail to consider the continuous time setting, where
it is difficult to handle the dynamic behavior and complex
interactions of covariates and treatments (Gao et al. 2021).
Second, hidden confounders’ values generated by randomness and noise can introduce high variance and undesirable
explanations. For example, in healthcare applications, according to domain knowledge of drug resistance, the response to
single-agent immune-checkpoint inhibitors (ICI) in uremic
patients ranged from 15% to 31% (Zibelman, Ramamurthy,
and Plimack 2016). Consequently, when left unconsidered,
drug resistance will introduce biased estimates of treatment
effects. Furthermore, any substitute confounders generated
by data-driven methods with an impact on outcomes over
31% can lead to high variance.
Recently, there have been several attempts to address these
challenges. To model hidden confounders over time, (Bahadori and Heckerman 2021) introduce a new causal prior
graph for the confounding information and concept completeness to improve the interpretability of prediction models; (Mastakouri, Schölkopf, and Janzing 2021) study the
identification of direct and indirect causes for causal feature
selection in time series solely based on observational data.
Deconfounding-based models (Hatt and Feuerriegel 2021;
Bica, Alaa, and Van Der Schaar 2020) use latent variables
given by their factor model as substitutes for the hidden
confounders to render the assigned treatments conditionally
independent. However, existing works either cannot handle
irregular time series (Bahadori and Heckerman 2021; Mas-

Causal analysis for time series data, in particular estimating
individualized treatment effect (ITE), is a key task in many
real-world applications, such as finance, retail, healthcare,
etc. Real-world time series can include large-scale, irregular,
and intermittent time series observations, raising significant
challenges to existing work attempting to estimate treatment
effects. Specifically, the existence of hidden confounders can
lead to biased treatment estimates and complicate the causal
inference process. In particular, anomaly hidden confounders
which exceed the typical range can lead to high variance estimates. Moreover, in continuous time settings with irregular
samples, it is challenging to directly handle the dynamics of
causality. In this paper, we leverage recent advances in Lipschitz regularization and neural controlled differential equations (CDE) to develop an effective and scalable solution,
namely LipCDE, to address the above challenges. LipCDE
can directly model the dynamic causal relationships between
historical data and outcomes with irregular samples by considering the boundary of hidden confounders given by Lipschitz
constrained neural networks. Furthermore, we conduct extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets to
demonstrate the effectiveness and scalability of LipCDE.

Introduction
Estimating individualized treatment effects (ITE) for time
series data, which makes predictions about causal effects of
actions (Zhang, Cao, and Liu 2022), is one key task in many
domains, including marketing (Brodersen et al. 2015; Abadie,
Diamond, and Hainmueller 2010), education (Mandel et al.
2014), healthcare (Kuzmanovic, Hatt, and Feuerriegel 2021),
etc. However, the existence of confounders can introduce
bias into the estimation (Simpson 1951; Pearl et al. 2000).
For example, in finance applications, multi-factor investing
strategies can give investors a deeper understanding of the
risk drivers underlying a portfolio. The unobserved factors
(i.e., hidden confounders), which typically happen at irregular
time stamps and are not reflected in finance system records
or are difficult to observe, could bring bias by influencing
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6897

