The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Evaluating Epistemic Logic Programs via
Answer Set Programming with Quantifiers
Wolfgang Faber, Michael Morak
University of Klagenfurt, Austria
wolfgang.faber@aau.at, michael.morak@aau.at

Abstract

explicit way to express quantifiers and quantifier alternations in ASP, reminiscent of Quantified Boolean Formulas
(QBFs), but also different in spirit. It has the form

In this paper we introduce a simple way to evaluate epistemic
logic programs by means of answer set programming with
quantifiers, a recently proposed extension of answer set programming. The method can easily be adapted for most of the
many semantics that were proposed for epistemic logic programs. We evaluate the proposed transformation on existing
benchmarks using a recently proposed solver for answer set
programming with quantifiers, which relies on QBF solvers.

1

1 P1 2 P2 · · · n Pn : C,
where the Pi are classical ASP programs, i are quantifiers,
and C expresses a set of constraints in ASP.
Example 2. The intuitive reading of the ASP(Q) program
∃P1 ∀P2 : C
is that there exists an answer set A1 of ASP program P1
such that for each answer set A2 of the ASP program P2
combined with A1 as facts, A2 satisfies the constraints C.
Since evaluating ASP(Q) programs is PS PACE-complete
in general (Amendola, Ricca, and Truszczynski 2019), this
formalism forms an interesting target for rewriting ELPs. In
this paper, we propose such a rewriting, where, given an
ELP Π, we create an ASP(Q) program that is consistent
if and only if Π has a world view. This happens by using
the ASP(Q) quantifiers to directly encode the semantics of
world views of ELPs, and, in turn, the existence the relevant
stable models inside of that world view. We then experimentally verify that this encoding, together with a QBF solverbased ASP(Q) solver, indeed performs well, compared to
current ELP solvers.

Introduction

Answer Set Programming (ASP) is a generic, fully declarative logic programming language that allows users to encode problems such that the resulting output of the program (called answer sets) directly corresponds to solutions
of the original problem (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988, 1991;
Brewka, Eiter, and Truszczynski 2011; Schaub and Woltran
2018).
Epistemic Logic Programs (ELPs) are an extension of
ASP with epistemic operators. Originally introduced as the
two modal operators K (“known” or “provably true”) and
M (“possible” or “not provably false”) by Gelfond (Gelfond
1991, 1994), epistemic extensions of ASP have received renewed interest (c.f. e.g. (Gelfond 2011; Truszczynski 2011;
Kahl 2014; del Cerro, Herzig, and Su 2015; Shen and Eiter
2016; Son et al. 2017; Kahl and Leclerc 2018; Faber, Morak,
and Woltran 2019; Morak 2019)), with refinements of the semantics and proposals of new language features. Further, the
development of efficient solving systems is underway with
several efficient systems now available (Kahl et al. 2015;
Son et al. 2017; Bichler, Morak, and Woltran 2020).

Contributions. The results and contributions presented in
this paper can be summarized as follows.
• We specify a rewriting from ELPs to ASP(Q) programs
in such a way that it preserves consistency. This rewriting also allows us to extract information about the world
views of the original ELPs by evaluating the outermost
quantifier block of the obtained ASP(Q) program. We
show that our rewriting is flexible in the sense that it is
applicable to all known semantics of ELPs, as long as
they are based on the notion of an epistemic reduct.
• We implement a rewriting tool that performs our rewriting on real-world ELP instances under the well-known
G94 semantics for ELPs (Gelfond 1991, 1994).
• We compare the performance of evaluating ELPs via our
rewriting tool and state-of-the-art ASP(Q) solvers versus
several existing ELP solvers. We observe that, indeed,
our ASP(Q) rewriting approach shows competitive performance.

Example 1. A classical example for the use of epistemic
operators is the presumption of innocence rule
innocent(X ) ← ¬K guilty(X ),
namely: a person is innocent if they cannot be proven guilty.
Recently, another language extension for ASP has been
proposed, named ASP with Quantifiers, or ASP(Q) (Amendola, Ricca, and Truszczynski 2019), which introduces an
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6322

