The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CEE-Net: Complementary End-to-End Network for 3D Human Pose Generation
and Estimation
Haolun Li, Chi-Man Pun*
University of Macau, Macau, China
lhl219319@gmail.com, cmpun@umac.mo

Abstract
The limited number of actors and actions in existing datasets
make 3D pose estimators tend to overfit, which can be seen
from the performance degradation of the algorithm on crossdatasets, especially for rare and complex poses. Although
previous data augmentation works have increased the diversity of the training set, the changes in camera viewpoint and
position play a dominant role in improving the accuracy of the
estimator, while the generated 3D poses are limited and still
heavily rely on the source dataset. In addition, these works
do not consider the adaptability of the pose estimator to generated data, and complex poses will cause training collapse.
In this paper, we propose the CEE-Net, a Complementary
End-to-End Network for 3D human pose generation and estimation. The generator extremely expands the distribution
of each joint-angle in the existing dataset and limits them
to a reasonable range. By learning the correlations within
and between the torso and limbs, the estimator can combine
different body-parts more effectively and weaken the influence of specific joint-angle changes on the global pose, improving the generalization ability. Extensive ablation studies
show that our pose generator greatly strengthens the jointangle distribution, and our pose estimator can utilize these
poses positively. Compared with the state-of-the-art methods,
our method can achieve much better performance on various
cross-datasets, rare and complex poses.

Figure 1: Comparison of the performance on cross-datasets
3DHP and 3DPW between the CEE-Net and state-of-the-art
generalization frameworks for 3D human pose estimation. A
lower MPJPE and PA-MPJPE indicate better performance.

poses, (2) limited actors restrict the range of bone lengths,
(3) limited cameras restrict the diversity of viewpoints, and
(4) uneven data distribution makes the network easier to
learn common poses while ignoring the rare poses.
Large-scale training with sufficient data is the most stable way to improve the generalization of algorithms, but
it is limited by collection costs. Fortunately, data generation can be an excellent substitute. When expanding human 3D pose datasets, some papers recombine the joints
of different poses in the existing datasets or pre-define a
skeleton and rotate joint-angles to generate a large amount
of new data (Li et al. 2020; Guan et al. 2022). However,
these methods of randomly generating data are easy to generate invalid poses that duplicate the original dataset. In contrast, (Gong, Zhang, and Feng 2021) proposes using Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) to achieve data augmentation for the first time, which can make the pose generator
and the estimator train together. Based on PoseAug (Gong,
Zhang, and Feng 2021), (Gholami et al. 2022; Lin, Liang,
and Deng 2022) propose various continuous pose generation algorithms, which can be used to train video-based 3D
pose estimators. However, through ablation experiments, it
is found that the generalization ability of the improved algorithms is almost derived from the new camera viewpoint
through Rigid Transformation (RT) and human Bone Length
(BL), while the change of Bone Angle (BA) hardly improves
the performance. Take PoseAug as an example, and the results are shown in Figure 2. There are three main reasons for

Introduction
3D Human Pose Estimation (HPE) is the foundation of many
research fields such as action understanding (Yan, Xiong,
and Lin 2018; Duan et al. 2022), virtual humans (Guzov
et al. 2021), and self-driving (Xu et al. 2021; Bouazizi et al.
2022). Although some latest algorithms (Zeng et al. 2021;
Zheng et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022b) have achieved high
accuracy on public datasets, their performance on crossdatasets has dropped significantly. In order to maintain stability in reliability-critical applications, some works (Chen
et al. 2020; Zeng et al. 2020; Gong et al. 2022; Zhang, Nie,
and Feng 2020) improve robustness by analyzing the pose
estimator individually. In addition, the insufficient training
set is also the main reason for poor generalization ability:
(1) limited actions restrict the diversity of relative 3D human
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1305

