The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Fractals by Gradient Descent
Cheng-Hao Tu* , Hong-You Chen* , David Carlyn, Wei-Lun Chao
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University
{tu.343, chen.9301, carlyn.1, chao.209}@osu.edu

Abstract

instance, Kataoka et al. (2020) sampled multiple sets of parameters and treated each set as a fractal class. Within each
class, they leveraged the stochastic nature of the IFS to generate fractal images with intra-class variations. They then used
these images to pre-train a neural network in a supervised
way without natural images and achieved promising results.
In this paper, we study a complementary and inverse problem — given a target image that is not necessarily a fractal,
can we find the parameters such that the generated IFS fractal image looks like it? We consider this problem important
from at least two aspects. First, it has the potential to find
fractal parameters suitable for downstream visual tasks, e.g.,
for different kinds of image domains. Second, it can help us
understand the limitations of IFS fractals, e.g., what kinds of
image patterns the IFS cannot generate.
We propose a novel gradient-descent-based approach for
this problem (see section 6). Given a target image and the
(initial) fractal parameters, our approach compares the image
generated by the IFS to the target image, back-propagates
the gradients w.r.t. the generated image through the IFS, and
uses the resulting gradients w.r.t. the parameters to update the
fractal parameters. The key insights are three-folded. First,
we view an IFS as a special recurrent neural network (RNN)
with identity activation functions and stochastic weights. The
weights in each recurrent step (i.e., one affine transformation)
are not the same, but are sampled with replacement from
shared parameters. This analogy allows us to implement the
forward (i.e., image generation) and backward (i.e., backpropagation) passes of IFS using deep learning frameworks
like PyTorch (Paszke et al. 2019) and TensorFlow (Abadi
et al. 2016). Second, the IFS generates a sequence of points,
not an image directly. To compare this sequence to the target
image and, in turn, calculate the gradients w.r.t. the generated points, we introduce a differentiable rendering module
inspired by (Qian et al. 2020). Third, we identify several challenges in optimization and propose corresponding solutions
to make the overall learning process stable, effective, and efficient. The learned parameters can thus lead to high-quality
fractal images that are visually similar to the target image. We
note that besides reconstructing a target image, our approach
can easily be repurposed by plugging in other loss functions
that return gradients w.r.t. the generated image.
We conduct two experiments to validate our approach.
First, given a target image (that is not necessarily a fractal),

Fractals are geometric shapes that can display complex and
self-similar patterns found in nature (e.g., clouds and plants).
Recent works in visual recognition have leveraged this property to create random fractal images for model pre-training.
In this paper, we study the inverse problem — given a target
image (not necessarily a fractal), we aim to generate a fractal
image that looks like it. We propose a novel approach that
learns the parameters underlying a fractal image via gradient
descent. We show that our approach can find fractal parameters of high visual quality and be compatible with different
loss functions, opening up several potentials, e.g., learning
fractals for downstream tasks, scientific understanding, etc.

Introduction
A fractal is an infinitely complex shape that is self-similar
across different scales. It displays a pattern that repeats forever, and every part of a fractal looks very similar to the
whole fractal. Fractals have been shown to capture geometric
properties of elements found in nature (Mandelbrot and Mandelbrot 1982). In essence, our nature is full of fractals, e.g.,
trees, rivers, coastlines, mountains, clouds, seashells, etc.
Despite its complex shape, a fractal can be generated via
well-defined mathematical systems like iterated function systems (IFS) (Barnsley 2014). An IFS generates a fractal image
by “drawing” points iteratively on a canvas, in which the
point transition is governed by a small set of 2 × 2 affine
transformations (each with a probability). Concretely, given
the current point v (t) ∈ R2 , the IFS randomly samples one
affine transformation with replacement from the set, and uses
it to transform v (t) into the next point v (t+1) . This stochastic
step is repeated until a pre-defined number of iterations T
is reached. The collection of {v (0) , · · · , v (T ) } can then be
used to draw the fractal image (see Figure 1 for an illustration). The set of affine transformations thus can be seen as
the parameters (or ID) of a fractal.
Motivated by these nice properties, several recent works
in visual recognition have investigated generating a large
number of fractal images to facilitate model (pre-)training,
in which the parameters of each fractal are randomly sampled (Kataoka et al. 2020; Anderson and Farrell 2022). For
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2456

