The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

TransLO: A Window-Based Masked Point Transformer Framework for
Large-Scale LiDAR Odometry
Jiuming Liu1 * , Guangming Wang1 * , Chaokang Jiang2 , Zhe Liu3 , Hesheng Wang1†
1

Department of Automation, Key Laboratory of System Control and Information Processing of Ministry of Education, Key
Laboratory of Marine Intelligent Equipment and System of Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Control for Underground Space, Ministry of Education, School of Information
and Control Engineering, Advanced Robotics Research Center, China University of Mining and Technology
3
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{liujiuming,wangguangming,liuzhesjtu,wanghesheng}@sjtu.edu.cn
ts20060079a31@cumt.edu.cn
Abstract
Recently, transformer architecture has gained great success
in the computer vision community, such as image classification, object detection, etc. Nonetheless, its application for
3D vision remains to be explored, given that point cloud is
inherently sparse, irregular, and unordered. Furthermore, existing point transformer frameworks usually feed raw point
cloud of N × 3 dimension into transformers, which limits
the point processing scale because of their quadratic computational costs to the input size N . In this paper, we rethink
the structure of point transformer. Instead of directly applying transformer to points, our network (TransLO) can process tens of thousands of points simultaneously by projecting
points onto a 2D surface and then feeding them into a local
transformer with linear complexity. Specifically, it is mainly
composed of two components: Window-based Masked transformer with Self Attention (WMSA) to capture long-range
dependencies; Masked Cross-Frame Attention (MCFA) to
associate two frames and predict pose estimation. To deal
with the sparsity issue of point cloud, we propose a binary mask to remove invalid and dynamic points. To our
knowledge, this is the first transformer-based LiDAR odometry network. The experiment results on the KITTI odometry dataset show that our average rotational and translational RMSE achieves 0.500 ◦ /100m and 0.993 % respectively. The performance of our network surpasses all recent learning-based methods and even outperforms LOAM
on most evaluation sequences. Codes will be released on
https://github.com/IRMVLab/TransLO.

Figure 1: The pipeline of our LiDAR odometry. We design a
hierarchical transformer-based odometry network. Pose between two consecutive point cloud frames is estimated by
the cross-attention mechanism and iterative refinement.

Traditional methods treat LiDAR odometry as a scan registration problem where the Iterative Closest Point algorithm (ICP) (Besl and McKay 1992) is generally employed
to refine the transformation. Some feature-based methods
(Zheng et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2022) are also proposed
using point, line, or planar features. Since soft correspondences of point clouds can be learned by convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in an end-to-end manner, learningbased methods have attracted increasing attention in recent
years. However, CNNs focus on the interrelation between local areas and enlarge the receptive field as the network deepens. This will create a problem: CNN can’t capture relationships between patches that have similar features but locate
over great distances. To overcome this limitation, we further
explore transformer-based LiDAR odometry for long-range
dependencies, based on our observation that global descriptors are helpful for correlating above similar patches.
We observe that some intrinsic qualities of transformer
fit fairly well with the task: 1) Self-attention is naturally
invariant to permutation of input. Point cloud is irregular

Introduction
LiDAR odometry plays a fundamental role in perceiving the
environment for various applications, including Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) system (Zhu et al.
2022), robot navigation (Wang et al. 2018), autonomous
driving (Zheng and Zhu 2021), etc. As depicted in Fig. 1,
the target of this task is to estimate pose transformation between two consecutive point cloud frames (Li et al. 2019).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1683

