The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AdapSafe: Adaptive and Safe-Certified Deep Reinforcement Learning-Based
Frequency Control for Carbon-Neutral Power Systems
Xu Wan1,4 , Mingyang Sun* 1,4 , Boli Chen3 , Zhongda Chu2 , Fei Teng2
1
Zhejiang University
Imperial College London
3
University College London
4
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Institute of Frontier Technologies
wanxu@zju.edu.cn, mingyangsun@zju.edu.cn, boli.chen@ucl.ac.uk, zc4915@ic.ac.uk, f.teng@imperial.ac.uk
2

Abstract

driver of this blackout is the rapid frequency changes as a
significant amount of new devices and distributed resources
were added to the system in a very short time (Bialek 2020).
In the literature, load frequency control (LFC) has been
extensively studied to ensure frequency stability and improve power quality in power systems. Traditional modelbased LFC methods are mainly designed based on the PID
control methods (Tan 2009; Zhang et al. 2013), and their
effectiveness is highly dependent on the specific physical
model and the precision of parameters. In order to achieve
self-tuning of PID parameters under model uncertainty, Ranjit et al. (Singh and Ramesh 2019) proposed a PID controller
with filtering for the LFC problem in a two-region interconnected grid containing PV generation, which exhibits strong
robustness under parameter uncertainty. Furthermore, fuzzy
control (Sahu, Panda, and Pradhan 2015; Debnath, Jena, and
Sanyal 2019), BAT optimization algorithm (Abd-Elazim and
Ali 2016) and model predictive control (Ersdal, Imsland,
and Uhlen 2015) also show improvements to a certain extent compared to the traditional PID methods. However, it is
imperative to note that most model-based methods are computationally expensive and thus significantly limit their implementation and performance for real-time LFC scenarios
under uncertainty.
To this end, the data-driven approach, especially the Deep
Reinforcement Learning (DRL) control scheme, is considered as a promising solution to realize the real-time LFC,
especially in the carbon-neutral case, due to its capability
to deal with dynamic uncertainty and sequential decisionmaking problems. In particular, Yin et al. (Yin et al. 2017)
proposed a novel emotional reinforcement learning (ERL)
with nine control strategies for designing controllers in a
two-area LFC power system, where each strategy is combined with different converting functions, reward function,
and learning rate of RL. Moreover, a collaborative multiagent DRL method is proposed for multi-area power systems
(Yan and Xu 2020). The reward function is set up to minimize the regional control error signals in all regions, and the
performance of the proposed method is demonstrated on the
New-England 39-bus system. For the existing DRL-based
LFC approaches, although fully exploring the whole action
space during the learning process can assist in obtaining the
optimal strategy, it may also lead to unsafe actions that need
to be avoided. Therefore, it is of great importance to balance

With the increasing penetration of inverter-based renewable
energy resources, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has
been proposed as one of the most promising solutions to
realize real-time and autonomous control for future carbonneutral power systems. In particular, DRL-based frequency
control approaches have been extensively investigated to
overcome the limitations of model-based approaches, such
as the computational cost and scalability for large-scale systems. Nevertheless, the real-world implementation of DRLbased frequency control methods is facing the following fundamental challenges: 1) safety guarantee during the learning
and decision-making processes; 2) adaptability against the
dynamic system operating conditions.
To this end, this is the first work that proposes an Adaptive
and Safe-Certified DRL (AdapSafe) algorithm for frequency
control to simultaneously address the aforementioned challenges. In particular, a novel self-tuning control barrier function is designed to actively compensate the unsafe frequency
control strategies under variational safety constraints and
thus achieve guaranteed safety. Furthermore, the concept of
meta-reinforcement learning is integrated to significantly enhance its adaptiveness in non-stationary power system environments without sacrificing the safety cost. Experiments are
conducted based on GB 2030 power system, and the results
demonstrate that the proposed AdapSafe exhibits superior
performance in terms of its guaranteed safety in both training and test phases, as well as its considerable adaptability
against the dynamics changes of system parameters.

Introduction
To achieve the carbon-neutral target, high penetration of renewable energy sources (RES) is expected in power systems
(Zhang et al. 2020). Nevertheless, the wide deployment of
power electronic devices for RES integration renders the decrease of system synchronous inertia (Ulbig, Borsche, and
Andersson 2014), which may endanger the frequency stability or limit the penetration of RES (Teng, Trovato, and
Strbac 2015). For example, the UK suffered the most significant power outage in over a decade in 2019, lasting more
than 1.5 hours, causing widespread disruption to the traffic
light network and affecting about 1 million people. The main
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5294

