The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Critical Firms Prediction for Stemming Contagion Risk in Networked-Loans
through Graph-Based Deep Reinforcement Learning
Dawei Cheng1,4,5 , Zhibin Niu2 * , Jianfu Zhang3,4 , Yiyi Zhang3,4 , Changjun Jiang1,5
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
2
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
4
Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, China
5
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
{dcheng, cjjiang}@tongji.edu.cn, zniu@tju.edu.cn, {c.sis,yi95yi}@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
The networked-loan is major financing support for Micro,
Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (MSMEs) in some developing countries. But external shocks may weaken the
financial networks’ robustness; an accidental default may
spread across the network and collapse the whole network.
Thus, predicting the critical firms in networked-loans to stem
contagion risk and prevent potential systemic financial crises
is of crucial significance to the long-term health of inclusive
finance and sustainable economic development. Existing approaches in the banking industry dismiss the contagion risk
across loan networks and need extensive knowledge with sophisticated financial expertise. Regarding the issues, we propose a novel approach to predict critical firms for stemming
contagion risk in the bank industry with deep reinforcement
learning integrated with high-order graph message-passing
networks. We demonstrate that our approach outperforms the
state-of-the-art baselines significantly on the dataset from a
large commercial bank. Moreover, we also conducted empirical studies on the real-world loan dataset for risk mitigation.
The proposed approach enables financial regulators and risk
managers to better track and understands contagion and systemic risk in networked-loans. The superior performance also
represents a paradigm shift in addressing the modern challenges in financing support of MSMEs and sustainable economic development.

Figure 1: Illustration of risk contagion from Node A.
operation can enhance financial security while introducing
more potential risks (Cheng et al. 2018; Wang, Zhang, and
Yang 2020). For example, when there is an inevitable negative shock to the nodes, the network structure may magnify
the defaults, resulting in large-scale or even systemic risk
(Dumitrescu et al. 2022). Only after the capital chain rupture, the financial experts can analyze the cause.
In the banking industry, accidental default is tolerable in
most cases; large-scale default or systemic financial crisis is
to be firmly prevented. Figure 1 illustrates an example of risk
contagion in networked-loans. The default of node (Firm) A,
as can be seen, could spread to the whole network. Nodes B
and C need to repay the bank’s loan from Node A as the result of its default. Therefore, the risk spreads across with the
guarantee direction from Firm A to Firm B and C. The banking experts usually rely on the empirical research methodology and have difficulty in foreseeing how to stem the contagion risk effectively (Sui, Li, and Chen 2020; Cheng et al.
2019b). Therefore, in the post-pandemic era, monitoring and
mitigating the risk of contagion is more pressing than ever
for a healthy economic environment.
Previous work on credit risk modeling utilizes statistics
and regression methods as early as the 1950s (Baesens et al.
2003). Then, later in the 1980s, the Basel Committee issued
a series of recommendations on banking regulations (Basel
Capital Accord I, II, and III) to enhance the understanding
of critical regulatory issues and improve macro-prudential
oversight (Eubanks 2010; Acemoglu, Ozdaglar, and TahbazSalehi 2015; Georgios 2019). The principles have been
widely accepted by banks around the world (Montgomery
2005). Recently, machine learning and deep learning-based
approaches have gained success in various sectors (Tu et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2022), which have also been employed
for risk assessment in the current financial situation (Addo,

Introduction
The networked-loans, a kind of understudied financial network, increased their significant role in shaping the systemic
risk after the 2008 global crisis. The regulation and risk management attracted massive attention from the academic and
banking industry as MSMEs financing support is crucially
important for sustainable economic development. Thus, under the economic stimulus program, they are encouraged
to guarantee each other to apply for bank loans (Mian and
Sufi 2009) and thereby form complex loan networks. This
networked-loans differentiates itself from each node representing a borrower company to that in the usual financial networks where each node presents a financial institute. Such
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14205

