The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Resource Sharing Through Multi-Round Matchings
Yohai Trabelsi1 , Abhijin Adiga2 , Sarit Kraus1 , S. S. Ravi2, 3 , Daniel J. Rosenkrantz2, 3
1
Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel
Biocomplexity Institute and Initiative, Univ. of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA
3
Dept. of Computer Science, University at Albany – SUNY, Albany, NY, USA
yohai.trabelsi@gmail.com, abhijin@virginia.edu, sarit@cs.biu.ac.il, ssravi0@gmail.com, drosenkrantz@gmail.com
2

Abstract

of resources to which they can be matched or possible time
slots in which they can be matched. Any resource whose
specifications do not meet an agent’s restrictions is incompatible with that agent.
In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, such resource allocation problems have become as important as ever. For
example, social-distancing requirements (such as maintaining a six-foot separation between individuals) led to a dramatic decrease in the number of individuals who can occupy an enclosed space, whether it is a classroom (District Management Group 2020; Enriching Students 2020),
workspace (Parker 2020) or visitation room (Wong 2021).
We model this resource allocation problem as a k-round
matching problem on a bipartite graph, where the two node
sets represent the agents and resources respectively. We assume that the rounds are numbered 1 through k, and each
round matches a subset of agents with a subset of resources.
Each agent specifies the set of permissible rounds in which it
can participate and the desired number of rounds (or matchings) in which it needs to be assigned a resource. Consider for example a classroom scheduling for a workweek
(k = 5). Each lecturer who wants to schedule class sessions
for her courses specifies the number of sessions she would
like to schedule and the possible weekdays. There may also
be additional requirements for classrooms (e.g., room size,
location, computer lab). As a result, some agent-resource
pairs become incompatible. The P RINCIPAL’s objective is to
find a set of at most k matchings satisfying all the requirements, if one exists. In the classroom scheduling example,
the existence of such a set means that there exists a solution
where each lecturer receives the desired number of sessions
on the desired days.
We refer to this as the multi-round matching problem
(MRM). We consider two additional problem formulations
to cope with the situation when a solution satisfying all the
requirements does not exist.
In the first formulation, an agent receives a benefit (or
reward) that depends on the number of rounds where it is
matched, and the objective is to find a solution that maximizes the sum of the benefits over all agents. We refer to
this as the multi-round matching for total benefit maximization problem (abbreviated as M AX TB-MRM). When
applying this formulation to the classroom scheduling example, it is possible to find a solution in which the number of

Applications such as employees sharing office spaces over
a workweek can be modeled as problems where agents are
matched to resources over multiple rounds. Agents’ requirements limit the set of compatible resources and the rounds
in which they want to be matched. Viewing such an application as a multi-round matching problem on a bipartite compatibility graph between agents and resources, we show that
a solution (i.e., a set of matchings, with one matching per
round) can be found efficiently if one exists. To cope with
situations where a solution does not exist, we consider two
extensions. In the first extension, a benefit function is defined for each agent and the objective is to find a multi-round
matching to maximize the total benefit. For a general class of
benefit functions satisfying certain properties (including diminishing returns), we show that this multi-round matching
problem is efficiently solvable. This class includes utilitarian
and Rawlsian welfare functions. For another benefit function,
we show that the maximization problem is NP-hard. In the
second extension, the objective is to generate advice to each
agent (i.e., a subset of requirements to be relaxed) subject to a
budget constraint so that the agent can be matched. We show
that this budget-constrained advice generation problem is NPhard. For this problem, we develop an integer linear programming formulation as well as a heuristic based on local search.
We experimentally evaluate our algorithms on synthetic networks and apply them to two real-world situations: shared
office spaces and matching courses to classrooms.

1

Introduction

We consider resource allocation problems that arise in
practical applications such as hot desking or shared work
spaces (Varone and Beffa 2019; Cai and Khan 2010), classroom scheduling (Phillips et al. 2015), matching customers
with taxicabs (Karamanis, Anastasiadis, and Angeloudis
2021; Kucharski and Cats 2020), and matching agricultural equipment with farms (Gilbert 2018; Rakhra and Singh
2020). In such scenarios, many agents (individuals, cohorts,
farms, or in general, entities) are competing for a limited
number of time-shared resources. In our formulation, an
agent can be matched to at most one resource in any time
slot, but might want to be matched in more than one time
slot. Agents may have some restrictions that limit the set
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11681

