The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SeDepTTS: Enhancing the Naturalness via Semantic Dependency and Local
Convolution for Text-to-Speech Synthesis
Chenglong Jiang, Ying Gao* , Wing W. Y. Ng∗ ,
Jiyong Zhou, Jinghui Zhong, Hongzhong Zhen
School of Computer and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
{csjiangcl gx,202121044812,cshzzhen}@mail.scut.edu.cn, {gaoying,jinghuizhong}@scut.edu.cn, wingng@ieee.org
target
phrase

Abstract
Self-attention-based networks have obtained impressive performance in parallel training and global context modeling.
However, it is weak in local dependency capturing, especially for data with strong local correlations such as utterances. Therefore, we will mine linguistic information of the
original text based on a semantic dependency and the semantic relationship between nodes is regarded as prior knowledge
to revise the distribution of self-attention. On the other hand,
given the strong correlation between input characters, we introduce a one-dimensional (1-D) convolution neural network
(CNN) producing query(Q) and value(V) in the self-attention
mechanism for a better fusion of local contextual information.
Then, we migrate this variant of the self-attention networks
to speech synthesis tasks and propose a non-autoregressive
(NAR) neural Text-to-Speech (TTS): SeDepTTS. Experimental results show that our model yields good performance
in speech synthesis. Specifically, the proposed method yields
significant improvement for the processing of pause, stress,
and intonation in speech.

我们

AGT
mDEPD
mRELA **

**
**
即将 以 昂扬 的 斗志 迎来

mPUNC
PAT
PEAT
**
**

新

的

一

年

。

(a) Semantic dependency graph

(b) Original distribution

(c) Gaussian distribution of semantic dependency prior

Introduction

(d) Revised distribution

Speech synthesis aims to generate natural and expressive
speech from text. In recent years, the proposal of the
seq2seq (Cho et al. 2014) paradigm has significantly improved the performance of neural TTS. Autoregressive (AR)
neural TTS models are known to be able to generate speech
with naturalness such as Tacotron (Wang et al. 2017). However, these models use recurrent neural network units, so parallel training is not applicable. Recently, Transformer-based
NAR models (e.g., FastSpeech 1/2 (Ren et al. 2019, 2020))
have been proposed for the TTS task. Compared with AR
models, the NAR neural TTS has unique advantages in synthesis speed and global context modeling. But many studies
show that the self-attention mechanism has an inherent issue that dispersal the attention, which weakens the attention
of local information (Li et al. 2019; Guo, Zhang, and Liu
2019; Pilault, Pal et al. 2020), especially for data with relatively strong local correlation, such as text sentences. Therefore, in this paper, we will focus on the local modeling performance of the self-attention mechanism, especially on the

Figure 1: Semantic dependency prior. (a) illustrates the semantic dependency graph (SDG), where the phrase, connecting line and token indicates node, semantic dependency
arc and semantic relation token, respectively. ▽ denote the
central position corresponding to the target phrase;(b) The
distribution of attention for each phrase under the original
self-attention networks;(c) a Gaussian distribution of semantic dependence prior is introduced at the central position; (d)
The attention corrected by the prior knowledge.

distribution of attention in self-attention. An example of our
work as shown in Figure 1, we propose a method for fusing
the semantic dependency prior knowledge into the attention
distribution produced by self-attention.
Prior knowledge can effectively enhance the local modeling performance of the self-attention mechanism (Yang
et al. 2020; Guo, Zhang, and Liu 2019; Ying et al. 2021).
Yang et al. (Yang et al. 2018) propose introducing a learnable Gaussian bias to reconstruct the attention distribution in the self-attention mechanism for machine transla-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12959

