The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Hypotheses Tree Building for One-Shot Temporal Sentence Localization
Daizong Liu1,2 , Xiang Fang3 , Pan Zhou1* , Xing Di4 , Weining Lu5 , Yu Cheng6
1

School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
3
Nanyang Technological University
4
ProtagoLabs Inc
5
Tsinghua University
6
Microsoft Research
dzliu@hust.edu.cn, xfang9508@gmail.com, panzhou@hust.edu.cn, xing.di@protagolabs.com,
luwn@tsinghua.edu.cn, yu.cheng@microsoft.com
Sentence Query: We see the man in khakis stumble and fail repeatedly.

Abstract
Given an untrimmed video, temporal sentence localization
(TSL) aims to localize a specific segment according to a given
sentence query. Though respectable works have made decent
achievements in this task, they severely rely on dense video
frame annotations, which require a tremendous amount of human effort to collect. In this paper, we target another more
practical and challenging setting: one-shot temporal sentence
localization (one-shot TSL), which learns to retrieve the
query information among the entire video with only one annotated frame. Particularly, we propose an effective and novel
tree-structure baseline for one-shot TSL, called Multiple Hypotheses Segment Tree (MHST), to capture the query-aware
discriminative frame-wise information under the insufficient
annotations. Each video frame is taken as the leaf-node, and
the adjacent frames sharing the same visual-linguistic semantics will be merged into the upper non-leaf node for tree building. At last, each root node is an individual segment hypothesis containing the consecutive frames of its leaf-nodes. During the tree construction, we also introduce a pruning strategy to eliminate the interference of query-irrelevant nodes.
With our designed self-supervised loss functions, our MHST
is able to generate high-quality segment hypotheses for ranking and selection with the query. Experiments on two challenging datasets demonstrate that MHST achieves competitive performance compared to existing methods.

Ground Truth

| 58.87s
43.05s |
(a) An illustration of the temporal sentence localization.

Segment Hypothesis
Query-Guided

Negative Proposal

...

...
...

...

Positive Proposal

...

Segment Hypothesis

...

Positive Proposal

...

...

...

...

One-shot
Label

Ranking and
Selection

Segment Hypothesis

Tree Building Process

(b) An example of our proposed tree building process for segment generation.

Figure 1: (a) The example of the temporal sentence localization (TSL) task. (b) Illustration of the one-shot TSL setting
and our proposed tree-structure method.
2021a; Liu, Qu, and Zhou 2021; Liu et al. 2022d,b) proposed for this task are under fully-supervised setting, where
each frame is manually labeled as the query-relevant or
query-irrelevant frame. In spite of their great advances, these
methods severely rely on abundant video-query annotations,
which is labor-intensive and time-consuming to collect in
real-world scenarios. To alleviate this problem, some recent
works explore a weakly-supervised setting (Mithun, Paul,
and Roy-Chowdhury 2019; Lin et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2020c; Liu et al. 2022c; Chen et al. 2020b; Song et al. 2020)
with only the video-query correspondence rather than the
dense frame annotations. However, their performances are
validated to be less satisfied with such weak supervision.
In this paper, we aim to tackle a more practical and challenging scenario for TSL task, i.e., one-shot TSL, which
only has the label of one query-relevant frame in each video.
This one-shot TSL setting is first proposed by ViGA (Cui
et al. 2022), however, the performance of this model is
severely underestimated by current limited designs. We find
that previous supervised TSL methods also can not be directly applicable to this challenging setting due to the following limitations: 1) Firstly, most existing works generally
pre-define multiple segment proposals and utilize the dense
annotations to score these proposals for ranking and selec-

Introduction
Temporal sentence localization (TSL) (Anne Hendricks
et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2017) has drawn increasing attention in recent years, which aims to retrieve a temporal video
segment that semantically corresponds to a given sentence
query. An illustrative example of TSL is shown in Figure 1
(a). Clearly, this task involves both computer vision and natural language processing techniques for multi-modal encoding and cross-modal reasoning, to correctly locate the segment boundaries from an untrimmed video.
Most previous TSL works (Liu et al. 2018b; Ge et al.
2019; Yuan et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019a, 2020a; Chen
et al. 2020a; Yuan, Mei, and Zhu 2019; Liu et al. 2020b,a,
*Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1640

