The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Automata Cascades: Expressivity and Sample Complexity
Alessandro Ronca1 , Nadezda Alexandrovna Knorozova2,3 , Giuseppe De Giacomo1,4
1

DIAG, Sapienza University of Rome
2
RelationalAI
3
IFI, University of Zurich
4
Computer Science Department, University of Oxford
ronca@diag.uniroma1.it, nadezda.knorozova@relational.ai, giuseppe.degiacomo@cs.ox.ac.uk
Abstract

order to learn large dynamical systems made of many components, the amount of data required is exponential in the
number of components, as the number of states of a system
will typically be exponential in the number of its stateful
components.
We propose automata cascades as a structured, modular,
way to describe automata as complex systems made of many
components connected in an acyclic way. Our cascades are
strongly based on the theory of Krohn and Rhodes, which
says that every automaton can be decomposed into a cascade of basic components called prime automata (Krohn and
Rhodes 1965). Conversely, the theory can be seen as prescribing which components to use in order to build certain
classes of automata, and hence obtain a certain expressivity.
For example, we can cascade so-called flip-flop automata in
order to build all noncounting automata, and hence obtain
the expressivity of well-known logics such as monadic firstorder logic on finite linearly-ordered domains (McNaughton
and Papert 1971) and the linear temporal logic on finite
traces LTLf (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013).
We focus on cascades as a means to learn automata. Our
cascades are designed for a fine control of their sample complexity. We show that—ignoring logarithmic factors—the
sample complexity of automata cascades is at most linear in
the product of the number of components and the maximum
complexity of a single component. Notably, the complexity
of a single component does not grow with the number of
components in the cascade. We carry out the analysis both
in the setting where classes of automata cascades are finite,
and in the more general setting where they can be infinite.
For both cases, we obtain bounds of the same shape, with
one notable difference that for infinite classes we incur a
logarithmic dependency on the maximum length of a string.
Overall, our results show that the sample complexity of automata can be decoupled from the the number of states and
input letters. Rather, it can be described in terms of the components of a cascade capturing the automaton. Notably, the
number of states of such an automaton can be exponential in
the number of components of the cascade.
We see the opportunity for cascades to unlock a greater
potential of automata in learning applications. On one hand,
automata come with many favourable, well-understood, theoretical properties, and they admit elegant algorithmic solutions. On the other hand, the existing automata learning

Every automaton can be decomposed into a cascade of basic
prime automata. This is the Prime Decomposition Theorem
by Krohn and Rhodes. Guided by this theory, we propose automata cascades as a structured, modular, way to describe
automata as complex systems made of many components,
each implementing a specific functionality. Any automaton
can serve as a component; using specific components allows
for a fine-grained control of the expressivity of the resulting
class of automata; using prime automata as components implies specific expressivity guarantees. Moreover, specifying
automata as cascades allows for describing the sample complexity of automata in terms of their components. We show
that the sample complexity is linear in the number of components and the maximum complexity of a single component,
modulo logarithmic factors. This opens to the possibility of
learning automata representing large dynamical systems consisting of many parts interacting with each other. It is in
sharp contrast with the established understanding of the sample complexity of automata, described in terms of the overall
number of states and input letters, which implies that it is only
possible to learn automata where the number of states is linear in the amount of data available. Instead our results show
that one can learn automata with a number of states that is
exponential in the amount of data available.

Introduction
Automata are fundamental in computer science. They are
one of the simplest models of computation, with the expressive power of regular languages, placed at the bottom of the Chomsky hierarchy. They are also a mathematical model of finite-state dynamical systems. In learning
applications, automata allow for capturing targets that exhibit a time-dependent behaviour; namely, functions over
sequences such as time-series, traces of a system, histories of interactions between an agent and its environment.
Automata are typically viewed as state diagrams, where
states and transitions are the building blocks of an automaton, cf. (Hopcroft and Ullman 1979). Accordingly, classes
of automata are described in terms of the number of states
and input letters. Learning from such classes requires an
amount of data that is linear in the number of states and letters (Ishigami and Tani 1997). Practically it means that, in
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9588

