The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Pair-Approximation Method for Modelling the Dynamics of Multi-Agent
Stochastic Games
Chen Chu1,2 , Zheng Yuan1 , Shuyue Hu3 * , Chunjiang Mu2,4 , Zhen Wang2,4 *
2

1
School of Statistics and Mathematics, Yunnan University of Finance and Economics
School of Artificial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
4
School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University
hushuyue@pjlab.org.cn, w-zhen@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract

theory (EGT); thus, it has inspired many works in the literature. Along this line of research, Panozzo et al. (2014) generalize this model for Q-learning that operates on extensive
form games. Hennes et al. (2009) introduce a state-coupled
variant of this model, extending it to 2-player stochastic
games. However, these early works typically focus on twoagent interaction scenarios.
More recently, there have also been some works reported
on modelling the Q-learning dynamics beyond the two-agent
setting. Hu et al. (2019) leverages mean field theory and
derives a model for the evolution of an infinite well-mixed
population where Q-learning agents are randomly paired up
to play 2-player normal form games. Using a similar mean
field-theoretic approach, Leung et al. (2022) generalize the
model to capture the stochastic effects of local and incomplete information; Chu et al. (2022) propose a variant of the
model for Q-learning on regular graphs where each edge
represents a 2-player normal form game between two vertices (agents).
In this paper, we aim to formally model the learning dynamics in stochastic games under the infinite-agent setting.
Specifically, we consider the population structure to be a
complete graph, where each myopic Q-learner occupies a
node and each edge, connecting two agents, is associated
with a stochastic game with symmetric state transitions. At
a given time step, each agent takes an action to play against
all of its neighbours along every edge that the agent is connected with. Then, depending on the joint actions of two
connected agents, the state of the stochastic game transits.
Although infinite-agent settings and stochastic games each
have independently been studied, the learning dynamics in
stochastic games with infinitely many agents have not been
explored before. More importantly, this is a common and
realistic setting in the MARL literature, as modern MARL
algorithms often feature state transitions and a large number
of agents (Ganapathi Subramanian et al. 2020; Yang et al.
2018; Long et al. 2020).
A typical approach to formalizing the evolution of an infinite well-mixed population is based on mean field theory,
which approximates the effects of other agents on a focal
agent with a mean field. This approach, however, is incompatible with our considered setting. Modelling the dynamics in stochastic games poses a new challenge—how should
we reflect the correlation between strategic interactions and

Developing a dynamical model for learning in games has attracted much recent interest. In stochastic games, agents need
to make decisions in multiple states, and transitions between
states, in turn, influence the dynamics of strategies. While
previous works typically focus either on 2-agent stochastic
games or on normal form games under an infinite-agent setting, we aim at formally modelling the learning dynamics
in stochastic games under the infinite-agent setting. With a
novel use of pair-approximation method, we develop a formal model for myopic Q-learning in stochastic games with
symmetric state transition. We verify the descriptive power
of our model (a partial differential equation) across various
games through comparisons with agent-based simulation results. Based on our proposed model, we can gain qualitative
and quantitative insights into the influence of transition probabilities on the dynamics of strategies. In particular, we illustrate that a careful design of transition probabilities can help
players overcome the social dilemmas and promote cooperation, even if agents are myopic learners.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a significant gain in the capability of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). However, the theory underlying MARL is still far from being
well understood. One line of emergent research is to examine the evolutionary dynamics of learning in games (Bloembergen et al. 2015; Boone and Piliouras 2019; Cheung 2018;
Leonardos, Piliouras, and Spendlove 2021). As Tuyls and
Parsons (2007) voice, the development of theory in this direction is crucial because it will not only yield a better theoretical understanding of existing algorithms, but potentially
facilitate the design of new methods, leading to practical algorithmic advancements.
In their seminal work, Tuyls et al. (2003) propose the
selection-mutation model to formalize the dynamics of Qlearning (Watkins and Dayan 1992) with Boltzmann exploration in 2-player normal-form games. This model reveals
a surprising connection between multi-agent Q-learning and
the well-known replicator dynamics of evolutionary game
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5565

