The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MNER-QG: An End-to-End MRC Framework for Multimodal Named Entity
Recognition with Query Grounding
Meihuizi Jia1,2 , Lei Shen2 , Xin Shen3 , Lejian Liao1 , Meng Chen2 * , Xiaodong He2 ,
Zhendong Chen1 , Jiaqi Li1
1

School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
3
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
{jmhuizi24, liaolj, chenzd, 3120195492}@bit.edu.cn, {shenlei20, chenmeng20, xiaodong.he}@jd.com,
u6498962@anu.edu.au
Abstract
Multimodal named entity recognition (MNER) is a critical
step in information extraction, which aims to detect entity
spans and classify them to corresponding entity types given
a sentence-image pair. Existing methods either (1) obtain
named entities with coarse-grained visual clues from attention mechanisms, or (2) first detect fine-grained visual regions with toolkits and then recognize named entities. However, they suffer from improper alignment between entity
types and visual regions or error propagation in the twostage manner, which finally imports irrelevant visual information into texts. In this paper, we propose a novel end-to-end
framework named MNER-QG that can simultaneously perform MRC-based multimodal named entity recognition and
query grounding. Specifically, with the assistance of queries,
MNER-QG can provide prior knowledge of entity types and
visual regions, and further enhance representations of both
text and image. To conduct the query grounding task, we provide manual annotations and weak supervisions that are obtained via training a highly flexible visual grounding model
with transfer learning. We conduct extensive experiments on
two public MNER datasets, Twitter2015 and Twitter2017.
Experimental results show that MNER-QG outperforms the
current state-of-the-art models on the MNER task, and also
improves the query grounding performance.

Figure 1: Two examples of MNER-QG with entity type
“ORG”, “PER”, and “OTHER”.

and Carvalho 2018; Lu et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018; Arshad et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021a; Xu et al.
2022). However, it is hard to interpret and evaluate the effectiveness of implicit alignments. Recently, visual grounding
toolkits (Yang et al. 2019) are exploited to explicitly extract
visual regions related to different entity types (Zhang et al.
2021). The detected regions are then bound with the input
sentence and fed into the recognition model together (Jia
et al. 2022c). Because of the two-stage manner, incorporating inaccurate visual regions from the first stage will hurt the
final results (error propagation).
With respect to the problem formalization, early methods
regard MNER as a sequence labeling task that integrates image embeddings into a sequence labeling model and assigns
type labels to named entities. Recently, the machine reading
comprehension (MRC) framework is employed in many natural language processing tasks due to its solid language understanding capability (Li et al. 2019a,b; Chen et al. 2021b).
To take advantage of the prior knowledge encoded in MRC
queries (Li et al. 2019a), we consider MNER as a MRC
task, which extracts entity spans by answering queries about
entity types. In addition, to capture the fine-grained alignment between entity types and visual regions, we ground
the MRC queries on image regions and output their positions as bounding boxes. For example, as shown in Figure 1

Introduction
Multimodal named entity recognition (MNER) is a visionlanguage task that extends the traditional text-based NER
and alleviates ambiguity in natural languages by taking images as additional inputs. The essence of MNER is to effectively capture visual features corresponding to entity spans
and incorporate certain visual regions into textual representations.
Existing MNER datasets contain few fine-grained annotations in each sentence-image pair, i.e., the relevant image
is given as a whole without regional signals for a particular
entity type. Therefore, previous works implicitly align contents inside a sentence-image pair and fuse their representations based on various attention mechanisms (Moon, Neves,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8032

