The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Weakly Supervised 3D Segmentation via Receptive-Driven Pseudo Label
Consistency and Structural Consistency
Yuxiang Lan1∗ , Yachao Zhang1∗ , Yanyun Qu 1† , Cong Wang2 Chengyang Li 3 , Jia Cai 3
Yuan Xie 3† , Zongze Wu4
1

School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
2
Huawei Technologies, Shanghai, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
4
School of Mechatronics and Control Engineering, Shenzhen University, Guangdong, China
{lanyuxiang,yachaozhang}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract
As manual point-wise label is time and labor-intensive for fully supervised large-scale point cloud semantic segmentation,
weakly supervised method is increasingly active. However,
existing methods fail to generate high-quality pseudo labels
effectively, leading to unsatisfactory results. In this paper, we
propose a weakly supervised point cloud semantic segmentation framework via receptive-driven pseudo label consistency and structural consistency to mine potential knowledge.
Specifically, we propose three consistency contrains: pseudo label consistency among different scales, semantic structure consistency between intra-class features and class-level
relation structure consistency between pair-wise categories.
Three consistency constraints are jointly used to effectively
prepares and utilizes pseudo labels simultaneously for stable training. Finally, extensive experimental results on three
challenging datasets demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art weakly supervised methods
and even achieves comparable performance to the fully supervised methods.

Figure 1: Comparison of single-scale inference and multiscale inference in training stage and pseudo label selection
stage. 10101 indicates the multiple scale label in Training
stage and prediction in Pseudo label selection stage

Cheng et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021a; Hu et al. 2022; Liu,
Qi, and Fu 2021) have been attracting more attention to the
weakly supervised point cloud segmentation task.
In 3D weakly supervised learning, current popular methods can be roughly divided into two categories: pseudo labeling based methods (Zhang et al. 2021a; Cheng et al.
2021; Liu, Qi, and Fu 2021) and consistency based methods (Xu and Lee 2020; Zhang et al. 2021b). Current pseudo
labeling based methods (Zhang et al. 2021a; Cheng et al.
2021; Liu, Qi, and Fu 2021) generate pseudo labels at a single scale and use a pre-defined fixed threshold for pseudo
label selection. Firstly, single-scale inference only supervises the output prediction, in the case of sparse supervision
information, only a few valid labels can be used, which seriously affects the performance of the network, resulting in
unsatisfactory results. So, it is not an ideal solution. In contrast, as shown in Figure 1, receptive-driven multi-scale inference generates multiple scale labels by enriching the supervision information within the receptive field in the process of down-sampling. Then, using multiple scale labels to
supervise the features of multiple scales, which will more
fully mine and exploit extremely limited supervised information. Secondly, in the pseudo label selection stage, only using single-scale inference to select pseudo labels will
generate a large number of false pseudo labels, which will
bring too much noise for training. Additionally, these works (Zhang et al. 2021a; Cheng et al. 2021; Liu, Qi, and Fu

Introduction
Point cloud semantic segmentation attracts more and more
attention in the field of 3D computer vision due to its wide
applications in many scenarios, including remote sensing,
AR/VR, robotics, and automatic driving. Fully supervised
deep learning methods (Wu, Qi, and Fuxin 2019; Hu et al.
2020; Han et al. 2020; Yan et al. 2020; Ma et al. 2020)
are prevalently studied, which depends on densely annotated datasets. However, the full annotation for large-scale
datasets with amount of millions of points is labor-intensive
and time-consuming. Taking ScanNet-v2 (Dai et al. 2017) as
an example, it takes 22.3 minutes to annotate one scene on
average, and the entire dataset contains 1513 scenes. Due to
the lack of supervision information, the performance will be
severely degraded when directly extending the fully supervised method to weakly supervised learning (Hu et al. 2022).
Therefore, recent works (Wei et al. 2020; Xu and Lee 2020;
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1222

