The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Gradient Estimation for Binary Latent Variables via Gradient Variance Clipping
Russell Z. Kunes1,2,4 , Mingzhang Yin4,5 , Max Land2 , Doron Haviv2 , Dana Pe’er2,3 , Simon Tavaré1,4
2

1
Department of Statistics, Columbia University
Computational and Systems Biology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
3
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
4
Irving Institute of Cancer Dynamics, Columbia University
5
Warrington College of Business, University of Florida

Abstract

an intractable number function evaluations due to an exponential number of summation terms (Titsias and LázaroGredilla 2015). Moreover, the derivative of the function itself with respect to discrete variables is not well defined so
the chain rule-based reparametrization trick (Kingma and
Welling 2013) cannot be used.
A number of methods for estimating the gradient of expected values with respect to discrete random variables have
been devised (Dong, Mnih, and Tucker 2020; Dimitriev and
Zhou 2021; Dong, Mnih, and Tucker 2021; Yin, Yue, and
Zhou 2019; Titsias and Lázaro-Gredilla 2015; Tucker et al.
2017; Grathwohl et al. 2017; Titsias and Shi 2022). A central
role shared among the designs of useful gradient estimation
is to control the bias and variance of the estimates. One line
of research reduces the gradient variance in a trade-off of introducing bias. Widely used methods include continuous relaxations such as the Gumbel-softmax trick (Jang, Gu, and
Poole 2016; Maddison, Mnih, and Teh 2016; Paulus et al.
2020), and the straight through gradient estimator (Bengio,
Léonard, and Courville 2013; Yin et al. 2019), which have
been successfully applied for learning latent representations
of images (Razavi, Van den Oord, and Vinyals 2019) and
text (Tran et al. 2019). Another line of work considers unbiased estimates that offer guarantees of convergence under
conditions on the learning rate sequence (Ranganath, Gerrish, and Blei 2014; Robbins and Monro 1951). Some methods construct control variate baselines by continuous relaxation of the discrete distributions (Tucker et al. 2017; Grathwohl et al. 2017), by first-order Taylor expansions (Gu et al.
2015; Titsias and Shi 2022), or by Stein operators (Shi et al.
2022). Other methods reduce the estimator variance by applying antithetic sampling and coupled sampling (Yin and
Zhou 2019; Dong, Mnih, and Tucker 2020; Dimitriev and
Zhou 2021; Yin, Yue, and Zhou 2019; Yin et al. 2020; Kool,
van Hoof, and Welling 2019). Our work proceeds in this direction of designing unbiased and low-variance gradient estimators for discrete optimization.
In this work, we notice that in the context of Bernoulli discrete latent variables, a number of existing unbiased methods have unfavorably high variance at the boundary of the
parameter space (namely, near 0 and near 1) due to reliance
on an importance weight that is necessary in order to maintain unbiasedness. To address this downside of existing estimators, we introduce an unbiased gradient variance clip-

Gradient estimation is often necessary for fitting generative
models with discrete latent variables, in contexts such as
reinforcement learning and variational autoencoder (VAE)
training. The DisARM estimator achieves state of the art gradient variance for Bernoulli latent variable models in many
contexts. However, DisARM and other estimators have potentially exploding variance near the boundary of the parameter space, where solutions tend to lie. To ameliorate this
issue, we propose a new gradient estimator bitflip-1 that has
lower variance at the boundaries of the parameter space. As
bitflip-1 has complementary properties to existing estimators, we introduce an aggregated estimator, unbiased gradient variance clipping (UGC) that uses either a bitflip-1 or
a DisARM gradient update for each coordinate. We theoretically prove that UGC has uniformly lower variance than
DisARM. Empirically, we observe that UGC achieves the
optimal value of the optimization objectives in toy experiments, discrete VAE training, and in a best subset selection
problem.

Introduction
Many modern machine learning tasks rely on stochastic gradient estimators, where the estimand is the gradient of an
expected value Ez∼p(z;θ) [f (z)] that is intractable to compute
(Mohamed et al. 2020). For example, in reinforcement learning (RL) it is often of interest to compute the gradient of an
expected reward with respect to the parameters of a distribution over actions, where the reward may be a black box function of discrete states and actions (Li 2017). In variational inference, the objective function is the evidence lower bound,
expressed as an expected value of the log joint probability
of latent variable and data under a variational distribution
(Ranganath, Gerrish, and Blei 2014; Blei, Kucukelbir, and
McAuliffe 2017). In many cases z is discrete; for example,
in the design of biological sequences (Brookes, Park, and
Listgarten 2019) or in models with spike and slab Bayesian
priors (Moran et al. 2021).
When the latent variables z are discrete and high dimensional, there are several challenges in optimizing the meanvalued objective with respect to the distributional parameters θ. First, computing the exact expectation often requires
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8405

