The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Holistic Approach to Undesired Content Detection in the Real World
Warning: some content may contain racism, sexuality, or other harmful language.

Todor Markov* , Chong Zhang* , Sandhini Agarwal, Florentine Eloundou Nekoul,
Theodore Lee, Steven Adler, Angela Jiang, Lilian Weng*
OpenAI

Abstract
We present a holistic approach to building a robust and useful
natural language classification system for real-world content
moderation. The success of such a system relies on a chain of
carefully designed and executed steps, including the design
of content taxonomies and labeling instructions, data quality control, an active learning pipeline to capture rare events,
and a variety of methods to make the model robust and to
avoid overfitting. Our moderation system is trained to detect
a broad set of categories of undesired content, including sexual content, hateful content, violence, self-harm, and harassment. This approach generalizes to a wide range of different
content taxonomies and can be used to create high-quality
content classifiers that outperform off-the-shelf models.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in deep learning have accelerated the adoption of language models for socioeconomically valuable
tasks in the real world (Devlin et al. 2019; Brown et al.
2020; Thoppilan et al. 2022). Both the system builders and
users may benefit from a responsible deployment approach
that includes moderating the models’ outputs: First, model
providers may want assurances that the models will not produce content disallowed by their policies. Second, customers
of these models sometimes require control over content to
mitigate the impact of sensitive use cases or to reduce brand
risk. We believe that a strong undesired content classifier
provides fine-grained control to enable use cases with sensitive needs and also lays the foundation for building safer AI
systems in the wild, as it enables the capacity of moderating,
evaluating, and guiding the models towards safer behavior.
Existing work on content detection either focuses mainly
on a limited set of categories, including toxicity (Pavlopoulos et al. 2020; Gehman et al. 2020), hate speech (Kwok and
Wang 2013; Davidson et al. 2017), and abusive content (Nobata et al. 2016; Vidgen et al. 2019); or is tailored towards a
targeted use case, such as Perspective API (Jigsaw 2017) on
online toxic comment moderation. There is increasing attention to understanding the risk areas of large language models
via a more rigorous taxonomy (Weidinger et al. 2021), but

Figure 1: Overview of the model training framework.

the amount of work is still limited, especially when it comes
to deploying language models for real-world applications.
Here, we build a more comprehensive system for detecting
a broad set of categories of undesired content, including sexual content, hateful content, violence, self-harm, and harassment, as well as severe subcategories under each top-level
category. Large-scale content moderation systems and tooling exist on a number of platforms (YouTube 2019; Reddit
2022). We aim to provide a blueprint for creating such systems across a wide variety of use cases (Fig. 1).
Detecting undesired content is difficult due to a few challenges. First, there is no clearly and widely agreed-upon categorization of undesired content. Designing a detailed taxonomy for undesired content and operationalizing it for labeling purposes requires a lot of work. The categorization
framework usually needs to clarify a significant number of
corner cases to achieve high inter-rater agreement during
labeling. This is further complicated by the subjectivity of
some labeling decisions due to the different social and cultural backgrounds of human annotators. Second, a practical
moderation system needs to process real-world traffic. Thus,
a model bootstrapped from public data or academic datasets
would not work well because there exists a big data distribution shift and taxonomy misalignment. Third, it is rare to en-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*
These authors contributed equally to this work. Corresponding
author: lilian@openai.com.

15009

