The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Enabling Knowledge Refinement upon New Concepts in Abductive Learning
Yu-Xuan Huang, Wang-Zhou Dai, Yuan Jiang, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{huangyx, daiwz, jiangy, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

Representative frameworks include DeepProbLog (Manhaeve et al. 2018) and ABductive Learning (ABL) (Zhou
2019; Zhou and Huang 2022), in which the perception
model learns to convert raw data into primitive logic facts,
serving as input to symbolic reasoning; while the reasoning model tries to infer the truth-value of the perceived logic
facts based on a given knowledge base, for updating the perception model. The integration of the two systems is realized
by abduction, also known as abductive reasoning.
Most of the above methods focus on closed-environment
tasks, where a fixed and complete set of symbols representing the primitive concepts in domain are predefined in the
knowledge base. In other words, they assume that the knowledge base has contained all possible primitive concepts in
the task, and the logic facts to be perceived from incoming
data must be an instance of these predefined concepts. For
example, when trying to learn whether a handwritten arithmetic equation is correct, the system is already provided
with all the symbols of the numbers and operator symbols
that could appear in the data.
In real-world applications, the environment we encounter
is usually open and dynamic, a major challenge of which is
the emerging new concepts (Zhou 2022). Hence, it is crucial
for machine learning to enquire the ability to identify and
internalize the emerging new concepts, otherwise the model
would treat all the instances of new concepts as known ones
and degrades the performance.
The first difficulty lies in how to detect new concepts
while preserving the model performance on known concepts (Zhou 2022). The old background knowledge needs
to be enhanced and refined to incorporate the discovered
new concepts, whose semantics will be expressed by a set
of newly induced/abduced logic clauses that may conflict
with the current background knowledge base. Furthermore,
researchers have pointed out that adding arbitrary new rules
to an existing knowledge base might harm the interpretability of the model (Ai et al. 2021). Therefore, the semantics
of the new concepts should be reflected in their names with
meaningful words instead of meaningless symbols for better
human understanding.
This paper proposes to tackle the above challenges with
ABLnc (ABductive Learning with New Concept). It first
leverages machine learning to monitor the distribution
change in raw feature space and identify the instances of

Recently there are great efforts on leveraging machine learning and logical reasoning. Many approaches start from a
given knowledge base, and then try to utilize the knowledge to help machine learning. In real practice, however, the
given knowledge base can often be incomplete or even noisy,
and thus, it is crucial to develop the ability of knowledge
refinement or enhancement. This paper proposes to enable
the Abductive learning (ABL) paradigm to have the ability
of knowledge refinement/enhancement. In particular, we focus on the problem that, in contrast to closed-environment
tasks where a fixed set of symbols are enough to represent
the concepts in the domain, in open-environment tasks new
concepts may emerge. Ignoring those new concepts can lead
to significant performance decay, whereas it is challenging to
identify new concepts and add them to the existing knowledge base with potential conflicts resolved. We propose the
ABLnc approach which exploits machine learning in ABL to
identify new concepts from data, exploits knowledge graph
to match them with entities, and refines existing knowledge
base to resolve conflicts. The refined/enhanced knowledge
base can then be used in the next loop of ABL and help improve the performance of machine learning. Experiments on
three neuro-symbolic learning tasks verified the effectiveness
of the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

Integrating data-driven machine learning and knowledgedriven reasoning in a unified framework is considered to
be one of the keys to the next generation of Artificial Intelligence (AI). Recent years have witnessed representative
progress in this direction such as Neuro-Symbolic (NeSy)
Learning (Garcez et al. 2019; Raedt et al. 2020) and Statistical Relational AI (StarAI) (Raedt et al. 2016). Most of
them try to build a neural network structure or a probabilistic graphical model based on domain knowledge expressed in first-order logic. Probabilistic Logic Program
(PLP) (De Raedt and Kimmig 2015) extends first-order logic
to accommodate a probability distribution in Herbrand Universe to conduct probabilistic inference.
Recently, some researchers propose to build a hybrid
model, which usually consists of a perception model for machine learning and a reasoning model for logical reasoning.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7928

