The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Farsighted Probabilistic Sampling:
A General Strategy for Boosting Local Search MaxSAT Solvers
Jiongzhi Zheng1,2 , Kun He1,2 * , Jianrong Zhou1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
Hopcroft Center on Computing Science, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{jzzheng, brooklet60, jrzhou}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

plete algorithms for MaxSAT. One of the most common
frameworks of local search MaxSAT algorithms starts from
an initial solution, and then flips a variable in each iteration
to explore the solution space. Recently, many effective local
search strategies have been proposed for (W)PMS, such as
approaches for generating high-quality initial solutions (Cai,
Luo, and Zhang 2017; Cai and Lei 2020; Zheng et al. 2022),
variable selection strategies (Luo et al. 2017; Zheng et al.
2022), and clause weighting schemes (Cai et al. 2014; Luo
et al. 2017; Lei and Cai 2018).
These state-of-the-art local search algorithms (Cai et al.
2014; Luo et al. 2017; Lei and Cai 2018; Cai and Lei 2020;
Zheng et al. 2022) have made considerable achievements in
solving the (W)PMS. However, they all follow a similar single flipping mechanism to explore the solution space. That
is, they only flip a single variable in each iteration. Such a
mechanism may cause the algorithm easily fall into a local
optimum, i.e., flipping any variable can not improve the current solution. Thus the quality of the local optimal solutions
might not be good enough. Moreover, most of these algorithms escape from local optima by a simple random walk
strategy (Cai et al. 2014; Lei and Cai 2018; Cai and Lei
2020), i.e., satisfying a randomly selected falsified clause.
The high-degree randomness of this strategy may make it
hard for these algorithms to find a good direction for the
subsequent search.
To handle these issues, we propose a general variable
selection strategy, dubbed farsighted probabilistic sampling
(FPS), to replace the single flipping mechanism in the local
search (W)PMS solvers. FPS employs a two-level technique,
that allows the algorithm to look-ahead and considers the
benefit of continuously flipping a pair of variables, as well
as a probabilistic sampling approach. First, when there is no
single flipping that can improve the current solution (i.e., a
local optimum of the single flipping mechanism reaches),
FPS tries to look-ahead to find a pair of variables that flipping both can improve the current solution. In this way, local
optima can be further improved. Second, the two-level technique and the sampling strategy can provide more and better
search directions to escape from local optima. If FPS fails to
improve the current solution by flipping a pair of variables,
it will choose the best to flip among the best sampled single
variable and the best sampled pair of variables.
In the literature, there exist related studies that apply the

Local search has been demonstrated as an efficient approach
for two practical generalizations of the MaxSAT problem,
namely Partial MaxSAT (PMS) and Weighted PMS (WPMS).
In this work, we observe that most local search (W)PMS
solvers usually flip a single variable per iteration. Such a
mechanism may lead to relatively low-quality local optimal
solutions, and may limit the diversity of search directions
to escape from local optima. To address this issue, we propose a general strategy, called farsighted probabilistic sampling (FPS), to replace the single flipping mechanism so as
to boost the local search (W)PMS algorithms. FPS considers
the benefit of continuously flipping a pair of variables in order to find higher-quality local optimal solutions. Moreover,
FPS proposes an effective approach to escape from local optima by preferring the best to flip among the best sampled
single variable and the best sampled variable pair. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our proposed FPS strategy significantly improves the state-of-the-art (W)PMS solvers, and
FPS has an excellent generalization capability to various local
search MaxSAT solvers.

Introduction
Maximum Boolean Satisfiability (MaxSAT) is an optimization version of the famous SAT decision problem. Given
a propositional formula in the Conjunctive Normal Form
(CNF), MaxSAT aims to maximize the number of satisfied clauses. Partial MaxSAT (PMS) is a generalization of
MaxSAT, whose clauses are divided into hard and soft.
PMS aims to maximize the number of satisfied soft clauses
while satisfying all the hard clauses. In a more generalized situation, each soft clause is associated with a positive weight. The resulting problem is called Weighted PMS
(WPMS), which aims to maximize the total weight of satisfied soft clauses meanwhile satisfying all the hard clauses.
Both PMS and WPMS, denoted as (W)PMS, have many
practical applications, such as planning (Bonet, Francès, and
Geffner 2019), timetabling (Demirovic and Musliu 2017),
routing (Khadilkar 2022), group testing (Ciampiconi et al.
2020), etc.
Local search (Selman, Kautz, and Cohen 1993; Morris
1993; Cha et al. 1997) is a well-studied category of incom* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4132

