The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Better and Faster: Adaptive Event Conversion for Event-Based Object Detection
Yansong Peng, Yueyi Zhang* , Peilin Xiao, Xiaoyan Sun, Feng Wu
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China, 230026
{pengyansong, peilinxiao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhyuey, sunxiaoyan, fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

2022), which directly operate the raw events, have been proposed. The second category of event-based object detection
methods converts asynchronous events into image-like representations, such as event histogram (Moeys et al. 2016),
time surface (Lagorce et al. 2017) and event volume (Hu
et al. 2020). These representations are fed to frame-based
object detectors.
Given a series of excellent frame-based object detectors
have been proposed and achieved great success, in this paper, we attempt to exploit the potential of these frame-based
object detectors and extend them to event-based data. In
other words, we seek to achieve event-based object detection following the pipeline of the second category mentioned
before. The frame-based object detectors originally cannot
deal with event data. Thus, an efficient and effective conversion method is needed to transform the event data to event
frames. A number of methods have been proposed for event
conversion, but they either sacrifice performance or are very
time-consuming, not suitable for efficient end-to-end eventbased object detection.
To solve this problem, we first propose an event representation Hyper Histogram, which adequately preserves both
the polarity and fine-grained temporal information of events.
We also provide a fast implementation to convert events to
Hyper Histograms. Then, we consider that a suitable input
density is beneficial to event-based object detection. Thus,
we devise an efficient Adaptive Event Conversion (AEC)
module, which converts events into a Hyper Histogram according to the event density via an adaptive queue.
Similar to frame-based object detectors, data augmentation plays an important role in event-based object detection. However, the augmentation for event data is rarely explored. We propose a novel event-based data augmentation
method Shadow Mosaic that can directly handle the raw
asynchronous event streams. It can significantly increase the
sample diversity by randomly changing the scale and density
of the input event streams.
Our proposed methods can be easily combined with
frame-based detectors. We test three mainstream object
detection networks YOLOv5 (Jocher 2021), DeformableDETR (Zhu et al. 2021) and RetinaNet (Lin et al. 2020). Experimental results on both the 1Mpx (Perot et al. 2020) and
Gen1 (de Tournemire et al. 2020) datasets demonstrate that
our proposed method significantly outperforms the current

Event cameras are a kind of bio-inspired imaging sensor,
which asynchronously collect sparse event streams with
many advantages. In this paper, we focus on building better and faster event-based object detectors. To this end, we
first propose a computationally efficient event representation Hyper Histogram, which adequately preserves both the
polarity and temporal information of events. Then we devise an Adaptive Event Conversion module, which converts
events into Hyper Histograms according to event density via
an adaptive queue. Moreover, we introduce a novel eventbased augmentation method Shadow Mosaic, which significantly improves the event sample diversity and enhances the
generalization ability of detection models. We equip our proposed modules on three representative object detection models: YOLOv5, Deformable-DETR, and RetinaNet. Experimental results on three event-based detection datasets (1Mpx,
Gen1, and MVSEC-NIGHTL21) demonstrate that our proposed approach outperforms other state-of-the-art methods
by a large margin, while achieving a much faster running
speed (< 14 ms and < 4 ms for 50 ms event data on the
1Mpx and Gen1 datasets).

Introduction
The event camera is a bio-inspired sensor to capture dynamic visual information, which brings a new paradigm to
the sensing technology. Compared with traditional frame
cameras, event cameras offer high temporal resolution
(>10K fps) and high dynamic range (>120 dB), while
maintaining low power consumption (<10 mW) (Gallego,
Delbrück, and Orchard 2022). Object detection, which outputs the bounding box and classification for objects, is a
field that may benefit from the advantages, especially in the
scenes with low/high illumination and high moving speed.
After the birth of event cameras, there have been many attempts at event-based object detection (Liang et al. 2021;
Messikommer et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022; Cordone et al.
2022; Bi et al. 2020). They can be roughly classified into two
main categories according to the input representation. The
first category attempts to detect objects directly from asynchronous events. For example, SNN-based methods (Cordone et al. 2022) and GNN-based methods (Schaefer et al.
* Corresponding author: Yueyi Zhang
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2056

