The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Class-Independent Regularization for Learning with Noisy Labels
Rumeng Yi1 , Dayan Guan2 , Yaping Huang1 * and Shijian Lu3
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
rumengyi@bjtu.edu.cn, dayan.guan@mbzuai.ac.ae, yphuang@bjtu.edu.cn, shijian.lu@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Training deep neural networks (DNNs) with noisy labels often leads to poorly generalized models as DNNs tend to memorize the noisy labels in training. Various strategies have been
developed for improving sample selection precision and mitigating the noisy label memorization issue. However, most existing works adopt a class-dependent softmax classifier that is
vulnerable to noisy labels by entangling the classification of
multi-class features. This paper presents a class-independent
regularization (CIR) method that can effectively alleviate the
negative impact of noisy labels in DNN training. CIR regularizes the class-dependent softmax classifier by introducing
multi-binary classifiers each of which takes care of one class
only. Thanks to its class-independent nature, CIR is tolerant
to noisy labels as misclassification by one binary classifier
does not affect others. For effective training of CIR, we design a heterogeneous adaptive co-teaching strategy that forces
the class-independent and class-dependent classifiers to focus
on sample selection and image classification, respectively, in
a cooperative manner. Extensive experiments show that CIR
achieves superior performance consistently across multiple
benchmarks with both synthetic and real images. Code is
available at https://github.com/RumengYi/CIR.

(a) CIFAR-10: Clean

(b) CIFAR-10: Noisy

(c) CIFAR-100: Clean

(d) CIFAR-100: Noisy

Figure 1: Quantitative comparisons of class-independent
multi-binary classifier with standard class-dependent softmax classifier on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets with
clean and 80% symmetric noisy labels.

Introduction
samples. An active research direction is training DNNs with
selected or reweighted training, where the challenge is to
design a proper criterion for identifying clean samples. Existing criteria are mainly divided into two types: loss-based
criterion (i.e., small-loss (Han et al. 2018) (Yu et al. 2019)
and Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) (Li, Socher, and Hoi
2020)) and consistency-based criterion (i.e., prediction consistency between two networks (Wei et al. 2020) (Liang
et al. 2022) or two views (Yi and Huang 2021)). Although
promising performance gains have been witnessed by employing these sample selection strategies, they heavily rely
on the predictions from DNNs commonly trained with softmax cross-entropy loss. However, the standard softmax classifier is sensitive to noisy labels due to its class-dependent
property, i.e., the misclassification of one class penalizes the
activation on others (Chen et al. 2022) (Chen et al. 2019),
which not only outputs misleadingly high confidences on
noisy data, but also affects the training of other classes, and
eventually degrades the purity of the selected clean samples.
Given this insight, we propose a novel Class-Independent

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success in the computer vision community thanks to
the large-scale datasets with precisely human-annotated labels (Chen et al. 2018) (Girshick 2015). However, collecting such high-quality annotations is extremely expensive
and time-consuming, which may not be feasible in practice. Two alternative solutions are crowd-sourcing from nonexperts and online queries by search engines. Unfortunately,
these low-cost approaches inevitably introduce noisy labels. Recent studies have shown that DNNs can easily overfit to noisy labels and result in poor generalization performance (Zhang et al. 2017). Therefore, attention has been
concentrated on how to learn with noisy labels.
Recent studies have reached a consensus for learning from
noisy labels by jointly minimizing the negative impact of
noisy samples and maximizing the exploitation of clean
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3276

