The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Scene Graph to Image Synthesis via Knowledge Consensus
Yang Wu1 , Pengxu Wei1, * , Liang Lin1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, GuangDong Province
wuyang36@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, weipx3@mail.sysu.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org

latent code

In this paper, we study graph-to-image generation conditioned exclusively on scene graphs, in which we seek to
disentangle the veiled semantics between knowledge graphs
and images. While most existing research resorts to laborious auxiliary information such as object layouts or segmentation masks, it is also of interest to unveil the generalization
of the model with limited supervision, avoiding extra crossmodal alignments. To tackle this challenge, we delve into the
causality of the adversarial generation process, and reason out
a new principle to realize a simultaneous semantic disentanglement with an alignment on target and model distributions.
This principle is named knowledge consensus, which explicitly describes a triangle causal dependency among observed
images, graph semantics and hidden visual representations.
The consensus also determines a new graph-to-image generation framework, carried on several adversarial optimization
objectives. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that,
even conditioned only on scene graphs, our model surprisingly achieves superior performance on semantics-aware image generation, without losing the competence on manipulating the generation through knowledge graphs.

white

plant

short

sheep behinddog

small

cow near tree

tall

black

walking

scene graph

plant
sheep
dog
cow tree

Correspondence
Discovery
Mechanism

Conditional
Generator

Abstract

layout

2

plant

short

sheepbehind dog

white

small

cow near tree

tall

black

walking

scene graph

Causal
Dependence
Identification
deduced latent code
Correspondence
Discovery
Mechanism

Conditional
Generator

(a)
latent code

(b)

Figure 1: A comparison between (a) a typical graph-toimage generation algorithm that utilizes layout information
as auxiliary, and (b) our framework.

Introduction
Conditional image generation (Isola et al. 2017) has gained
popularity in computer vision for its ability of making generative modeling more controllable, as well as its potential of
cognitively understanding the visual world. Previous works,
for the most part, put their efforts into incorporating the condition with variety of scene descriptions, such as natural language instructions (Tan, Feng, and Ordonez 2019), bounding boxes (Zhao et al. 2019; Sun and Wu 2019; Talavera
et al. 2019), semantic segmentations (Reed et al. 2016; Li
et al. 2019), scene graphs (Johnson et al. 2018; Herzig et al.
2020), and many more. Although it is often reasonable to
combine as many types of conditions as possible, there is
also substantial motivation to use as little conditions as possible. The reasons may include but not limited to: 1) in real
world scenarios, it is not always guaranteed that all the conditions required by our model are accessible; 2) controlling
only one or two variables is also more user-friendly when

performing human-computer interaction generation; 3) introducing extra supervision is rather than an “addition”, but
instead a “multiplication”, since it might increase the complexity of the model.
In this paper, we follow the work of (Mittal et al. 2019)
and (Herzig et al. 2020) to synthesize images conditioning
only on scene graphs, since the scene graphs usually embody
objects and their relationships simultaneously (compared to
bounding boxes or other similar layout information), and
is easier to manipulate than languages and segmentations.
However, this apparently poses the challenge of only relying on the relationship between latent space and semantic
factors in scene graphs, when producing images with precise semantic consistency. To mitigate this challenge, (Mittal et al. 2019) and (Herzig et al. 2020) build the relationship
with relatively weak correspondence due to the ignorance of
semantic consistency, so that they usually fail on the synthesis quality compared with others with extra supervision.
Distinct from those methods, our goal is to take full advantage of the information embedded in the scene graph and

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2856

