The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Differentially Private Condorcet Voting
Zhechen Li1 , Ao Liu2 , Lirong Xia2 , Yongzhi Cao1∗ , Hanpin Wang3,1
1

Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies (MOE), School of Computer Science, Peking University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
3
School of Computer Science and Cyber Engineering, Guangzhou University, China
lizhechen@pku.edu.cn, liua6@rpi.edu, xialirong@gmail.com, caoyz@pku.edu.cn, whpxhy@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

act privacy-preserving level of the mechanisms is unclear.
Moreover, we are not aware of a previous work on making
voting private while maintaining the satisfaction to desirable
voting axioms beyond strategyproofness (Lee 2015). Therefore, the following question remains largely open.

Designing private voting rules is an important and pressing
problem for trustworthy democracy. In this paper, under the
framework of differential privacy, we propose a novel famliy
of randomized voting rules based on the well-known Condorcet method, and focus on three classes of voting rules
in this family: Laplacian Condorcet method (CMLAP
λ ), exponential Condorcet method (CMEXP
λ ), and randomized response Condorcet method (CMRR
λ ), where λ represents the
level of noise. We prove that all of our rules satisfy absolute monotonicity, lexi-participation, probabilistic Pareto efficiency, approximate probabilistic Condorcet criterion, and
approximate SD-strategyproofness. In addition, CMRR
λ satisfies (non-approximate) probabilistic Condorcet criterion,
while CMLAP
and CMEXP
satisfy strong lexi-participation. Fiλ
λ
nally, we regard differential privacy as a voting axiom, and
discuss its relations to other axioms.

1

How can we design private voting rules that satisfy
desirable axiomatic properties?
Our contributions. We propose a novel class of random, based on the celized voting rules, denoted by CMRand
λ
ebrated Condorcet method, which chooses the Condorcet
winner when it exists, where Rand is a randomized function (called a mechanism in DP literature) that introduces
noises to pairwise comparisons between alternatives, and λ
represents the level of noise. To choose a winner, CMRand
λ
applies Rand with parameter λ to the pairwise comparisons
for the input profile until a Condorcet winner appears, and
then chooses it as the winner.
We focus on three classes voting rules in this family,
RR
EXP
namely CMLAP
λ , CMλ , and CMλ , which are obtained by
applying the Laplace mechanism, exponential mechanism,
and randomized response mechanism, respectively. Under
these mechanisms, while it may take exponentially many iterations to obtain the winner by definition, we show that the
winner can be efficiently sampled (Lemma 1).
Our main technical contributions are three-fold. First, we
prove that all the three classes of voting rules are differentially private by characterizing the upper and lower bounds
on the privacy budget  (Theorem 1). Second, we study
the satisfaction of our voting rules to probabilistic variants
to Condorcet criterion (p-Condorcet, requiring the winning
rate of the Condorcet winner is not lower than the other alternatives), Pareto efficiency (p-Pareto, which requires the winning rate of a is not lower than b, if a Pareto dominates b),
monotonicity (a-monotonicity, which ensures the winning
rate of each alternative does not decrease when her ranking is lifted by any voter simply), strategyproofness (SDstrategyproofness, SD-SP for short, which ensures that no
voter can benefit herself in the sense of stochastic dominance
by changing her vote), and participation (lexi-participation,
which ensures that no voter can improve the result of the
voting lexicographically by withdrawing her vote). Besides,
we consider the approximate version of p-Condorcet (α-pCondorcet, Definition 5) and SD-SP (α-SD-SP, Definition

Introduction

Voting is a commonly used method for group decision making, where voters submit their preferences over a set of alternatives, and then a voting rule is applied to choose the
winner. A major and classical paradigm behind the design
and analysis of voting rules is the axiomatic approach (Plott
1976), under which voting rules are evaluated by their satisfaction to various normative properties, known as (voting)
axioms. For example, the Condorcet criterion requires that
whenever there exists a Condorcet winner, which is the alternative that beats all other alternatives in their head-to-head
competitions, it must be selected as the winner.
Recently, privacy in voting has become a critical public concern. There are a series of works on examining the
differential privacy (DP) (Dwork 2006) of voting (Shang
et al. 2014; Hay, Elagina, and Miklau 2017; Yan, Li, and Liu
2020). These works mainly focused on applying several randomized mechanisms to existing voting rules, proving upper
bounds on the privacy-preserving level (also called privacy
budget, denoted by  throughout the paper), and then evaluating the utility loss (measured by accuracy or mean square
error) due to randomness. However, the upper bounds on privacy in most of them are not tight, which means that the ex∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5755

