The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Strategyproofness and Proportionality in Party-Approval Multiwinner Elections
Théo Delemazure1 , Tom Demeulemeester2 , Manuel Eberl3 , Jonas Israel4 , Patrick Lederer5
1

Paris Dauphine University, PSL, CNRS, France,
Research Center for Operations Research & Statistics, KU Leuven, Belgium,
3
Computational Logic Group, University of Innsbruck, Austria,
4
Research Group Efficient Algorithms, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany,
5
Technical University of Munich, Germany,
theo.delemazure@dauphine.eu, tom.demeulemeester@kuleuven.be, manuel.eberl@uibk.ac.at, j.israel@tu-berlin.de,
ledererp@in.tum.de
2

Abstract

size, is elected based on the approval ballots of the voters,
i.e., each voter reports a set of approved parties instead of
only her most preferred one.
Two central desiderata for party-approval elections are proportional representation and strategyproofness. The former
requires that the chosen committee should proportionally
reflect the voters’ preferences. The latter postulates that no
voter can benefit by misreporting her preferences. While Brill
et al. (2020) have shown that even core-stable committees,
which satisfy one of the highest degrees of proportionality,
always exist in party-approval elections, strategyproofness is
not yet well-understood for this setting. We thus analyze the
trade-off between strategyproofness and proportional representation for party-approval elections in this paper.
Our research question also draws motivation from related
models (see Figure 1 for details). Firstly, party-approval
elections can be seen as a special case of approval-based
committee (ABC) elections, where voters approve individual
candidates instead of parties and the outcome is a subset
of the candidates instead of a multiset. For ABC elections,
proportionality and strategyproofness have received significant attention (see, e.g., the survey by Lackner and Skowron
(2022)). Unfortunately, these axioms are jointly incompatible for ABC voting rules (Peters 2018) and our study can
thus be seen as an attempt to circumvent this impossibility.
Even more, there are hints that these axioms could be compatible for party-approval elections: this setting lies logically
between ABC elections on one side, and either apportionment (where voters can only approve a single party instead of
multiple ones (Balinski and Young 2001; Pukelsheim 2014))
or fair mixing (where the outcome is a probability distribution
over the parties instead of a multiset (Bogomolnaia, Moulin,
and Stong 2005; Aziz, Bogomolnaia, and Moulin 2019)) on
the other side. Since strategyproofness and proportionality
are compatible in the latter two models, it seems reasonable
to conjecture positive results for party-approval elections.

In party-approval multiwinner elections the goal is to allocate
the seats of a fixed-size committee to parties based on the
approval ballots of the voters over the parties. In particular,
each voter can approve multiple parties and each party can
be assigned multiple seats. Two central requirements in this
setting are proportional representation and strategyproofness.
Intuitively, proportional representation requires that every sufficiently large group of voters with similar preferences is represented in the committee. Strategyproofness demands that
no voter can benefit by misreporting her true preferences. We
show that these two axioms are incompatible for anonymous
party-approval multiwinner voting rules, thus proving a farreaching impossibility theorem. The proof of this result is
obtained by formulating the problem in propositional logic
and then letting a SAT solver show that the formula is unsatisfiable. Additionally, we demonstrate how to circumvent this
impossibility by considering a weakening of strategyproofness
which requires that only voters who do not approve any elected party cannot manipulate. While most common voting rules
fail even this weak notion of strategyproofness, we characterize Chamberlin–Courant approval voting within the class of
Thiele rules based on this strategyproofness notion.

1

Introduction

A central problem in multi-agent systems is collective decision making: given the preferences of multiple agents over a
set of alternatives, a joint decision has to be made. While classic literature for this problem focuses on the case of choosing
a single alternative as the winner, there is also a wide range
of scenarios where a set of winners needs to be elected. For
instance, this is the case in parliamentary elections, where
the seats of a parliament are assigned to parties based on the
voters’ preferences. In the literature, parliamentary elections
are studied under the term apportionment and a crucial assumption for their analysis is that voters are only allowed to
vote for a single party (Balinski and Young 2001; Pukelsheim
2014). However, this assumption has recently been criticized
because of its lack of flexibility and expressiveness (Brill,
Laslier, and Skowron 2018; Brill et al. 2020). Following Brill
et al. (2020), we thus study party-approval elections. In this
setting, the parliament, or more generally a multiset of fixed

Our contribution. Unfortunately, it turns out that strategyproofness conflicts even with minimal notions of proportional representation in party-approval elections. To prove
this, we introduce the notions of weak representation and
weak proportional representation, which require that a party
is assigned at least 1 (resp. ℓ) out of k available seats if it
is uniquely approved by at least an k1 (resp. kℓ ) fraction of

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5591

