The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Sparse Maximum Margin Learning from Multimodal Human Behavioral Patterns
Ervine Zheng, Qi Yu, Zhi Zheng
Rochester Institute of Technology
{mxz5733, qi.yu, zhzbme}@rit.edu

Abstract

and integration (Hori et al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2019), reduce
noise through a multi-feature autoencoder (Ma et al. 2016),
and effectively handle missing data through a generative
variational module (Seo et al. 2018). With a deep network,
multimodal feature vectors can be concatenated for fusion
purposes (Baltrušaitis, Ahuja, and Morency 2018).
However, applying data fusion models to human behavioral studies still faces fundamental challenges in specialized
domains, such as psychology and health. One primary reason
is that data collection is usually based on rigorously designed
experiments involving human subjects, which is difficult to
conduct on a large scale. The limited behavioral data may
hinder the application of the existing data-driven models that
require massive training data (Wu and Goodman 2018; Tsai
et al. 2019; Kumar et al. 2021). Besides data scarcity, there
are several critical requirements of behavioral analytics that
may not be simultaneously satisfied by existing data-driven
models: 1) Human behavioral data is inherently dynamic
and multimodal, while behavioral research in psychology
and health domains usually requires discovering interpretable
patterns from complex behavior. 2) Aside from pattern discovery, research in those specialized domains may involve
classification tasks, such as predicting which social group a
person belongs to based on the observed behaviors. However,
if pattern discovery (unsupervised) and classification (supervised) are conducted in isolation, some discovered patterns
may not contribute to classification and may cause model
overfitting. 3) Some modalities of human behavioral data may
be highly noisy or exhibit no easily distinguishable patterns.
Directly using such data for downstream domain research
without systematic feature selection will negatively impact
the final decision-making process.
To address the fundamental challenges and meet all critical
requirements simultaneously, we propose Sparse Maximum
Margin learning from Multimodal Recurrent States (SM2 MRS) of human behavioral patterns. The MRS model extracts significant patterns from the observed human behavioral data and uses a latent state space to dynamically fuse
the patterns from different modalities. In particular, MRS
formulates a two-tier probabilistic mixture model. The lower
tier models the observations from each modality as a mixture
of component distributions from the exponential family (EF).
Mixtures of EF distributions are adopted due to the following
reasons. First, most behavioral data are low-dimensional in

We propose a multimodal data fusion framework to systematically analyze human behavioral data from specialized domains
that are inherently dynamic, sparse, and heterogeneous. We develop a two-tier architecture of probabilistic mixtures, where
the lower tier leverages parametric distributions from the exponential family to extract significant behavioral patterns from
each data modality. These patterns are then organized into a
dynamic latent state space at the higher tier to fuse patterns
from different modalities. In addition, our framework jointly
performs pattern discovery and maximum-margin learning
for downstream classification tasks by using a group-wise
sparse prior that regularizes the coefficients of the maximummargin classifier. Therefore, the discovered patterns are highly
interpretable and discriminative to support downstream classification tasks. Experiments on real-world behavioral data
from medical and psychological domains demonstrate that
our framework discovers meaningful multimodal behavioral
patterns with improved interpretability and prediction performance.

Introduction
Analyzing human behavior is an important and broad research topic in various areas, including decision science,
economics, sociology, and many more (Pantic et al. 2007).
Human behavioral data usually involves multiple modalities (Barros et al. 2018; Rasouli, Kotseruba, and Tsotsos
2017), such as verbal communications, gestures, eye gazes,
and facial expressions. The research of human behaviors has
significantly benefited from the technological advances in
multimodal data fusion (Song, Morency, and Davis 2012).
Data fusion can capture the complex relationship across
modalities and provide predictive information for understanding the data. For example, factorization-based models decompose the data into the shared factor matrix and the matrix capturing the uniqueness of each modality (Correa et al.
2010; Sorber, Van Barel, and De Lathauwer 2015). Bayesian
graphical models capture the joint probability of multiple
modalities, or conditional probability of cross-modal relations (Velivelli and Huang 2008; Nakamura et al. 2011). In
recent years, deep neural networks (DNN) have been developed for data fusion, aiming to model complicated relationships among modalities through multi-level feature extraction
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5437

