The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DM2 : Decentralized Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning via Distribution
Matching
Caroline Wang1 * , Ishan Durugkar1 * , Elad Liebman2 * , Peter Stone1,3
1

The University of Texas at Austin
2
SparkCognition Research
3
Sony AI
caroline.l.wang@utexas.edu, ishand@cs.utexas.edu,
eliebman@sparkcognition.com, pstone@cs.utexas.edu
Abstract
Current approaches to multi-agent cooperation rely heavily
on centralized mechanisms or explicit communication protocols to ensure convergence. This paper studies the problem
of distributed multi-agent learning without resorting to centralized components or explicit communication. It examines
the use of distribution matching to facilitate the coordination
of independent agents. In the proposed scheme, each agent
independently minimizes the distribution mismatch to the corresponding component of a target visitation distribution. The
theoretical analysis shows that under certain conditions, each
agent minimizing its individual distribution mismatch allows
the convergence to the joint policy that generated the target
distribution. Further, if the target distribution is from a joint
policy that optimizes a cooperative task, the optimal policy for
a combination of this task reward and the distribution matching
reward is the same joint policy. This insight is used to formulate a practical algorithm (DM2 ), in which each individual
agent matches a target distribution derived from concurrently
sampled trajectories from a joint expert policy. Experimental
validation on the StarCraft domain shows that combining (1) a
task reward, and (2) a distribution matching reward for expert
demonstrations for the same task, allows agents to outperform
a naive distributed baseline. Additional experiments probe
the conditions under which expert demonstrations need to be
sampled to obtain the learning benefits.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) (Littman 1994)
is a paradigm for learning agent policies that may interact
with each other in cooperative or competitive settings (Silver et al. 2017, 2018; Barrett and Stone 2012; Leibo et al.
2017). Training multiple agents at once is challenging, since
an agent updating its own strategy induces a nonstationary
environment for other agents, potentially leading to training
instabilities, and offsetting any theoretical guarantees single
agent RL algorithms confer. To overcome these issues, agent
policies can be set up as a single, centralized joint policy, be
trained together but then deployed individually (Rashid et al.
2018; Foerster et al. 2018), or be coordinated through some
form of communication (Lowe et al. 2017; Jaques et al. 2019;
Liu et al. 2021).
* Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11699

Fully distributed training of agent policies remains an open
problem in MARL. Distributed, or decentralized, training is
desirable particularly in situations where parallelism, robustness, flexibility, or scalability is needed. Such settings include
where there are a large number of agents, where agents are
faced with changing environments (Marinescu, Dusparic,
and Clarke 2017), where agents must perform tasks in varying team configurations over their lifetime (Thrun 1998), or
where ensuring privacy is a concern (Léauté and Faltings
2013).
This paper considers the setting of cooperative tasks involving K agents, where the goal is to learn a high-performing
joint policy in a fully distributed fashion. To mitigate the
limitations imposed by this setting, we propose distribution
matching to a target state-action distribution, as a strategy
to induce coordination. We assume that this distribution is
associated with the execution of some joint policy, such as
demonstrations of expert teams (Song et al. 2018), or from
high-performing trajectories from the agents’ past interactions (Hao et al. 2019). One tempting way to utilize this
distribution is to assign each agent the distribution associated
with its corresponding expert, and have the agent minimize
the distribution mismatch to this target distribution over states
and actions.
At first glance, this approach is fraught with complications.
Since the target distribution over states and actions is based
on the execution of some joint policy, a single agent trying
to adjust its policy might not make meaningful progress on
its own, given that other agents could change their behaviors
at the same time. Second, this distributed approach to distribution matching could suffer from the same destabilization
that causes distributed MARL to diverge (Hernandez-Leal,
Kartal, and Taylor 2019; Yang and Wang 2020).
This paper shows that despite the above complications,
individual distribution matching can be combined with maximization of shared task rewards to learn effectively. In particular, the contributions of the paper are:
• Theoretical analysis showing that distributed distribution
matching to the target distributions converges to the joint
expert policy that generated the demonstrations.
• The DM2 algorithm, a practical method combining the distribution matching reward with the task reward. Experimental validation shows that if demonstrations are aligned with
the shared objective, DM2 accelerates learning compared

