The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

RESDSQL: Decoupling Schema Linking and Skeleton Parsing for Text-to-SQL
Haoyang Li1,2,3 , Jing Zhang1,2,3 * , Cuiping Li1,2,3 , Hong Chen1,2,3
1

Key Laboratory of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Renmin University of China
2
Engineering Research Center of Ministry of Education on Database and BI
3
Information School, Renmin University of China
{lihaoyang.cs, zhang-jing, licuiping, chong}@ruc.edu.cn

Question
What are flight numbers of flights departing from City
"Aberdeen"?

Abstract
One of the recent best attempts at Text-to-SQL is the pretrained language model. Due to the structural property of the
SQL queries, the seq2seq model takes the responsibility of
parsing both the schema items (i.e., tables and columns) and
the skeleton (i.e., SQL keywords). Such coupled targets increase the difficulty of parsing the correct SQL queries especially when they involve many schema items and logic
operators. This paper proposes a ranking-enhanced encoding and skeleton-aware decoding framework to decouple the
schema linking and the skeleton parsing. Specifically, for a
seq2seq encoder-decode model, its encoder is injected by
the most relevant schema items instead of the whole unordered ones, which could alleviate the schema linking effort during SQL parsing, and its decoder first generates the
skeleton and then the actual SQL query, which could implicitly constrain the SQL parsing. We evaluate our proposed framework on Spider and its three robustness variants: Spider-DK, Spider-Syn, and Spider-Realistic. The experimental results show that our framework delivers promising performance and robustness. Our code is available at
https://github.com/RUCKBReasoning/RESDSQL.

Database schema (including tables and columns)
airlines (airlines)
uid
airline
abbreviation
country
(airline id) (airline name) (abbreviation) (country)
airports (airports)
city
airportcode
airportname
country
(city)
(airport code) (airport name) (country)
countryabbrev
(country abbrev)
flights (flights)
airline
flightno
(airline) (flight number)
destairport
(destination airport)

sourceairport
(source airport)

Serialize schema items.
Schema sequence
airlines: uid, airline, abbreviation, county|airports:
city, airportcode, airportname, county, countyabbrev|
flights: airline, flightno, sourceairport, destairport

Question + Schema sequence
Seq2seq PLM (such as BART and T5)
SQL query
select flights.flightno from flights join airports on
flights.sourceairport = airports.airportcode where
airports.city = “Aberdeen”

Introduction
Relational databases that are used to store heterogeneous
data types including text, integer, float, etc., are omnipresent
in modern data management systems. However, ordinary
users usually cannot make the best use of databases because they are not good at translating their requirements to
the database language—i.e., the structured query language
(SQL). To assist these non-professional users in querying
the databases, researchers propose the Text-to-SQL task (Yu
et al. 2018a; Cai et al. 2018), which aims to automatically translate users’ natural language questions into SQL
queries. At the same time, related benchmarks are becoming increasingly complex, from the single-domain benchmarks such as ATIS (Iyer et al. 2017) and GeoQuery (Zelle
and Mooney 1996) to the cross-domain benchmarks such as
WikiSQL (Zhong, Xiong, and Socher 2017) and Spider (Yu
et al. 2018c). Most of the recent works are done on Spider because it is the most challenging benchmark which in-

Figure 1: Illustration of a Text-to-SQL instance solved by a
seq2seq PLM. In the database schema, each schema item is
denoted by its “original name (semantic name)”.

volves many complex SQL operators (such as GROUP BY,
ORDER BY, and HAVING, etc.) and nested SQL queries.
With the recent advances in pre-trained language models (PLMs), many existing works formulate the Text-to-SQL
task as a semantic parsing problem and use a sequence-tosequence (seq2seq) model to solve it (Scholak, Schucher,
and Bahdanau 2021; Shi et al. 2021; Shaw et al. 2021). Concretely, as shown in Figure 1, given a question and a database
schema, the schema items are serialized into a schema sequence where the order of the schema items is either default
or random. Then, a seq2seq PLM, such as BART (Lewis
et al. 2020) and T5 (Raffel et al. 2020), is leveraged to generate the SQL query based on the concatenation of the ques-

* Jing Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13067

