The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ConvMatch: Rethinking Network Design for Two-View Correspondence Learning
Shihua Zhang, Jiayi Ma*
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
suhzhang001@gmail.com, jyma2010@gmail.com

Abstract
Multilayer perceptron (MLP) has been widely used in twoview correspondence learning for only unordered correspondences provided, and it extracts deep features from individual
correspondence effectively. However, the problem of lacking
context information limits its performance and hence, many
extra complex blocks are designed to capture such information in the follow-up studies. In this paper, from a novel
perspective, we design a correspondence learning network
called ConvMatch that for the first time can leverage convolutional neural network (CNN) as the backbone to capture better context, thus avoiding the complex design of extra blocks. Specifically, with the observation that sparse motion vectors and dense motion field can be converted into
each other with interpolating and sampling, we regularize
the putative motion vectors by estimating dense motion field
implicitly, then rectify the errors caused by outliers in local areas with CNN, and finally obtain correct motion vectors from the rectified motion field. Extensive experiments
reveal that ConvMatch with a simple CNN backbone consistently outperforms state-of-the-arts including MLP-based
methods for relative pose estimation and homography estimation, and shows promising generalization ability to different datasets and descriptors. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/SuhZhang/ConvMatch.

(a) Interconversion of dense motion field and sparse motion vectors
ℱ

ℱ
CNN
(b) Framework of ConvMatch for two-view correspondence learning

Figure 1: Illustrations of the proposed framework for correspondence learning. Lines or arrows colored with blue are
inliers, with red are outliers, and with green are rectified outliers. The head and tail of each arrow correspond to the positions of feature points in two images. (a) Interconversion of
dense motion field and sparse motion vectors, where motion
field can act as the bridge between unordered and ordered
motion vectors. From left to right: putative correspondences,
sparse unordered motion vectors, dense motion filed, sparse
ordered motion vectors. (b) Our framework with three steps:
regularizing the unordered motion vectors to ordered ones
with motion field F , rectifying errors of ordered motion
vectors with CNN, recovering the unordered motion vectors
from rectified ordered ones with rectified motion field Fe.

Introduction
Two-view corresponding is a fundamental problem in computer vision. It aims to establish sparse feature correspondences/matches between two-view images and estimate geometry relationship, serving as a premise for many complex
vision problems such as structure from motion (Snavely,
Seitz, and Szeliski 2008), simultaneous location and mapping (Mur-Artal, Montiel, and Tardos 2015), visual localization (Philbin et al. 2010), and image fusion (Xu et al. 2022).
The most classical geometry matching pipeline starts from
feature extraction and matching, and great efforts have been
spent on handcrafted or learning-based detectors and descriptors, e.g., SIFT (Lowe 2004) and SuperPoint (DeTone,
Malisiewicz, and Rabinovich 2018). Outlier rejection is then
applied to preserve correct matches (a.k.a. inliers) and reject false ones (a.k.a. outliers) caused by sensitive detector-

descriptor methods, estimating relative pose robustly. This
paper also focuses on removing outliers to obtain two-view
correspondences and geometry relationship accurately.
Among the traditional methods, RANSAC (Fischler and
Bolles 1981) and its variants (Raguram et al. 2012; Barath,
Matas, and Noskova 2019) obtain the smallest consistent
inlier set to fit a given transformation model. The locality
consistency-based methods such as LPM (Ma et al. 2019)
and GMS (Bian et al. 2017) are also well developed, together
with another active topic based on motion field consensus,
e.g., CRC (Fan et al. 2021) and VFC (Ma et al. 2014). However, handcrafted methods often fail in case of heavy outliers
due to extreme viewpoint changes or repetitive structures,
which often occur in the feature matching problem. Hence,
researchers seek help from more powerful learning-based

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3472

