The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Contrastive Classification and Representation Learning with Probabilistic
Interpretation
Rahaf Aljundi1 , Yash Patel2 , Milan Sulc 2 , Nikolay Chumerin1 , Daniel Olmeda Reino1
1

2

Toyota Motor Europe
Visual Recognition Group, Czech Technical University in Prague
rahaf.al.jundi@toyota-europe.com

Abstract

shown that supervised contrastive learning marginally outperforms the cross entropy loss in fully supervised image
classification (Khosla et al. 2020). Not only for standard
supervised classification but it has been applied in continual learning (Davari et al. 2022), Out of Distribution Detection (Winkens et al. 2020), Domain Adaptation (Chen
et al. 2022) and many more showing superior performance
to cross entropy based counterpart.
Minimizing cross entropy (CE) loss is widely used in
training deep neural network classifiers, derived as the maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) of classifier’s parameters θ
to approximate posterior probabilities p̂(class|observation).
(Boudiaf et al. 2020) draw the connection among popular
pairwise-distance losses and the cross entropy loss, showing that all of them are related to maximizing the mutual
information (MI) between the learned embeddings and the
corresponding samples’ labels.
We emphasize the advantages of the probabilistic interpretation of the CE loss in classification problems. Such
explicit probabilistic interpretation is missing within the
embedding spaces trained by popular contrastive learning
methods. The posterior estimates p̂(class|observation) can
be utilized when combining classifiers (Kittler et al. 1998;
Breiman 1996; Ju, Bibaut, and van der Laan 2018), in adaptation to prior shift (Saerens, Latinne, and Decaestecker
2002; Sulc and Matas 2019; Alexandari, Kundaje, and
Shrikumar 2020; Sipka, Sulc, and Matas 2021), in knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015); out-ofdistribution detection (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2016) and in
many other problems.
In this work, we suggest that one possible reason for the
improved performance of supervised contrastive learning is
the inherent access to a large number of samples pairs, while
the “pairs” within the softmax CE loss are centered around
the linear classifier weights. Here we draw an analogy with
proxy based loss and consider the linear classifier weights
optimized in the softmax CE loss as proxies for learning
the samples representations. Proxy base training that utilizes proxies instead of the direct sample to sample relationship is simple and faster to converge, however, it doesn’t
leverage the rich data to data similarities as the supervised
contrastive loss. We refer to Figure 1 for an illustration on
this assumption. We hypothesize that the access to more
pairs during training might lead to a better convergence and

Cross entropy loss has served as the main objective function for classification-based tasks. Widely deployed for learning neural network classifiers, it shows both effectiveness
and a probabilistic interpretation. Recently, after the success
of self supervised contrastive representation learning methods, supervised contrastive methods have been proposed to
learn representations and have shown superior and more robust performance, compared to solely training with cross entropy loss. However, cross entropy loss is still needed to train
the final classification layer. In this work, we investigate the
possibility of learning both the representation and the classifier using one objective function that combines the robustness of contrastive learning and the probabilistic interpretation of cross entropy loss. First, we revisit a previously proposed contrastive-based objective function that approximates
cross entropy loss and present a simple extension to learn the
classifier jointly. Second, we propose a new version of the
supervised contrastive training that learns jointly the parameters of the classifier and the backbone of the network. We empirically show that our proposed objective functions show a
significant improvement over the standard cross entropy loss
with more training stability and robustness in various challenging settings. Supplementary materials can be found in
ArXiv.

Introduction
Representation learning is a powerful tool to create an embedding space that is beneficial for performing downstream
tasks e.g., classification or retrieval. Contrastive representation learning first proposed by (Chopra, Hadsell, and LeCun
2005) is a dominant successful line for representation learning. It divides the data into pairs of positive (similar) and
negative (unrelated) samples with the objective of maximizing the similarity of positive pairs samples and minimize it
for negative pairs.
More recently, contrastive learning has become a key
component of methods for self-supervised learning (Chen
et al. 2020a; Kalantidis et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020b; Caron
et al. 2021) and has shown impressive performance (Caron
et al. 2020, 2021) that is very close to the supervised learning counterpart with cross entropy loss. Moreover, it was
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6675

