The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

WAT: Improve the Worst-Class Robustness in Adversarial Training
Boqi Li, Weiwei Liu*
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
{lbq988, liuweiwei863}@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNN) have been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial examples. Adversarial training (AT) is
a popular and effective strategy to defend against adversarial attacks. Recent works have shown that a robust model
well-trained by AT exhibits a remarkable robustness disparity
among classes, and propose various methods to obtain consistent robust accuracy across classes. Unfortunately, these
methods sacrifice a good deal of the average robust accuracy.
Accordingly, this paper proposes a novel framework of worstclass adversarial training and leverages no-regret dynamics
to solve this problem. Our goal is to obtain a classifier with
great performance on worst-class and sacrifice just a little average robust accuracy at the same time. We then rigorously
analyze the theoretical properties of our proposed algorithm,
and the generalization error bound in terms of the worst-class
robust risk. Furthermore, we propose a measurement to evaluate the proposed method in terms of both the average and
worst-class accuracies. Experiments on various datasets and
networks show that our proposed method outperforms the
state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are known to be vulnerable
to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2014; Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2015). An adversarial example in a
small perturbation from test data can easily fool the DNN
model, which remains a security issue and is unacceptable in
some applications of DNN, such as road sign classification
(Eykholt et al. 2018) , text classification (Ebrahimi et al.
2018), self-supervised learning (Wang and Liu 2022) and
object detection (Xu et al. 2020).
Numerous works (Raghunathan, Steinhardt, and Liang
2018; Madry et al. 2018; Li, Zou, and Liu 2022) have attempted to improve the model robustness with various defenses. Adversarial Training (AT) (Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2015; Madry et al. 2018) is one of the most widely
used and effective methods of defense. AT generates adversarial examples from the training data in every mini-batch,
then uses these examples to replace training data or adds
them into the training data during the training phase.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14982

Although AT obtains great average adversarial robustness
over classes, Benz et al. (2020); Xu et al. (2021); Tian et al.
(2021) find that a robust model well-trained by AT exhibits
a large robustness disparity in different classes on various
balanced datasets, like the left classifier in Figure 1. Thus,
AT leaves some classes vulnerable and may not perform well
on some specific classes in certain real-world secure systems.
For example, in the autonomous driving context, a classifier
that has been well trained by AT may perform well on traffic
sign classification and achieve great adversarial robustness
performance on average while still exhibiting vulnerabilities
on specific signs, which represents a potential danger for
users.
Recently, some works (Benz et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2021)
have attempted to solve this problem. Benz et al. (2020)
analyze this phenomenon and use cost-sensitive learning
to make the performance consistent over classes. Xu et al.
(2021) propose employing re-weight and re-margin strategies
to solve this problem. Both of these methods obtain consistent
robust accuracy over classes, but they sacrifice a good deal of
the average robust accuracy, like middle classifier in Figure
1. To overcome the limitations of Benz et al. (2020); Xu
et al. (2021), this paper proposes a novel min-max learning
paradigm to optimize worst-class robust risk and leverages noregret dynamics to solve the proposed min-max problem, our
goal is to achieve a classifier with great performance on worstclass but sacrifice a little average robust accuracy like the
right classifier in Figure 1. Moreover, we rigorously analyze
the theoretical properties of our proposed algorithm, and the
generalization error bound in terms of the worst-class robust
risk. Empirically, we find that a trade-off exists between
average and worst-class robust accuracies, and accordingly
propose a measurement to evaluate the method in terms of
both the average and worst-class accuracies.
The main contributions in this paper are as follows:
• We propose a novel framework of worst-class adversarial
training that leverages no-regret dynamics to solve the
problem.
• We analyze the theoretical properties of our proposed
algorithm, and the generalization error bound in terms of
the worst-class robust risk.
• A measurement is presented to evaluate the method in
terms of both the average and worst-class accuracies.

