The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Frequency Domain Disentanglement for Arbitrary Neural Style Transfer
Dongyang Li, Hao Luo∗ , Pichao Wang, Zhibin Wang∗ , Shang Liu, Fan Wang†
Alibaba Group
{yingtian.ldy, michuan.lh, pichao.wang, zhibin.waz, liushang.ls, fan.w}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

𝑓!

𝐹)!

𝐹!
𝐹𝐹𝑇

𝐼(!

⊗

𝐼!

𝐾!

𝐼"

𝐾"

𝐹"!
+

𝐹𝐹𝑇

𝑓"

Disentangled stage

𝑓"!

𝐼"!

𝐼("

⊗
𝐹"

𝐼𝐹𝐹𝑇

Arbitrary neural style transfer has been a popular research
topic due to its rich application scenarios. Effective disentanglement of content and style is the critical factor for synthesizing an image with arbitrary style. The existing methods focus on disentangling feature representations of content and style in the spatial domain where the content and
style components are innately entangled and difficult to be
disentangled clearly. Therefore, these methods always suffer from low-quality results because of the sub-optimal disentanglement. To address such a challenge, this paper proposes the frequency mixer (FreMixer) module that disentangles and re-entangles the frequency spectrum of content and
style components in the frequency domain. Since content and
style components have different frequency-domain characteristics (frequency bands and frequency patterns), the FreMixer
could well disentangle these two components. Based on the
FreMixer module, we design a novel Frequency Domain Disentanglement (FDD) framework for arbitrary neural style
transfer. Qualitative and quantitative experiments verify that
the proposed method can render better stylized results compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

𝐹)"
Re-entangled stage

Figure 1: The disentanglement and re-entanglement of content and style in the frequency domain. The subscripts c and
s represent that current node is from the content image Ic
and style image Is , respectively. f denotes the feature map
of the convolutional layer. F /Fe stands for the original/disentangled frequency spectrum. K is the global frequency kernel. All f , F , Fe and K have the same spatial size.

Introduction
Style transfer, which aims to generate an image Ics applying the style s of image Is to the content c of image
Ic (Efros and Freeman 2001; Drori, Cohen-Or, and Yeshurun 2003; Frigo et al. 2016; Elad and Milanfar 2017), has
attracted significant research attention. Recent works have
shown that the key point of synthesizing a stylized image
is how to disentangle the content and style from the image. According to the different constraints, mainstream approaches for learning content-style disentanglement include
loss constraints (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016; Johnson,
Alahi, and Fei-Fei 2016), global mean and variance constraints (AdaIN) (Huang and Belongie 2017) and adversarial
constraints (Kotovenko et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2021). Recently, some works (Park and Lee 2019; Yao et al. 2019; Wu
et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021; Deng et al. 2022) introduced
the spatial attention mechanism to learn point-wise weights
for content and style, respectively. Although these methods

have significantly improved the performance in neural style
transfer, they still suffer from problems such as local distortions, weak generalization and inflexibility because of the
innate entanglement of content and style in the spatial domain. Specifically, the content and style components closely
coexist in the image patch and are difficult to disentangle,
which leads to the effects of loss of detailed contents or broken structure in the stylized images.
The image/feature map can be transformed into the frequency domain where the low-frequency bands describe the
smoothly changing parts and the high-frequency bands are
related to the rapidly changing parts (Chen et al. 2019),
and we call this property as Frequency Separable Property (FSP). It is also well known that in signal processing, some signal characteristics are easy to analyze in the
frequency domain but challenging to explore in the spatial
domain. Recently, several works try to apply FSP to solve

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Corresponding author, † Project lead.

1287

