The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Graphix-T5: Mixing Pre-trained Transformers with
Graph-Aware Layers for Text-to-SQL Parsing
Jinyang Li1,2 * , Binyuan Hui2 , Reynold Cheng1,5† , Bowen Qin3 , Chenhao Ma4 , Nan Huo1 ,
Fei Huang2 , Wenyu Du1 , Luo Si2 , Yongbin Li2 †
1
The University of Hong Kong
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
3
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
5
Guangdong–Hong Kong-Macau Joint Laboratory
{jl0725,huonan,wenyudu}@connect.hku.hk, ckcheng@cs.hku.hk,
bw.qin@siat.ac.cn, machenhao@cuhk.edu.cn,
{binyuan.hby,f.huang,luo.si,shuide.lyb}@alibaba-inc.com
2

Abstract

Nature Language Question:
🧑💻 Find the number of dog pets that are raised by female students

The task of text-to-SQL parsing, which aims at converting
natural language questions into executable SQL queries, has
garnered increasing attention in recent years. One of the
major challenges in text-to-SQL parsing is domain generalization, i.e. , how to generalize well to unseen databases.
Recently, the pre-trained text-to-text transformer model,
namely T5, though not specialized for text-to-SQL parsing, has achieved state-of-the-art performance on standard
benchmarks targeting domain generalization. In this work,
we explore ways to further augment the pre-trained T5
model with specialized components for text-to-SQL parsing. Such components are expected to introduce structural inductive bias into text-to-SQL parsers thus improving model’s capacity on (potentially multi-hop) reasoning,
which is critical for generating structure-rich SQLs. To this
end, we propose a new architecture G RAPHIX-T5, a mixed
model with the standard pre-trained transformer model augmented by specially-designed graph-aware layers. Extensive experiments and analysis demonstrate the effectiveness
of G RAPHIX-T5 across four text-to-SQL benchmarks: S PI DER , S YN , R EALISTIC and D K . G RAPHIX -T5 surpass all
other T5-based parsers with a significant margin, achieving new state-of-the-art performance. Notably, G RAPHIX-T5large reaches performance superior to the original T5-large by
5.7% on exact match (EM) accuracy and 6.6% on execution
accuracy (EX). This even outperforms the T5-3B by 1.2% on
EM and 1.5% on EX.

1

student

Database:
Pets

Has_Pet

PetID PetType Pet_age

PetID

Student
StuID

StuID

Sex

MOD

female

EM

Age

HAS

Student

Sex

SQL:
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM student AS T1 JOIN has_pet AS
T2 ON T1.stuid = T2.stuid JOIN pets AS T3 ON T2.petid =
T3.petid WHERE T1.sex = 'F' AND T3.pettype = 'dog'

Question
Column
Table
Desired Linking

Figure 1: This is an illustration of cross-domain text-to-SQL
challenge. The link between the target column sex and the
token female is highly desired but extremely challenging for the model to capture. However, this dilemma can
M OD
be mitigated by a multi-hop reasoning path (female −→
EM
HAS
student −→ Student −→ Sex).

e.g., SQL. Despite its effectiveness and efficiency, the complex nature of SQLs leads to extremely expensive learning
efforts for non-technical users. Therefore, text-to-SQL (Cai
et al. 2018; Zelle and Mooney 1996; Xu, Liu, and Song
2017; Yu et al. 2018a; Yaghmazadeh et al. 2017), aiming to
convert natural language instructions or questions into SQL
queries, has attracted remarkable attention.
In this work, we explore the challenging cross-domain
setting where a text-to-SQL parser needs to achieve domain
generalization, i.e. , the ability to generalize to domains that
are unseen during training. Achieving this goal would, in
principle, contribute to a universal natural language interface
that allows users to interact with data in arbitrary domains.
The major challenge towards domain generalization (Wang
et al. 2020a; Cao et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022; Cai et al.
2021; Hui et al. 2022) is that generating structure-rich SQLs
requires (potentially multi-hop) reasoning, i.e. the ability
to properly contextualize a user question against a given
database by considering many explicit relations (e.g., table-

Introduction

Relational database, serving as an important resource for
users to make decision in many fields, such as health care,
sports, and entertainment, has emerged frequently because
of the big data era. It is efficient for data users to access the
information from databases via structured query language,
*

Work done during an intern at Alibaba DAMO Academy.
Corresponding authors are Reynold Cheng and Yongbin Li.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

13076

