The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Mutual-Enhanced Incongruity Learning Network for Multi-Modal Sarcasm
Detection
Yang Qiao1 ,Liqiang Jing1 , Xuemeng Song1 * , Xiaolin Chen2 , Lei Zhu3 , Liqiang Nie4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao, China
2
School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
3
School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong Normal University, Jinan, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen campus), Shenzhen, China
yang.qiao@mail.sdu.edu.cn, {jingliqiang6,sxmustc,cxlicd,leizhu0609,nieliqiang}@gmial.com
Abstract
Sarcasm is a sophisticated linguistic phenomenon that is
prevalent on today’s social media platforms. Multi-modal sarcasm detection aims to identify whether a given sample with
multi-modal information (i.e., text and image) is sarcastic.
This task’s key lies in capturing both inter- and intra-modal
incongruities within the same context. Although existing
methods have achieved compelling success, they are disturbed by irrelevant information extracted from the whole image and text, or overlooking some important information due
to the incomplete input. To address these limitations, we propose a Mutual-enhanced Incongruity Learning Network for
multi-modal sarcasm detection, named MILNet. In particular, we design a local semantic-guided incongruity learning
module and a global incongruity learning module. Moreover,
we introduce a mutual enhancement module to take advantage of the underlying consistency between the two modules to boost the performance. Extensive experiments on a
widely-used dataset demonstrate the superiority of our model
over cutting-edge methods.

Figure 1: A multi-modal sarcasm sample from the public
dataset (Cai, Cai, and Wan 2019).

sarcasm detection, whose key is to accurately detect the
inter- and intra-modal incongruities within the same context.
In existing works, some models focus on exploiting the
whole image feature for incongruity learning (Cai, Cai, and
Wan 2019; Xu, Zeng, and Mao 2020; Pan et al. 2020; Liang
et al. 2021). Despite their significant progress, they ignore
the fact that only some specific visual objects are relevant
to the textual context, and the information simply extracted
from the whole image is too general. Motivated by this, the
recent work (Liang et al. 2022) extracts the object-level feature rather than the global feature of the image, and proposes
a cross-modal graph convolutional network that links the visual objects with textual tokens by word similarity to utilize
the semantic relations for the multi-modal sarcasm detection. Although this method has achieved promising performance, it suffers from two key limitations. 1) It only emphasizes the visual information in the detected object regions
(i.e. the area in bounding boxes of Figure 1), but overlooks
the contextual relationships between object regions, which
also benefit the sarcasm detection. For example, as shown
in Figure 1, if we can capture the relationship between the
“man” and “woman” in the “bus”, we can infer that “the
bus is crowded”, and find the sarcasm by referring to the
text description. 2) It highly depends on the pre-trained object detection model, and thus is prone to missing objects
whose categories are not pre-defined in the object detection model. In light of this, it is inappropriate to abandon
the global image-level features, which can complement the
object-level feature more or less.

Introduction
Sarcasm is a special linguistic phenomenon that aims to
express people’s emotions contrary to the normal interpretations, which frequently appears on online social media platforms. Therefore, sarcasm detection is particularly
important in customer service, opinion mining, and various tasks that require understanding people’s emotions,
and has gained increasing research attention. Early sarcasm
detection methods (Davidov, Tsur, and Rappoport 2010;
González-Ibáñez, Muresan, and Wacholder 2011; Riloff
et al. 2013; Poria et al. 2016; Zhang, Zhang, and Fu 2016)
purely focus on the textual modality and the intra-modal incongruity. Nevertheless, with the advances of multimedia,
people tend to express their opinions by multi-modal posts
(e.g., text and image) (Lu et al. 2019; Cui et al. 2019; Wei
et al. 2019a; Sun et al. 2022). In this context, as shown
in Figure 1, if the model ignores the visual information,
it would miss the inter-modal incongruity and cannot detect the sarcasm in the social post. Therefore, recent research interests have been drawn to the task of multi-modal
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9507

