The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

One-Shot Replay: Boosting Incremental Object Detection via
Retrospecting One Object
Dongbao Yang1,2 , Yu Zhou1,2 * , Xiaopeng Hong3 , Aoting Zhang1,2† , Weiping Wang1
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Harbin Institute of Technology
{yangdongbao, zhouyu, zhangaoting, wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn, hongxiaopeng@ieee.org
2

70

Modern object detectors are ill-equipped to incrementally
learn new emerging object classes over time due to the wellknown phenomenon of catastrophic forgetting. Due to data
privacy or limited storage, few or no images of the old data
can be stored for replay. In this paper, we design a novel OneShot Replay (OSR) method for incremental object detection,
which is an augmentation-based method. Rather than storing
original images, only one object-level sample for each old
class is stored to reduce memory usage significantly, and we
find that copy-paste is a harmonious way to replay for incremental object detection. In the incremental learning procedure, diverse augmented samples with co-occurrence of old
and new objects to existing training data are generated. To introduce more variants for objects of old classes, we propose
two augmentation modules. The object augmentation module
aims to enhance the ability of the detector to perceive potential unknown objects. The feature augmentation module
explores the relations between old and new classes and augments the feature space via analogy. Extensive experimental
results on VOC2007 and COCO demonstrate that OSR can
outperform the state-of-the-art incremental object detection
methods without using extra wild data.

60

68

Object
Image

50

49

40
30

30

28

25
22

20

18
15

co

r

w

3.2

ai

t

8.2

ch

r

s

15

5.9

3.4

ca

ttl

e

3.2

bu

3.1

at

rd

5.6

bo

ke

ro
ae

4.6

bi

3.6

0

bi

10

ca

15

14

bo

Memory (Mb)

Abstract

Class

Figure 1: Memory usage (Mb) of all images and cropped
objects for the first 10 classes on VOC2007.

on new data, which is called Incremental Object Detection
(IOD).
According to the ways of tackling catastrophic forgetting, incremental learning methods can be divided
into: regularization-based, replay (or memory)-based and
parameter-isolation-based (Delange et al. 2021). Recent incremental object detection methods (Chen, Yu, and Chen
2019; Hao, Fu, and Jiang 2019; Hao et al. 2019; Li et al.
2019; Shmelkov, Schmid, and Alahari 2017; Zhang et al.
2020; Zhou et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2022a,b) mainly resort to
designing complex regularization-based methods, which focus on knowledge preservation and utilize distillation techniques to transfer the knowledge learned from the old data
to the new model.
To this day, replay methods are not thoroughly studied in
recent incremental object detection methods. For the classification task, traditional replay methods commonly save a
set of original training samples for old classes and combine
it with the new training set in the incremental learning procedure. Previous methods have proven that data replay can
boost performance and mitigate catastrophic forgetting (Rebuffi et al. 2017). However, it still has limitations if traditional replay methods are straightforwardly transferred to
the detection task. On one hand, due to the limited memory
on devices, the number of large-size samples to be stored is
restricted. On the other hand, due to data privacy, completed

Introduction
Modern object detection methods based on deep learning have achieved remarkable progress, which are usually trained on pre-defined datasets with a fixed number of
classes. However, in many practical applications, new object
classes often emerge after the detectors have been trained. It
is well-known that naive fine-tuning on new classes suffers
from catastrophic forgetting (French 1999; Goodfellow et al.
2013; McCloskey and Cohen 1989), severely degrading the
performance on old classes (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017). Due
to data privacy and limited storage of the devices, few or
even no old data are available for training the detectors from
scratch. In addition, even if the old data are available, jointly
training with both old and new data will take a long training time. Therefore, it is necessary to improve the ability
of object detectors to continuously learn new object classes
* Corresponding author
†
Aoting Zhang’s work is cooperated and partially sponsored by
Peking University.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3127

