The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multi-Level Compositional Reasoning for Interactive Instruction Following
Suvaansh Bhambri* , Byeonghwi Kim* , Jonghyun Choi
Yonsei University
suvaanshbhambri@gmail.com, byeonghwikim@yonsei.ac.kr, jc@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

requires detecting objects and analysing their distances and
states (Singh et al. 2021).
Meanwhile, the human cognition process learns to divide a task into sub-objectives such as navigation or interaction, which enables humans to facilitate complex reasoning in various circumstances (Hayes-Roth and Hayes-Roth
1979). Inspired by this, we propose a multi-level compositional reasoning agent (MCR-Agent) that disentangles the
task into high-level subgoals; then learns and infers a lowlevel policy for each sub-task. Specifically, we propose a
multi-level agent comprised of (1) a policy composition controller (PCC) that specifies a sub-policy sequence, (2) a master policy (MP) that specialises in navigation, and (3) a set of
interaction policies (IP) that execute interactions. This disentanglement enables easier analysis of subtasks with shorter
horizons (See Sec. ‘Multi-Level Policy vs. Flat Policy’ for
empirical evidence).
In addition, to interact with multiple objects in a long sequence, the agent should be able to keep track of the current
target object at each time instance. Inspired by (Yang et al.
2018; Wortsman et al. 2019), we additionally propose an object encoding module (OEM) that provides target object information which is used as a navigational subgoal monitor,
i.e., stopping criterion for the navigation policy.
In our empirical evaluations with a long horizon instruction following task with the condition of not requiring additional depth supervision and perfect egomotion assumption,
usually not available for real world deployment, we observe
that MCR-Agent outperforms most prior arts in literature by
large margins. We summarize our contributions as follows:

Robotic agents performing domestic chores by natural language directives are required to master the complex job of
navigating environment and interacting with objects in the environments. The tasks given to the agents are often composite thus are challenging as completing them require to reason
about multiple subtasks, e.g., bring a cup of coffee. To address
the challenge, we propose to divide and conquer it by breaking the task into multiple subgoals and attend to them individually for better navigation and interaction. We call it Multilevel Compositional Reasoning Agent (MCR-Agent). Specifically, we learn a three-level action policy. At the highest
level, we infer a sequence of human-interpretable subgoals
to be executed based on language instructions by a highlevel policy composition controller. At the middle level, we
discriminatively control the agent’s navigation by a master
policy by alternating between a navigation policy and various independent interaction policies. Finally, at the lowest
level, we infer manipulation actions with the corresponding
object masks using the appropriate interaction policy. Our approach not only generates human interpretable subgoals but
also achieves 2.03% absolute gain to comparable state of the
arts in the efficiency metric (PLWSR in unseen set) without
using rule-based planning or a semantic spatial memory. The
code is available at https://github.com/yonseivnl/mcr-agent.

Introduction
For the long-awaited dream of building a robot to assist humans in daily life, we now witness rapid advances in various
embodied AI tasks such as visual navigation (Anderson et al.
2018b; Chen et al. 2019; Krantz et al. 2020), object interaction (Zhu et al. 2017; Misra, Langford, and Artzi 2017), and
interactive reasoning (Das et al. 2018a; Gordon et al. 2018).
Towards building an ideal robotic assistant, the agent should
be capable of all of these tasks to address more complex
problems. A typical approach for combining these abilities
is to build a unified model (Shridhar et al. 2020; Singh et al.
2021) to jointly perform different sub-tasks. However, the
reasoning for navigation can differ significantly from the one
for object interaction; the former needs to detect navigable
space and explore to reach a target location while the latter

• We propose a multi-level hierarchical framework,
MCR-Agent, that decomposes a compositional task into
semantic subgoals and effectively addresses them with
corresponding submodules.
• We propose an object encoding module (OEM) that encodes object information from natural language instructions for effective navigation.
• By extensive quantitative analyses on a challenging interactive instruction following benchmark (Shridhar et al.
2020), we show that MCR-Agent yields competitive performance with higher efficiency than prior arts that do not
assume perfect egomotion and extra depth supervision.

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

223

