The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Principled and Efficient Motif Finding for
Structure Learning of Lifted Graphical Models
Jonathan Feldstein* 1,2 , Dominic Phillips* 1 , Efthymia Tsamoura3
1

University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
2
BENNU.AI, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
3
Samsung AI, Cambridge, United Kingdom
jonathan.feldstein@bennu.ai, dominic.phillips@ed.ac.uk, efi.tsamoura@samsung.com
Abstract

2008), entity linking (Singla and Domingos 2006) and others (Chen and Wang 2014; Ha et al. 2011; Riedel and MezaRuiz 2008; Crane and Mcdowell 2012). Recently, they have
also been adopted in neurosymbolic frameworks (Wang and
Poon 2018; Hu et al. 2016).
Unsurprisingly, the quality of a logical theory, that is, the
extent to which it models the task it is supposed to solve,
has a strong impact on the performance of the downstream
applications. Manually optimising formulae to boost performance is a costly, time-consuming and error-prone process
that restricts the scope of application. This can raise fundamental criticism against frameworks that require such theories as part of their input (Manhaeve et al. 2018; Yang, Ishay,
and Lee 2020). An alternative is the automated learning of
LGMs from data, a problem known as structure learning.
The ultimate goal is to design a general framework that can
efficiently learn high-quality models on large datasets in a
principled fashion. Several pioneering structure learning algorithms have been developed for MLNs (Kok and Domingos 2005; Mihalkova and Mooney 2007; Kok and Domingos
2010).
Problem Generally, structure learning consists in searching for formulae in an exponential search space. The naive
approach would consist in trying every possible combination
of predicates and logical connectives, which is computationally expensive (Kok and Domingos 2005). Therefore, to reduce computational complexity, every sophisticated structure learner proceeds by searching for formulae within templates. These templates can be user-defined or learnt automatically (Mihalkova and Mooney 2007; Kok et al. 2007).
Every sophisticated learner can thus be summarized in three
main steps: S1 - Apply heuristics to abstract-out common,
recurrent patterns within the data to be used as templates.
S2 - Iteratively generate formulae based on the previously
found patterns and evaluate candidate formulae based on
how well they generalize to the training data. S3 - Learn
the collective weights of the optimal formulae. Remark that
finding good templates is the basis for successful structural
learning, as it not only reduces the search space but also
forms the starting point of the structure learning algorithm
and constrains the shape of logical formulae generated in
later stages.
For example, the state-of-the-art structure learning algorithm, Learning using Structural Motifs (LSM), reduces

Structure learning is a core problem in AI central to the fields
of neuro-symbolic AI and statistical relational learning. It
consists in automatically learning a logical theory from data.
The basis for structure learning is mining repeating patterns
in the data, known as structural motifs. Finding these patterns
reduces the exponential search space and therefore guides the
learning of formulas. Despite the importance of motif learning, it is still not well understood. We present the first principled approach for mining structural motifs in lifted graphical
models, languages that blend first-order logic with probabilistic models, which uses a stochastic process to measure the
similarity of entities in the data.
Our first contribution is an algorithm, which depends on two
intuitive hyperparameters: one controlling the uncertainty in
the entity similarity measure, and one controlling the softness
of the resulting rules. Our second contribution is a preprocessing step where we perform hierarchical clustering on the
data to reduce the search space to the most relevant data. Our
third contribution is to introduce an O(n ln n) (in the size of
the entities in the data) algorithm for clustering structurallyrelated data. We evaluate our approach using standard benchmarks and show that we outperform state-of-the-art structure
learning approaches by up to 6% in terms of accuracy and up
to 80% in terms of runtime.

1

Introduction

Motivation In artificial intelligence, combining statistical
and logical representations is a long-standing and challenging aim. The motivation behind combining the two is
that logical models can represent heterogenous data and
capture causality, while statistical models handle uncertainty (Getoor and Taskar 2007; Russell 2015). General
approaches to represent structural information are lifted
graphical models (LGMs), such as Markov logic networks
(MLNs) (Richardson and Domingos 2006) and probabilistic
soft logic (PSL) (Bach et al. 2017). These are languages that
define Markov random fields in a declarative fashion and are
represented as theories of weighted formulas in first-order
logic. The versatility of LGMs is reflected in their variety
of applications, including bioinformatics (Lippi and Frasconi 2009), natural language understanding(Wu and Weld
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12205

