The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Tale of Two Latent Flows: Learning Latent Space Normalizing Flow with
Short-Run Langevin Flow for Approximate Inference
Jianwen Xie, Yaxuan Zhu, Yifei Xu, Dingcheng Li, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{jianwen.kenny, yaxuanzhu.alvin, fei960922, dingchengl, pingli98}@gmail.com
Abstract

and Dhariwal 2018), videos (Kumar et al. 2020), point
clouds (Yang et al. 2019), audio (Ping et al. 2020) etc.
In spite of the computational convenience, the expressivity of a normalizing flow is constrained by the unnatural design of the invertible transformation. Increasing the
model expressivity typically requires significantly enlarging
the network structure, thus leading to difficulty in constructing the network architecture and optimizing the network parameters. In order to foster the strengths and circumvent the
shortcomings of the normalizing flow, we propose to learn
a normalizing flow in the low-dimensional latent space of
observed data. The resulting generative model becomes a
normalizing flow standing on top of a top-down generator
network. The latent space normalizing flow model can not
only reserve the computational merit, but also focus on capturing regularities and rules of the data in the continuous
latent space without having to care about the data type and
data complexity. Also, the learning and the design of a normalizing flow in the latent space is much easier than those
in the data space due to the low dimensionality of the latent
space. Typically, it can be parameterized by a small invertible multi-layer perceptron that consists of several layers.
Besides, the proposed latent space normalizing flow can
be considered an informative prior distribution of the latent variables in the top-down generator model. Compared
to the commonly used isotropic Gaussian (or uniform) noninformative prior in the conventional generator model, the
informative prior represented by a trainable normalizing
flow can significantly increase the expressive power of the
entire generator. The normalizing flow model is a good fit
for the role of prior distribution in the deep latent variable
framework in the sense that (i) the normalizing-flow-based
prior can be jointly trained with the top-down network due
to the tractability of the prior probability density and (ii) the
data generation from the learned model can be explicit and
fast because of the ease of the prior sampling. We call our
model the latent space flow-based prior model (LFBM).
In this work, we propose a novel and principled way to
jointly train the flow-based prior model and the generator via
maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). The training process alternates the inference step and the learning step. Each
inference step involves Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
sampling of the posterior distribution, which is guided by
both the flow-based prior distribution and the top-down gen-

We study a normalizing flow in the latent space of a topdown generator model, in which the normalizing flow model
plays the role of the informative prior model of the generator. We propose to jointly learn the latent space normalizing flow prior model and the top-down generator model by a
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)-based maximum likelihood algorithm, where a short-run Langevin sampling from
the intractable posterior distribution is performed to infer the
latent variables for each observed example, so that the parameters of the normalizing flow prior and the generator can
be updated with the inferred latent variables. We show that,
under the scenario of non-convergent short-run MCMC, the
finite step Langevin dynamics is a flow-like approximate inference model and the learning objective actually follows the
perturbation of the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE).
We further point out that the learning framework seeks to (i)
match the latent space normalizing flow and the aggregated
posterior produced by the short-run Langevin flow, and (ii)
bias the model from MLE such that the short-run Langevin
flow inference is close to the true posterior. Empirical results
of extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of the proposed latent space normalizing flow model in the tasks of image generation, image reconstruction, anomaly detection, supervised image inpainting and unsupervised image recovery.

1

Introduction

A flow-based model (Dinh, Krueger, and Bengio 2015;
Dinh, Sohl-Dickstein, and Bengio 2016; Kingma and Dhariwal 2018), also known as normalizing flow, represents a data
distribution by a non-linear invertible transformation of a
simple distribution, e.g., Gaussian distribution. Thanks to
the special design of the computation layers of the transformation, the flow-based model defines a normalized probability distribution explicitly, making it convenient for learning, sampling and inference. Specifically, its learning can be
handily accomplished by the maximum likelihood estimation with the tractable density function, its sampling can be
efficiently achieved by a direct mapping of samples drawn
from a Gaussian distribution, and its inference can be easily realized by the inverse transformation of data. Therefore, flow-based models have been widely used for direct
modeling of various types of data, such as images (Kingma
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10499

