The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Diffusion Models Beat GANs on Topology Optimization
François Mazé1 , Faez Ahmed1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
francois.maze@etu.minesparis.psl.eu, {fmaze,faez}@mit.edu

Abstract

and Birker 1992). Despite their wide adoption, these traditional methods have two major pitfalls: their iterative nature
makes them computationally expensive and they may generate non-optimal designs, for example, when penalization
and filtering augmentations are used to avoid grayscale pixels in SIMP (Sigmund and Maute 2013).
Several deep learning methods have been developed in recent years to improve and speed up the TO process (Yu et al.
2018; Sharpe and Seepersad 2019; Nie et al. 2021; Behzadi
and Ilieş 2021) by learning from large datasets of optimized
structures. The latest and most promising results were obtained with deep generative models (DGMs) and notably
with conditional generative adversarial networks (cGANs)
trained for image synthesis, which take as input the boundary conditions and directly generate images of optimized
structures. Although popular, most of these models optimize
a loss function that does not align with the primary goals of
topology optimization — getting high-performance and feasible structures. They often train for loss functions related to
image reconstruction to achieve visual similarity and ignore
modeling the physical performance of the generated structures. Most of them produce disconnected, floating material
that seriously affects the manufacturability of the generated
design. They also suffer from limited generalizability, especially for out-of-distribution boundary conditions.
We hypothesize that the absence of explicit methods to
generate designs with low compliance and good manufacturability causes these issues. We further hypothesize that
the reliance of the optimization objective on the sole cGAN
prompts the model to only mimic pixel-wise the ground truth
produced by traditional TO methods. As a result, two images with comparable pixel-wise similarity may still have
significantly different performance values. The absence of
explicit external guidance is even more problematic since
the ground truth data is not guaranteed to be optimal, as explained above.
This paper introduces TopoDiff, a conditional diffusionmodel-based method for TO. Dhariwal and Nichol (2021)
have shown that diffusion models can outperform GANs for
image generation, are easier to train, and are thus more readily adaptable to other tasks. We show that by introducing
performance and constraints to diffusion models, they also
outperform GANs on topology optimization problems. In
addition, the sequential nature of diffusion models makes

Structural topology optimization, which aims to find the
optimal physical structure that maximizes mechanical performance, is vital in engineering design applications in
aerospace, mechanical, and civil engineering. Recently, generative adversarial networks (GANs) have emerged as a popular alternative to traditional iterative topology optimization
methods. However, GANs can be challenging to train, have
limited generalizability, and often neglect important performance objectives such as mechanical compliance and manufacturability. To address these issues, we propose a new architecture called TopoDiff that uses conditional diffusion models
to perform performance-aware and manufacturability-aware
topology optimization. Our method introduces a surrogate
model-based guidance strategy that actively favors structures
with low compliance and good manufacturability. Compared
to a state-of-the-art conditional GAN, our approach reduces
the average error on physical performance by a factor of eight
and produces eleven times fewer infeasible samples. Our
work demonstrates the potential of using diffusion models
in topology optimization and suggests a general framework
for solving engineering optimization problems using external
performance with constraint-aware guidance. We provide access to our data, code, and trained models at the following
link: https://decode.mit.edu/projects/topodiff/.

1

Introduction

Structural topology optimization (TO) of solid structures involves generating the optimal shape of a material by minimizing an objective function, for instance, mechanical compliance, within a given domain and under a given set of constraints (volume fraction, boundary conditions, and loads).
TO is therefore becoming an essential design tool and is now
included in most professional design software, such as Autodesk’s Fusion 360 and Solidworks. It is the driving force
behind Autodesk’s generative design toolset, where designers input design goals into the software, along with parameters such as performance or spatial requirements, materials, manufacturing methods, and cost constraints. The software quickly generates design alternatives. Most methods to
solve TO rely on gradient-based approaches, the most common method being the Solid Isotropic Material with Penalization method (Bendsøe and Kikuchi 1988; Rozvany, Zhou,
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9108

