The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Weighted Policy Constraints for Offline Reinforcement Learning
Zhiyong Peng, Changlin Han, Yadong Liu∗ , Zongtan Zhou*
College of Intelligence Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
pengzhyong@qq.com, ytcnhan@foxmail.com, liuyadong@nudt.edu.cn, narcz@163.com

Abstract

unsafe exploration can be fatal. Offline RL directly utilizes
passively collected static datasets to learn policy, providing
a new approach to address the above challenges. Firstly, offline datasets are relatively easy to collect, such as for autonomous driving, where large amounts of data can be obtained from the driving records of vehicles; secondly, passive data recording does not introduce any new risks to the
running systems.

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) aims to learn policy from
the passively collected offline dataset. Applying existing RL
methods on the static dataset straightforwardly will raise distribution shift, causing these unconstrained RL methods to
fail. To cope with the distribution shift problem, a common
practice in offline RL is to constrain the policy explicitly
or implicitly close to behavioral policy. However, the available dataset usually contains sub-optimal or inferior actions,
constraining the policy near all these actions will make the
policy inevitably learn inferior behaviors, limiting the performance of the algorithm. Based on this observation, we propose a weighted policy constraints (wPC) method that only
constrains the learned policy to desirable behaviors, making
room for policy improvement on other parts. Our algorithm
outperforms existing state-of-the-art offline RL algorithms on
the D4RL offline gym datasets. Moreover, the proposed algorithm is simple to implement with few hyper-parameters,
making the proposed wPC algorithm a robust offline RL
method with low computational complexity.

The main challenge of offline RL is the distribution shift
problem, which leads to an overestimation on the values of
out-of-distribution (OOD) states. Due to the inability to interact with the environment, the value estimation error on
OOD states cannot be corrected, which eventually leads to
failure if the policy is not been properly constrained. A common practice to resist distribution shift is constraining the
learned policy to be close to behavior policy explicitly (Kumar et al. 2019; Wu, Tucker, and Nachum 2019), or implicitly (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup 2019). However, offline
datasets often contain non-expert actions or even dangerous
actions, constraining the learned policy to all these actions
will force it to imitate undesirable behaviors and degrade the
performance of the algorithm. For example, in autonomous
driving, if the recorded dataset contains samples of accidents
that may be caused by a drunken driver, imitating these kinds
of behaviors will have catastrophic consequences. Based on
such an observation, a natural question is whether it is possible to construct a more reasonable policy constraint method
that only constrains the learned policy to desirable behaviors but not inferior behaviors by identifying the superiority
of state-action pairs in the dataset? To recognize desirable
actions, we borrow ideas from another class of methods in
offline RL, i.e., weighted behavior cloning methods (Peng
et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2020; Siegel et al.
2020). Weighted behavior cloning methods usually learn an
advantage function to recognize desirable actions and then
imitate them. However, weighted behavior cloning inherits
the disadvantage of imitation learning: imitation learning
is unable to outperform the demonstration policy, thus the
policy learned by weighted behavior cloning cannot outperform the best behavior among the offline dataset. Moreover,
weighted behavior cloning imitates only parts of states in
the dataset, and the behaviors in other not imitated states are
unknown, it may output unpredictable actions in these unconsidered states. In contrast, RL employs reward signals to

Introduction
RL has made great success in games, such as Atari games
(Mnih et al. 2015), Go (Silver et al. 2016, 2017; Schrittwieser et al. 2020), Starcraft2 (Vinyals et al. 2019), etc. Another widely applied domain of RL is robot learning, such
as quadrupedal robot (Hwangbo et al. 2019), robot manipulation (Andrychowicz et al. 2020) and mobile robot navigation (Fan et al. 2018). These success cases share a common
characteristic of having perfect or near-perfect simulators,
which enables RL agents easily to explore and collect large
amounts of experience actively. In many real-world problems, however, it is difficult to model the environment dynamics, or requires a great deal of effort to construct a highfidelity simulator. Deploying RL directly in the real world
also faces several challenges: the time-consuming learning
process and high learning cost caused by low sample efficiency. For example, it takes four months for a group of reality robotic arms to learn grasping tasks (Kalashnikov et al.
2018). Another problem is the safety risk associated with exploration, such as medical and autonomous driving, where
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9435

