The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On the Sample Complexity of Vanilla Model-Based Offline Reinforcement Learning
with Dependent Samples
Mustafa O. Karabag, Ufuk Topcu
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
{karabag, utopcu}@utexas.edu

Abstract

evaluation. We mainly focus on vanilla model-based offpolicy evaluation, where a target policy is evaluated through
a model based on the sample mean estimator of the transition
dynamics.
Analyzing the theoretical properties of model-based offpolicy evaluation is challenging due to the sequential nature
of the MDP model and potentially dependent samples. These
factors make model-based off-policy evaluation lack the unbiasedness property that importance-sampling-based off-policy
methods have (Levine et al. 2018). The first source of bias
is because the expected value is a non-linear function of
the transition probabilities. Under the assumption that the
transition probability estimates are unbiased, the bias in the
value function estimate vanishes asymptotically with the increasing number of sample transitions. However, this bias
is present with any finite number of samples (Mannor et al.
2004). The second source of bias is because of potentially
biased transition probability estimates. In reality, the sample
transitions come from time series data and are not necessarily
independent. The sample mean estimator, consequently, is
not guaranteed to be unbiased. Quantifying this bias requires
knowing the model, which contradicts the motivations of RL.
We consider that the dataset is constructed using sample
paths that are executions of an MDP under the behavior policy
and derive a sample complexity upper bound for model-based
off-policy evaluation. We overcome the first source of bias
by using a robust MDP (Nilim and El Ghaoui 2005) that
includes the true MDP with high probability. To overcome
the second source of bias, we use a concentration bound that
can handle random stopping times potentially dependent on
the previous samples. We combine these methods and derive
a sufficient condition on the number of sample paths to be
collected to accurately estimate the value of the target policy with high probability. The bound shows that the vanilla
model-based off-policy evaluation has performance guarantees under both partial and uniform coverage. We extend this
sample complexity result to off-policy optimization under
uniform coverage. In addition, as a comparison, we derive a
sufficient condition on the number of samples for the vanilla
importance sampling method. Finally, we give an estimator
that outperforms the sample mean estimator in settings where
transition dynamics of the MDP is almost deterministic, i.e.,
there is a probable next state for every state and action.
The main contributions of this paper are threefold:

Offline reinforcement learning (offline RL) considers problems where learning is performed using only previously collected samples and is helpful for the settings in which collecting new data is costly or risky. In model-based offline RL, the
learner performs estimation (or optimization) using a model
constructed according to the empirical transition frequencies.
We analyze the sample complexity of vanilla model-based
offline RL with dependent samples in the infinite-horizon
discounted-reward setting. In our setting, the samples obey the
dynamics of the Markov decision process and, consequently,
may have interdependencies. Under no assumption of independent samples, we provide a high-probability, polynomial
sample complexity bound for vanilla model-based off-policy
evaluation that requires partial or uniform coverage. We extend this result to the off-policy optimization under uniform
coverage. As a comparison to the model-based approach, we
analyze the sample complexity of off-policy evaluation with
vanilla importance sampling in the infinite-horizon setting.
Finally, we provide an estimator that outperforms the samplemean estimator for almost deterministic dynamics that are
prevalent in reinforcement learning.

Introduction
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) considers problems
where a learner has access to only a dataset that is collected
under a behavior policy in an environment and tries to evaluate (or optimize) a target policy. The learner typically has no
control over the behavior policy, and the transition dynamics
of the environment are unknown to the learner. Offline RL is
helpful for settings where online learning may not be safe or
previously collected data are abundant. The applications of offline RL include, but are not limited to healthcare (Shortreed
et al. 2011; Tseng et al. 2017), robotics (Levine et al. 2018;
Ebert et al. 2018; Zeng et al. 2018), natural language processing (Zhou et al. 2017; Henderson, Lemon, and Georgila
2008), and recommendation systems (Swaminathan et al.
2017; Gilotte et al. 2018).
We develop theoretical guarantees for offline RL. In detail,
we use an infinite horizon Markov decision process (MDP)
to model the environment and analyze the number of sample
paths sufficient to achieve the desired accuracy for off-policy
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8195

