The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Equi-Tuning: Group Equivariant Fine-Tuning of Pretrained Models
Sourya Basu1, 2, * , Prasanna Sattigeri1 , Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy1 ,
Vijil Chenthamarakshan1 , Kush R. Varshney1 , Lav R. Varshney2 , Payel Das1
1

IBM Research – Thomas J. Watson Research Center
2
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
We introduce equi-tuning, a novel fine-tuning method that
transforms (potentially non-equivariant) pretrained models
into group equivariant models while incurring minimum L2
loss between the feature representations of the pretrained
and the equivariant models. Large pretrained models can be
equi-tuned for different groups to satisfy the needs of various downstream tasks. Equi-tuned models benefit from both
group equivariance as an inductive bias and semantic priors from pretrained models. We provide applications of equituning on three different tasks: image classification, compositional generalization in language, and fairness in natural
language generation (NLG). We also provide a novel grouptheoretic definition for fairness in NLG. The effectiveness of
this definition is shown by testing it against a standard empirical method of fairness in NLG. We provide experimental
results for equi-tuning using a variety of pretrained models:
Alexnet, Resnet, VGG, and Densenet for image classification; RNNs, GRUs, and LSTMs for compositional generalization; and GPT2 for fairness in NLG. We test these models
on benchmark datasets across all considered tasks to show the
generality and effectiveness of the proposed method.

1

(a) Fine-tuning

(b) Equi-tuning for the c4 group

Figure 1: Comparison of architectures for fine-tuning and
equi-tuning for c4 group of 90◦ rotations. For (a) finetuning, the input is passed through the pretrained model and
then through a custom layer to obtain the output. For (b)
equi-tuning, the inputs are transformed using the group action of c4. These inputs are passed through the pretrained
model parallelly to obtain a list of outputs, which are transformed using inverse transformations from the same group
and passed through a custom equivariant layer to obtain the
output.

Introduction

Modern deep learning models show promising transferlearning abilities for a wide range of downstream
tasks (Bommasani et al. 2021). Lu et al. (2021) show that
the GPT2 language model (Radford et al. 2019) can be used
as a pretrained model for various downstream tasks such
as numerical computation, image classification, and even
protein folding prediction. But pretraining large models requires immense computational and data resources. Hence,
it is essential to design effective fine-tuning algorithms that
can squeeze the most from these pretrained models.
Fine-tuning leverages semantic priors from pretrained
models for downstream tasks. E.g. CNNs trained on Imagenet (Deng et al. 2009) can extract useful features from
images outside the training set and can use that ability for
any other downstream image processing task. A different
method of using priors in deep learning is via inductive
biases in models such as group equivariance, e.g. designing group equivariant architectures such as GCNNs (Cohen

and Welling 2016; Kondor and Trivedi 2018). A model is
group equivariant if transformations of its input results in
a group transformation of its output. Popular examples include CNNs themselves that are equivariant to translations
and GCNNs that are equivariant to more general symmetries
such as 90◦ rotations. Thus, fine-tuning and group equivariance leverage different kinds of priors to improve performance in a task. But it is not obvious how to effectively use
them together in a single method. Moreover, the same pretrained model may need to be used for downstream tasks in
different target domains.
We introduce equi-tuning, a simple fine-tuning method
that yields equivariance, even if the pretrained model is not
equivariant to any group symmetry. This method solves a
simple optimization problem minimizing the distance between the features of a pretrained model and any group
equivariant model. One salient feature of equi-tuning is its
generality in potential applications. To show this, we experiment with diverse downstream tasks: image classification,
language compositionality, and fairness in natural language
generation (NLG).

* Work done during an internship at IBM Research
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6788

