The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PaTeCon: A Pattern-Based Temporal Constraint Mining Method for Conflict
Detection on Knowledge Graphs
Jianhao Chen* , Junyang Ren, Wentao Ding* , Yuzhong Qu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
{jh chen, jyren, wtding}@smail.nju.edu.cn, yzqu@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

designed representation structures. However, the practical
KGs are far from complete, and have quality issues. Example 1 illustrates a real conflict in Wikidata.
Example 1. Wikidata, one of the most widely used KG, contains two temporal facts as follows:

Temporal facts, the facts for characterizing events that hold
in specific time periods, are attracting rising attention in
the knowledge graph (KG) research communities. In terms
of quality management, the introduction of time restrictions
brings new challenges to maintaining the temporal consistency of KGs and detecting potential temporal conflicts. Previous studies rely on manually enumerated temporal constraints to detect conflicts, which are labor-intensive and may
have granularity issues. We start from the common pattern
of temporal facts and constraints and propose a pattern-based
temporal constraint mining method, PaTeCon. PaTeCon uses
automatically determined graph patterns and their relevant
statistical information over the given KG instead of human
experts to generate time constraints. Specifically, PaTeCon
dynamically attaches class restriction to candidate constraints
according to their measuring scores.We evaluate PaTeCon on
two large-scale datasets based on Wikidata and Freebase respectively. The experimental results show that pattern-based
automatic constraint mining is powerful in generating valuable temporal constraints.

(Q718275, member of . . ., Q180798, [1998, 2009]) ,
(Q718275, member of . . ., Q180798, [2002, −]) ,
, where Q718275 and Q180798 are Wikidata ids of “Juli
Fernández” and “Andorra national football team” respectively. It is obvious they can’t both hold because “two different career experience of an athlete should be disjoint in
time”.
The current state of practical KGs brings the need of acquisition and quality management of temporal knowledge.
The introduction of time restrictions brings a new challenge
to KG quality management – the inconsistency in the time
dimension. Besides, deep learning-based knowledge acquisition has become a very popular trend in recent years. Since
they cannot provide theoretical guarantees of the consistency of the acquired knowledge, explicit quality checks on
the acquired knowledge may be needed.
In order to maintain the temporal consistency of KGs, we
need to find the conflicting temporal facts. As shown in the
previous example, a common perception in temporal conflict
detection is that violations of specific constraints cause people to believe that certain temporal facts are conflicting. Example 2 illustrates such a rule found in Chekol et al. (2017)’s
work. By enumerating the temporal constraints on a given
knowledge graph, we can easily identify all potential conflicts that violate these constraints.
Example 2. Rule for representing the constraint “One can’t
be a member of two sports teams at the same time”:

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) represent real-world facts and
support countless AI applications in many areas, such as
information retrieval, natural language question answering,
and healthcare. Classical KGs provide a static view of the
real world by RDF triples (i.e., subject-predicate-object) ,
which cannot satisfy the downstream application’s demands
of the specific occurring time periods of events. For example, classical KGs may simply record Backham’s career in Real Madrid CF as (David Beckham, play for,
Real Madrid CF). Such facts are not sufficient enough to
answer questions like “When did David Beckham play for
Real Madrid CF?”. The demand for modeling and acquiring
temporal facts for KGs has attracted rising attention in recent years. Formally, a temporal fact can be represented as
a quadruple (S, P, O, T ), where time interval T represents
the time period in which the subject-predicate-object triple
holds.
In practice, some popular KGs such as Freebase and Wikidata have introduced many temporal facts with particularly

disjoint (t1 , t2 ) :− (x, member of sports team, y, t1 ) ,
(x, member of sports team, z, t2 ) ,
y ̸= z.
(1)
However, previous studies enumerate the temporal constraints by human experts. Although experienced experts
can provide high-quality constraints, manual enumeration of temporal constraints is labor-intensive, and human experts may have difficulty on judging the granularity of temporal constraints. For example, Chekol et al.

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4166

