The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning to Generate an Unbiased Scene Graph by Using Attribute-Guided
Predicate Features
Lei Wang, Zejian Yuan, Badong Chen*
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
leiwangmail@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {yuan.ze.jian, chenbd}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Predicate Relative Frequencies

seat

man

motorcycle

glove

has

helmet
wearing

Scene Graph Generation (SGG) aims to capture the semantic
information in an image and build a structured representation,
which facilitates downstream tasks. The current challenge in
SGG is to tackle the biased predictions caused by the longtailed distribution of predicates. Since multiple predicates
in SGG are coupled in an image, existing data re-balancing
methods cannot completely balance the head and tail predicates. In this work, a decoupled learning framework is proposed for unbiased scene graph generation by using attributeguided predicate features to construct a balanced training
set. Specifically, the predicate recognition is decoupled into
Predicate Feature Representation Learning (PFRL) and predicate classifier training with a class-balanced predicate feature
set, which is constructed by our proposed Attribute-guided
Predicate Feature Generation (A-PFG) model. In the A-PFG
model, we first define the class labels of ⟨subject-predicateobject⟩ and corresponding visual feature as attributes to describe a predicate. Then the predicate feature and the attribute embedding are mapped into a shared hidden space by
a dual Variational Auto-encoder (VAE), and finally the synthetic predicate features are forced to learn the contextual information in the attributes via cross reconstruction and distribution alignment. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed method, our decoupled learning framework and APFG model are applied to various SGG models. The empirical
results show that our method is substantially improved on all
benchmarks and achieves new state-of-the-art performance
for unbiased scene graph generation. Our code is available
at https://github.com/wanglei0618/A-PFG.

riding

pant

(a)

wheel

wheel

on
we has
ari
ng
of
i
nean
wi r
beh th
ho ind
ldi
ng
sittabov
ing e
we on
a
un rs
d
rid er
ing

Abstract

(b)

Predicate Attribute
p

ci
cj
uij

Guide

є

N(0, 1) Gaussian Noise

Predicate Re-balancing
Feature
r
Generator Predicate
Feature

(c)

Balanced Predicate
Feature Set

Figure 1: (a) The head (“has, wearing”) and tail (“riding”)
predicates are coupled in the image. (b) The long-tailed distribution of predicates in the Visual Genome (VG) dataset.
(c) Our approach constructs a class-balanced predicate feature training set by the attribute-guided predicate feature
generation model for unbiased scene graph generation.

However, the current scene graph generation suffers from
the problem of biased predictions due to the long-tailed distribution of predicates in the dataset. As shown in Figure
1(b), the annotations in the commonly used Visual Genome
(VG) dataset (Krishna et al. 2017) mainly concentrate on a
few head predicates and are much sparse on most tail predicates. The long-tailed distribution results in coarse-grained
head classes (e.g., on/has) dominating the predictions, while
tail classes (e.g., wears/riding) containing more fine-grained
semantic information are difficult to be predicted.
Recently, many de-biasing strategies have been introduced for unbiased scene graph generation, such as causal
analysis (Tang et al. 2020) and loss re-weighting (Yan et al.
2020; Yu et al. 2020). However, the data re-balancing methods commonly used in long-tailed recognition (Zhou et al.
2020), such as re-sampling and data augmentation, are rarely
applied to SGG. This is attributed to the fact that the head

Introduction
Scene Graph Generation (SGG) aims to capture the semantic information in an image by detecting visual objects
and their relationships, as shown in Figure 1(a). The structured ⟨subject-predicate-object⟩ triplet of the scene graph
can bridge the gap between vision and language, which is
beneficial for many downstream visual understanding tasks,
such as image captioning (Zhong et al. 2020), visual question answering (Hudson and Manning 2019), image retrieval
(Johnson et al. 2015), and image generation(Johnson, Gupta,
and Fei-Fei 2018).
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2581

