The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Domain-General Crowd Counting in Unseen Scenarios
Zhipeng Du2 , Jiankang Deng3 , Miaojing Shi1,2 *
1

College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University, China
2
King’s College London, UK
3
Huawei London Research Center, UK
zhipeng.du@kcl.ac.uk, j.deng16@imperial.ac.uk, mshi@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract

test

Domain shift across crowd data severely hinders crowd
counting models to generalize to unseen scenarios. Although domain adaptive crowd counting approaches close
this gap to a certain extent, they are still dependent on
the target domain data to adapt (e.g. finetune) their models to the specific domain. In this paper, we aim to train a
model based on a single source domain which can generalize well on any unseen domain. This falls into the realm
of domain generalization that remains unexplored in crowd
counting. We first introduce a dynamic sub-domain division scheme which divides the source domain into multiple sub-domains such that we can initiate a meta-learning
framework for domain generalization. The sub-domain division is dynamically refined during the meta-learning. Next,
in order to disentangle domain-invariant information from
domain-specific information in image features, we design
the domain-invariant and -specific crowd memory modules
to re-encode image features. Two types of losses, i.e. feature reconstruction and orthogonal losses, are devised to enable this disentanglement. Extensive experiments on several
standard crowd counting benchmarks i.e. SHA, SHB, QNRF,
and NWPU, show the strong generalizability of our method.
Our code is available at: https://github.com/ZPDu/Domaingeneral-Crowd-Counting-in-Unseen-Scenarios

1

Target Domains

Source Domain
adapt

test

……

Domain Adaptation
Domain Generalization

Figure 1: Comparison between domain adaptation and domain generalization. The former normally requires data
from target domain while the latter does not.

suffer from severe performance degradation as a result of the
distribution mismatch between the training and test data.
To surmount this domain shift in crowd counting,
many works resort to the domain adaptation (DA) technique (Wang et al. 2019; Sindagi et al. 2020; Zhao et al.
2020; He et al. 2021; Gong et al. 2022). DA focuses on
adapting the knowledge learned from the source domain
(training) to the target domain (testing) where domain gap
exists. Though satisfactory results have been achieved in
many DA approaches, they normally rely on the availability of target data to perform model retraining or finetuning.
While in practice, target data are not always available and
the target can also change, making DA incompetent.
In this work, we study an unexplored field, i.e. domain
generalization (DG), in crowd counting to address the above
problem. As shown in Fig. 1, DG aims to learn a model only
from the source domain that can generalize to unseen target domains without requiring additional data or model updates. Compared to DA, DG is more practical but also more
challenging. Its essential idea is to effectively mine domaininvariant knowledge from the source domain data which can
be shared and utilized across all domains including unseen
ones. Meta-learning is a popular approach for solving DG.
The seminal work, MLDG (Li et al. 2018), uses meta-train
and meta-test to simulate the domain shift between training
and testing phases in reality so as to learn domain-invariant

Introduction

Crowd counting, which aims to automatically count the
number of crowd instances in images/videos, is an essential task in computer vision. Recent years have witnessed
numerous progress in crowd counting fueled by the development of deep learning. Most works are learned in a fullysupervised manner (Shi et al. 2019; Ma et al. 2019; Jiang
et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021b; Lin et al. 2022) which assumes training and test data are independent and identically
distributed. In practice, crowd data can be collected from
different locations, environments and devices. These factors
cause domain shift in crowd data hence violate the above assumption. The conventional fully-supervised models would
* Corresponding author.

Work partially done during Zhipeng Du’s internship at Huawei
London Research Center.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

561

