The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Preference-Controlled Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning for Conditional
Text Generation
Wenqing Chen1∗ , Jidong Tian2, 3∗ , Caoyun Fan2, 3 , Yitian Li2, 3 , Hao He2, 3† , Yaohui Jin2, 3†
1

School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
State Key Lab of Advanced Optical Communication System and Network, School of Electronic Information and Electrical
Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
chenwq95@mail.sysu.edu.cn, {frank92, fcy3649, yitian li, hehao, jinyh}@sjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

or the beam-search decoding process. Specifically, greedy
decoding only yields one text sequence. Beam search can
yield different candidate sentences, but the k-th (k > 1) candidate would have lower quality than the top-1 (Gupta et al.
2018). It means that beam search does not produce multiple high-quality sentences in a principled way (Gupta et al.
2018; Chen et al. 2020).
Another line of work improves the diversity based on
the conditional variational auto-encoder (CVAE), that has
been applied on some tasks such as dialog response generation (Du et al. 2018), paraphrasing (Gupta et al. 2018;
Chen et al. 2020), and image captioning (Wang, Schwing,
and Lazebnik 2017). CVAE can be denoted by a model
pθ (y|x, z) where a latent variable z is sampled from a prior
distribution pθ (z|x) during testing (Sohn, Lee, and Yan
2015). Although the greedy decoding or the beam search is
relatively deterministic, the sampling process z ∼ pθ (z|x)
contributes to the diversity.
The remaining problem is that CVAE regards diversity as
an implicit objective and may not be optimal. Specifically,
CVAE assumes the sampling process z ∼ pθ (z|x) does not
significantly hurt the quality of the generated text, and the
diversity highly depends on the characteristics of pθ (z|x).
We raise two questions for CVAE: i) Can the diversity be
further improved with an explicit objective? ii) Since fidelity and diversity are two conflicting objectives, how can
we obtain different multi-objective optimal solutions according to user preferences? To respond to the two questions, we propose a preference-controlled multi-objective reinforcement learning (PCMORL) method.
Firstly, for question i), we introduce a multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL) strategy to improve both fidelity and diversity. Recent RL-based work on text generation mainly considered the fidelity-oriented rewards such
as BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002) score for machine translation (Wu et al. 2018), ROUGE (Lin 2004) score for text summarization (Buciumas 2019), and CIDEr (Vedantam, Zitnick, and Parikh 2015) score for image captioning (Rennie et al. 2017). We choose the CIDEr score as the fidelityoriented reward because it not only encourages the n-gram
consistency but also penalizes less informative n-grams.
Then we choose the Self-CIDEr (Wang and Chan 2019)
score as the diversity-oriented reward, which is an explicit

Conditional text generation is to generate text sequences conditioning on linguistic or non-linguistic data. The main line
of existing work proposed deterministic models to improve
the fidelity of the generated text but often ignored the diversity. Another line relied on conditional variational autoencoders (CVAEs), which increased the diversity over their
deterministic backbones. However, CVAEs regard diversity
as an implicit objective and may not be optimal. In this paper,
we raise two questions: i) Can diversity be further improved
with an explicit objective? ii) Since fidelity and diversity are
two conflicting objectives, how can we obtain different multiobjective optimal solutions according to user preferences? To
answer question i), we propose a multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL) method which explicitly takes CIDEr
and Self-CIDEr scores as the fidelity-oriented and diversityoriented rewards respectively. To answer question ii), we propose a preference-controlled MORL method, which can obtain infinite multi-objective optimal solutions by tuning the
preference variable. We conduct extensive experiments on
paraphrasing and image captioning tasks, which show that in
the fidelity-diversity trade-off space, our model outperforms
both deterministic and CVAE-based baselines.

Introduction
Conditional text generation covers a wide range of tasks
such as machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio
2015), abstractive summarization (Nallapati et al. 2016),
conversation (Vinyals and Le 2015), and image captioning (Xu et al. 2015). In practice, most of these tasks can
be formulated as sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) generation problems where models are required to generate proper
text conditioning on linguistic or non-linguistic input data.
While recent work mainly focused on improving the semantic fidelity of generated text with respect to the input, diversity was often ignored. Given the input x, models that capture the diverse nature of human language are
expected to generate multiple faithful and diverse sentences
e 2 , ..., y
e k ). However, most of the existing models are
(e
y1 , y
relatively deterministic partially due to the greedy decoding
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12662

