The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Exploring Faithful Rationale for Multi-Hop Fact Verification via Salience-Aware
Graph Learning
Jiasheng Si, Yingjie Zhu, Deyu Zhou*
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory of Computer Network
and Information Integration, Ministry of Education, Southeast University, China
{jasenchn, yj zhu, d.zhou}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

Claim: Olympic athlete May Wafic Sardouk represented
Lebanon at the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul, Korea,
landing in the 6th position in the Heat 4 event.

The opaqueness of the multi-hop fact verification model imposes imperative requirements for explainability. One feasible way is to extract rationales, a subset of inputs, where the
performance of prediction drops dramatically when being removed. Though being explainable, most rationale extraction
methods for multi-hop fact verification explore the semantic information within each piece of evidence individually,
while ignoring the topological information interaction among
different pieces of evidence. Intuitively, a faithful rationale
bears complementary information being able to extract other
rationales through the multi-hop reasoning process. To tackle
such disadvantages, we cast explainable multi-hop fact verification as subgraph extraction, which can be solved based
on graph convolutional network (GCN) with salience-aware
graph learning. In specific, GCN is utilized to incorporate the
topological interaction information among multiple pieces of
evidence for learning evidence representation. Meanwhile, to
alleviate the influence of noisy evidence, the salience-aware
graph perturbation is induced into the message passing of
GCN. Moreover, the multi-task model with three diagnostic
properties of rationale is elaborately designed to improve the
quality of an explanation without any explicit annotations.
Experimental results on the FEVEROUS benchmark show
significant gains over previous state-of-the-art methods for
both rationale extraction and fact verification.

Evidence:
S1(wiki/May Sardouk): May Wafic Sardouk (Arabic: ‫وﻓﯿﻖ ﻣﻲ‬
‫ ;ﺳﺮدوك‬born June 4, 1963) is a Lebanese Olympic athlete.
S2(wiki/May Sardouk): She represented Lebanon in 1988
Summer Olympics in Seoul.
S3(wiki/May Sardouk): Sardouk and Nancy Khalaf were the
only female participants for Lebanon in that tournament
among a total of 21 participant for Lebanon.
S4(wiki/Seoul): Seoul, officially the Seoul Special City, is
the capital and largest metropolis of South Korea.
S5(wiki/1988 Summer Olympics): The 1988 Summer
Olympics, …, was an international multi-sport event held
from 17 September to 2 October 1988 in Seoul, South Korea.
T6(wiki/May Sardouk):
Heat 4
Rank
1
2

Athlete
Athlete
Diane Dixon (USA)
Ute Thimm (FRG)

Time
52.45
52.79

6

……
Sardouk(LIB)
(LIB)
May Sardouk

1:00.01

Label: SUPPORTS

Figure 1: An example from FEVEROUS dataset, where S1,
S2, S4 and two table cells in T6 are considered as rationales.

Introduction
The wide availability of user-provided content on online social media facilitates the rapid dissemination of unfounded
rumors and misinformation. Fact verification, automatically
assessing the veracity of a textual claim against multiple pieces of evidence retrieved from external sources, has
gained intense attention to combat misinformation spread
on the internet (Zhou and Zafarani 2020; Guo, Schlichtkrull,
and Vlachos 2022; Si et al. 2021). However, as the opaqueness of the model diminishes user confidence and impedes
the discovery of harmful biases (Kotonya and Toni 2020a), it
is essential to understand the “reasoning” behind the model
prediction, i.e, the explainability of the fact verification approaches.

A straightforward way to generate explanations for fact
verification is to use rationale extraction (Zaidan, Eisner,
and Piatko 2007; DeYoung et al. 2020; Atanasova et al.
2020; Glockner, Habernal, and Gurevych 2020; Atanasova
et al. 2022), a post-hoc technique searching for a minimal
portion of input (i.e., rationales) that can be sufficient (i.e.,
solely based on the rationales) to derive a veracity prediction. The intuition is that the retrieved evidence for verifying the claim comprises noisy evidence inevitably, and the
interaction of true evidence1 is adequate for the multi-hop
fact verification model to reach a disposition accurately. It
1
Note that we make a distinction between true evidence and
noisy evidence conceptually, and define the true evidence as
the rationale since the term “rationale” implies human-like intent (Wiegreffe and Marasovic 2021).

* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13573

