The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

One-for-All: Proposal Masked Cross-Class Anomaly Detection
Xincheng Yao1 , Chongyang Zhang1,2 * , Ruoqi Li1 , Jun Sun1 , Zhenyu Liu3
1

School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
3
Ningbo HTVision Digital Technology Co.,Ltd, Ningbo 315000, China
{i-Dover, sunny zhang, nilponi, junsun}@sjtu.edu.cn1 , lzy409911075@163.com3

Single-Class Setting (one-for-one)

Abstract
One of the most challenges for anomaly detection (AD) is
how to learn one unified and generalizable model to adapt
to multi-class especially cross-class settings: the model is
trained with normal samples from seen classes with the objective to detect anomalies from both seen and unseen classes.
In this work, we propose a novel Proposal Masked Anomaly
Detection (PMAD) approach for such challenging multi- and
cross-class anomaly detection. The proposed PMAD can be
adapted to seen and unseen classes by two key designs: MAEbased patch-level reconstruction and prototype-guided proposal masking. First, motivated by MAE (Masked AutoEncoder), we develop a patch-level reconstruction model rather
than the image-level reconstruction adopted in most AD
methods for this reason: the masked patches in unseen classes
can be reconstructed well by using the visible patches and
the adaptive reconstruction capability of MAE. Moreover, we
improve MAE by ViT encoder-decoder architecture, combinational masking, and visual tokens as reconstruction objectives to make it more suitable for anomaly detection. Second,
we develop a two-stage anomaly detection manner during inference. In the proposal masking stage, the prototype-guided
proposal masking module is utilized to generate proposals
for suspicious anomalies as much as possible, then masked
patches can be generated from the proposal regions. By masking most likely anomalous patches, the “shortcut reconstruction” issue (i.e., anomalous regions can be well reconstructed)
can be mostly avoided. In the reconstruction stage, these
masked patches are then reconstructed by the trained patchlevel reconstruction model to determine if they are anomalies. Extensive experiments show that the proposed PMAD
can outperform current state-of-the-art models significantly
under the multi- and especially cross-class settings. Code will
be publicly available at https://github.com/xcyao00/PMAD.

Train

(a)

Train

ℳ1

ℳN

Test

Test
Testing Classes

Training Classes

Multi-Class Setting (one-for-many)
(b)

Train

ℳ

Test

Multiple Classes
Multiple Classes
Cross-Class Setting (one-for-all)
(c)

ℳC
Train
Test
Seen Classes

Seen Classes

Unseen Classes

Figure 1: Different anomaly detection settings. (a) SingleClass Setting (one-for-one): most AD methods train a specific model for each class. (b) Multi-Class Setting (one-formany): one unified model is trained and then used for multiple known classes. (c) Cross-Class Setting (one-for-all):
one unified model is trained with normal data from seen
classes, and aims to detect anomalies directly without any
fine-tuning from both seen and unseen classes.

road anomaly detection (Vojir, Sipka, and Aljundi 2021; Biase et al. 2021). Due to the scarcity of anomalies, most previous anomaly detection studies have mainly devoted to unsupervised learning, i.e., learning normal patterns by only utilizing anomaly-free data and treating anomalies as outliers.
The current unsupervised AD methods are comprised of
two main trends, i.e., reconstruction-based (Bergmann et al.
2019b; Schlegl et al. 2017) and embedding-based methods
(Defard et al. 2021; Roth et al. 2022). The former mainly
utilizes AutoEncoders (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006) or
GANs (Goodfellow et al. 2014) to generate reconstructed
image and then employ reconstruction errors between the input and reconstructed image to localize anomalies. The latter
aims to learn an embedding neural network for making normal data close to each other in the embedding space (Reiss
et al. 2021; Roth et al. 2022; Li et al. 2021).
However, regarding the issue of class adaptability, we

Introduction
Anomaly detection has widespread applications in diverse
domains, such as industrial defect inspection (Bergmann
et al. 2019a; Mishra et al. 2021; Defard et al. 2021; Roth
et al. 2022; Yao, Zhang, and Li 2022), video surveillance
(Acsintoae et al. 2022; Sultani, Chen, and Shah 2018), medical lesion detection (Tian et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021), and
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4792

