The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fairness in Contextual Resource Allocation Systems:
Metrics and Incompatibility Results
Nathanael Jo* , Bill Tang* , Kathryn Dullerud, Sina Aghaei, Eric Rice, Phebe Vayanos
USC Center for AI in Society, Los Angeles, CA
nathanael.jo@gmail.com, {yongpeng, kdulleru, saghaei, ericr, phebe.vayanos}@usc.edu
Abstract

and community members the system is designed to help. Indeed, even the perception of bias or lack of transparency can
result in a loss of trust and participation. Systems that do
not align with the values of their stakeholders may even get
defunded, further exacerbating resource scarcity.
Our goals in this paper are a) to establish a simple framework for stakeholders to evaluate the fairness of such highstakes resource allocation systems, and b) to guide policymakers in choosing which fairness requirements to impose
in the design of new (counterfactual) allocation policies. In
these systems, a central decision maker makes recommendations for how resources should be allocated. Such policies
rely on contextual information, i.e., they are based on an individual’s intrinsic characteristics (or covariates) which are
validated by case managers, as opposed to an individual’s
preferences (as in the mechanism design literature). Therefore, our learning problem closely resembles that of the classical machine learning framework. Instead of predicting outcomes from features, however, we additionally consider the
causal effect of resources (or treatments) on covariates.
We first present a menu of options for evaluating fairness
at different stages of the allocation process that are inspired
by popular fairness notions in the machine learning literature. We then present incompatibility results between these
notions that illuminate the concrete decisions that policymakers need to make in deciding how to allocate resources.
For instance, is it acceptable to use protected characteristics
like race in deciding which resource an individual should
receive? Is it sufficient to only use a vulnerability score to
prioritize individuals for resources, or should one necessarily include more context (e.g., information on treatment effects)?
Our results in this paper apply to many high-stakes resource allocation systems. To streamline exposition, we focus on one concrete application, that of allocating scarce
housing resources to people experiencing homelessness.
Housing Allocation for People Experiencing Homelessness in Los Angeles. Many cities face dramatic shortages of housing resources used to support those experiencing homelessness. In Los Angeles County, for example,
there are over 69,000 homeless persons and only around
30,000 permanent housing units as of the latest counts in
2022 (Authority 2022a,b). Communities have attempted to
address this problem by creating Coordinated Entry Systems
(CES) where agencies pool their housing resources in a centralized system called a Continuum of Care (CoC). Agencies

We study critical systems that allocate scarce resources to satisfy basic needs, such as homeless services that provide housing. These systems often support communities disproportionately affected by systemic racial, gender, or other injustices,
so it is crucial to design these systems with fairness considerations in mind. To address this problem, we propose a framework for evaluating fairness in contextual resource allocation
systems that is inspired by fairness metrics in machine learning. This framework can be applied to evaluate the fairness
properties of a historical policy, as well as to impose constraints in the design of new (counterfactual) allocation policies. Our work culminates with a set of incompatibility results
that investigate the interplay between the different fairness
metrics we propose. Notably, we demonstrate that: 1) fairness
in allocation and fairness in outcomes are usually incompatible; 2) policies that prioritize based on a vulnerability score
will usually result in unequal outcomes across groups, even
if the score is perfectly calibrated; 3) policies using contextual information beyond what is needed to characterize baseline risk and treatment effects can be fairer in their outcomes
than those using just baseline risk and treatment effects; and
4) policies using group status in addition to baseline risk and
treatment effects are as fair as possible given all available
information. Our framework can help guide the discussion
among stakeholders in deciding which fairness metrics to impose when allocating scarce resources.

1

Introduction

Many of our social and health service systems that operate
in high-stakes settings are severely under-resourced. These
systems allocate scarce resources that satisfy basic human
needs, such as hospitals that provide treatments, social services that offer preventive care, or homeless services that
provide shelter and housing. Inadequate allocation in these
systems can have grave consequences; for instance, a social
service program may exclude those most at risk of suicide
from an appropriate preventive intervention.
Since these systems often support communities disproportionately affected by systemic racial, gender, or other injustices, they must be sensitive to the worsening of preexisting inequalities. As such, the fairness of a high-stakes resource allocation system must be easily scrutinized and understood by key stakeholders, which include policymakers
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11837

