The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Inverse-Reference Priors for Fisher Regularization of Bayesian Neural Networks
Keunseo Kim1 * , Eun-Yeol Ma2 , Jeongman Choi2 , Heeyoung Kim2
1

2

Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, Suwon, Republic of Korea
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
keunseo.kim@samsung.com, {eyma1127, jmchoi14, heeyoungkim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

Previous methods that explicitly regularized the norm of the
loss gradient (Varga, Csiszárik, and Zombori 2017; Barrett
and Dherin 2020) can also be interpreted as regularizing the
local curvature of the loss function.
Similar to DNNs, Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) can
suffer from the poor generalization problem caused by the
misspecification of the hyperparameters of SGD. However,
the generalization issue has not been studied for BNNs, despite their wide use in risk-sensitive applications as they can
quantify uncertainties in DNN predictions by placing prior
distributions over the network weights (Jospin et al. 2022).
BNNs are typically trained by maximizing the evidence
lower bound (ELBO) using variational inference. However,
the inherent noisy estimation of the ELBO during training
makes the specification of the hyperparameters more critical for BNNs (Jospin et al. 2022). Moreover, their use of
the ELBO for inference makes the direct application of the
Fisher penalty (Jastrzebski et al. 2021) intractable.
Indeed, the generalization ability of BNNs can easily deteriorate for large-scale data depending on the specification of priors and the choice of hyperparameters such as
the learning rate and batch size (Ghosh, Yao, and DoshiVelez 2019; McGregor et al. 2019; Farquhar, Osborne, and
Gal 2020). For instance, recent studies have shown that
the Gaussian distribution, despite being the most frequently
used, may be inappropriate as a prior distribution for BNNs
(Nalisnick and Smyth 2018; Farquhar, Osborne, and Gal
2020) because it degrades the generalization of BNNs. In
particular, Wenzel et al. (2020) pointed out that the Gaussian prior distribution is not suitable for BNNs because it
is unintentionally informative and the unwanted effect of
the prior amplifies as the network scale increases. We also
empirically show in Section that the validation accuracy
decreases significantly when a BNN with a Gaussian prior
distribution is trained using a comparatively small learning
rate. Although various priors have been proposed for betterperforming BNNs (Ghosh, Yao, and Doshi-Velez 2019; McGregor et al. 2019; Farquhar, Osborne, and Gal 2020), identifying a prior that guarantees good generalization is still a
problem to be solved.
In this study, we achieve regularization of the FIM of
BNNs by specifying a new suitable prior distribution called
the inverse-reference (IR) prior. Specifically, we derive the
IR prior by manipulating the reference prior, inspired by the

Recent studies have shown that the generalization ability of
deep neural networks (DNNs) is closely related to the Fisher
information matrix (FIM) calculated during the early training phase. Several methods have been proposed to regularize
the FIM for increased generalization of DNNs. However, they
cannot be used directly for Bayesian neural networks (BNNs)
because the variable parameters of BNNs make it difficult to
calculate the FIM. To address this problem, we achieve regularization of the FIM of BNNs by specifying a new suitable prior distribution called the inverse-reference (IR) prior.
To regularize the FIM, the IR prior is derived as the inverse
of the reference prior that imposes minimal prior knowledge
on the parameters and maximizes the trace of the FIM. We
demonstrate that the IR prior can enhance the generalization
ability of BNNs for large-scale data over previously used priors while providing adequate uncertainty quantifications using various benchmark image datasets and BNN structures.

Introduction
The generalization of deep neural networks (DNNs) with a
large number of parameters has received considerable attention in recent studies for complex data analysis (Neyshabur
2017; Jiang et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2021). Widely used
methods include implicit regularization techniques such as
dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014), batch normalization (Ioffe
and Szegedy 2015), and early stopping of training (LeCun
et al. 2012), as well as explicit regularization techniques
such as ℓ2 regularization (Drucker and Le Cun 1992). However, for the past years it has been unclear why and how these
regularization methods affect the generalization of DNNs.
Recent studies have found that the generalization of
DNNs is highly affected by the local curvature of the loss
function in the early training phase (Jastrzebski et al. 2019,
2021; Cohen et al. 2020). Jastrzebski et al. (2021) found that
the trace of the Fisher information matrix (FIM) becomes
excessively high during the early phase of training when the
hyperparameters of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) are
misspecified, which results in poor generalization. To prevent poor generalization, Jastrzebski et al. (2021) proposed
the Fisher penalty, which regularizes the trace of the FIM.
* Work done while a student at KAIST.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8264

