The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Semidefinite Programming versus Burer-Monteiro Factorization for Matrix Sensing
Baturalp Yalçın* 1 , Ziye Ma* 2 , Javad Lavaei1 , Somayeh Sojoudi2
1

UC Berkeley, Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
UC Berkeley, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
{baturalp_yalcin, ziyema, lavaei, sojoudi}@berkeley.edu

2

Abstract

problem can be stated as the feasibility problem
find
s.t.

Many fundamental low-rank optimization problems, such as
matrix completion, phase retrieval, and robust PCA, can be formulated as the matrix sensing problem. Two main approaches
for solving matrix sensing are based on semidefinite programming (SDP) and Burer-Monteiro (B-M) factorization. The
former suffers from high computational and space complexities, whereas the latter may return a spurious solution due
to the non-convexity of the problem. The existing theoretical guarantees for the success of these methods have led to
similar conservative conditions, which may wrongly imply
that these methods have comparable performances. In this
paper, we shed light on some major differences between these
two methods. First, we present a class of structured matrix
completion problems for which the B-M methods fail with
an overwhelming probability, while the SDP method works
correctly. Second, we identify a class of highly sparse matrix
completion problems for which the B-M method works and
the SDP method fails. Third, we prove that although the B-M
method exhibits the same performance independent of the
rank of the unknown solution, the success of the SDP method
is correlated to the rank of the solution and improves as the
rank increases. Unlike the existing literature that has mainly
focused on those instances of matrix sensing for which both
SDP and B-M work, this paper offers the first result on the
unique merit of each method over the alternative approach.

1

Introduction

Low-rank matrix recovery problems have ubiquitous applications in machine learning and data analytics, including collaborative filtering (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009), phase
retrieval (Candes et al. 2015; Singer 2011; Boumal 2016;
Shechtman et al. 2015), motion detection (Fattahi and Sojoudi 2020), and power system state estimation (Jin et al.
2020; Zhang, Madani, and Lavaei 2017; Jin et al. 2019). This
problem is formally defined as follows: Given a measurement operator A(·) : Rm×n 7→ Rd returning a d-dimensional
measurement vector A(M∗ ) from a low-rank ground truth
matrix M∗ ∈ Rm×n with rank r, the goal is to obtain a matrix with rank less than equal to r that conforms with the
measurements, preferably the ground truth matrix M∗ . This
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10702

M ∈ Rm×n
A(M) = A(M∗ )
rank(M) ≤ r.

(1)

While the measurement operator A can be nonlinear as in the
case of one-bit matrix sensing (Davenport et al. 2014) and
phase retrieval (Shechtman et al. 2015), matrix sensing and
matrix completion that are widely studied have linear measurement operators (Candès and Recht 2009; Recht, Fazel,
and Parrilo 2010). We focus on the matrix sensing and matrix completion problems throughout this paper. Despite the
linearity of A, there are two types of problems depending on
the structure of the ground truth matrix M∗ . The first type,
symmetric problem, consists of a low-rank positive semidefinite ground truth matrix M∗ ∈ Rn×n , whereas the second
type, asymmetric problem, consists of a ground truth matrix
M∗ ∈ Rm×n that is possibly sign indefinite and non-square.
Since each asymmetric problem can be converted to an equivalent symmetric problem (Zhang, Bi, and Lavaei 2021a), we
study only the symmetric problem in this paper.
The matrix sensing and completion problems have linear measurements; hence, the first constraint in problem (1)
is linear. Therefore, the only nonconvexity of the problem
arises from the nonconvex rank constraint. Earlier works on
these problems focused on their convex relaxations by penalizing high-rank solutions (Candès and Recht 2009; Recht,
Fazel, and Parrilo 2010; Candès and Tao 2010). They utilized
the nuclear norm of a matrix as the convex surrogate of the
rank function. This led to semidefinite programming (SDP)
relaxations, which solve the original non-convex problems
exactly with high probability based on some assumptions
on the linear measurement operator and the ground truth
matrix, such as the Restricted Isometry Property (RIP) and
incoherence conditions. High computational time and storage requirements of the SDP algorithms incentivized the
implementation of the B-M factorization approach (Burer
and Monteiro 2003). This approach factorizes the symmetric
matrix variable M ∈ Rn×n as M = XXT for some matrix
X ∈ Rn×r , which obviates imposing the positive semidefiniteness and rank constraints. Although the dimension of
the decision variable reduces dramatically when r is small,
the problem is still nonconvex since its objective function is
nonconvex in terms of the factorized X.

