The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Deconstructed Generation-Based Zero-Shot Model
Dubing Chen1 , Yuming Shen2 , Haofeng Zhang1 * , Philip H.S. Torr2
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
University of Oxford
{db.chen, zhanghf}@njust.edu.cn, ymcidence@gmail.com, philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

classes. A central hypothesis of generation-based GZSL
methods is that the generated class-level and instance-level
unseen distribution should match the real unseen distribution (Fig. 1). By generating pseudo-unseen instances,
these methods enable classifier training to encompass unseen classes, resulting in a superior discrimination of unseen
classes compared to their counterparts. Despite their success
in enhancing GZSL performance, generation-based methods
encounter various challenges in future extensions or developments. Firstly, the underlying reasons for the effectiveness
of these approaches remain largely unexplored. Although
certain literature suggests that improved discrimination (Wu
et al. 2020) or diversity (Liu et al. 2021a) of generated samples contributes to enhanced GZSL performance, no theoretical or empirical evidence supports these performance
gains. Secondly, training a generative model entails additional computational and complexity. In most generationbased methods, the primary time complexity arises from
training the generative model.
To address these challenges, we conduct both an empirical and a theoretical investigation to uncover, understand, and extend generation-based methods. We begin by
analyzing the role of instance-level distribution and classlevel distribution. In doing so, we replace the generatorlearned instance-level distribution with the Gaussian distribution and conclude its substitutability in improving GZSL
performance. (Sec. 3.1). By decomposing the gradient of
the cross-entropy loss, we further relate class- and instancelevel distributions to unseen class discrimination and decision boundary formation (Sec. 3.2). Based on our analysis, we point out the core improvement direction for the
generator-classifier framework. First, the key for the ZSL
generator is attribute generalization, where we should focus
on generalizing the attribute-conditioned image distribution
learned from the seen data to unseen classes. Second, classifier learning is an independent task to learn from partially
biased data. We summarize two principles for this task: mitigating the impact of pseudo samples on seen class boundaries during training and reducing the seen-unseen bias.
We finally propose a single baseline based on the idea
of deconstruction. Our approach surpasses existing methods
in performance, despite having lower complexity. Additionally, we replace the generative model with a one-to-one mapping network from attributes to the visual class centers. Our

Recent research on Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL)
has focused primarily on generation-based methods. However, current literature has overlooked the fundamental principles of these methods and has made limited progress in a
complex manner. In this paper, we aim to deconstruct the
generator-classifier framework and provide guidance for its
improvement and extension. We begin by breaking down the
generator-learned unseen class distribution into class-level
and instance-level distributions. Through our analysis of the
role of these two types of distributions in solving the GZSL
problem, we generalize the focus of the generation-based approach, emphasizing the importance of (i) attribute generalization in generator learning and (ii) independent classifier learning with partially biased data. We present a simple method based on this analysis that outperforms SotAs
on four public GZSL datasets, demonstrating the validity of
our deconstruction. Furthermore, our proposed method remains effective even without a generative model, representing
a step towards simplifying the generator-classifier structure.
Our code is available at https://github.com/cdb342/DGZ.

1

Introduction

Big data fuels the progress of deep learning, but obtaining
specific data can sometimes prove difficult. In cases where
specific data is not available, Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL)
(Palatucci et al. 2009) can be used to recognize unseen
data by utilizing the relationship between seen and unseen
data. In general, ZSL seeks to recognize unseen data by exploiting the correlation between seen and unseen data. This
correlation is established using semantic knowledge, which
can be obtained through human annotations (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009) or word-to-vector approaches
(Mikolov et al. 2013a). By using semantic descriptors, ZSL
enables the transfer of information from seen to unseen domains. Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) (Chao et al.
2016) expands on ZSL by including additional seen classes
in the target decision domain, and it has received increasing
attention from researchers.
Recently, generative models have been used in mainstream GZSL research to supplement information on unseen
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

295

