The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Pseudo Label-Guided Model Inversion Attack via Conditional Generative
Adversarial Network
Xiaojian Yuan1 , Kejiang Chen* 1 , Jie Zhang1,2 , Weiming Zhang1 ,
Nenghai Yu1 , Yang Zhang3
1

University of Science and Technology of China,
2
University of Waterloo,
3
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
xjyuan@mail.ustc.edu.cn, chenkj@ustc.edu.cn, jiezhangsp@gmail.com,
zhangwm@ustc.edu.cn, ynh@ustc.edu.cn, zhang@cispa.de
GAN Latent Space

Abstract

GAN Latent Space

GAN Latent Space
Public Data

Public Data

Model inversion (MI) attacks have raised increasing concerns
about privacy, which can reconstruct training data from public models. Indeed, MI attacks can be formalized as an optimization problem that seeks private data in a certain space.
Recent MI attacks leverage a generative adversarial network
(GAN) as an image prior to narrow the search space, and
can successfully reconstruct even the high-dimensional data
(e.g., face images). However, these generative MI attacks do
not fully exploit the potential capabilities of the target model,
still leading to a vague and coupled search space, i.e., different classes of images are coupled in the search space. Besides, the widely used cross-entropy loss in these attacks suffers from gradient vanishing. To address these problems, we
propose Pseudo Label-Guided MI (PLG-MI) attack via conditional GAN (cGAN). At first, a top-n selection strategy is
proposed to provide pseudo-labels for public data, and use
pseudo-labels to guide the training of the cGAN. In this way,
the search space is decoupled for different classes of images.
Then a max-margin loss is introduced to improve the search
process on the subspace of a target class. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our PLG-MI attack significantly improves the attack success rate and visual quality for various
datasets and models, notably, 2 ∼ 3× better than state-ofthe-art attacks under large distributional shifts. Our code is
available at: https://github.com/LetheSec/PLG-MI-Attack.

Class 1

Public Data

All classes in the
private data

Class 3

···

Class 4

GMI

KED-MI

Class 2

Class 5

Ours

Figure 1: Latent search space for different MI attacks.
The blue area represents the latent space that needs to be
searched to reconstruct a certain class of images. That is, the
adversary should find an optimal latent point in the blue area,
so that the generator outputs the private image of a specified
class.

Typically, MI attacks can be formalized as an optimization problem with the goal of searching the input space for
the sensitive feature value that achieves the highest likelihood under the target model. However, when attacking
DNNs trained on more complex data (e.g., RGB images),
directly solving the optimization problem via gradient descent tends to stuck in local minima, resulting in reconstructed images lacking clear semantic information. Recent
work (Zhang et al. 2020) proposed generative MI attacks
(GMI), which used a generative adversarial network (GAN)
to learn a generic prior of natural images, avoiding reconstructing private data directly from the unconstrained space.
Generally, generative MI attacks can be summarized as the
following two search stages:

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have revolutionized a wide
variety of tasks, including computer vision, natural language
processing, and healthcare. However, many practical applications of DNNs require training on private or sensitive
datasets, such as facial recognition (Taigman et al. 2014)
and medical diagnosis (Rajpurkar et al. 2017), which may
pose some privacy threats. Indeed, the prior study of privacy
attacks has demonstrated the possibility of exposing unauthorized information from access to a model (Shokri et al.
2017; Gopinath et al. 2019; Tramèr et al. 2016; Fredrikson,
Jha, and Ristenpart 2015). In this paper, we mainly focus on
model inversion (MI) attacks, a type of privacy attack that
aims to recover the training data given a trained model.

• stage-1: Generator Parameter Space Search. The adversary trains a generative model (i.e., searches for the optimal parameters) on a public dataset that only shares
structural similarity with the private dataset.
• stage-2: Latent Vector Search. The adversary keeps
searching the latent space of the generator trained in
stage-1, until the output is close to the images in the private dataset.
Notably, GMI totally ignored the potential capability of
the target model for the training process. Inspired by semisupervised GAN (Salimans et al. 2016), KED-MI (Chen
et al. 2021) adopted a classifier as the GAN discriminator

* Corresponding authors.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3349

