The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Audio-Visual Contrastive Learning with Temporal Self-Supervision
Simon Jenni1 , Alexander Black2 , John Collomosse1,2
1

Adobe Research
University of Surrey
jenni@adobe.com, alex.black@surrey.ac.uk, collomos@adobe.com
2

Abstract

and the aural and temporal features potentially results in a
representation that better generalizes to downstream vision
applications, such as action recognition, video retrieval, or
robust video content fingerprinting.
Indeed, recent works that explored the aural and temporal dimensions of videos in isolation have demonstrated that they are both effective self-supervision signals.
Several works (Morgado, Vasconcelos, and Misra 2021;
Patrick et al. 2020; Alwassel et al. 2019) demonstrate that
audio-visual contrastive learning often performs better than
uni-modal contrastive learning (i.e., using only the RGB
frames). Likewise, temporal reasoning tasks (Misra, Zitnick,
and Hebert 2016; Jenni and Jin 2021; Dave et al. 2021)
have demonstrated good transfer performance, especially for
downstream tasks where motion is the main discerning factor (as opposed to static scene appearance).
In contrast, our work aims to leverage both sound and
time as learning signals in a unified model architecture and
training objective. To this end, we extend temporal selfsupervision to the audio domain and propose cross-modal
audio-visual temporal reasoning tasks. Concretely, we pose
playback-speed and -direction recognition (Wei et al. 2018;
Benaim et al. 2020; Jenni, Meishvili, and Favaro 2020), as
a pretext task for audio representation learning and propose
temporal clip ordering as a task for both intra-modal (e.g.,
audio-audio) and cross-modal (e.g., audio-video) learning
(see Figure 2). Furthermore, we introduce a model architecture and training objective for contrastive audio-visual learning that supplements these temporal learning tasks. Towards
this goal, we carefully study how the inclusion and exclusion of different intra- and inter-modal contrastive objectives
influences downstream performance. Our key findings for
optimal audio-visual contrastive learning are 1. inclusion of
video-video contrastive terms 2. temporally aligned crossmodal positives, and 3. exclusion of audio-audio contrastive
terms (see Figure 1).
We further explore the design of the contrastive loss terms
(Wu et al. 2018), i.e., how to build positive and negative pairs
for effective learning. In constructing our contrastive objective, we take inspiration from recent image-based methods
(Dwibedi et al. 2021; Koohpayegani, Tejankar, and Pirsiavash 2021) and extend the set of positive samples with nearest neighbors in the evolving feature space. Thus, besides
standard augmented views for positive sampling, we con-

We propose a self-supervised learning approach for videos
that learns representations of both the RGB frames and the
accompanying audio without human supervision. In contrast
to images that capture the static scene appearance, videos also
contain sound and temporal scene dynamics. To leverage the
temporal and aural dimension inherent to videos, our method
extends temporal self-supervision to the audio-visual setting
and integrates it with multi-modal contrastive objectives. As
temporal self-supervision, we pose playback speed and direction recognition in both modalities and propose intra- and
inter-modal temporal ordering tasks. Furthermore, we design
a novel contrastive objective in which the usual pairs are supplemented with additional sample-dependent positives and
negatives sampled from the evolving feature space. In our
model, we apply such losses among video clips and between
videos and their temporally corresponding audio clips. We
verify our model design in extensive ablation experiments and
evaluate the video and audio representations in transfer experiments to action recognition and retrieval on UCF101 and
HMBD51, audio classification on ESC50, and robust video
fingerprinting on VGG-Sound, with state-of-the-art results.

Introduction
Videos provide a rich source of information for audiovisual learning. Besides static moments in time (single video
frames), they also contain the scene dynamics (object motion) and often include the sounds of the environment and
scene objects. It seems hopeless to learn general representations that capture this rich semantic information in videos,
i.e., their appearance, motions, and sounds from such highdimensional data through sparse human supervision. Selfsupervised learning (SSL) (Doersch, Gupta, and Efros 2015;
Chen et al. 2020b; He et al. 2020) has emerged as a viable alternative to supervised learning in recent years. Such methods might be better suited for general video representation
learning since they are not constrained by the prohibitive
cost of exhaustive human annotations on video. However,
since most current self-supervised methods are tailored to
static images, they might not effectively use videos’ added
temporal and aural dimensions. A self-supervised learning
task that successfully integrates the static scene appearance
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7996

