The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Supervised Graph Attention Networks for Deep Weighted
Multi-View Clustering
Zongmo Huang1 , Yazhou Ren1,2 * , Xiaorong Pu1,2 * , Shudong Huang3 , Zenglin Xu4 , Lifang He5
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen, China
3
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
5
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Lehigh Univerisity, Bethlehem, USA
zongmohuang@gmail.com, yazhou.ren@uestc.edu.cn, puxiaor@uestc.edu.cn, huangsd@scu.edu.cn,
zenglin@gmail.com, lih319@lehigh.edu
Abstract

of studies that introduce the Graph Neural Networks (Wu
et al. 2021) (GNN) to the deep embedded MVC framework
(Fan et al. 2020; Cheng et al. 2020) are proposed recently.
With the GNN structures, these models aggregate the latent
features of samples from their neighbors according to the
topological structures of nodes. In this way, the GNN-based
MVC models explore the clusters based on both attributes
and adjacent relationship of samples, thus obtaining much
better clustering results.
Although great progresses have been achieved, existing
GNN-based MVC methods often give insufficient consideration to the usage of the self-supervised information during the training, hindering their clustering performance. To
this end, we introduce Self-Supervised Graph Attention Networks for Deep Weighted Multi-View Clustering (SGDMC),
which improves GNN-based MVC models by utilizing selfsupervised information in the following two ways.
Firstly, to comprehensively evaluate the relevance of samples and improve the aggregating capability of the graph
attention layer, a novel attention allocating approach that
considers the similarity of both local node attributes and
global pseudo-labels is developed for the learned adjacent
graph. Specifically, in each epoch, SGDMC first employs
kNN graph algorithm (Fix and Hodges 1989) to construct
the adjacent graph on the latent embeddings of nodes in each
view. After that, the attention coefficient of each edge in
the adjacent graph is determined by the Gaussian similarity
of their features and the cosine similarity of their pseudolabels. In this way, the proposed SGDMC not only improve
the representation learning capability of model but also has
a much wider application scenario as it does not require explicit graphs as input like most GNN-based MVC models
(Fan et al. 2020; Cheng et al. 2020; Xia et al. 2022).
Secondly, based on attention graphs as well as the discrepancy between the global pseudo-label and local cluster
assignment, a novel sample-weighting strategy is also proposed in this paper. Since existing GNN-based MVC models generally treat all the samples equally, their clustering
performance is extremely sensitive to the existence of the
noisy samples and are easily stuck into the suboptimal solutions. Meanwhile, during the self-supervised training pro-

As one of the most important research topics in the unsupervised learning field, Multi-View Clustering (MVC) has been
widely studied in the past decade and numerous MVC methods have been developed. Among these methods, the recently
emerged graph neural networks (GNNs) shine a light on modeling both topological structure and node attributes in the
form of graphs, to guide unified embedding learning and clustering. However, existing GNN-based MVC methods generally do not give sufficient consideration to the use of selfsupervised information during the training process, which
prevents them from achieving better results. To this end, in
this paper we propose Self-Supervised Graph Attention Networks for Deep Weighted Multi-View Clustering (SGDMC),
which exploits the self-supervised information to enhance
the effectiveness of the graph-based deep MVC model from
two aspects. Firstly, a novel attention allocating approach
that considers both the similarity of node attributes and the
self-supervised information is developed to comprehensively
evaluate the relevance among different nodes. Secondly, to alleviate the negative impact caused by noisy samples and the
discrepancy of cluster structures, we further design a sampleweighting strategy based on the attention graphs as well as the
discrepancy between the global pseudo-labels and the local
cluster assignment of each single view. Experimental results
on multiple real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method over existing approaches.

Introduction
Multi-view clustering aims to promote clustering performance by utilizing the complementary knowledge from multiple views, which has been widely studied in the past
decade. Among numerous MVC methods (Yang and Wang
2018), the deep embedded multi-view clustering models (Li
et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2022a; Zhou and Shen 2020) perform superior clustering results owing to the representation
learning capability of deep networks and become increasingly popular in these years. However, the effectiveness of
these methods is limited as they cannot exploit the topological information of samples. To address this issue, a series
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7936

