The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Echo of Neighbors: Privacy Amplification for Personalized Private
Federated Learning with Shuffle Model
Yixuan Liu1,2,3 , Suyun Zhao1,2,3 , Li Xiong4 , Yuhan Liu1,2,3 , Hong Chen1,2,3 *
1

Key Laboratory of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Renmin University of China
2
Engineering Research Center of Ministry of Education on Database and BI
3
Information School, Renmin University of China
4
Department of Computer Science, Emory University
{liuyixuan, zhaosuyun}@ruc.edu.cn, lxiong@emory.edu, {liuyh2019, chong}@ruc.edu.cn
Abstract

Federated Learning, as a popular paradigm for collaborative training, is vulnerable against privacy attacks. Different privacy levels regarding users’ attitudes need to be satisfied locally, while a strict privacy guarantee for the global
model is also required centrally. Personalized Local Differential Privacy (PLDP) is suitable for preserving users’ varying local privacy, yet only provides a central privacy guarantee equivalent to the worst-case local privacy level. Thus,
achieving strong central privacy as well as personalized local
privacy with a utility-promising model is a challenging problem. In this work, a general framework (APES) is built up
to strengthen model privacy under personalized local privacy
by leveraging the privacy amplification effect of the shuffle
model. To tighten the privacy bound, we quantify the heterogeneous contributions to the central privacy user by user. The
contributions are characterized by the ability of generating
“echos” from the perturbation of each user, which is carefully measured by proposed methods Neighbor Divergence
and Clip-Laplace Mechanism. Furthermore, we propose a refined framework (S-APES) with the post-sparsification technique to reduce privacy loss in high-dimension scenarios. To
the best of our knowledge, the impact of shuffling on personalized local privacy is considered for the first time. We
provide a strong privacy amplification effect, and the bound
is tighter than the baseline result based on existing methods for uniform local privacy. Experiments demonstrate that
our frameworks ensure comparable or higher accuracy for the
global model.

Methods

Personalization

PLDP
Uni-Shuffle
APES
S-APES

!
%
!
!

FL Process
Local
Central
!
!
!
!

Weak
!
!
Strong

Table 1: Comparison of related work. !denotes protected,
%denotes unprotected.
and Houmansadr 2019; Xiong et al. 2021). These attacks can
lead to severe data leakage, hence it is necessary to provide
additional protection with strict privacy guarantees for both
the global model and local parameters. Moreover, in practice, different local privacy levels may be desired depending
on users’ privacy preferences. A one-size-fits-all approach
would either downgrade the model utility or sacrifice privacy protection for certain users. Thus, an open problem in
FL is how to provide strong central privacy as well as personalized local privacy while maintaining model utility.
Several recent works have attempted to address this problem. Personalized Local Differential Privacy (PLDP) protects both local gradients and the global model by perturbing
gradients with heterogeneous parameters (Chen et al. 2016;
Li et al. 2020; Shen, Xia, and Yu 2021). The central privacy of the global model is equivalent to the weakest local privacy. For achieving both strong central and local privacy, a potential solution is the shuffle model (Bittau et al.
2017). It amplifies central privacy by permuting data points
randomly after local perturbation. However, existing studies on shuffle model only focus on the scenarios where local
privacy requirements are assumed uniform (Uni-Shuffle for
short) (Erlingsson et al. 2019; Balle et al. 2019; Girgis et al.
2021; Feldman, McMillan, and Talwar 2022). To the best of
our knowledge, there is no work that provides both strong
central privacy for the global model and personalized local
privacy guarantees, while achieving strong utility of global
model (cf. Tab.1).
To narrow this gap, we propose APES, a privacy
Amplification framework for PErsonalized private federated
learning with Shuffle model (cf. Fig. 1). APES gains a strong

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017) is an
emerging machine learning paradigm that allows multiple
clients to train a global model collaboratively while keeping the private raw data of each client locally. While not directly sharing private data, recent works indicate that FL by
itself is insufficient to preserve privacy of users’ data. By observing the global model or intermediate parameters during
the training process, adversaries can infer the membership of
users or even reconstruct training records (Fredrikson, Jha,
and Ristenpart 2015; Zhu, Liu, and Han 2019; Nasr, Shokri,
* Corresponding author: Hong Chen, chong@ruc.edu.cn
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11865

