The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

TransVCL: Attention-Enhanced Video Copy Localization Network
with Flexible Supervision
Sifeng He1* , Yue He1 , Minlong Lu1 , Chen Jiang1 , Xudong Yang1 ,
Feng Qian1* , Xiaobo Zhang1 , Lei Yang1 , Jiandong Zhang2
1
Ant Group
Copyright Protection Center of China
{sifeng.hsf, youzhi.qf}@antgroup.com

2

Abstract
Video copy localization aims to precisely localize all the
copied segments within a pair of untrimmed videos in video
retrieval applications. Previous methods typically start from
frame-to-frame similarity matrix generated by cosine similarity between frame-level features of the input video pair,
and then detect and refine the boundaries of copied segments
on similarity matrix under temporal constraints. In this paper,
we propose TransVCL: an attention-enhanced video copy localization network, which is optimized directly from initial
frame-level features and trained end-to-end with three main
components: a customized Transformer for feature enhancement, a correlation and softmax layer for similarity matrix
generation, and a temporal alignment module for copied segments localization. In contrast to previous methods demanding the handcrafted similarity matrix, TransVCL incorporates long-range temporal information between feature sequence pair using self- and cross- attention layers. With the
joint design and optimization of three components, the similarity matrix can be learned to present more discriminative copied patterns, leading to significant improvements over
previous methods on segment-level labeled datasets (VCSL
and VCDB). Besides the state-of-the-art performance in
fully supervised setting, the attention architecture facilitates
TransVCL to further exploit unlabeled or simply video-level
labeled data. Additional experiments of supplementing videolevel labeled datasets including SVD and FIVR reveal the
high flexibility of TransVCL from full supervision to semisupervision (with or without video-level annotation). Code is
publicly available at https://github.com/transvcl/TransVCL.

Figure 1: Video copy localization is to accurately detect the
start and end timestamps of all copied segment pairs in the
query and reference videos. The yellow highlight points on
similarity matrix indicate high similarity scores of temporal
corresponding frames between query and reference videos.

The green or purple bounding box corresponding to trimmed
temporal section of two original videos (query and reference
video) is a pair of copied segments. The goal of video copy
localization task is to search and obtain all these copied segments pairs from query and reference videos as consistent as
possible to ground-truth labels.
Many recent works (Baraldi et al. 2018; Jiang et al. 2021;
Han et al. 2021; He et al. 2022) have been proposed to precisely localize copied segments within video pairs. (He et al.
2022) concludes a detailed benchmark pipeline for video
copy localization. The pipeline starts with a pair of copied
videos as input and then outputs the predicted copied segments. All the benchmarked copy localization algorithms
follow the scheme that generates a handcrafted frame-toframe similarity matrix (usually cosine similarity between
frame-level feature sequence pairs), and then feed this correlation matrix to temporal alignment methods including TN
(Tan et al. 2009), DP (Chou, Chen, and Lee 2015), SPD
(Jiang et al. 2021) etc. This pipeline has good generalizability and extensibility, and it is suitable for most basic copy
transformations.
However, this pipeline also has several limitations. First,

Introduction
Due to the explosive growth of pirated multimedia and increasing demands for preventing copyright infringements in
recent years, content-based video retrieval (CBVR) becomes
increasingly essential in applications such as copyright protection, video filtering, recommendation, etc. Besides overall video-level copy detection for given pairs of potential
copied videos, finer-grained segment-level copy details with
temporal boundaries are also desired particularly in large
datasets or real-world scenarios so that applications such as
copyright protection become easier and more intuitive. Figure 1 shows this segment-level video copy detection task.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

799

