The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Safe Multi-View Deep Classification
Wei Liu1 , Yufei Chen1 * , Xiaodong Yue2,3,5 , Changqing Zhang4 , Shaorong Xie2
1

College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
3
Artificial Intelligence Institute of Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
4
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
5
VLN Lab, NAVI MedTech Co., Ltd. Shanghai, China
ldachuan@outlook.com, yufeichen@tongji.edu.cn, yswantfly@shu.edu.cn, zhangchangqing@tju.edu.cn, srxie@shu.edu.cn
Abstract
Multi-view deep classification expects to obtain better classification performance than using a single view. However, due
to the uncertainty and inconsistency of data sources, adding
data views does not necessarily lead to the performance improvements in multi-view classification. How to avoid worsening classification performance when adding views is crucial for multi-view deep learning but rarely studied. To tackle
this limitation, in this paper, we reformulate the multi-view
classification problem from the perspective of safe learning
and thereby propose a Safe Multi-view Deep Classification
(SMDC) method, which can guarantee that the classification performance does not deteriorate when fusing multiple
views. In the SMDC method, we dynamically integrate multiple views and estimate the inherent uncertainties among multiple views with different root causes based on evidence theory. Through minimizing the uncertainties, SMDC promotes
the evidences from data views for correct classification, and
in the meantime excludes the incorrect evidences to produce
the safe multi-view classification results. Furthermore, we
theoretically prove that in the safe multi-view classification,
adding data views will certainly not increase the empirical
risk of classification. The experiments on various kinds of
multi-view datasets validate that the proposed SMDC method
can achieve precise and safe classification results.

Figure 1: Empirical error for multi-view and single-view
classification results with deep learning.

ited. Existing multi-view learning algorithms generally treat
an equal value for different views or assign/learn a fixed
weight for each view. However, in real-world applications,
not all information from each view can contribute a good
representation due to the unknown and complex correlation among different views. Many works show that sometimes the use of multiple views may degenerate the performance (Bickel and Scheffer 2004; Yang et al. 2012). This
problem is more critical in multi-view deep learning due to
the overconfident incorrect predictions of DNNs (Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017), which makes the fusion result of multiple views from uncertain and inconsistent
data sources unsafe. Taking the Figure 1 as example, which
shows the empirical error on real-world multi-view dataset
Food-101 (Wang et al. 2015b) with deep learning. We can
find the image empirical error increases with the coming
of the abnormal text view that contains unknown information described by error code. Such phenomena undoubtedly
go against the expectation of multi-view deep learning and
limit its effectiveness in a large of practical tasks, particularly safety-critical applications (e.g., medical diagnosis or
autonomous driving). Thus, it is vital to have a safe multiview learning algorithm, whose performance is never significantly worse when fusing multiple views.
Though there are already many studies on multi-view
learning, little work has been done explicitly about its safe-

Introduction
In real-world scenarios, such as image analysis, computing
vision, data mining and multimedia, the same object can
be represented by multiple different modalities or multiple
types of features, known as multi-view data (Xu, Tao, and
Xu 2013), which promotes multi-view learning to design
advanced methods of combining multiple views to achieve
the performance improvement. Recently, joining the success
of deep learning, multi-view deep learning, which aims to
learn a shared representation of multiple information from
different types of views with deep neural networks (DNNs)
(Bachman, Hjelm, and Buchwalter 2019; Sun, Dong, and
Liu 2020), has become an important research direction.
While multi-view deep learning shows excellent power in
practice, theoretical safeness guarantee (performance without degradation) of existing multi-view deep learning is lim* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8870

