The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Adversarial Alignment for Source Free Object Detection
Qiaosong Chu1,2 * , Shuyan Li1,2 * , Guangyi Chen3,4 , Kai Li5 , Xiu Li1,2†
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Shenzhen, China
2
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
5
NEC LABORATORIES AMERICA, INC
zqs20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, sl2141@cam.ac.uk, {guangyichen1994, li.gml.kai}@gmail.com, li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Source-free object detection (SFOD) aims to transfer a detector pre-trained on a label-rich source domain to an unlabeled target domain without seeing source data. While most
existing SFOD methods generate pseudo labels via a sourcepretrained model to guide training, these pseudo labels usually contain high noises due to heavy domain discrepancy.
In order to obtain better pseudo supervisions, we divide the
target domain into source-similar and source-dissimilar parts
and align them in the feature space by adversarial learning.
Specifically, we design a detection variance-based criterion
to divide the target domain. This criterion is motivated by
a finding that larger detection variances denote higher recall
and larger similarity to the source domain. Then we incorporate an adversarial module into a mean teacher framework
to drive the feature spaces of these two subsets indistinguishable. Extensive experiments on multiple cross-domain object
detection datasets demonstrate that our proposed method consistently outperforms the compared SFOD methods. Our implementation is available at https://github.com/ChuQiaosong.

Figure 1: Basic idea of A2 SFOD. We propose a variancebased criterion to divide the target domain data into sourcesimilar and source-dissimilar subsets, based on a finding that
larger detection variances denote higher recall and larger
similarity to the source domain. We can achieve the domain
alignment by simulating the source and target domains with
the divided source-similar and source-dissimilar subsets.

Introduction
Despite the promising performance, deep object detection
still heavily relies on numerous manually annotated training data. It leads to a significant performance drop in realworld scenarios when the detection system faces a new environment with the domain shift. As collecting labels for all
conditions is impractical, it requires detectors to efficiently
adapt to new environments without further annotations. To
this end, Unsupervised Domain Adaptive (UDA) object detection has gained increasing attention in recent years (He
and Zhang 2019; Saito et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2021).
The aforementioned methods are based on the assumption
that both source and target domain data are accessible. However, this assumption may not hold in many real-world applications due to infeasible data transmission, computation resource restrictions, or data privacy. It poses a new challenge,
which is named source data-free or source-free, i.e. only a
well-trained source model is provided during adapting to the
target domain without having access to source data (Kundu

et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022a; Yazdanpanah and Moradi
2022; Machireddy et al. 2022).
While the source-free challenge has been well studied
for image classification tasks (Xia, Zhao, and Ding 2021;
Liang, Hu, and Feng 2020), there are much fewer works
that focus on Source-Free Object Detection (SFOD) (Zhang
et al. 2021; VS, Oza, and Patel 2022). Due to complex background, obscured objects, and numerous negative samples,
directly applying conventional source-free domain adaptation methods to SFOD cannot achieve satisfactory detection
accuracy. Therefore, it is desirable to develop effective domain adaptation methods to solve the source-free problem
for object detection.
As there is no manually labeled data available during
adaptation, most existing SFOD methods train the model
by using pseudo-labels generated by a source-pretrained
model (Yuan et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2021). However, the
domain shift inevitably introduces high noises in pseudo labels, which deteriorates the detection performance (Deng
et al. 2021). Though various data augmentation methods (Li
et al. 2021a) have been developed to improve the quality of

* These authors contributed equally.
†

*Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

452

