The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Sequence Generation with Label Augmentation for Relation Extraction
Bo Li1,2 * , Dingyao Yu1,2 * , Wei Ye1† , Jinglei Zhang1,2 , Shikun Zhang1†
1

National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University
2
School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University
deepblue.lb@stu.pku.edu.cn, yudingyao@pku.edu.cn, wye@pku.edu.cn,
jinglei.zhang@stu.pku.edu.cn, zhangsk@pku.edu.cn

71.0

Sequence generation demonstrates promising performance in
recent information extraction efforts, by incorporating largescale pre-trained Seq2Seq models. This paper investigates the
merits of employing sequence generation in relation extraction, finding that with relation names or synonyms as generation targets, their textual semantics and the correlation (in
terms of word sequence pattern) among them affect model
performance. We then propose Relation Extraction with Label
Augmentation (RELA), a Seq2Seq model with automatic label
augmentation for RE. By saying label augmentation, we mean
prod semantically synonyms for each relation name as the
generation target. Besides, we present an in-depth analysis of
the Seq2Seq model’s behavior when dealing with RE. Experimental results show that RELA achieves competitive results
compared with previous methods on four RE datasets.

70.5

1

Micro F1-score

Abstract

70.0

70.4
IRE-BERT(69.7)

69.5
69.0

68.8

69.1

68.5
68.0

Introduction

Paradigm shift has been observed in an increasing number of
tasks in recent years, that is some paradigms have the potential to solve diverse NLP tasks (Sun et al. 2021). For example,
although most natural language understanding (NLU) tasks
treat the classification-based methods as the default solution,
sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) models could achieve onpair performances (Yan et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2022; Saxena,
Kochsiek, and Gemulla 2022; Zhang et al. 2022b; Sun et al.
2022; Mao et al. 2022). With the help of pre-trained Seq2Seq
models (Lewis et al. 2020; Raffel et al. 2020) and carefully
designed schema, these methods directly generate various
objectives, such as sentiment polarity, class name, entity type,
etc.
There are also numerous works incorporating Seq2Seq
models for relation extraction (RE). Previous efforts mainly
focus on the following three aspects. The first one designs
novel modules or model architectures, for example, Chen,
Zhang, and Huang (2022) proposes a framework of text and
graph to learn relational reasoning patterns for relational
triple extraction. The second one utilizes various external
datasets or resources to enrich the input (Cabot and Navigli
2021; Zhang et al. 2022a; Paolini et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2022).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13043

Random Name Meaningless Token Relation Name

Figure 1: The results of different models on the TACRED
test set. We report three kinds of BART-based variants with
different generation objectives. The horizontal line is the
result from IRE-BERT(Zhou and Chen 2021), which is a
strong classification-based model. Note that we use BARTlarge and BERT-large as backbone networks. The results
indicate that the generation target significantly affects the
performance of Seq2Seq-based RE model.

The last one aims to design proper generation schema. For
example, Josifoski et al. (2022) leveraged constrained beam
search (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Cao et al. 2021)
to generate reasonable outputs. Lu et al. (2022) proposed a
structured extraction language to better guide the Seq2Seq
model. By improving the model itself or enriching the input,
the above methods could better utilize the knowledge existing
in Seq2Seq model. A natural question is raised: does the target side could also active the knowledge and have significant
impact on the Seq2seq-based RE model? In this research, we
work towards closing the above research gap by enriching
the information existing in relation names.
To answer the aforementioned questions, we first conduct
a pilot experiment to explore whether Seq2Seq models could
learn useful information from label spaces. Specifically, for
a given input and two target entities, we force the BART
to generate three kinds of labels: 1) Relation Name. We
use original relation names as generation objectives directly.
These labels contain correct information. 2) Meaningless
Token. As its name implies, we replace relation names with
some meaningless token, such as ö. These tokens do not in-

