The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Offline Quantum Reinforcement Learning in a Conservative Manner
Zhihao Cheng1 , Kaining Zhang1 , Li Shen2 , Dacheng Tao2, 1
1

The University of Sydney, Australia
2
JD Explore Academy, China
zche3121@uni.sydney.edu.au, kzha3670@uni.sydney.edu.au, mathshenli@gmail.com, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract

Nevertheless, despite the success of RL, training an RL algorithm from scratch suffers from high sample complexity (Yu
2018; Li et al. 2021). Researchers have proposed various
methods to reduce the sample complexity of RL (Nachum
et al. 2018; Seitzer, Schölkopf, and Martius 2021), among
which quantum technologies are of great interest (Saggio
et al. 2021).
Empowered by superposition and entanglement, the quantum system can represent and process an exponentially larger
number of states with one operation compared to that in classical computing (Biamonte et al. 2017), leading to a possible
exponential speedup for specific tasks (Gyongyosi and Imre
2019; Zhong et al. 2020; Arute et al. 2019). Machine learning (ML), a research domain that requests huge computing
resources (Dean, Patterson, and Young 2018), has benefited
from quantum computing to speed up ML algorithms (Biamonte et al. 2017; Nguyen et al. 2020). Among ML, enhancing RL with quantum technologies has attracted extensive
attention, opening a new research field dubbed as quantum
reinforcement learning (QRL) (Dong et al. 2008). Theoretical
analyses have proved that QRL based on the Grover search
can obtain a quadratic improvement compared to the classical
RL regarding learning efficiency (Biamonte et al. 2017; Li
et al. 2020; Saggio et al. 2021). However, the QRL methods
that utilize Grover search are hard to be implemented in the
noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) era (Hsiao et al.
2022). A promising solution is to build QRL with variational
quantum circuits (VQCs), which are suitable for NISQ devices. Researchers have developed various QRL algorithms
by employing VQCs, e.g., on-policy methods (Jerbi et al.
2021) and off-policy approaches (Lockwood and Si 2020;
Skolik, Jerbi, and Dunjko 2022; Franz et al. 2022).
However, current QRL algorithms rely on an online learning paradigm (Lockwood and Si 2020; Jerbi et al. 2021;
Skolik, Jerbi, and Dunjko 2022), which means that they need
to actively interact with environments to obtain new trials.
Although online QRL has witnessed some successful applications, this online learning scheme imposes an obstacle to its
applicability to complex real-world problems (Levine et al.
2020). There are three major reasons that can impair the
applicability of online QRL. First, it is infeasible to online
sample data for many cases because this could be expensive
or dangerous (Wang et al. 2020). For example, in robotics,
a sequence of improper actions during learning could irre-

Recently, to reap the quantum advantage, empowering reinforcement learning (RL) with quantum computing has attracted much attention, which is dubbed as quantum RL (QRL).
However, current QRL algorithms employ an online learning
scheme, i.e., the policy that is run on a quantum computer
needs to interact with the environment to collect experiences,
which could be expensive and dangerous for practical applications. In this paper, we aim to solve this problem in an offline
learning manner. To be more specific, we develop the first
offline quantum RL (offline QRL) algorithm named CQ2L
(Conservative Quantum Q-learning), which learns from offline
samples and does not require any interaction with the environment. CQ2L utilizes variational quantum circuits (VQCs),
which are improved with data re-uploading and scaling parameters, to represent Q-value functions of agents. To suppress the
overestimation of Q-values resulting from offline data, we first
employ a double Q-learning framework to reduce the overestimation bias; then a penalty term that encourages generating
conservative Q-values is designed. We conduct abundant experiments to demonstrate that the proposed method CQ2L can
successfully solve offline QRL tasks that the online counterpart could not.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL), a machine learning paradigm
that learns by trial and error, has recently made rapid
progress in addressing complicated decision-making problems such as games (Mnih et al. 2015; Ye et al. 2019),
robotics (Andrychowicz et al. 2020b), animation (Peng et al.
2018), etc. RL algorithms are emerging and can be further
classified based on different standards. For example, according to whether a model is used during learning, RL can be
divided into model-free RL and model-based RL (Moerland,
Broekens, and Jonker 2020); according to how samples for
training are obtained, RL could be categorized into, on-policy
RL (Andrychowicz et al. 2020a), off-policy RL (Fujimoto,
Meger, and Precup 2019), and offline RL (Levine et al. 2020).
On-policy and off-policy RL are online, meaning that they
require interactions with the environment for learning. In
contrast, offline RL learns from a given dataset collected by
another agent and thus does not demand online interactions.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7148

