The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Supervised Video Representation Learning via Latent Time Navigation
Di Yang1,2 , Yaohui Wang1,2,5* , Quan Kong4 , Antitza Dantcheva1,2 , Lorenzo Garattoni3 ,
Gianpiero Francesca3 , François Brémond1,2
1
Inria, 2004 Rte des Lucioles, Valbonne, France
Université Côte d’Azur, 28 Av. de Valrose, Nice, France
3
Toyota Motor Europe, 60 Av. du Bourget, Brussels, Belgium
4
Woven Planet Holdings, 3-2-1 Nihonbashimuromachi, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
5
Shanghai AI Laboratory, 701 Yunjin Road, Shanghai, China
{di.yang, yaohui.wang, antitza.dantcheva, francois.bremond}@inria.fr,
{lorenzo.garattoni, gianpiero.francesca}@toyota-europe.com, quan.kong@woven-planet.global
2

Abstract

Remarkable results have been reported by augmentationinvariant contrastive learning. In this context, contrastive
learning methods enable the visual encoder to find compact and meaningful image representations, invariant to data
augmentation. The latent representation of two augmented
views of the same instance are enforced to be similar via
contrastive learning. In image-based tasks, a common augmentation method relates to random cropping (Chen et al.
2020; Wu et al. 2018). When extending this idea to videos,
which are endowed with additional temporal information,
cropping in the spatial dimension (Kong et al. 2020) is not
sufficient for training an effective visual encoder. Therefore,
recent works (Feichtenhofer et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021b; Sun
et al. 2021) sample different views with a temporal shift,
learning representations that are invariant to time changes.
However, for downstream tasks involving temporal relationships, a representation invariant to temporal shifts might omit
valuable information. For instance, in differentiating actions
such as ‘enter’ and ‘leave’ the temporal order is fundamental. Hence, a trained visual encoder remains a challenge in
handling downstream video understanding tasks such as finegrained human action recognition (Das et al. 2019; Goyal
et al. 2017; Li et al. 2021c).
Motivated by the above, we propose Latent Time Navigation (LTN), a time parameterization scheme streamlined
to learn time-aware representations on top of the contrastive
module. As illustrated in Fig. 1, deviating from current contrastive methods (Feichtenhofer et al. 2021; He et al. 2020;
Tian, Krishnan, and Isola 2020; Wu et al. 2018) which directly maximize the similarity between representations obtained from the visual encoder for positive samples, LTN
encompasses the following steps. Firstly, we decompose a
subspace (i.e., a learnable orthogonal basis and associated
magnitudes) from the latent representation code for the video
segment, namely ‘time-encoded component’, to do with temporal changes (e.g., changes in appearances, motion, object
locations). The other subspace (‘time-invariant component’)
has to do with invariant information. Subsequently, we embed the time shift value used for generating data view into a
high-dimensional vector as the magnitudes of the directions
in the orthogonal basis and then encode this time information
into the ‘time-encoded component’ by linear combination
of the orthogonal basis and the magnitudes. Finally, we con-

Self-supervised video representation learning aimed at maximizing similarity between different temporal segments of
one video, in order to enforce feature persistence over time.
This leads to loss of pertinent information related to temporal relationships, rendering actions such as ‘enter’ and ‘leave’
to be indistinguishable. To mitigate this limitation, we propose Latent Time Navigation (LTN), a time-parameterized
contrastive learning strategy that is streamlined to capture finegrained motions. Specifically, we maximize the representation
similarity between different video segments from one video,
while maintaining their representations time-aware along a
subspace of the latent representation code including an orthogonal basis to represent temporal changes. Our extensive
experimental analysis suggests that learning video representations by LTN consistently improves performance of action
classification in fine-grained and human-oriented tasks (e.g.,
on Toyota Smarthome dataset). In addition, we demonstrate
that our proposed model, when pre-trained on Kinetics-400,
generalizes well onto the unseen real world video benchmark
datasets UCF101 and HMDB51, achieving state-of-the-art
performance in action recognition.

Introduction
Contrastive learning (Hadsell, Chopra, and LeCun 2006) is
a prominent variant in learning self-supervised visual representations. The associated objective is to minimize the distance between latent representations of positive pairs, while
maximizing the distance between latent representations of
negative pairs. For instance, a visual encoder aims at learning
the invariance of multiple views of a scene, which constitute
positive pairs, by extracting generic features of images (Bachman, Hjelm, and Buchwalter 2019; Caron et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2020; Grill et al. 2020; He et al. 2020; Hjelm et al. 2019;
Jiao et al. 2020; Tian, Krishnan, and Isola 2020; Wu et al.
2018) or videos (Feichtenhofer et al. 2021; Han, Xie, and
Zisserman 2020; Huang et al. 2019; Kong et al. 2020; Li et al.
2021a,b; Park et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2021b, 2022; Sun et al.
2021). Then, the trained visual encoder can be transferred
onto other downstream tasks.
*Work done while the author was at Inria
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3118

