The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Scalable and Effective Conductance-Based Graph Clustering
Longlong Lin1 , Rong-Hua Li 2 , Tao Jia1
1

College of Computer and Information Science, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China
2
Beijing Institute of Technology, China
longlonglin@swu.edu.cn; lironghuabit@126.com; tjia@swu.edu.cn

Given an undirected graph G(V, E), the conductance of
|E(C,C̄)|
the cluster C is defined as φ(C) = min{vol(C),2m−vol(C)}
,
in which |E(C, C̄)| is the number of edges with one endpoint in C and another not in C, vol(C) is the sum of the
degree of all vertices in C, and m is the number of the edges
in G. Thus, a smaller φ(C) implies that the number of edges
going out of C is relatively small compared with the number
of edges within C. As a consequence, the smaller the φ(C),
the better the clustering quality of the cluster C (Leskovec,
Lang, and Mahoney 2010; Yang and Leskovec 2015). Therefore, conductance-based graph clustering aims at identifying
a vertex set C with the smallest φ(C). However, identifying the smallest conductance φ∗ ∈ (0, 1] raises significant
challenges due to its NP-hardness (Chawla et al. 2006). On
the positive side, many approximate or heuristic algorithms
have been proposed to either reduce the conductance of the
returned cluster or improve the efficiency. For example, classic Fiedler vector-based spectral clustering
algorithm out√
puts a cluster with conductance O( φ∗ ) (Alon and Milman 1985). Unfortunately, such an algorithm has to compute the eigenvector corresponding to the second smallest
eigenvalue of normalized Laplacian matrix of G, resulting
in prohibitively high time and space complexity. To boost
the efficiency, numerous diffusion-based local clustering algorithms have been proposed, whose running time depends
only on the size of the resulting cluster and is independent
of or depends at most polylogarithmically on the size of the
entire graph (Spielman and Teng 2004; Andersen, Chung,
and Lang 2006; Kloster and Gleich 2014). However all these
diffusion-based local clustering algorithms are heuristic and
the clustering quality of their output is heavily dependent on
many hard-to-tune parameters, resulting in that their clustering performance are unstable and in most cases very poor
(Zhu, Lattanzi, and Mirrokni 2013; Fountoulakis, Wang, and
Yang 2020). Thus, it is very challenging to improve both the
computational efficiency and the clustering quality.

Abstract
Conductance-based graph clustering has been recognized as
a fundamental operator in numerous graph analysis applications. Despite the significant success of conductance-based
graph clustering, existing algorithms are either hard to obtain
satisfactory clustering qualities, or have high time and space
complexity to achieve provable clustering qualities. To overcome these limitations, we devise a powerful peeling-based
graph clustering framework PCon. We show that many existing solutions can be reduced to our framework. Namely,
they first define a score function for each vertex, then iteratively remove the vertex with the smallest score. Finally, they
output the result with the smallest conductance during the
peeling process. Based on our framework, we propose two
novel algorithms PCon core and PCon de with linear time
and space complexity, which can efficiently and effectively
identify clusters from massive graphs with more than a few
billion edges. Surprisingly, we prove that PCon de can identify clusters with near-constant approximation ratio, resulting
in an important theoretical improvement over the well-known
quadratic Cheeger bound. Empirical results on real-life and
synthetic datasets show that our algorithms can achieve 5∼42
times speedup with a high clustering accuracy, while using
1.4∼7.8 times less memory than the baseline algorithms.

Introduction
Graph clustering is an important algorithmic primitive with
applications in numerous tasks, including image segmentation (Shi and Malik 1997; Tolliver and Miller 2006), community detection (Fortunato 2009; Leskovec, Lang, and Mahoney 2010), and machine learning (Belkin and Niyogi
2001; Bianchi, Grattarola, and Alippi 2020). Generally,
graph clustering aims to partition the entire graph into several non-overlapping vertex sets, called clusters, such that
the vertices within the same cluster have more connections
than the vertices in different clusters. Many graph clustering methods have been proposed, such as modularity based
graph clustering (Newman 2004), structural graph clustering (Xu et al. 2007), and cohesive subgraph based clustering (Chang and Qin 2019). Perhaps, the most representative
graph clustering method is the conductance-based clustering
(Andersen, Chung, and Lang 2006; Yang et al. 2019) due to
its nice structure properties and solid theoretical foundation.

To this end, we propose a powerful peeling-based computing framework PCon, which can efficiently and effectively identify conductance-based clusters. In particular, we
observe that Fiedler vector-based spectral clustering algorithms and diffusion-based local clustering algorithms are
essentially a peeling-based computing paradigm. Namely,
they first define a score function for each vertex, then iter-

Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4471

