The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Non-IID Transfer Learning on Graphs
Jun Wu1 , Jingrui He1 , Elizabeth Ainsworth1,2
1

2

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
USDA ARS Global Change and Photosynthesis Research Unit
{junwu3, jingrui, ainswort}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Transfer learning refers to the transfer of knowledge or information from a relevant source domain to a target domain.
However, most existing transfer learning theories and algorithms focus on IID tasks, where the source/target samples are
assumed to be independent and identically distributed. Very
little effort is devoted to theoretically studying the knowledge
transferability on non-IID tasks, e.g., cross-network mining.
To bridge the gap, in this paper, we propose rigorous generalization bounds and algorithms for cross-network transfer
learning from a source graph to a target graph. The crucial
idea is to characterize the cross-network knowledge transferability from the perspective of the Weisfeiler-Lehman graph
isomorphism test. To this end, we propose a novel Graph
Subtree Discrepancy to measure the graph distribution shift
between source and target graphs. Then the generalization
error bounds on cross-network transfer learning, including
both cross-network node classification and link prediction
tasks, can be derived in terms of the source knowledge and
the Graph Subtree Discrepancy across domains. This thereby
motivates us to propose a generic graph adaptive network
(GRADE) to minimize the distribution shift between source
and target graphs for cross-network transfer learning. Experimental results verify the effectiveness and efficiency of our
GRADE framework on both cross-network node classification and cross-domain recommendation tasks.

Figure 1: Illustration of the cross-network transfer learning
(best viewed in color). Given a labeled source graph (color
indicates node label) and an unlabeled target graph, crossnetwork transfer learning tackles the classification and link
prediction tasks in the target graph, by leveraging the auxiliary information from the source graph.

theoretical guarantees and empirical algorithms hold the IID
assumption that all the source/target samples are drawn independently from an identical source/target distribution. This
hinders their applications on other tasks with non-IID data,
e.g., node classification (Kipf and Welling 2017; Wu and He
2019; Tang et al. 2020) and recommendation (Zhao, Li, and
Fu 2019; Zhou et al. 2021a,b) across domains.
In this paper, we focus on studying the problem of crossnetwork transfer learning, where the knowledge can be
transferred from a source graph to a target graph1 . To be
specific, we consider the following cross-network mining
tasks (see Figure 1). (1) Node classification (e.g., crossnetwork role identification (Zhu et al. 2021)): It aims to
predict the class labels of nodes, by leveraging the knowledge from a source graph with fully labeled nodes. Following (Wu et al. 2020), we consider the unsupervised learning

Introduction
Transfer learning (Pan and Yang 2009) tackles the knowledge transferability from a source domain to a relevant target
domain under a distribution shift. It has been theoretically
shown (Ben-David et al. 2010; Zhang et al. 2019a; Acuna
et al. 2021) that the generalization performance of a learning algorithm can be improved by leveraging the knowledge
from the source domain, when the source and target domains
have the same labeling space (also known as domain adaption (Pan and Yang 2009; Zhao et al. 2019)). To be more
specific, the expected target error could be bounded in terms
of the prediction error of the source domain and the distribution discrepancy across domains. It thus motivates a line of
practical approaches with domain discrepancy minimization
in the latent feature space (Ganin et al. 2016; Acuna et al.
2021). However, it is noteworthy that most of the existing

1
In this paper, we use “graph” and “network” interchangeably
to denote the graph-structured data in every domain.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10342

