The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Mean Estimation of Truncated Mixtures of Two Gaussians: A Gradient Based
Approach
Sai Ganesh Nagarajan1 , Gerasimos Palaiopanos2 , Ioannis Panageas3 , Tushar Vaidya4 , Samson Yu 5
1

EPFL
University of Pittsburgh
3
University of California, Irvine
4
NTU
5
NUS
2

Abstract

approach this by studying different models of missing data.
Aside from missing data occurring at random, sometimes
there might be reasons for missing data and this could be
incorporated into the statistical model. However, in many
cases such flexibility may not be available.
Gaussian mixtures are ubiquitous in machine learning and
statistics with a variety of applications ranging from biology
(Boedigheimer and Ferbas 2008; Aristophanous et al. 2007;
Brigo and Mercurio 2002; Tasche 2002) to finance, e.g., risk
management of financial portfolios. The expected shortfall
calculation involves truncated loss distributions. However,
the data to compute this risk measure is historical. Hence,
inevitably the data is already censored. For example to compute future losses for a portfolio of shares, historical data is
used and even with Gaussian returns, we are not sure which
distribution the data originates from. In this case, a particular Gaussian distribution with mean µ may reflect a market
regime that alternates over time between different means.
With truncated data, it will be hard to guess which distribution N (x; µ, Σ) is generating the data, if knowledge of µ is
uncertain. In this paper, we focus on the problem of estimating the means of a mixture of two Gaussians that are prone
to truncation.

Even though data is abundant, it is often subjected to some
form of censoring or truncation which inherently creates biases. Removing such biases and performing parameter estimation is a classical challenge in Statistics. In this paper, we
focus on the problem of estimating the means of a mixture
of two balanced d-dimensional Gaussians when the samples
are prone to truncation. A recent theoretical study on the performance of the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm
for the aforementioned problem showed EM almost surely
converges for d=1 and exhibits local convergence for d > 1 to
the true means. Nevertheless, the EM algorithm for the case of
truncated mixture of two Gaussians is not easy to implement
as it requires solving a set of nonlinear equations at every
iteration which makes the algorithm impractical. In this work,
we propose a gradient based variant of the EM algorithm that
has global convergence guarantees when d = 1 and local convergence for d > 1 to the true means. Moreover, the update
rule at every iteration is easy to compute which makes the
proposed method practical. We also provide numerous experiments to obtain more insights into the effect of truncation on
the convergence to the true parameters in high dimensions.

Introduction
The performance of algorithms in parameter estimation is
crucial for machine learning and its numerous applications.
Algorithms such as gradient descent (GD), stochastic gradient
descent (SGD), expectation maximization (EM) and their
variants are an important part of the modern machine learning
toolbox. These algorithms have guarantees, when the data
is independent and identically distributed according to the
true unknown distribution. However, this is not the case in
practice. Data is often subjected to intentional/unintentional
censoring or truncation and usually, the modeller has no
control over this process. Consequently, an inherent bias
could be introduced in the model.
Statisticians, dating back to Pearson (Lee and Pearson
1908) and Fisher (Fisher 1931), tried to address this problem
in the early 1900s. Techniques such as method of moments
and maximum-likelihood were used for estimating a Gaussian distribution from truncated samples. The seminal work
of Rubin (Rubin 1976), on missing/censored data, tried to

Convergence Guarantees for EM in Gaussian Mixture
Models: A standard approach for parameter estimation in
Gaussian Mixture models is the EM algorithm. Classically,
EM was used to compute the maximum likelihood estimation
of parameters in statistical models that depend on hidden
(latent) variables. It is well known that there are guarantees
for convergence of EM to stationary points (Wu 1983). The
idea behind this fact is that the log-likelihood is decreasing
along the trajectories of the EM dynamics. Theoretical analysis of EM in mixture of un-truncated Gaussians has been
studied extensively, yet the performance of EM is not fully
understood. The known theoretical analyses focus on simple
cases, i.e., mean estimation of a balanced mixture of two
Gaussians with known covariance. Recent results indicate
that EM works well (converges to true mean) for mixture of
two Gaussians (see (Xu, Hsu, and Maleki 2016), (Daskalakis,
Tzamos, and Zampetakis 2017) for global convergence and
(Balakrishnan et al. 2017) for local convergence), a result
that is not true if the number of components is at least three
(in (Jin et al. 2016) an example is constructed where the log-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9260

