The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Confidence-Aware Training of Smoothed Classifiers for Certified Robustness
Jongheon Jeong* , Seojin Kim* , Jinwoo Shin
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
Daejeon, 34141 South Korea
{jongheonj, osikjs, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

Kolter 2018; Xiao et al. 2019; Cohen, Rosenfeld, and Kolter
2019; Zhang et al. 2020b), depending on whether the robustness claim can be theoretically guaranteed or not.
Randomized smoothing (Lecuyer et al. 2019; Cohen,
Rosenfeld, and Kolter 2019), our focus in this paper, is currently a prominent approach in the context of certified defense, thanks to its scalability to arbitrary neural network
architectures while previous methods have been mostly limited in network sizes or require strong assumptions, e.g.,
Lipschitz constraint, on their architectures: specifically, for
a given classifier f , it constructs a new classifier fˆ, where
fˆ(x) is defined to be the class that f (x + δ) outputs most
likely over δ ∼ N (0, σ 2 I), i.e., the Gaussian noise. Then,
it is shown by Lecuyer et al. (2019) that fˆ is certifiably robust in `2 -norm, and Cohen, Rosenfeld, and Kolter (2019)
further tightened the `2 -robustness guarantee which is currently considered as the state-of-the-art in certified defense.
However, even with recent methods for adversarial defense, including randomized smoothing, the trade-off between robustness and accuracy (Tsipras et al. 2019; Zhang
et al. 2019) has been well evidenced, i.e., increasing the robustness for a specific input can be at the expense of decreased accuracy for other inputs. For instance, with the current best practices, Salman et al. (2020a) reports that the
accuracy of ResNet-50 on ImageNet degrades, e.g., 75.8%
→ 63.9%, by an `∞ -adversarial training, i.e., optimizing the
classifier to ensure robustness at all the given training sam4
ples around an `∞ -ball of size 255
. In addition, Zhang et al.
(2019) has shown that the (empirical) robustness of a classifier can be further boosted in training by paying more expense in accuracy. A similar trend can be also observed with
certified defenses, e.g., randomized smoothing, as the clean
accuracy of smoothed classifiers are usually less than those
one can obtain from the standard training on the same architecture (Cohen, Rosenfeld, and Kolter 2019).

Any classifier can be “smoothed out” under Gaussian noise to
build a new classifier that is provably robust to `2 -adversarial
perturbations, viz., by averaging its predictions over the noise
via randomized smoothing. Under the smoothed classifiers,
the fundamental trade-off between accuracy and (adversarial) robustness has been well evidenced in the literature: i.e.,
increasing the robustness of a classifier for an input can be
at the expense of decreased accuracy for some other inputs. In this paper, we propose a simple training method
leveraging this trade-off to obtain robust smoothed classifiers, in particular, through a sample-wise control of robustness over the training samples. We make this control feasible by using “accuracy under Gaussian noise” as an easy-tocompute proxy of adversarial robustness for an input. Specifically, we differentiate the training objective depending on this
proxy to filter out samples that are unlikely to benefit from
the worst-case (adversarial) objective. Our experiments show
that the proposed method, despite its simplicity, consistently
exhibits improved certified robustness upon state-of-the-art
training methods. Somewhat surprisingly, we find these improvements persist even for other notions of robustness, e.g.,
to various types of common corruptions. Code is available at
https://github.com/alinlab/smoothing-catrs.

1

Introduction

Despite these tremendous advances in deep neural networks
for a variety of computer vision tasks towards artificial
intelligence, the broad existence of adversarial examples
(Szegedy et al. 2014) is still a significant aspect that reveals
the gap between machine learning systems and humans: for
a given input x (e.g., an image) to a classifier f , say a neural network, f often permits a perturbation δ that completely
flips the prediction f (x + δ), while δ is too small to change
the semantic in x. In response to this vulnerability, there
have been tremendous efforts in building robust neural network based classifiers against adversarial examples, either
in forms of empirical defenses (Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018; Carlini et al. 2019; Tramer et al. 2020), which are
largely based on adversarial training (Madry et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020c;
Wu, Xia, and Wang 2020), or certified defenses (Wong and

Contribution. In this paper, we develop a novel training method for randomized smoothing, coined ConfidenceAware Training for Randomized Smoothing (CAT-RS),
which incorporates a sample-wise control of target robustness on-the-fly motivated by the accuracy-robustness tradeoff in smoothed classifiers. Intuitively, a natural approach
one can consider in response to the trade-off in robust training is to appropriately lower the robustness requirement for

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8005

