The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Constrained Reinforcement Learning in Hard Exploration Problems
Pathmanathan Pankayaraj and Pradeep Varakantham
Singapore Management University, Singapore
pankayarajp@smu.edu.sg, pradeepv@smu.edu.sg

Abstract

tro, and Mannor 2012). Such problems have been represented using the Constrained MDP (Dalal et al. 2018) framework and model free approaches have been proposed to
solve such problems. One of the initial approaches to be developed for addressing such constraints is the Lagrangian
method (Chow et al. 2015b). However, such an approach
does not provide either theoretical or empirical guarantees
in ensuring the constraints are enforced. To counter the issue
of safety guarantees, next set of approaches focused on imposing surrogate constraints (El Chamie, Yu, and Açıkmeşe
2016; Gábor, Kalmár, and Szepesvári 1998) on individual
state and action pairs. Since the surrogate constraints are
typically stricter than the original constraint on the entire trajectory, they were able to provide theoretical guarantees on
safety. However, the issue with such type of approaches is
their conservative nature, which can potentially hamper the
expected reward objective. The next set of approaches, CPO
(Constrained Policy Optimization) (Achiam et al. 2017),
Lyapunov (Chow et al. 2019), BVF (Satija, Amortila, and
Pineau 2020) have since improved the state of art in guaranteeing safety while providing high quality solutions (with
regards to expected reward). The most recent of these, referred to as BVF (Satija, Amortila, and Pineau 2020) converts the trajectory based constraint into an instantaneous
state dependent constraint by using forward and backward
cost value functions thus ensuring that the constraints are
fulfilled at every time step. While these approaches have improved the state of art significantly, they primarily work on
simple tasks (as shown in our experimental results) and do
not work on real-world tasks that are typically a sequence of
multiple sub-tasks (e.g., a combination of movement, object
detection and discrete decision making) or of a long horizon.

One approach to guaranteeing safety in Reinforcement
Learning is through cost constraints that are imposed on trajectories. Recent works in constrained RL have developed
methods that ensure constraints can be enforced even at learning time while maximizing the overall value of the policy. Unfortunately, as demonstrated in our experimental results, such
approaches do not perform well on complex multi-level tasks,
with longer episode lengths or sparse rewards. To that end, we
propose a scalable hierarchical approach for constrained RL
problems that employs backward cost value functions in the
context of task hierarchy and a novel intrinsic reward function in lower levels of the hierarchy to enable cost constraint
enforcement. One of our key contributions is in proving that
backward value functions are theoretically viable even when
there are multiple levels of decision making. We also show
that our new approach, referred to as Hierarchically Limited consTraint Enforcement (HiLiTE) significantly improves
on state of the art Constrained RL approaches for many
benchmark problems from literature. We further demonstrate
that this performance (on value and constraint enforcement)
clearly outperforms existing best approaches for constrained
RL and hierarchical RL.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL)(Sutton and Barto 2018) is
a framework to represent decision learning problem in
Markov Decision Problem (MDP) environments. Recent
works of (Lillicrap et al. 2015; Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al.
2016) have shown that Deep Reinforcement Learning can
be used to solve large and complex decision making problems. As RL methods permeate the real world it becomes
paramount for the agent to handle difficult tasks effectively
while having safety measures in place.
In this paper, we are specifically interested in imposing
safety constraints associated with cumulative cost or risk
accrued by the RL agent. Such constraints defined on trajectories have numerous applications in robot motion planning (Ono et al. 2015; Moldovan and Abbeel 2012; Chow
et al. 2015a), resource allocation (Bhatia, Varakantham, and
Kumar 2018; Junges et al. 2015; Lowalekar et al. 2017),
and financial engineering (Abe et al. 2010; Tamar, Di Cas-

To that end, a second aspect of focus in this paper is
handling hard exploration problems, typically multi-level
tasks or long horizon tasks. Traditionally, such hard exploration problems have been addressed via hierarchical RL approaches, where the top level of the hierarchy is responsible for taking decisions on the next sub-goal (from a not so
large set of sub-goals) and the bottom level takes decisions
to achieve the sub-goal. The work of (Kulkarni et al. 2016)
introduced a two level Deep HRL, where the top level selects the next sub-goal to be achieved and the lower level
takes primitive actions to achieve the sub-goal. But using hierarchies can result in a non stationary transition function

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15055

