The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FoPro: Few-Shot Guided Robust Webly-Supervised Prototypical Learning
Yulei Qin* 1 , Xingyu Chen* 1 , Chao Chen1 , Yunhang Shen1 , Bo Ren1 ,
Yun Gu2 , Jie Yang2 , Chunhua Shen3
1
Tencent YouTu Lab
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Zhejiang University
{yuleiqin, harleychen, aaronccchen, odysseyshen, timren}@tencent.com,
yungu@ieee.org, jieyang@sjtu.edu.cn, chunhuashen@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Recently, webly supervised learning (WSL) has been studied to leverage numerous and accessible data from the Internet. Most existing methods focus on learning noise-robust
models from web images while neglecting the performance
drop caused by the differences between web domain and realworld domain. However, only by tackling the performance
gap above can we fully exploit the practical value of web
datasets. To this end, we propose a Few-shot guided Prototypical (FoPro) representation learning method, which only
needs a few labeled examples from reality and can significantly improve the performance in the real-world domain.
Specifically, we initialize each class center with few-shot
real-world data as the “realistic” prototype. Then, the intraclass distance between web instances and “realistic” prototypes is narrowed by contrastive learning. Finally, we measure image-prototype distance with a learnable metric. Prototypes are polished by adjacent high-quality web images and
involved in removing distant out-of-distribution samples. In
experiments, FoPro is trained on web datasets with a few realworld examples guided and evaluated on real-world datasets.
Our method achieves the state-of-the-art performance on
three fine-grained datasets and two large-scale datasets. Compared with existing WSL methods under the same few-shot
settings, FoPro still excels in real-world generalization. Code
is available at https://github.com/yuleiqin/fopro.

Figure 1: Differences between web and real-world images.
(a) Web dataset noise. (b) Web dataset bias.

et al. 2017), 34% in WebVision (Li et al. 2017), and 32%
in WebFG496 (Sun et al. 2021)). As shown in Fig. 1(a), various noises include label flipping errors, semantic ambiguity
of polysemy queries, and outliers of unknown categories. To
alleviate their effect, prior knowledge such as neighbor density (Guo et al. 2018), reference clean sets (Jiang et al. 2018;
Lee et al. 2018), and side information (Zhou et al. 2020;
Cheng et al. 2020) is explored for label correction and sample selection. Recently, Li et al. (Li, Xiong, and Hoi 2020)
develop a self-supervised method with representative class
prototypes (MoPro) to achieve satisfying performance.
Most existing WSL methods are merely concerned with
noise reduction. They ignore the model degradation in realworld scenarios because the performance on web domain
testing sets is emphasized in previous model assessments.
Domain gaps exist between images crawled from the web
(e.g., advertising photos, artworks, and rendering) and those
captured in reality (see Fig. 1(b)). In this case, the better
fitting of web images counteractively leads to worse generalization on practical applications. Few studies try to tackle
such performance gaps by domain adaptation methods. For
example, Xu et al. (Xu et al. 2016) distill knowledge from
the web domain to the real-world domain. Niu et al. (Niu,
Li, and Xu 2015) fine-tune pretrained models on real-world
datasets. However, both of them need plenty of labeled data
in the target domain, which impedes practicability.
Unlike the methods above, our objective is to costefficiently mine web data for real-world applications. We

Introduction
The past decade has witnessed a revolution in computer vision with the advent of large-scale labeled datasets (e.g.,
ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009)). However, a large collection of data are sometimes inaccessible, let alone the timeconsuming and expensive annotations. On the contrary, there
are abundant weakly labeled images on the Internet. Therefore, webly supervised learning (WSL) has attracted growing attention from researchers (Krause et al. 2016; Kaur,
Sikka, and Divakaran 2017; Kolesnikov et al. 2019; Zhang
et al. 2020; Tu et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021).
Queries and tags are directly used as weak labels without verification, bringing about a considerable proportion
of noises in web datasets (e.g., 20% in JMT-300M (Sun
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2101

