The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Structure Aware Incremental Learning with Personalized Imitation Weights for
Recommender Systems
Yuening Wang1 , Yingxue Zhang1 , Antonios Valkanas2 * , Ruiming Tang1 , Chen Ma3 , Jianye Hao1, 4 ,
Mark Coates2
1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
2
McGill University
3
City University of Hong Kong
4
Tianjin University
yuening.wang@huawei.com, yingxue.zhang@huawei.com, antonios.valkanas@mail.mcgill.ca, tangruiming@huawei.com,
chenma@cityu.edu.hk, haojianye@huawei.com, mark.coates@mcgill.ca
Abstract

Sargin 2016; Guo et al. 2017; Cheng et al. 2016). There is a
recent trend to formulate the recommendation problem as a
learning task on graphs because of the rich relational information that graphs can model. Much of the data from recommender systems can naturally be expressed using graph
structures (van den Berg, Kipf, and Welling 2018; Wang
et al. 2019b, 2021; Sun et al. 2019). For example, we can
use the user-item bipartite interaction graph, an item similarity graph, a user-user graph derived from social network
exchanges, and an additional knowledge graph to improve
the representation learning process. Graph Neural Network
(GNN) based recommender systems have emerged as one
of the most effective models because the message-passing
paradigm allows sufficient modeling of the relational information in the data. However, training GNNs on large-scale
graphs can be prohibitively expensive (Ying et al. 2018; Zou
et al. 2019; Chiang et al. 2019; Zeng et al. 2020; Qiu et al.
2020; Xu et al. 2020), which makes deploying models with
GNN backbone networks extremely challenging on largescale recommender systems.

Recommender systems now consume large-scale data and
play a significant role in improving user experience. Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as one of the most
effective recommender system models because they model
the rich relational information. The ever-growing volume of
data can make training GNNs prohibitively expensive. To address this, previous attempts propose to train the GNN models
incrementally as new data blocks arrive. Feature and structure knowledge distillation techniques have been explored to
allow the GNN model to train in a fast incremental fashion
while alleviating the catastrophic forgetting problem. However, preserving the same amount of the historical information for all users is sub-optimal since it fails to take into
account the dynamics of each user’s change of preferences.
For the users whose interests shift substantially, retaining too
much of the old knowledge can overly constrain the model,
preventing it from quickly adapting to the users’ novel interests. In contrast, for users who have static preferences, model
performance can benefit greatly from preserving as much of
the user’s long-term preferences as possible. In this work, we
propose a novel training strategy that adaptively learns personalized imitation weights for each user to balance the contribution from the recent data and the amount of knowledge to
be distilled from previous time periods. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of learning imitation weights via a comparison
on five diverse datasets for three state-of-art structure distillation based recommender systems. The performance shows
consistent improvement over competitive incremental learning techniques.

One approach to address the computation issue is to train
the deep learning models incrementally as new data blocks
arrive (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; Shmelkov, Schmid, and Alahari 2017; Castro et al. 2018; Rebuffi et al. 2017; Mallya and
Lazebnik 2018; Xu and Zhu 2018; Qiu et al. 2020). However, directly using the data from the incremental block to
fine-tune a model can lead to catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; Shmelkov, Schmid, and Alahari 2017).
Because of their superiority in terms of efficiency and performance, knowledge distillation approaches (Castro et al.
2018; Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2020; Wang, Zhang,
and Coates 2021) are preferable for models with a GNN
backbone architecture. Benefiting from the knowledge distillation paradigm, key information from the historical data
is preserved and transferred to the student model trained using only newly arrived data. This is achieved by regularizing the distance between the representations of the teacher
and the student models. Both feature and structure knowledge distillation techniques have been explored; these allow the GNN model to better preserve both the node feature
and structure information in the previous training data while
enjoying the fast incremental training process (Yang et al.

Introduction
The growth of online services has rendered recommender
systems a vital part of providing personalized recommendations to users. Making highly relevant recommendations improves user experience and increases the service provider’s
revenue. Deep learning models are becoming more prevalent in all aspects of recommender system design due to their
superiority in constructing high-quality user and item representations in an end-to-end fashion (Covington, Adams, and
* Work done as an intern at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4711

