The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Zero-Shot Cross-Lingual Event Argument Extraction with Language-Oriented
Prefix-Tuning
Pengfei Cao1,2 * , Zhuoran Jin1,2 * , Yubo Chen1,2 , Kang Liu1,2,3 , Jun Zhao1,2
1

2

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS, Beijing, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, 100084, China
{pengfei.cao, zhuoran.jin, yubo.chen, kliu, jzhao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

Target

Event argument extraction (EAE) aims to identify the arguments of a given event, and classify the roles that those arguments play. Due to high data demands of training EAE
models, zero-shot cross-lingual EAE has attracted increasing attention, as it greatly reduces human annotation effort.
Some prior works indicate that generation-based methods
have achieved promising performance for monolingual EAE.
However, when applying existing generation-based methods
to zero-shot cross-lingual EAE, we find two critical challenges, including Language Discrepancy and Template Construction. In this paper, we propose a novel method termed
as LanguAge-oriented Prefix-tunIng Network (L A P IN) to
address the above challenges. Specifically, we devise a
Language-oriented Prefix Generator module to handle the
discrepancies between source and target languages. Moreover, we leverage a Language-agnostic Template Constructor module to design templates that can be adapted to any
language. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed method achieves the best performance, outperforming
the previous state-of-the-art model by 4.8% and 2.3% of the
average F1-score on two multilingual EAE datasets.

Attacker

Two soldiers were attacked by demonstrators yesterday.
Attack Type

Time

(a) An example of event argument extraction

Sentence: Two soldiers were attacked by demonstrators yesterday.
Template: some attacker attacked someone in somewhere and
sometime.
generation

demonstrators attacked Two soldiers in somewhere and
Output:
yesterday.
(b) An example of generation-based method
EAE output

EAE output
Multilingual
EAE Model

parameter
copy

Multilingual
EAE Model

English Data

Chinese Data

Training

Zero-shot Testing

(c) Zero-shot cross-lingual event argument extraction

Introduction

Figure 1: (a) An example of event argument extraction; (b)
An example of generation-based method; (c) An illustration
of zero-shot cross-lingual event argument extraction.

Event argument extraction (EAE) aims to identify the entities that serve as event arguments of a given event, and
predict the roles they play. Figure 1(a) illustrates an example of EAE task. Given the trigger “attacked” for an Attack event, the EAE model is expected to recognize “two
soldiers”, “demonstrators” and “yesterday” as the event arguments, and predict their roles as “Target”, “Attacker” and
“Time”, respectively. EAE is a key step for event extraction
(EE), which can be beneficial for various downstream applications, such as recommendation systems (Li et al. 2020b),
dialogue systems (Zhang, Chen, and Bui 2020) and timeline
summarization (Li et al. 2021).
With the development of deep neural network methods,
EAE has met with remarkable success. However, training
an EAE model relies on considerably large-scale labeled
data, which makes it hard to adapt to low-resource languages
that lack sufficient labeled data. To address this shortcoming, cross-lingual EAE transfers the advantage of the

source language with rich resources to the target language,
which gains increasing attention (Subburathinam et al. 2019;
Van Nguyen and Nguyen 2021; Ahmad, Peng, and Chang
2021; Lou et al. 2022). In this work, we focus on the zeroshot cross-lingual EAE task, where the EAE model is trained
with the annotated data in a source language and directly applied to other target languages (cf. Figure 1(c)).
For monolingual EAE, most of previous methods treat it
as classification tasks (including entity recognition and argument classification), either trained in a pipelined or joint
manner (Nguyen, Cho, and Grishman 2016; Wang et al.
2019; Lin et al. 2020). Recently, there is an emerging trend
of casting EAE as a sequence generation problem (Li, Ji, and
Han 2021; Hsu et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022). As shown in
Figure 1(b), this line of methods design templates with several placeholders (i.e., underlined words), and steer generative pre-trained language models (PLMs) to fill them. Com-

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12589

