The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On Generalized Degree Fairness in Graph Neural Networks
Zemin Liu1 * , Trung-Kien Nguyen2 , Yuan Fang2
1

National University of Singapore, Singapore
Singapore Management University, Singapore
zeminliu@nus.edu.sg, {tknguyen, yfang}@smu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

adequately improve fairness, as the correlation between sensitive attributes and other attributes could still induce bias
(Pedreshi, Ruggieri, and Turini 2008). Thus, prior work on
Euclidean data often employs additional regularizations or
constraints to debias the model or post-processing the predictions (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016; Pleiss et al. 2017).
Similar principles have been extended to graphs to eliminate
bias rooted in sensitive node attributes (Rahman et al. 2019;
Bose and Hamilton 2019; Buyl and De Bie 2020; Li et al.
2021; Dai and Wang 2021; Wang et al. 2022). For example,
CFC (Bose and Hamilton 2019) tries to debias by applying some filters on the generated node representations, and
some others resort to adversarial learning to detect sensitive
attributes (Bose and Hamilton 2019; Dai and Wang 2021).

Conventional graph neural networks (GNNs) are often confronted with fairness issues that may stem from their input,
including node attributes and neighbors surrounding a node.
While several recent approaches have been proposed to eliminate the bias rooted in sensitive attributes, they ignore the
other key input of GNNs, namely the neighbors of a node,
which can introduce bias since GNNs hinge on neighborhood
structures to generate node representations. In particular, the
varying neighborhood structures across nodes, manifesting
themselves in drastically different node degrees, give rise to
the diverse behaviors of nodes and biased outcomes. In this
paper, we first define and generalize the degree bias using a
generalized definition of node degree as a manifestation and
quantification of different multi-hop structures around different nodes. To address the bias in the context of node classification, we propose a novel GNN framework called Generalized Degree Fairness-centric Graph Neural Network (DegFairGNN). Specifically, in each GNN layer, we employ a
learnable debiasing function to generate debiasing contexts,
which modulate the layer-wise neighborhood aggregation to
eliminate the degree bias originating from the diverse degrees among nodes. Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our model on
both accuracy and fairness metrics.

1

However, these approaches fail to account for the other
key input of GNNs—the neighborhood structures of each
node, which can also induce bias into node representations. Specifically, each node is linked to different neighbors, forming diverse neighborhood structures and manifesting drastically different node degrees. By virtue of the
message passing framework, GNNs generate the representation of a node based on its neighborhood structures, which is
highly dependent on the abundance or scarcity of its neighboring nodes. Hence, drastic differences in node degrees
could lead to differential node behaviors and biased outcomes. In particular, while the “value” of a node is usually co-determined by its own attributes and its neighboring
structure (i.e., “social capital”), the latter may systematically
bias against newcomers despite their individual attributes,
and established individuals may passively accumulate more
social capital and become even harder for newcomers to
compete. For example, on a social network involving NBA
players (Dai and Wang 2021), a player with more followers may command a higher salary than another player with
comparable physical ability and skills due to his popularity
among fans; on a citation network, a paper with more initial
citations may attract even more future citations than another
paper with comparable quality on the same topic. Generally,
a node of larger degree is more likely to possess crucial advantages and thus receives more favorable outcomes than
warranted. This reveals a notable issue of degree fairness, in
which degree-biased neighborhood structures can marginalize or even override the quality and competency of individual nodes. The goal of degree fairness is to achieve equitable

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Veličković et al. 2018)
have emerged as a powerful family of graph representation
learning approaches. They typically adopt a message passing framework, in which each node on the graph aggregates
information from its neighbors recursively in multiple layers, unifying both node attributes and structures to generate
node representations. Despite their success, GNNs are often
confronted with fairness issues stemming from input node
attributes (Zemel et al. 2013; Dwork et al. 2012). To be more
specific, certain sensitive attributes (e.g., gender, age or race)
may trigger bias and cause unfairness in downstream applications. Naı̈vely removing the sensitive attributes does not
* Part of the work was done as a research scientist at Singapore
Management University.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4525

