The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Consensus Learning for Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Zhiwei Xu, Bin Zhang, Dapeng Li, Zeren Zhang, Guangchong Zhou, Hao Chen, Guoliang Fan
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China
{xuzhiwei2019, zhangbin2020, lidapeng2020, zhangzeren2021, zhouguangchong2021, chenhao2019, guoliang.fan}@ia.ac.cn

Observations

Abstract

State

Sight Radius

Almost all multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithms
without communication follow the principle of centralized
training with decentralized execution. During the centralized
training, agents can be guided by the same signals, such as
the global state. However, agents lack the shared signal and
choose actions given local observations during execution.
Inspired by viewpoint invariance and contrastive learning,
we propose consensus learning for cooperative multi-agent
reinforcement learning in this study. Although based on local
observations, different agents can infer the same consensus
in discrete spaces without communication. We feed the
inferred one-hot consensus to the network of agents as
an explicit input in a decentralized way, thereby fostering
their cooperative spirit. With minor model modifications,
our suggested framework can be extended to a variety of
multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithms. Moreover,
we carry out these variants on some fully cooperative tasks
and get convincing results.

Figure 1: An example on the viewpoint invariance. In the
StarCraft multi-agent challenge, agents receive local observations drawn within their field of view. Even though observations of all agents are completely different at each
timestep, they nonetheless reflect the same global state.
ecution. The lack of common guidance is particularly severe in the partially observable Markov decision process
(POMDP) (Monahan 1982). As a result, agents lack the
desire to cooperate when executing. This issue can be resolved by using certain communication-based multi-agent
reinforcement learning techniques (Sukhbaatar, Szlam, and
Fergus 2016; Foerster et al. 2016). However, communication methods also bring about problems like choosing the
information to pass and additional bandwidth requirements.
Inspired by computer vision (Morel and Yu 2009;
Xia, Chen, and Aggarwal 2012), we propose COnsensus
LeArning (COLA) for multi-agent reinforcement learning
based on the invariance to views. In POMDPs, despite the
fact that local observations of each agent are unique, the observations of all agents at the same moment are different representations of the same global state, as shown in Figure 1. It
is like a multi-view problem (Xu, Tao, and Xu 2013), where
the same object can look different from various viewpoints.
If the agents are aware of the invariance, they can explicitly
select cooperative actions by inferring the same consensus
on the state from their different local observations during
the decentralized execution. Meanwhile, there is no communication throughout the entire process above.
There are several ways to represent the consensus of the
agents on the state. The easiest way is to use the real state
as consensus. However, it is not feasible in the implementation to accurately infer the global state from local observations. As a representation learning framework based on the
similarity between samples, contrastive learning (Sermanet

Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning has received increasing attention recently due to its successful applications in
games (Vinyals et al. 2019), transportation (Chu et al. 2020),
and networks (Nasir and Guo 2019). And multi-agent cooperation has gradually gained popularity as a research field:
how to control multiple agents to work together to solve
the same problem simultaneously? Many multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithms based on centralized training
with decentralized execution (CTDE) paradigms (Lowe
et al. 2017) have been proposed, including multi-agent
deep deterministic policy gradient (MADDPG) (Lowe
et al. 2017), counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients
(COMA) (Foerster et al. 2018), and numerous value decomposition methods (Sunehag et al. 2018; Rashid et al. 2018,
2020; Wang et al. 2020, 2021; Mahajan et al. 2019). All
of the above methods use a centralized critic to address the
instability problem in multi-agent systems.
Methods built on CTDE, however, have a flaw. While
an agent can share the information with other agents during the centralized learning, it can only make decisions regarding its own individual observations for decentralized exCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11726

