The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ClassFormer: Exploring Class-Aware Dependency with Transformer for Medical
Image Segmentation
Huimin Huang1 , Shiao Xie1† , Lanfen Lin1* , Ruofeng Tong1,2 , Yen-Wei Chen3 , Hong Wang4 ,
Yuexiang Li4 , Yawen Huang4* , Yefeng Zheng4
1

Zhejiang University
2
Zhejiang Lab
3
Ritsumeikan University
4
Tencent Jarvis Lab
Abstract
Vision Transformers have recently shown impressive performances on medical image segmentation. Despite their strong
capability of modeling long-range dependencies, the current
methods still give rise to two main concerns in a classlevel perspective: (1) intra-class problem: the existing methods lacked in extracting class-specific correspondences of
different pixels, which may lead to poor object coverage
and/or boundary prediction; (2) inter-class problem: the existing methods failed to model explicit category-dependencies
among various objects, which may result in inaccurate localization. In light of these two issues, we propose a novel
transformer, called ClassFormer, powered by two appealing
transformers, i.e., intra-class dynamic transformer and interclass interactive transformer, to address the challenge of fully
exploration on compactness and discrepancy. Technically, the
intra-class dynamic transformer is first designed to decouple
representations of different categories with an adaptive selection mechanism for compact learning, which optimally highlights the informative features to reflect the salient keys/values from multiple scales. We further introduce the inter-class
interactive transformer to capture the category dependency
among different objects, and model class tokens as the representative class centers to guide a global semantic reasoning. As a consequence, the feature consistency is ensured with
the expense of intra-class penalization, while inter-class constraint strengthens the feature discriminability between different categories. Extensive empirical evidence shows that
ClassFormer can be easily plugged into any architecture,
and yields improvements over the state-of-the-art methods in
three public benchmarks.

1

Figure 1: Motivation of ClassFormer. Intra-class dependency considers the highly-structured patterns for each object, e.g., liver region is relatively highlighted in its classspecific representation, and then the pixel-to-pixel relations
are explored. Inter-class dependency further considers the
high-level object-to-object relations (e.g., liver-to-stomach),
with additional guidance of multiple class tokens (centers).

learn a limited receptive field from the convolution filters,
which fail to model the explicit long-range relations (in
Fig. 2 (d)). Rather, the introduction of large, sometimes even
global contexts endows models with richer representations,
especially for medical images with complex anatomical contrasts, anfractuous boundaries, and heterogeneous textures.
Recently, transformers have been emerged as alternative
architecture in vision tasks attracting more interest. Unlike
CNN-based methods that rely on local convolution operators, visual transformers become highly considerate to learn
the expressively attentive relations of different patch tokens, which are proven to be an efficient way by modeling the global contexts. For example, on the medical image
segmentation task, TransUNet (Chen et al. 2021) was the
first study to build a CNN-Transformer architecture, which
added transformers into the high-level CNN features to learn
the global attention. SwinUNet (Cao et al. 2021) was designed as a pure transformer architecture by stacking Swin
transformer blocks. The global relations release the advantages of transformer-based methods, nevertheless, simply
enlarging global attention still gives rise to the limited coverage of objects and inaccurate localization, as depicted in
Figs. 2 (b) and (c). Substantially, the difficulty of inconsistency in the same category and the confused semantics
among categories, all lead to inseparable representations.
The observed phenomenon can be elaborated as the fol-

Introduction

Medical image segmentation is crucial to many clinical applications, such as diagnosing disease and preoperative assessment. Over the last decade, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have greatly promoted the development of
medical image segmentation (Ronneberger, Fischer, and
Brox 2015; Zhou et al. 2019). Despite their success, CNNs
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*Corresponding Authors: Lanfen Lin (llf@zju.edu.cn), Yawen
Huang (yawenhuang@tencent.com).
†Huimin Huang and Shiao Xie are co-first authors, and this work
is done during the internship at Tencent Jarvis Lab.

917

