The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Task-Specific Scene Structure Representations
Jisu Shin* , Seunghyun Shin* and Hae-Gon Jeon†
AI Graduate School, GIST, South Korea
{jsshin98, seunghyuns98}@gm.gist.ac.kr, haegonj@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
Understanding the informative structures of scenes is essential for low-level vision tasks. Unfortunately, it is difficult to
obtain a concrete visual definition of the informative structures because influences of visual features are task-specific.
In this paper, we propose a single general neural network architecture for extracting task-specific structure guidance for
scenes. To do this, we first analyze traditional spectral clustering methods, which computes a set of eigenvectors to model a
segmented graph forming small compact structures on image
domains. We then unfold the traditional graph-partitioning
problem into a learnable network, named Scene Structure
Guidance Network (SSGNet), to represent the task-specific
informative structures. The SSGNet yields a set of coefficients
of eigenvectors that produces explicit feature representations
of image structures. In addition, our SSGNet is light-weight
(56K parameters), and can be used as a plug-and-play module
for off-the-shelf architectures. We optimize the SSGNet without any supervision by proposing two novel training losses
that enforce task-specific scene structure generation during
training. Our main contribution is to show that such a simple
network can achieve state-of-the-art results for several lowlevel vision applications including joint upsampling and image
denoising. We also demonstrate that our SSGNet generalizes
well on unseen datasets, compared to existing methods which
use structural embedding frameworks. Our source codes are
available at https://github.com/jsshin98/SSGNet.

1

Scene Structure

LR

Baseline
Networks
Noisy

SSGNet

Ours
HR

Baseline
HR

RMSE :
25.15cm

RMSE :
25.72cm

Denoised

Denoised

PSNR :
34.00dB

PSNR :
30.51dB

Figure 1: Our SSGNet is a lightweight architecture and can
be applied as a plug-and-play module to improve the performance of baseline networks for low-level vision tasks.

2016) and depth completion (Eldesokey et al. 2020). Clearly,
the goodness of scene structures depends on the target applications, and is defined by either training data or objective
functions.
More recent approaches of extracting informative scene
structures have focused on capturing task-specific features
from various learning frameworks. One interesting work for
joint filtering in (de Lutio et al. 2022) builds graph nodes on
learned features from a guidance image to encode semantic
information, and represents scene structures by segmenting
the graph edges based on objective functions. However, they
have heavy computational burdens and are not implemented
as an end-to-end architecture. To formulate an end-to-end
architecture, edge priors, directly obtained from conventional
edge detection (Irwin et al. 1968; Canny 1986), are used as a
guide. Typically, image edges (or gradients) represent high
frequency features and can be forced to generate fine details
in the prediction results (Fang, Li, and Zeng 2020). Nevertheless, the question of how to effectively exploit structure
guidance information remains unanswered. Tremendous efforts have been made to only generate a single purpose scene
structure with each different architecture.
In this paper, we propose a Scene Structure Guidance Network (SSGNet), a single general neural network architecture
for extracting task-specific structural features of scenes. Our
SSGNet is lightweight in both size and computation, and
is a plug-and-play module that can be applied to any baseline low-level vision architectures. The SSGNet computes a
set of parameterized eigenvector maps, whose combination
is selectively determined in favor of the target domain. To

Introduction

Methods for estimating scene structures have attracted wide
research attention for the past several decades. As an example,
texture representations based on image edges have been extensively studied with impressive performance on low-level
vision tasks, i.e. image denoising (Tomasi and Manduchi
1998), deblurring (Krishnan and Fergus 2009; Levin et al.
2007), super-resolution (Tai et al. 2010) and inpainting (Nazeri et al. 2019; Yang, Qi, and Shi 2020; Guo, Yang, and Huang
2021). Another aspect of scene structures involves inferring
robust object boundaries to quantify uncertainty and refine
initial predictions in visual perception tasks including joint
filtering (He, Sun, and Tang 2012; Guo et al. 2018; Li et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2272

