The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robust Graph Meta-Learning via Manifold Calibration with Proxy Subgraphs
Zhenzhong Wang1 , Lulu Cao2 , Wanyu Lin1 * , Min Jiang 2 , Kay Chen Tan 1
1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University
zhenzhong16.wang@connect.polyu.hk, lulucao@stu.xmu.edu.cn, wan-yu.lin@polyu.edu.hk, minjiang@xmu.edu.cn,
kctan@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

noise which refers to noisy or perturbed edges caused by unnoticeable perturbations or attacks (Dai et al. 2022). Due to
the message-passing process, noisy information can be propagated along the noisy edges, contaminating the deduced
node embedding and degrading the performance.
One paradigm to handle the long-tail issue is graph metalearning (Huang and Zitnik 2020; Liu et al. 2021; Zhou
et al. 2019a). In graph meta-learning, the intrinsic manifold of support nodes and query nodes can be learned by
propagating information along the topological structure (see
Fig.1 (c)), thus obtaining an optimum classification boundary that can be used as the transferable prior knowledge for
the meta-learner. On the contrary, the lack of topology information can induce a boundary with poor generalization
(see Fig.1 (b)). On the other hand, many efforts have been
made to alleviate the effects of structural noise. For example,
some works assume edges between dissimilar nodes as noisy
edges, and they prune such noisy edges to suppress the noisy
information (Entezari et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2019; Wu et al.
2019; Dai et al. 2022). However, simply pruning edges may
result in information loss because even in a clean graph, the
dissimilar nodes may still have inherent relationships (Tang
et al. 2020). Others attempt to construct a low-rank approximation of the adjacent matrix, as in a clean graph, the rank
of the adjacency matrix is usually lower than that of a noisy
graph (Luo et al. 2021; Zhou, Zha, and Song 2013; Jin et al.
2020). However, low-rank approximation methods often neglect to exploit node features as complementary information
for purifying embedding.
Compared with long-tail distribution solely appeared,
long-tail distribution with structural noise is more challenging. Specifically, we observe the contaminated node embedding may impair the smoothness S(M) 1 of the manifold
supporting the support and query nodes, thus leading to a
poor generalizable priori (see Fig.1 (d) and (e)). Inspired by
the observation, we argue that the manifold’s smoothness
property may serve as guidance to resist structural noise.
In this work, we use subgraph-level embedding to dilute
the noisy information and calibrate the smoothness of the
manifold. Firstly, noisy subgraph embedding is extracted
from the raw graph. Because the raw graph suffers from
structural noises, the manifold represented by the noisy sub-

Graph meta-learning has become a preferable paradigm for
graph-based node classification with long-tail distribution,
owing to its capability of capturing the intrinsic manifold
of support and query nodes. Despite the remarkable success,
graph meta-learning suffers from severe performance degradation when training on graph data with structural noise.
In this work, we observe that the structural noise may impair the smoothness of the intrinsic manifold supporting the
support and query nodes, leading to the poor transferable
priori of the meta-learner. To address the issue, we propose a new approach for graph meta-learning that is robust against structural noise, called Proxy subgraph based
Manifold Calibration method (Pro-MC). Concretely, a subgraph generator is designed to generate proxy subgraphs that
can calibrate the smoothness of the manifold. The proxy subgraph compromises two types of subgraphs with two biases,
thus preventing the manifold from being rugged and straightforward. By doing so, our proposed meta-learner can obtain
generalizable and transferable prior knowledge. In addition,
we provide a theoretical analysis to illustrate the effectiveness of Pro-MC. Experimental results have demonstrated that
our approach can achieve state-of-the-art performance under
various structural noises.

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017),
extracting node representations by propagating and updating the representations along the graph topology, have become an important research topic in various practical frontiers (Xie and Grossman 2018; Fout et al. 2017). Among
those applications, various scenarios involve graph-based
node classification tasks, e.g., fake account detection in social networks (Zhu et al. 2012).
Although GNNs have shown outstanding capability in
graph-based node classification tasks, their performance significantly degrades when they are trained on graphs with
long-tail distribution (Chauhan, Nathani, and Kaul 2020).
Specifically, in canonical graph-based few-shot node classification tasks, it is non-trivial to generalize to novel classes
as the novel classes typically only have one or very few
labeled nodes. Besides, GNNs are vulnerable to structural
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

15224

The smoothness S(M) is defined in Eq. (2)

