The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Integrating Reward Maximization and Population Estimation: Sequential
Decision-Making for Internal Revenue Service Audit Selection
Peter Henderson1 , Ben Chugg2 , Brandon Anderson3 , Kristen Altenburger1 ,
Alex Turk3 , John Guyton3 , Jacob Goldin4 , Daniel E. Ho1
1

2

Stanford University
Carnegie Mellon University
3
Internal Revenue Service
4
University of Chicago

Abstract

unifying audit processes with these multiple objectives under
a sequential decision-making framework. We call our setting
optimize-and-estimate structured bandits. This framework is
useful in practical settings, challenging, and has the potential
to bring together methods from survey sampling, bandits, and
active learning. It poses an interesting and novel challenge
for the machine learning community and can benefit many
public and private sector applications (see more discussion
in Appendix C).1 It is critical to many U.S. federal agencies
that are bound by law to balance enforcement priorities with
population estimates of improper payments (Henderson et al.
2021; Office of Management and Budget 2018, 2021).
We highlight this framework with a case study of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). The IRS selects taxpayers to audit
every year to detect under-reported tax liability. Improving
audit selection could yield 10:1 returns in revenue and help
fund socially beneficial programs (Sarin and Summers 2019).
But the agency must also provide an accurate assessment of
the tax gap (the projected amount of tax under-reporting if all
taxpayers were audited). Currently, the IRS accomplishes this
via two separate mechanisms: (1) a stratified random sample
to estimate the tax gap; (2) a focused risk-selected sample of
taxpayers to collect under-reported taxes. Based on a unique
multiyear collaboration with the IRS, we were provided with
full micro data access to masked audit data to research how
machine learning could improve audit selection. We investigate whether these separate mechanisms and objectives can
be combined into one batched structured bandit algorithm,
which must both maximize reward and maintain accurate population estimates. Ideally, if information is reused, the system
can make strategic selections to balance the two objectives.
We benchmark several sampling approaches and examine the
trade-offs between them with the goal of understanding the
effects of using bandit algorithms in this high-impact setting.
We identify several interesting results and challenges using
historical taxpayer audit data in collaboration with the IRS.
First, we introduce a novel sampling mechanism called
Adaptive Bin Sampling (ABS) which guarantees an unbiased
population estimate by employing a Horvitz-Thompson (HT)
approach (Horvitz and Thompson 1952), but is comparable
to other methods for cumulative reward. Its unbiasedness
and comparable reward comes at the cost of additional vari-

We introduce a new setting, optimize-and-estimate structured
bandits. Here, a policy must select a batch of arms, each
characterized by its own context, that would allow it to both
maximize reward and maintain an accurate (ideally unbiased)
population estimate of the reward. This setting is inherent
to many public and private sector applications and often requires handling delayed feedback, small data, and distribution shifts. We demonstrate its importance on real data from
the United States Internal Revenue Service (IRS). The IRS
performs yearly audits of the tax base. Two of its most important objectives are to identify suspected misreporting and
to estimate the “tax gap” — the global difference between
the amount paid and true amount owed. Based on a unique
collaboration with the IRS, we cast these two processes as a
unified optimize-and-estimate structured bandit. We analyze
optimize-and-estimate approaches to the IRS problem and propose a novel mechanism for unbiased population estimation
that achieves rewards comparable to baseline approaches. This
approach has the potential to improve audit efficacy, while
maintaining policy-relevant estimates of the tax gap. This has
important social consequences given that the current tax gap
is estimated at nearly half a trillion dollars. We suggest that
this problem setting is fertile ground for further research and
we highlight its interesting challenges. The results of this and
related research are currently being incorporated into the continual improvement of the IRS audit selection methods.

1

Introduction

Sequential decision-making algorithms, like bandit algorithms and active learning, have been used across a number of domains: from ad targeting to clinical trial optimization (Bouneffouf and Rish 2019). In the public sector, these
methods are not yet widely adopted, but could improve the
efficiency and quality of government services if deployed
with care. Henderson et al. (2021) provides a review of this
potential. Many administrative enforcement agencies in the
United States (U.S.) face the challenge of allocating scarce
resources for auditing regulatory non-compliance. But these
agencies must also balance additional constraints and objectives simultaneously. In particular, they must maintain an
accurate estimate of population non-compliance to inform
policy-making. In this paper, we focus on the potential of
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5087

Appendices can be found at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.11910.

