The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PaRot: Patch-Wise Rotation-Invariant Network via Feature Disentanglement and
Pose Restoration
Dingxin Zhang* , Jianhui Yu* , Chaoyi Zhang, Weidong Cai
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney, Australia
dzha2344@uni.sydney.edu.au, {jianhui.yu, chaoyi.zhang, tom.cai}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Recent interest in point cloud analysis has led rapid progress
in designing deep learning methods for 3D models. However,
state-of-the-art models are not robust to rotations, which remains an unknown prior to real applications and harms the
model performance. In this work, we introduce a novel Patchwise Rotation-invariant network (PaRot), which achieves rotation invariance via feature disentanglement and produces
consistent predictions for samples with arbitrary rotations.
Specifically, we design a siamese training module which disentangles rotation invariance and equivariance from patches
defined over different scales, e.g., the local geometry and
global shape, via a pair of rotations. However, our disentangled invariant feature loses the intrinsic pose information of each patch. To solve this problem, we propose
a rotation-invariant geometric relation to restore the relative pose with equivariant information for patches defined
over different scales. Utilising the pose information, we propose a hierarchical module which implements intra-scale and
inter-scale feature aggregation for 3D shape learning. Moreover, we introduce a pose-aware feature propagation process
with the rotation-invariant relative pose information embedded. Experiments show that our disentanglement module extracts high-quality rotation-robust features and the proposed
lightweight model achieves competitive results in rotated 3D
object classification and part segmentation tasks.

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

Figure 1: Illustration of pose information loss when generating patch-wise rotation-invariant features. We visualise our
learned patch-wise rotation-invariant features of an air plane
instance under two different orientations. As it can be seen,
for B and C that have exactly same geometric shapes and different poses (i.e. orientation and global position), the same
features are generated. However, the features for patches on
tail (A), left wing (B, C) and right wing (D) will be very
similar. The information for distinguishing their difference
between are lost.

Introduction
Point cloud analysis has recently drawn much interest from
researchers. As a common form of 3D representations, point
clouds are applied in areas such as unmanned driving and
3D face recognition. Recent deep learning models (Qi et al.
2017a,b) show great potential on well aligned point clouds
for classification and segmentation. However, 3D objects
are normally rotated and orientation angles are unknown in
real scenarios, which can largely impact the deep learning
models that are sensitive to rotations. Therefore, making the
model invariant to rotations becomes an important research
topic.
Pioneering work has attempted to obtain rotation robustness by transforming the shape into a canonical pose (Qi
et al. 2017a; Jaderberg et al. 2015), which cannot achieve

consistent invariance to rotation. Recent works construct
rotation-invariant representations from local geometry as
model input (Zhang et al. 2019; Kim, Park, and Han 2020),
which achieves consistent behavior under random rotations.
However, the rotation-invariant representations lose intrinsic pose information (i.e., orientation and position) as illustrated in Fig. 1. To solve this problem, Li et al. (2021b) and
Zhao et al. (2022) generate rotation-invariant features from
the global 3D shape and restore the global pose information
by simply concatenating features at both local and global
scales, without fully exploring how the pose information can
be used more effectively. Moreover, these methods achieve
rotation invariance based on handcrafted features invariant
to rotation, which could limit the model performance.
In this work, we borrow the idea of Zhao et al. (2022)
where we obtain rotation-invariant information from both local and global scales. Specifically, we capture point patches

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3418

