The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Isolation and Impartial Aggregation: A Paradigm of Incremental Learning
without Interference
Yabin Wang1, 3 * , Zhiheng Ma2 * , Zhiwu Huang3,4 , Yaowei Wang5 , Zhou Su1 , Xiaopeng Hong6, 5†
1

School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Singapore Management University
4
University of Southampton
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory
6
Harbin Institute of Technology
iamwangyabin@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, zh.ma@siat.ac.cn, zhiwu.huang@soton.ac.uk, wangyw@pcl.ac.cn, zhousu@ieee.org,
hongxiaopeng@ieee.org
2

PAST

Abstract

CURRENT
Final Classifiers

This paper focuses on the prevalent stage interference and
stage performance imbalance of incremental learning. To
avoid obvious stage learning bottlenecks, we propose a new
incremental learning framework, which leverages a series
of stage-isolated classifiers to perform the learning task at
each stage, without interference from others. To be concrete, to aggregate multiple stage classifiers as a uniform
one impartially, we first introduce a temperature-controlled
energy metric for indicating the confidence score levels of
the stage classifiers. We then propose an anchor-based energy self-normalization strategy to ensure the stage classifiers work at the same energy level. Finally, we design a
voting-based inference augmentation strategy for robust inference. The proposed method is rehearsal-free and can work
for almost all incremental learning scenarios. We evaluate
the proposed method on four large datasets. Extensive results
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method in setting
up new state-of-the-art overall performance. Code is available at https://github.com/iamwangyabin/ESN.

Transfer
Interference

(a)
Final Classifiers
Self-Normalization

Self-Normalization
Fixed Pre-trained Weights
Current Trainabe Weights

(b)

Past Trainabe Weights

Figure 1: Comparison of our method against traditional
methods. (a) Existing methods usually use a unified model
for incremental learning, which may cause interference
among the stages, as indicated by the lines of mixed colors. (b) In contrast, the proposed ESN uses a stage-isolation
scheme for learning stage classifiers upon a fixed pre-trained
backbone, resulting in much less forgetting and interference.

Introduction
Incremental learning (a.k.a, continual learning or lifelong
learning) is a paradigm that continually evolves machine
learning models on a data stream. It is a longstanding research topic and might offer a path toward more human-like
AI. The stability-plasticity dilemma is central to incremental learning (Mai et al. 2022; De Lange et al. 2021), which
requires the models to be plastic to acquire new knowledge
and stable to consolidate existing knowledge continuously.
Most previous works struggle to keep a fragile balance
between stability and plasticity and also achieve pretty good
results in terms of average accuracy, which, however, result in tremendous performance gaps of different learning
stages (a.k.a. sessions or tasks). This is a well-known phenomenon named class imbalance (Mai et al. 2022; De Lange

et al. 2021), which eventually leads to stage performance
imbalance. That is, the newer the stage, the higher the performance, and vice versa. The source of this problem is twofold: firstly, the imbalance in the number of samples between
the new incoming data and the historical data; secondly and
more importantly, using a uniform model to portray a heterogeneous data stream may suffer from stage interference
(Fig. 1 (a)) and lead to a zero-sum game (Riemer et al. 2018;
Knoblauch, Husain, and Diethe 2020; Wang, Huang, and
Hong 2022) in the performance of different stages. This results in breakdowns in recognizing certain classes, which
creates a bottleneck in the final performance and limits the
application of the model in real-world scenarios. A few
methods use a rehearsal buffer to alleviate such imbalance
problems (Hou et al. 2019). However, saving previous training data is memory expensive and has a privacy issue.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Xiaopeng Hong is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10209

