The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Gradient-Adaptive Pareto Optimization for Constrained Reinforcement Learning
Zixian Zhou* ,1,2 , Mengda Huang* ,1 , Feiyang Pan†,3 , Jia He3 , Xiang Ao†,1,2,4 ,
Dandan Tu3 , Qing He1,2
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Huawei EI Innovation Lab
4
Institute of Intelligent Computing Technology, Suzhou, CAS
{zhouzixian21s, huangmengda19s}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Constrained Reinforcement Learning (CRL) burgeons broad
interest in recent years, which pursues maximizing long-term
returns while constraining costs. Although CRL can be cast
as a multi-objective optimization problem, it is still facing the
key challenge that gradient-based Pareto optimization methods
tend to stick to known Pareto-optimal solutions even when they
yield poor returns (e.g., the safest self-driving car that never
moves) or violate the constraints (e.g., the record-breaking
racer that crashes the car). In this paper, we propose Gradientadaptive Constrained Policy Optimization (GCPO for short), a
novel Pareto optimization method for CRL with two adaptive
gradient recalibration techniques. First, to find Pareto-optimal
solutions with balanced performance over all targets, we propose gradient rebalancing which forces the agent to improve
more on under-optimized objectives at every policy iteration.
Second, to guarantee that the cost constraints are satisfied, we
propose gradient perturbation that can temporarily sacrifice
the returns for costs. Experiments on the SafetyGym benchmarks show that our method consistently outperforms previous
CRL methods in reward while satisfying the constraints.

1

Introduction

Due to the close relationship with real-world applications,
Constrained Reinforcement Learning (CRL) has burgeoned
broad interests in recent years (Achiam et al. 2017; Ding
et al. 2020; Wachi and Sui 2020; Satija, Amortila, and Pineau
2020). Unlike unconstrained reinforcement learning which
only aims at maximizing cumulative returns, CRL pursues
rewards while satisfying specific constraints. For example,
in the scenario of auto-pilot, the well-trained agent should
arrive at the destination and meets the safety constraints
simultaneously (Kong, Zhang, and Xu 2021).
CRL problems are usually formulated as Constrained
Markov Decision Processes (CMDPs) (Altman 1999), which
incorporate rewards and constraints into the same framework.
Aside from returning a scalar reward after each action like
* These authors contributed equally.
†
Correspondence to Feiyang Pan (pfy824@gmail.com) and Xiang Ao (aoxiang@ict.ac.cn).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11443

conventional MDPs, CMDPs send back one or multiple cost
signals independent of reward. Constraints are expressed explicitly in CMDPs by limiting the expected sum of each cost
in the corresponding region.
Essentially, the purpose of CRL is to maximize rewards
while controlling costs, which would be naturally associated
with Multi-objective optimization. In recent years, Pareto approaches (Sener and Koltun 2018; Lin et al. 2019), which find
a steep gradient that benefits all objectives, have been generally leveraged to multi-objective optimization. The ultimate
goal of Pareto approaches is to find a Pareto-optimal (Pareto
1897) solution, in which no objective can be advanced without harming any other objectives.
Adhering to this idea, the CRL problem can be transformed into a search for a specific Pareto-optimal policy,
which should also remain in the feasible region restricted by
constraints. However, algorithms for CRL seldom consider
experience from Pareto optimization area because existing
Pareto approaches perform poorly in practical CRL problems (Tessler, Mankowitz, and Mannor 2018; Ray, Achiam,
and Amodei 2019). Although existing Pareto approaches are
able to find Pareto-optimal policy effectively, they not only
overlook the constraints, but also yield imbalanced performance in terms of rewards and costs. As shown in Fig.1(b),
when the gradients of two objective functions disagree, traditional Pareto approaches will synthesize an updating vector
which is biased to the shorter gradient. Eventually, policy
updated in such biased direction will be either too risky to be
aware of the constraint or too conservative to interact with
the environment. A more detailed theoretical explanation is
presented in Section 4.
To tackle these challenges, we propose a practical algorithm for CRL named GCPO (abbr. for Gradient-adaptive
Constrained Policy Optimization). Beyond previous Pareto
methods, GCPO employs two gradient recalibration techniques.
First, the gradient rebalancing mechanism redefines the length
of gradients of each objective and ensures that the agent focuses more on the underdeveloped objective, leading to more
balanced development. Second, to achieve feasible solutions,
we use gradient perturbation to force the agent to control the
costs when the constraints are not satisfied. Experimental re-

