The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Generalizing Math Word Problem Solvers via Solution Diversification
Zhenwen Liang1 , Jipeng Zhang2 , Lei Wang3 , Yan Wang4 , Jie Shao5 , Xiangliang Zhang1 *
1

University of Notre Dame
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Singapore Management University
4
Tencent AI Lab
5
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
zliang6@nd.edu, jzhanggr@conect.ust.hk, lei.wang.2019@phdcs.smu.edu.sg, yanwang.branden@gmail.com,
shaojie@uestc.edu.cn, xzhang33@nd.edu
2

Abstract
Current math word problem (MWP) solvers are usually
Seq2Seq models trained by the (one-problem; one-solution)
pairs, each of which is made of a problem description and
a solution showing reasoning flow to get the correct answer.
However, one MWP problem naturally has multiple solution
equations. The training of an MWP solver with (one-problem;
one-solution) pairs excludes other correct solutions, and thus
limits the generalizability of the MWP solver. One feasible
solution to this limitation is to augment multiple solutions
to a given problem. However, it is difficult to collect diverse
and accurate augment solutions through human efforts. In this
paper, we design a new training framework for an MWP solver
by introducing a solution buffer and a solution discriminator.
The buffer includes solutions generated by an MWP solver to
encourage the training data diversity. The discriminator controls the quality of buffered solutions to participate in training.
Our framework is flexibly applicable to a wide setting of fully,
semi-weakly and weakly supervised training for all Seq2Seq
MWP solvers. We conduct extensive experiments on a benchmark dataset Math23k and a new dataset named Weak12k, and
show that our framework improves the performance of various
MWP solvers under different settings by generating correct
and diverse solutions.

Problem
Description:

Ground Truth
Solution:
Alternative
Solution 1:
Alternative
Solution 2:
Spurious
Solution:

There are 40 students taking
Chinese and math exams, 25
students passed the Chinese
exam, 20 students passed the
math exam, 10 students failed
both exams. How many
students pass both exams?
25+20-(40-10) = 15
25+20-40+10 = 15
10+25+20-40 = 15
25-10=15

Table 1: An MWP example with a ground truth solution and
an alternative solution that reaches the same correct answer.
It also has a spurious solution, which reaches the same correct answer but makes no sense. Our target is to improve the
generalizability of an MWP solver by considering the multiple solutions to one problem and distinguishing the correct
solutions from the spurious solutions.

Introduction
Automatic math word problem (MWP) solving has attracted
the interest of researchers for a long time. Most state-ofthe-art MWP solvers (Wang, Liu, and Shi 2017; Wang et al.
2019; Liu et al. 2019; Xie and Sun 2019; Zhang et al. 2020b;
Shen and Jin 2020; Hong et al. 2021a; Liang et al. 2022; Hu
and Jiang 2022) are Seq2Seq models, which use an encoder
to get latent representations for the problem and a decoder
to generate symbolic solutions. The Seq2Seq models are
typically trained by the (one-problem; one-solution) pairs,
each of which is made of a problem of an MWP description
and a solution of a corresponding ground truth equation.
However, MWPs typically have multiple reasonable solutions
to reach the final answer. As shown in Table 1, there exists an
alternative solution that gives the same answer as the given
ground truth.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13183

Training an MWP solver with (one-problem; one-solution)
pairs excludes other correct solutions, and thus limits the generalizability of the MWP solver. An intuitively better idea is
to incorporate multiple solutions instead of a single solution
to specific MWP in training, i.e., by data augmentation. However, it is difficult to acquire diverse and accurate augment
solutions. If randomly generating solutions and then fixing
the wrong ones as done in (Hong et al. 2021a), spurious solutions like “25-10=15” shown in Table 1 cannot be identified.
They reach the right value answer with the quantities that
appeared in the MWP description but make no sense. The
inclusion of them in training is harmful to the MWP solver
and eventually lowers the performance.
We are thus motivated to inject solution diversity into the
MWP solver training by meanwhile making quality control
on the training instances. One possible way is to label problems manually with diverse solutions. However, this is too

