The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Supervised Image Denoising Using Implicit Deep Denoiser Prior
Huangxing Lin1 , Yihong Zhuang1 , Xinghao Ding1 , Delu Zeng2 , Yue Huang1 , Xiaotong Tu1 * ,
John Paisley3
1
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
School of Mathematics, South China University of Technology, China
3
Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, USA
{hxlin, zhuangyihong}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {dxh, yhuang2010, xttu}@xmu.edu.cn, dlzeng@scut.edu.cn,
jwp2128@columbia.edu
2

2

where ∥x − y∥2 is a data fidelity term that ensures the solution agrees with the observation, R(x) is a regularizer, α
and β are trade-off parameters. R(x) is also referred to as a
prior term without probabilistic connotations. The first challenge of Eq. (2) is choosing R(x), which encodes the preknown image properties and directs the solution towards a
more plausible image. Some common priors for constructing R(x) include total variation (Selesnick 2017), non-local
self-similarity (Dabov et al. 2007), and others (Dong et al.
2015; Meng and De La Torre 2013). However, these preselected priors often do not model the finer properties of natural images, and so can lead to degraded results.
Recently, supervised deep networks have achieved unprecedented success in image denoising by learning image
priors and noise statistics from pairs of noisy/clean images
(Zhang et al. 2019a). Most CNN denoisers such as DnCNN
(Zhang et al. 2017a) and VDN (Yue et al. 2019) achieve
superior performance over model-based denoisers. Unfortunately, in most cases collecting a large number of realistic paired data is difficult, which limits the application of
supervised CNNs. This motivates learning to denoise without paired data – a common approach for non-deep models,
but less addressed by neural networks. Some self-supervised
methods (Laine et al. 2019; Pang et al. 2021) require only
noisy data to train a denoising network under certain minor assumptions, such as zero mean. One of these methods
that has attracted much attention is called a deep image prior
(DIP) (Ulyanov, Vedaldi, and Lempitsky 2018). DIP found
that the structure of a CNN is naturally an implicit regularizer for image denoising. Specifically, DIP uses a deep CNN
to reparameterize a noisy image y,
2
min ∥Fθ (z) − y∥2 ,
(3)

Abstract
We devise a new regularization for denoising with selfsupervised learning. The regularization uses a deep image
prior learned by the network, rather than a traditional predefined prior. Specifically, we treat the output of the network as
a “prior” that we again denoise after “re-noising.” The network is updated to minimize the discrepancy between the
twice-denoised image and its prior. We demonstrate that this
regularization enables the network to learn to denoise even
if it has not seen any clean images. The effectiveness of our
method is based on the fact that CNNs naturally tend to capture low-level image statistics. Since our method utilizes the
image prior implicitly captured by the deep denoising CNN
to guide denoising, we refer to this training strategy as an
Implicit Deep Denoiser Prior (IDDP). IDDP can be seen as
a mixture of learning-based methods and traditional modelbased denoising methods, in which regularization is adaptively formulated using the output of the network. We apply IDDP to various denoising tasks using only observed corrupted data and show that it achieves better denoising results
than other self-supervised denoising methods.

Introduction
Images captured by various devices are prone to noise and
corruption due to limitations of imaging environments such
as low light and slow shutter speed. Denoising is the problem whereby we recover the underlying clean image from
its noisy measurements. While sometimes the purpose may
be for aesthetic reasons, downstream computer vision tasks
such as detection and segmentation are also greatly facilitated by having minimally corrupted inputs.
A noisy image y is usually modeled as
y = x + n,

(1)

θ

where z is a fixed random vector, Fθ (·) represents the deep
CNN and θ is its parameters. The optimization trajectory
of Eq. (3) tends to produce a good local optimum (i.e., a
clean image) before overfitting to y. So denoising can be
completed by stopping training early. Moreover, we found
that similar results (see Figure 1) can be observed even if z
in Eq. (3) is replaced by y,
2
min ∥Fθ (y) − y∥2 .
(4)

where n represents the noise and x is the clean image to be
restored. The inverse problem of learning x is challenging
because the statistics of n are usually unknown and complex.
In general, model-based image denoising algorithms address this problem by optimizing functions of the form
2

x∗ = arg min α ∥x − y∥2 + βR(x),
x

(2)

θ

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

DIP demonstrates that the CNN naturally tends to
capture low-level image statistics, while showing strong
1586

