The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Goal-Conditioned Q-learning as Knowledge Distillation
Alexander Levine and Soheil Feizi
University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, USA
{alevine0, sfeizi}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract

off-policy reinforcement learning in a goal-conditioned setting, and knowledge distillation, the task of training a student network to model the same function as a (generally
more complex) teacher network.1 In brief, the Bellman update can be viewed as an instance of (conditional, stochastic)
knowledge distillation, where the current Q-value estimate is
the student, the target Q-value network (averaged over transitions) is the teacher, and the independent variable is the
goal that the agent is attempting to reach. We use this insight to develop an novel off-policy algorithm that in some
instances has improved performance over baselines for goalconditioned tasks. Our main contributions are as follows:

Many applications of reinforcement learning can be formalized as goal-conditioned environments, where, in each
episode, there is a “goal” that affects the rewards obtained
during that episode but does not affect the dynamics. Various techniques have been proposed to improve performance
in goal-conditioned environments, such as automatic curriculum generation and goal relabeling. In this work, we explore a connection between off-policy reinforcement learning in goal-conditioned settings and knowledge distillation.
In particular: the current Q-value function and the target Qvalue estimate are both functions of the goal, and we would
like to train the Q-value function to match its target for all
goals. We therefore apply Gradient-Based Attention Transfer
(Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2017), a knowledge distillation
technique, to the Q-function update. We empirically show
that this can improve the performance of goal-conditioned
off-policy reinforcement learning when the space of goals is
high-dimensional. We also show that this technique can be
adapted to allow for efficient learning in the case of multiple simultaneous sparse goals, where the agent can attain
a reward by achieving any one of a large set of objectives,
all specified at test time. Finally, to provide theoretical support, we give examples of classes of environments where (under some assumptions) standard off-policy algorithms such
as DDPG require at least O(d2 ) replay buffer transitions to
learn an optimal policy, while our proposed technique requires only O(d) transitions, where d is the dimensionality
of the goal and state space. Code and appendix are available
at https://github.com/alevine0/ReenGAGE.

1. We propose ReenGAGE, a novel technique for goalconditioned off-policy reinforcement learning, and evaluate its performance.
2. We propose Multi-ReenGAGE, a variant of ReenGAGE well-suited for goal-conditioned environments
with many simultaneous sparse goals.
3. We provide theoretical justification for ReenGAGE by
showing that it is in some cases asymptotically more efficient, in terms of the total number of replay buffer transitions required to learn an optimal policy, than standard
off-policy algorithms such as DDPG.
In most of this work, we focus on continuous action control
problems; we extend our method to discrete action spaces
in the appendix. Note that while we mostly focus on using
ReenGAGE on top of HER (Andrychowicz et al. 2017) and
DDPG (Lillicrap et al. 2016) in this work, it can be easily
applied alongside any goal-relabeling scheme or automated
curriculum, and can be adapted for other off-policy algorithms such as SAC (Haarnoja et al. 2018) or TD3 (Fujimoto, Hoof, and Meger 2018). In particular, we include an
application to SAC in the appendix.

Introduction
In recent years, many works have focused on applying deep
reinforcement learning to goal-conditioned tasks, through
approaches such as goal relabeling (Andrychowicz et al.
2017; Nair et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2021; Fang et al.
2019) and automatic curriculum generation (Florensa et al.
2018; Sukhbaatar et al. 2018; Zhang, Abbeel, and Pinto
2020). In this work, we focus on model-free off-policy goalconditioned RL, and present a novel technique for improving performance in this setting. Our approach relies on a
connection between the standard Bellman update used in

Preliminaries and Notation
We consider control problems defined by goal-conditioned
MDPs (S, A, G, T , R), where S, A, and G denote sets of
states, actions, and goals, respectively, G and A are assumed
1
Some works use the term “knowledge distillation” to refer to
the particular method for this task proposed by (Hinton, Vinyals,
and Dean 2015), while others, such as (Gou et al. 2021) use it to
refer to the task in general; we use the latter definition.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8500

