The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Take Your Model Further: A General Post-refinement Network for Light Field
Disparity Estimation via BadPix Correction
Rongshan Chen1,2 , Hao Sheng1,2,3* , Da Yang1,2 , Sizhe Wang1,2 , Zhenglong Cui1,2 , Ruixuan Cong1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2
Beihang Hangzhou Innovation Institute Yuhang
3
Faculty of Applied Sciences, Macao Polytechnic University
{rongshan, shenghao, da.yang, sizhewang, zhenglong.cui, congrx}@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

Zhang, and Lin 2021). However, when reviewing these algorithms, it can be found that most works, whether conventional or learning-based, focus on handling occlusion,
texture-less or other areas that harm LF structure to improve
accuracy, such as occlusion-aware cost construction (Park,
Lee et al. 2017; Han et al. 2021) and edge detection (Chen
et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2021), since these issues have been
a pain point in this field (Neri, Carli, and Battisti 2018). And
with the targeted research in previous years (Chen, Zhang,
and Lin 2021; Wang, Lin, and Zhang 2021; Chen et al.
2014), such issues have been handled very well, but there
is very little dedicated research to solve the problem of bad
pixels for LF disparity estimation.
As shown in Fig. 1, nine high ranking algorithms are selected from the Benchmark (Johannsen et al. 2017) and analyzed. It can be found that 1) these algorithms still have some
room for improvement in terms of BadPix, where still nearly
5-7% BadPixs in (0.10, 1.0) interval even for these high
ranking algorithms. 2) there are nearly 99% BadPix(<1.0),
so it can be assumed that all BadPixs are in a small range δ
for simplicity. 3) As these BadPixs can cause mse error, correcting them also has a positive effect on MSE×100. Following these observations, we propose a novel idea called
BadPix correction for LF disparity estimation, which is the
first time to the best of our knowledge, and implement a
general post-refinement network–Bad-pixel Correction Network (BpCNet), which could work on almost all existing
algorithms for disparity refinement.
To achieve our goal, there exist some challenges needed
to be overcome. Firstly, since the distribution of BadPix is irregular, a reasonable strategy needs to be considered. Here,
we model our BpCNet as: a fine-grained search strategy to
find the best result in a limited range δ, composed of hypothesis disparities generation, feature extraction, cost volume construction and disparity fusion modules. Secondly,
in BpCNet, some warp functions are needed to construct the
cost volume of hypothesis disparities for consistency evaluation. However, as δ is small (≤ 1) and the number of disparities generated is large (≥ 9), ensuring that nearly close
disparities are discriminative is another challenge. Conventional bilinear or bicubic-based warp function may cause the
misjudgment between adjacent disparities if used, as their
interpolated features are very similar. Here, we propose a
novel phase shift-based warp function and get more accu-

Most existing light field (LF) disparity estimation algorithms
focus on handling occlusion, texture-less or other areas that
harm LF structure to improve accuracy, while ignoring other
potential modeling ideas. In this paper, we propose a novel
idea called Bad Pixel (BadPix) correction for method modeling, then implement a general post-refinement network for LF
disparity estimation: Bad-pixel Correction Network (BpCNet). Given an initial disparity map generated by a specific
algorithm, we assume that all BadPixs on it are in a small
range. Then BpCNet is modeled as a fine-grained search strategy, and a more accurate result can be obtained by evaluating
the consistency of LF images in this limited range. Due to
the assumption and the consistency between input and output, BpCNet can perform as a general post-refinement network, and can work on almost all existing algorithms iteratively. We demonstrate the feasibility of our theory through
extensive experiments, and achieve remarkable performance
on the HCI 4D Light Field Benchmark.

Introduction
By collecting the lights from different directions of a scene,
the light field (LF) is formed as regular and dense images
sampled (Shi, Jiang, and Guillemot 2019). With these images, people can alleviate the problems caused by multiview stereo matching effectively, and estimate scene depth
information quickly and accurately (Johannsen, Sulc, and
Goldluecke 2016; Chen et al. 2022). Moreover, with the
advent of modern hand-held LF cameras, data acquisition
becomes a simple task, then LF is naturally considered for
depth estimation of real scenes. Since the scene depth information is directly related to the disparity between images,
people usually estimate disparity map instead of directly calculating depth map in LF (Mishiba 2020; Sheng et al. 2022).
Although researchers recently have made significant
progress in this field, especially with the rise of the convolutional neural network(Wang et al. 2022a; Yang and Tong
2022; Sheng et al. 2020), learning-based algorithms have
improved the accuracy of disparity estimation to a new level
(Wang et al. 2022c; Shin et al. 2018; Tsai et al. 2020; Chen,
*Corresponding author: Hao Sheng (shenghao@buaa.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

331

