The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SKIER: A Symbolic Knowledge Integrated Model
for Conversational Emotion Recognition
Wei Li, Luyao Zhu, Rui Mao, Erik Cambria
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
{wei008, luyao001}@e.ntu.edu.sg, {rui.mao, cambria}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

A0: Warriors wins! Anyone want to celebrate?
QAP

Emotion recognition in conversation (ERC) has received increasing attention from the research community. However,
the ERC task is challenging, largely due to the complex and
unstructured properties of multi-party conversations. Besides,
the majority of daily dialogues take place in a specific context or circumstance, which requires rich external knowledge to understand the background of a certain dialogue. In
this paper, we address these challenges by explicitly modeling the discourse relations between utterances and incorporating symbolic knowledge into multi-party conversations.
We first introduce a dialogue parsing algorithm into ERC
and further improve the algorithm through a transfer learning
method. Moreover, we leverage different symbolic knowledge graph relations to learn knowledge-enhanced features
for the ERC task. Extensive experiments on three benchmarks
demonstrate that both dialogue structure graphs and symbolic
knowledge are beneficial to the model performance on the
task. Additionally, experimental results indicate that the proposed model surpasses baseline models on several indices.

QAP

HasContext

(HAPPINESS)

music

B1: Yeah, let’s hit the bars!

(HAPPINESS)

C2: Not for me. I am with Celtics tonight.

(SADNESS)

B3: What will you do alone later?

(NEUTRAL)

lacrimator
C4: Chop all onions we have and cry.

(SADNESS)

Q-Elab
QAP

IsA

Comment
Comment

A5: Do it in your own room, bro!

(DISGUST)

B6: Don’t leave the door open, please.

(DISGUST)

Figure 1: Discourse with symbolic dependency representations. A, B, and C are three different speakers. QAP is a
question-answer pair. Q-Elab is a question-elaboration.

The later trend (Ghosal et al. 2020b) used graph convolutional networks (GCNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017) to model
historical and current utterance context, and utterancespeaker relationships. The dependencies were represented as
nodes and edges in a graph. The cross utterance dependency
modeling of the above-mentioned technical trends was normally achieved by contextualizers and attention mechanisms
in vector space. Despite the fact that contextualizer-based
methods have significantly improved ERC by incorporating more contextual information represented in sequential or
graphic forms, using attention mechanisms and undirected
edges in a graph cannot model the diversity of dialogue dependencies (Xu et al. 2019).
We argue that explicitly learning different types of dependencies can deliver extra accuracy gains in learning ERC
and dependency explainability in ERC results. Given the hypotheses that (1) symbolic dependency representations can
represent different types of dependency relationships between utterances (Shi and Huang 2019); (2) commonsense
knowledge can help to infer the emotion class of an utterance from its context (Zhong, Wang, and Miao 2019), the
motivation of this work is to effectively use and fuse these
different kinds of symbolic knowledge in an ERC model.
For example, as seen in Fig. 1, B1 and C2 depend on A0 in
a QAP (question-answer pair) relationship, respectively.

Introduction
Emotion recognition in conversation (ERC) is a task that
is beneficial to a wide range of natural language processing (NLP) research domains, such as dialogue systems (Ma
et al. 2020) and sentiment analysis (Zhang et al. 2021). ERC
is featured by the fact that the emotion classification task
depends on both current and historical utterances from different speakers. Thus, unlike phrase-level (Ge, Mao, and
Cambria 2022), aspect-level (Liang et al. 2022; Mao and
Li 2021), sentence-level (Chen et al. 2017) and documentlevel (Zhao, Rao, and Feng 2017) affective computing tasks
modeling dependency relationships within a context given
by a single presenter, utterance-level ERC requires modeling the various dependencies across multiple speakers.
Previous ERC studies have formulated two main trends,
e.g., sequence-based methods and graph-based methods (Li
et al. 2020a). The former trend (Song et al. 2022) encoded
concatenated historical and current utterances, and predicted
an emotion class for the current utterance, based on contextualized encoders, e.g., LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), GRU (Cho et al. 2014) and pre-trained language
models (Devlin et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13121

