The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ESL-SNNs: An Evolutionary Structure Learning Strategy for Spiking Neural
Networks
Jiangrong Shen1 , Qi Xu2* , Jian K. Liu3 , Yueming Wang1 , Gang Pan1 , Huajin Tang1,4 *
1

The College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology, China
3
School of Computing, University of Leeds, UK
4
Research Institute of Intelligent Computing, Zhejiang Lab, China
jrshen@zju.edu.cn, xuqi@dlut.edu.cn, j.liu9@leeds.ac.uk, {ymingwang, gpan, htang}@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

neural systems of the brain. Inspired by the information processing and learning mechanism of the brain, Spiking neural networks (SNNs) have attracted increasing attention due
to their highly biological plausibility and energy efficiency
on neuromorphic chips. However, lacking structural plasticity makes SNNs training and inference suffer the bottleneck similar to traditional artificial neural networks, i.e.,
high power consumption and big memory usage due to parameter redundancy (Han et al. 2015).
Recently, some studies focus on learning the sparse structure of SNNs. To optimize network structure and connection
weights, the synaptic sampling method is utilized by considering the spine motility of SNNs as Bayesian learning (Kappel et al. 2015). Deep rewiring (Deep R) pruning algorithm
(Bellec et al. 2018) is proposed and applied on SpiNNaker
2 prototype chips (Liu et al. 2018). Gradient rewiring (Grad
R) is proposed for connection learning (Chen et al. 2021),
where the gradient is redefined to a new synaptic parameter
to allow the connection competition between growing and
pruning. The above studies have revealed structure refining
capability in SNNs and indicated the high parameter redundancy in deep SNNs. (Chen et al. 2022) facilitates weight
optimization for pruning by modeling weight states, which
employs the weights reparameterization method to find the
final optimized sparse structure. However, these models still
could not implement stable sparse learning during the prolonged training process. The stable sparse learning emphasizes that the topology sparsity of SNNs is pursued starting
with the network design phase, which leads to the substantial reduction in connections and, in turn, to memory and
computation efficiency (Mocanu et al. 2018).
This paper implements the sparse training of SNNs from
scratch by a sparse structure learning method inspired by biological neuronal networks. The proposed ESL-SNNs not
only employ the sparse structure during the inference process but also can be trained with the sparse structure, in
which synaptic connections are pruned or regenerated dynamically during the training process (Figure 1). The ESLSNNs framework makes a step to close the gap between
sparse training and dense training and tries to improve
the expressibility of sparse training by the dynamic parameter exploration during the training process inspired by
the rewiring mechanism in the brain, instead of inheriting

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) have manifested remarkable
advantages in power consumption and event-driven property
during the inference process. To take full advantage of low
power consumption and improve the efficiency of these models further, the pruning methods have been explored to find
sparse SNNs without redundancy connections after training.
However, parameter redundancy still hinders the efficiency
of SNNs during training. In the human brain, the rewiring
process of neural networks is highly dynamic, while synaptic connections maintain relatively sparse during brain development. Inspired by this, here we propose an efficient
evolutionary structure learning (ESL) framework for SNNs,
named ESL-SNNs, to implement the sparse SNN training
from scratch. The pruning and regeneration of synaptic connections in SNNs evolve dynamically during learning, yet
keep the structural sparsity at a certain level. As a result, the
ESL-SNNs can search for optimal sparse connectivity by exploring all possible parameters across time. Our experiments
show that the proposed ESL-SNNs framework is able to learn
SNNs with sparse structures effectively while reducing the
limited accuracy. The ESL-SNNs achieve merely 0.28% accuracy loss with 10% connection density on the DVS-Cifar10
dataset. Our work presents a brand-new approach for sparse
training of SNNs from scratch with biologically plausible
evolutionary mechanisms, closing the gap in the expressibility between sparse training and dense training. Hence, it has
great potential for SNN lightweight training and inference
with low power consumption and small memory usage.

Introduction
Cognitive functions of the brain stem from the complex neural networks composed of billions of neurons and trillions
of synaptic connections between neurons. Synaptic connections form the physical basis for information communication
within the brain. During the brain developmental process,
synaptic connections rewire through the structural plasticity
mechanism by forming new synapses and eliminating existing synapses (De Vivo et al. 2017; Barnes and Finnerty
2010; Bennett, Kirby, and Finnerty 2018). Meanwhile, the
rewiring process promotes the sparsity of synaptic connections and further facilitates the low-power consumption of
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

86

