The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Interactive Concept Bottleneck Models
Kushal Chauhan, Rishabh Tiwari, Jan Freyberg, Pradeep Shenoy, Krishnamurthy Dvijotham∗
Google Research
{kushalchauhan, rishabhtiwari,janfreyberg,shenoypradeep,dvij}@google.com

Abstract
Concept bottleneck models (CBMs) are interpretable neural
networks that first predict labels for human-interpretable concepts relevant to the prediction task, and then predict the final
label based on the concept label predictions. We extend CBMs
to interactive prediction settings where the model can query
a human collaborator for the label to some concepts. We develop an interaction policy that, at prediction time, chooses
which concepts to request a label for so as to maximally improve the final prediction. We demonstrate that a simple policy
combining concept prediction uncertainty and influence of the
concept on the final prediction achieves strong performance
and outperforms static approaches as well as active feature
acquisition methods proposed in the literature. We show that
the interactive CBM can achieve accuracy gains of 5-10%
with only 5 interactions over competitive baselines on the
Caltech-UCSD Birds, CheXpert and OAI datasets.

1

(a) Concept Bottleneck Model

Introduction

(b) Interactive Prediction

Deep learning-based AI systems have demonstrated significant capabilities across a range of applications. However, in
many sensitive or safety-critical applications like healthcare
or toxicity detection, AI-based predictive systems are seldom
deployed in a standalone fashion; instead, they are used as
one component in the overall decision-making workflow (Lee
et al. 2021).
A concrete interactive setting that has received significant
attention in literature is that of active feature acquisition
(AFA) (Greiner, Grove, and Roth 2002; Kanani and Melville
2008). In this setting, a classifier can request additional features at prediction time. There is a cost associated with each
feature acquisition, so the AFA algorithms have to reason
about the value of the acquired feature relative to the cost.
In this paper, we focus on a slightly different setting where
the classifier always has access to a basic set of features (like
pixels of an image). However, at prediction time, the classifier can request additional labels corresponding to humaninterpretable concepts that are relevant to the prediction task.
For example, when predicting bird species from a bird image,
the classifier can request access to the wing shape. A key distinguishing feature of this framework from the general active

Figure 1: Interactive Prediction: Panel (a) shows a concept
bottleneck model (Koh et al. 2020) that predicts a label y from
an input x through an intermediate “concept” prediction layer
(Figure adapted from Koh et al. (2020)). Panel (b) shows our
proposal: after predicting concepts, the system interactively
queries the human for true values ci for concepts chosen so
as to maximize prediction accuracy and minimize acquisition
cost.

feature acquisition setting is that the human-interpretable concepts are potentially inferrable from the initial features input
to the model. In particular, we build on Concept bottleneck
models (Koh et al. 2020) which explicitly predict concept
labels from images and then predict the final label based
on the concept label predictions (Figure 1(a)). The authors
argue that CBMs show better explainability, performance
under distribution shift, and improvements in performance
when concept labels are made available at prediction time.
However, they only consider static policies for test time intervention that request concept labels in a predetermined order.
We present Cooperative Prediction (CooP), a dynamic
interactive policy that can reason about the uncertainty associated with a given test instance, and request only those con-

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5948

