The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Bilinear Exponential Family of MDPs: Frequentist Regret Bound with Tractable
Exploration & Planning
Reda Ouhamma, Debabrota Basu, Odalric Maillard
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 - CRIStAL, F-59000
reda.ouhamma@gmail.com, debabrota.basu@inria.fr, odalric.maillard@inria.fr

action value functions at step h ∈ [H] are defined as
"H
#
X
def
π
Vh (s) = E
r(st , at ) | sh = s ,

Abstract
We study the problem of episodic reinforcement learning in
continuous state-action spaces with unknown rewards and
transitions. Specifically, we consider the setting where the rewards and transitions are modeled using parametric bilinear
exponential families. We propose an algorithm, that a) uses
penalized maximum likelihood estimators to learn the unknown parameters, b) injects a calibrated Gaussian noise in
the parameter of rewards to ensure exploration, and c) leverages linearity of the bilinear exponential family transitions
with respect to an underlying RKHS to perform tractable
planning. We provide a frequentist regret upper-bound for
our algorithm which, in the case of tabular MDPs, is orderoptimal with respect to H and K, where H is the episode
length and K is the number of episodes. Our analysis improves the existing bounds for the bilinear exponential family
of MDPs by square root of H and removes the handcrafted
clipping deployed in existing RLSVI-type algorithms.

1

t=h

and

def

Qπh (s, a) = E

"H
X

#
r(st , at ) | sh = s, ah = a .

t=h

Here, computing the policy leading to maximization of cumulative reward requires the agent to strategically control
the actions in order to learn the transition functions and
reward functions as precisely as required. This tension between learning the unknown environment and reward maximization is quantified as regret: the typical performance
measure of an episodic RL algorithm. Regret is defined as
the difference between the expected cumulative reward or
value collected by the optimal agent that knows the environment and the expected cumulative reward or value obtained
by an agent that has to learn about the unknown environment. Formally, the regret over K episodes is

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a well-studied and popular
framework for sequential decision making, where an agent
aims to compute a policy that allows her to maximize the
accumulated reward over a horizon by interacting with an
unknown environment (Sutton and Barto 2018).
Episodic RL. In this paper, we consider the episodic finitehorizon MDP formulation of RL, in short Episodic RL (Osband, Russo, and Van Roy 2013; Azar, Osband, and Munos
2017; Dann, Lattimore, and Brunskill 2017). Episodic RL is
a tuple M = ⟨S, A, P, r, K, H⟩, where the state (resp. action) space S (resp. A) might be continuous. In episodic RL,
the agent interacts with the environment in episodes consisting of H steps. Episode k starts by observing state sk1 . Then,
for t = 1, . . . H, the agent draws action akt from a (possibly time-dependent) policy πt (skt ), observes the reward
r(skt , akt ) ∈ [0, 1], and transits to a state skt+1 ∼ P(. | skt , akt )
according to the transition function P. The performance of a
policy π is measured by the total expected reward V1π starting from a state s ∈ S, the value function and the state-

R(K) ≜

K
X


⋆
V1π (sk1 ) − V1πt (sk1 ) .

k=1

Key Challenges. The first challenge in episodic RL is to
tackle the exploration–exploitation trade-off. This is traditionally addressed with the optimism principle that either
carefully crafts optimistic upper bounds on the value functions (Azar, Osband, and Munos 2017), or maintains a posterior on the parameters to perform posterior sampling (Osband, Russo, and Van Roy 2013), or perturbs the value function estimates with calibrated noise (Osband, Van Roy, and
Wen 2016). Though the first two approaches induce theoretically optimal exploration, they might not yield tractable
algorithms for large/continuous state-action spaces as they
either involve optimization in the optimistic set or maintaining a high-dimensional posterior. Thus, we focus on extending the third approach of Randomized Least-Square Value
Iteration (RLSVI) framework, and inject noise only in rewards to perform tractable exploration.
The second challenge, which emerges for continuous
state-action spaces, is to learn a parametric functional approximation of either the value function or the rewards and

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9336

