The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning to Defer with Limited Expert Predictions
Patrick Hemmer* , Lukas Thede* , Michael Vössing, Johannes Jakubik, Niklas Kühl
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
{patrick.hemmer, michael.voessing, johannes.jakubik, niklas.kuehl}@kit.edu, lukas.thede@alumni.kit.edu

Abstract

to explore how the capabilities of human experts and AI
models can be combined. In this context, learning to defer algorithms have demonstrated promising results by enabling the AI model not to make a prediction for all instances
but rather to learn to defer a subset of them to the human
expert—based on the AI model’s and the expert’s capabilities (Mozannar and Sontag 2020; Okati, De, and Rodriguez
2021; Raghu et al. 2019). Non-identical capabilities of the
human expert and the AI can originate, e.g., from limited
training data, limited model capacity, or the availability of
side information only accessible to the human expert (Hemmer et al. 2022b; Charusaie et al. 2022). By compensating
for the weaknesses of both the human expert and the AI
through effective instance allocation, learning to defer algorithms can achieve a higher performance level than either
the human or the AI model can achieve individually (Raghu
et al. 2019; Wilder, Horvitz, and Kamar 2020).
However, large amounts of labeled data are required to
train learning to defer algorithms. In fact, they require not
only ground truth labels to train the AI model but also additional human expert predictions that accurately reflect the
expert’s capabilities (Leitão et al. 2022). In this context, any
new human expert aiming to collaborate with the AI model
would have to provide expert predictions so that the learning
to defer algorithms can understand the expert’s individual
capabilities. It can become particularly costly in application
domains with frequently changing human experts or where
data labeling is time-consuming and requires the knowledge
of highly trained specialists, e.g., in medicine. Due to this
impediment, the usage of learning to defer algorithms can
become infeasible in these cases—despite their potential for
decision-making tasks with high costs of errors.
To reduce the number of human expert predictions required for the training of learning to defer algorithms, we
propose a novel three-step approach capable of generating artificial expert predictions from only a small number
of human expert predictions accurately reflecting the expert’s capabilities. (1) We train an embedding model with
ground truth labels to extract feature representations which
(2) serve as a basis for training an expertise predictor model
that learns to approximate the human expert’s capabilities
with only a small number of human expert predictions. It is
trained on the available expert predictions while simultaneously leveraging instances for which no human expert pre-

Recent research suggests that combining AI models with a
human expert can exceed the performance of either alone.
The combination of their capabilities is often realized by
learning to defer algorithms that enable the AI to learn to
decide whether to make a prediction for a particular instance
or defer it to the human expert. However, to accurately learn
which instances should be deferred to the human expert, a
large number of expert predictions that accurately reflect the
expert’s capabilities are required—in addition to the ground
truth labels needed to train the AI. This requirement shared
by many learning to defer algorithms hinders their adoption
in scenarios where the responsible expert regularly changes
or where acquiring a sufficient number of expert predictions
is costly. In this paper, we propose a three-step approach to reduce the number of expert predictions required to train learning to defer algorithms. It encompasses (1) the training of an
embedding model with ground truth labels to generate feature
representations that serve as a basis for (2) the training of an
expertise predictor model to approximate the expert’s capabilities. (3) The expertise predictor generates artificial expert
predictions for instances not yet labeled by the expert, which
are required by the learning to defer algorithms. We evaluate
our approach on two public datasets. One with “synthetically”
generated human experts and another from the medical domain containing real-world radiologists’ predictions. Our experiments show that the approach allows the training of various learning to defer algorithms with a minimal number of
human expert predictions. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
even a small number of expert predictions per class is sufficient for these algorithms to exceed the performance the AI
and the human expert can achieve individually.

Introduction
Recent advances in the field of artificial intelligence (AI)
have improved the accuracy of AI models to a point where
they exceed the performance of human experts on an increasing number of tasks (Farrell 2021; Rajpurkar et al.
2017; Topol 2019). However, various application domains
remain where AI models can not consistently outperform
human experts (Cremer 2021; Raghu et al. 2019; Kühl et al.
2022). Motivated by this observation, prior work has started
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6002

