The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Planning and Learning for Non-markovian Negative Side Effects
Using Finite State Controllers
Aishwarya Srivastava1 , Sandhya Saisubramanian2 , Praveen Paruchuri1 ,
Akshat Kumar3 , Shlomo Zilberstein4
1
IIIT Hyderabad
Oregon State University
3
Singapore Management University
4
University of Massachusetts Amherst
aishwarya.srivastava@research.iiit.ac.in, sandhya.sai@oregonstate.edu, praveen.p@iiit.ac.in,
akshatkumar@smu.edu.sg, shlomo@cs.umass.edu
2

Abstract
Autonomous systems are often deployed in the open world
where it is hard to obtain complete specifications of objectives and constraints. Operating based on an incomplete
model can produce negative side effects (NSEs), which affect the safety and reliability of the system. We focus on
mitigating NSEs in environments modeled as Markov decision processes (MDPs). First, we learn a model of NSEs using observed data that contains state-action trajectories and
severity of associated NSEs. Unlike previous works that associate NSEs with state-action pairs, our framework associates
NSEs with entire trajectories, which is more general and captures non-Markovian dependence on states and actions. Second, we learn finite state controllers (FSCs) that predict NSE
severity for a given trajectory and generalize well to unseen
data. Finally, we develop a constrained MDP model that uses
information from the underlying MDP and the learned FSC
for planning while avoiding NSEs. Our empirical evaluation
demonstrates the effectiveness of our approach in learning
and mitigating Markovian and non-Markovian NSEs.

Figure 1: Non-Markovian NSE in a driving domain, NSE is
associated with frequency of driving fast through puddles.
on the problem setting (Saisubramanian, Kamar, and Zilberstein 2022). Markovian NSEs are those associated with the
immediate execution of an action in a state. Non-Markovian
NSEs are associated with a sequence of actions. Many realworld domains are characterized by non-Markovian NSEs.
For example, consider an autonomous vehicle (AV) that
aims to quickly navigate to a goal location while complying
with the traffic rules (Figure 1). While the AV’s model may
include all the details relevant to this task, it may lack superfluous details, such as the impact of driving fast through
puddles. Based on this model, the AV may drive fast through
puddles, producing an NSE. While the user may tolerate this
behavior occasionally, they may not be willing to tolerate the
AV frequently splashing water on nearby pedestrians. Since
the model has no information about NSE, the AV’s state representation may not include a feature indicating the number
of times it drove fast through puddles. Thus the severity of
NSE occurrence in this case depends on the agent’s trajectory and is therefore non-Markovian for its state representation, which is Markovian for the navigation task.
Prior works mitigate Markovian NSE through model
and policy updates (Saisubramanian, Kamar, and Zilberstein 2020), by constraining actions (Zhang, Durfee, and
Singh 2018, 2020), by minimizing deviations from a baseline (Krakovna et al. 2019), by incentivizing the agent to
preserve the ability to perform future tasks in the environment (Krakovna et al. 2020), and by considering the influence of actions on other agents in the environment (Al-

Introduction
As autonomous systems are increasingly deployed in openworld environments, obtaining perfect description of the target environment becomes practically infeasible (Dietterich
2017). Model incompleteness may arise in the form of underspecified objectives or missing constraints due to the limited availability of information or unintentional overlooking of details, especially those considered unrelated to the
agent’s primary task during system design (Saisubramanian,
Zilberstein, and Kamar 2022). Operating based on such
models may produce negative side effects (NSEs)—which
are unintended, undesired consequences of agent actions
that occur in addition to the intended effects, often discovered after deployment (Amodei et al. 2016; Alizadeh Alamdari et al. 2022; Krakovna et al. 2019; Saisubramanian,
Roberts, and Zilberstein 2021).
Addressing NSEs is gaining increased attention since it
affects the safety and reliability of deployed AI systems.
The NSEs may be Markovian or non-Markovian, depending
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15144

