The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Eliciting Structural and Semantic Global Knowledge in
Unsupervised Graph Contrastive Learning
Kaize Ding* , Yancheng Wang* , Yingzhen Yang, and Huan Liu
Arizona State University
School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence
kaize.ding@asu.edu, yancheng.wang@asu.edu, yingzhen.yang@asu.edu, huan.liu@asu.edu

Abstract

attention lately (Kipf and Welling 2016; Veličković et al.
2019; You et al. 2020).
More recently, contrastive learning (He et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2020b) has been actively explored to advance the performance of GNNs in graph self-supervised learning (Veličković
et al. 2019; You et al. 2020; Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020;
Qiu et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2020b). In general, graph contrastive learning (GCL) methods learn representations by
creating two augmented views of each graph element and
maximizing the agreement between the encoded representations of the two augmented views. Correspondingly, the
relevant view pairs (positive) will be pulled together, and the
irrelevant view pairs (negative) will be pushed away in the latent space. With only non-semantic labels, unsupervised GCL
can provide generalizable node representations for various
downstream tasks (You et al. 2020; Hassani and Khasahmadi
2020; Du et al. 2021), becoming a prevailing paradigm in
unsupervised node representation learning.
Despite the success, the research of unsupervised GCL
is still in its infancy – most of the existing GCL methods
learn node representations based on the information from
the local neighborhoods due to the shallow property of conventional GNNs. While for real-world graphs, nodes sharing
similar characteristics may not always be closely connected,
requiring the learning algorithm to retain such “global” awareness. However, it is a non-trivial task for the existing GCL
methods built on top of shallow GNNs since they have inherent limitations in capturing either structural global knowledge or semantic global knowledge. Specifically: (i) from
the structural perspective, long-range node interactions are
highly desired for capturing structural global knowledge, especially for many downstream tasks that have large problem
radii (Alon and Yahav 2021). To this end, a straightforward
way is to employ a deeper GNN encoder to encode the augmented graphs. However, directly stacking multiple GNN
layers will not only lead to information distortion caused by
the oversmoothing issue (Chen et al. 2020a), but also introduce additional training parameters that hamper the model
training efficiency; and (ii) from the semantic perspective,
existing unsupervised GCL methods predominately focus on
instance-level contrast that leads to a latent space where all
nodes are well-separated and each node is locally smooth (Li
et al. 2021) (i.e., input with different augmentations have similar representations), while the underlying semantic structure

Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) has recently drawn much
research interest for learning generalizable node representations in a self-supervised manner. In general, the contrastive
learning process in GCL is performed on top of the representations learned by a graph neural network (GNN) backbone,
which transforms and propagates the node contextual information based on its local neighborhoods. However, nodes sharing
similar characteristics may not always be closely connected,
which poses a great challenge for unsupervised GCL efforts
due to their inherent limitations in capturing such global graph
knowledge. In this work, we address their inherent limitations
by proposing a simple yet effective framework – Simple Neural
Networks with Structural and Semantic Contrastive Learning
(S3 -CL). Notably, by virtue of the proposed structural and
semantic contrastive learning algorithms, even a simple neural
network can learn expressive node representations that preserve valuable global structural and semantic patterns. Our
experiments demonstrate that the node representations learned
by S3 -CL achieve superior performance on different downstream tasks compared with the state-of-the-art unsupervised
GCL methods. Implementation and more experimental details
are publicly available at https://github.com/kaize0409/S-3-CL.

1

Introduction

Learning expressive node representations of graph-structured
data plays an essential role in a variety of real-world applications, ranging from social network analysis (Kipf and
Welling 2017), to drug discovery (Fout et al. 2017), to financial fraud detection (Ding et al. 2019). Recently, graph
neural networks (GNNs), which generally follow a recursive message-passing scheme, have emerged as powerful
architectures in graph machine learning (Kipf and Welling
2017; Veličković et al. 2018; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec
2017; Wu et al. 2019; Ding et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020).
Though GNNs are empirically effective in handling supervised or semi-supervised graph machine learning tasks, the
labor-intensive and resource-expensive data labeling cost is
meanwhile unbearable (Ding et al. 2022b; Zhang et al. 2022;
Ding et al. 2022c). To relieve the burdensome reliance on
human-annotated labels, unsupervised (self-supervised) node
representation learning with GNNs has drawn much research
* Indicates equal contribution.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7378

