The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Low Resource Quantitative Information Extraction via Structure Searching and
Prefix-Based Text Generation
Tongliang Li, Zixiang Wang, Zhoujun Li*
State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{tonyliangli, wangzixiang, lizj}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

A major problem for quantitative information extraction
is that the task is highly domain relevant, leading to a lack
of labeled data for the open domain. Hence, quantitative information extraction is not well studied as a research topic.
Prior work mainly rely on pure rule-based pattern-matching
approaches or rules combined with statistical methods to extract quantitative information. For example, Saha, Pal, and
Mausam (2017) propose BONIE that uses bootstrapping to
learn the dependency patterns to extract numerical relation
triples. However, not all quantities are expressed in forms of
“relation”. BONIE fails to extract any quantitative information from “What are the top 100 universities in the US?”,
and we should know that “100” refers to “universities in
the US”. Other similar studies like MARVE (Hundman and
Mattmann 2017) design complex pattern-matching rules on
the dependency structures. The rules are complex and is not
generic.
We argue that only relying on pattern-matching rules
is far from enough for open domain quantitative information extraction, as well as training fully-supervised models on domain-specific data. To gain higher performance
on open domain information extraction, low-resource approaches should be considered first. The model should be
able to fit on the smallest amount of data that is acquired
from the open domain with minimum human effort. Based
on these principles, we propose a low resource quantitative
information extraction method based on automatically generated training data.
To obtain the training data, we propose a novel searchbased approach by searching possible extraction results from
the constituency parsing (CP) structures. The approach is
simple yet effective, with no pattern-matching rules required. Previous studies already show the effectiveness of
applying CP in information extraction (Bast and Haussmann
2013; Barkschat 2014; Evans et al. 2017; Cetto et al. 2018;
Jiang and Diesner 2019). Our search-based approach significantly improves the recall compared with existing rulematching approaches (Saha, Pal, and Mausam 2017; Hundman and Mattmann 2017). To build an information extraction model on limited amount of training data, we transform
the information extraction task into a text generation task to
fully leverage the pre-trained weights of a language model.
Figure 1 shows the main concept of such transformation. We
design a natural language prefix to guide the model on what

Quantitative information plays an important part in the financial and data analysis areas. Prior work relied on patternmatching methods and complex hand-crafted rules to extract
quantitative information due to the lack of labeled data. Such
methods can be unstable and difficult to scale to the open domain. In this paper, we study quantitative information extraction in the low-resource setting. We propose a search-based
approach by searching from the syntactic structures to acquire basic training data. The search process is simple yet
effective. Then, a prefix-based text-to-text generation method
is employed to extract the quantitative information. The prefix design can fully leverage pre-trained language models for
text generation to serve the information extraction purpose.
Experimental results show that our approaches achieves high
performance with a limited amount of labeled data. The extraction result could further boost the performance of other
tasks such as quantitative reasoning.

Introduction
Quantitative information in the text is extremely valuable
in the financial and data analysis areas. For example, financial reports contain quantitative information that contributes
to the understanding of companies’ fundamentals which is
not reflected in data tables. Quantitative information extraction helps to understand these numbers and extracts them
into structured representations where standard financial tables or charts can be generated from. Despite these valuable applications, the task of Quantitative information extraction seems to be less studied and focused on. Most existing approaches in question answering and reading comprehension (Rajpurkar et al. 2016; Seo et al. 2017; Yu et al.
2018) do not explicitly address understanding quantities and
might fail to answer queries that require quantitative inference and reasoning. The understanding of quantities could
empower new applications like quantity search (Ho et al.
2019) to support analytic queries like “cities with more than
one million inhabitants”, “companies with PE small than
10”. In this paper, we study quantitative information extraction, which can be considered as a prerequisite to obtaining
a deep understanding of quantities.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13112

