The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

BEST: BERT Pre-training for Sign Language Recognition
with Coupling Tokenization
Weichao Zhao1 , Hezhen Hu1 * , Wengang Zhou1, 2† , Jiaxin Shi3 , Houqiang Li1, 2†
1

CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China (USTC)
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center 3 Huawei Inc.
{saruka, alexhu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn, shijiaxin3@huawei.com

Abstract

language in a model-aware paradigm with the hand mesh
as the intermediate constraint. However, those methods directly optimize on the target benchmark but fail to leverage
the universal statistics in the sign language domain.
Notably, self-supervised pre-training techniques represented by BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) have achieved great
success in Natural Language Processing (NLP). BERT
builds on the strong Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) backbone and designs an ingenious pretext task, i.e., masked language modeling (MLM). It aims to reconstruct the masked
word tokens from the corrupted input sequence, whose objective is implemented by cross entropy to maximize the
joint word probability distribution. However, the main obstacle to leverage its success in video SLR is the different
characteristics of the input signal. In NLP, the input word token is discrete and pre-defined with high semantics. In contrast, the video signal of sign language is continuous with the
spatial and temporal dimensions. This signal is quite lowlevel, making the original BERT objective not applicable.
Besides, since the sign language video is mainly characterized by hand and body movements, the direct adoption of
the BERT framework may not be optimal.
To tackle the above issue, we propose a self-supervised
pre-trainable framework with a specific design for sign language, namely BEST. Focusing on the main properties of
sign language, we organize the hand and body as the pose
triplet unit. This triplet unit is embedded and fed into the
Transformer backbone. Basically, our framework contains
two stages, i.e., self-supervised pre-training and downstream
fine-tuning. During pre-training, we propose the masked
unit modeling (MUM) pretext task to capture the context
cues. The input hand or body unit embedding is randomly
masked, and then the framework reconstructs the masked
unit from this corrupted input sequence. Similar to BERT,
self-reconstruction is optimized via the cross-entropy objective. To this end, we jointly tokenize the pose triplet unit as
the pseudo label, which represents the gesture/body state.
After pre-training, the pre-trained Transformer encoder is
fine-tuned with the newly added prediction head to perform
the SLR task.
Our contributions are summarized as follows,

In this work, we are dedicated to leveraging the BERT pretraining success and modeling the domain-specific statistics
to fertilize the sign language recognition (SLR) model. Considering the dominance of hand and body in sign language
expression, we organize them as pose triplet units and feed
them into the Transformer backbone in a frame-wise manner. Pre-training is performed via reconstructing the masked
triplet unit from the corrupted input sequence, which learns
the hierarchical correlation context cues among internal and
external triplet units. Notably, different from the highly semantic word token in BERT, the pose unit is a low-level signal originally located in continuous space, which prevents the
direct adoption of the BERT cross-entropy objective. To this
end, we bridge this semantic gap via coupling tokenization of
the triplet unit. It adaptively extracts the discrete pseudo label from the pose triplet unit, which represents the semantic
gesture/body state. After pre-training, we fine-tune the pretrained encoder on the downstream SLR task, jointly with
the newly added task-specific layer. Extensive experiments
are conducted to validate the effectiveness of our proposed
method, achieving new state-of-the-art performance on all
four benchmarks with a notable gain.

1

Introduction

Sign language is a primary communication tool for the deaf
community. It is characterized by its unique grammar and
lexicon, which are difficult to understand for non-sign language users. To bridge this communication gap, automatic
sign language recognition (SLR) is widely studied with
broad social influence. As one basic task, isolated SLR aims
to recognize at the gloss-level and is a fine-grained classification problem. In this work, we focus on this task.
Due to high annotation cost, current labeled sign data
sources are limited. Since common deep-learning-based
methods are data-hungry, they are prone to over-fitting on
SLR. To this end, several attempts have been made in SLR.
For instance, considering the dominant role of hand, some
methods (Hu, Zhou, and Li 2021; Albanie et al. 2020) utilize the cropped hand sequence as the auxiliary information.
HMA (Hu, Zhou, and Li 2021) proposes to recognize sign
* Contribute equally with the first author.

• We propose a self-supervised pre-trainable framework.
It leverages the BERT success, jointly with the specific
design for the sign language domain.

†

Corresponding authors: Wengang Zhou and Houqiang Li.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3597

