The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Joint Self-Supervised Image-Volume Representation Learning with Intra-inter
Contrastive Clustering
Duy M. H. Nguyen1,10 * , Hoang Nguyen2 , Truong T. N. Mai3 , Tri Cao2 , Binh T. Nguyen2
Nhat Ho4 , Paul Swoboda5 , Shadi Albarqouni 6,7 , Pengtao Xie8 , Daniel Sonntag9,10
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Stuttgart, Germany
2
AISIA Lab, University of Science - VNU HCM, Vietnam
3
Department of Multimedia Engineering, Dongguk University, South Korea
4
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, United States
5
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Germany
6
Helmholtz AI, Helmholtz Munich, Germany
7
Clinic for Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, University of Bonn, Germany
8
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California San Diego, United States
9
Department of Computer Science, Oldenburg University, Germany
10
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence, Germany
*
ho minh duy.nguyen@dfki.de
Abstract

data acquisition, expensive annotations, and privacy concerns (Cheplygina, de Bruijne, and Pluim 2019; Kaissis
et al. 2020). To alleviate these challenges, a conventional approach is to train deep networks, e.g., ResNet-50 (He et al.
2016), on large-scale natural image datasets such as ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) and subsequently fine-tune them on
the target medical domain. However, such schemes are suboptimal due to the large domain discrepancy between natural
images and medical data (Raghu et al. 2019; Nguyen et al.
2022b). This has motivated other techniques for collecting
annotated medical datasets across domains and training networks using full (Gibson et al. 2018; Chen, Ma, and Zheng
2019) or semi-supervision (Wang et al. 2020). Nevertheless,
the amount of acquired relevant training data in this manner
is still limited, which significantly limits the performance of
deep neural networks.
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has recently emerged as a
new trend in medical imaging due to its ability in obtaining feature representations from unlabeled data by solving
proxy tasks, which can be broadly categorized into generative (Chen et al. 2019) and discriminative ones (Chen et al.
2020a; He et al. 2020). Discriminative SSL can be further
separated into three directions: instance level-based methods
(Zbontar et al. 2021; Caron et al. 2021), contrastive learningbased methods (He et al. 2020; Chen, Xie, and He 2021)
and clustering-based methods (Caron et al. 2020; Li et al.
2021). Depending on a specific 2D, e.g., X-ray images or
3D magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) application, variations of these methods can be modified using 3D convolutional neural networks (CNNs) or Transformer architectures
(Taleb et al. 2020; Haghighi et al. 2021; Tang et al. 2022).
However, all aforementioned SSL methods have been designed to learn on either 2D or 3D data modalities. As a
result, they suffer from two major limitations. First, the ability to exploit unlabeled data from multiple source domains,
which commonly occurs in medical data, is restricted. For

Collecting large-scale medical datasets with fully annotated
samples for training of deep networks is prohibitively expensive, especially for 3D volume data. Recent breakthroughs
in self-supervised learning (SSL) offer the ability to overcome the lack of labeled training samples by learning feature
representations from unlabeled data. However, most current
SSL techniques in the medical field have been designed for
either 2D images or 3D volumes. In practice, this restricts
the capability to fully leverage unlabeled data from numerous
sources, which may include both 2D and 3D data. Additionally, the use of these pre-trained networks is constrained to
downstream tasks with compatible data dimensions. In this
paper, we propose a novel framework for unsupervised joint
learning on 2D and 3D data modalities. Given a set of 2D images or 2D slices extracted from 3D volumes, we construct
an SSL task based on a 2D contrastive clustering problem
for distinct classes. The 3D volumes are exploited by computing vectored embedding at each slice and then assembling
a holistic feature through deformable self-attention mechanisms in Transformer, allowing incorporating long-range dependencies between slices inside 3D volumes. These holistic
features are further utilized to define a novel 3D clustering
agreement-based SSL task and masking embedding prediction inspired by pre-trained language models. Experiments
on downstream tasks, such as 3D brain segmentation, lung
nodule detection, 3D heart structures segmentation, and abnormal chest X-ray detection, demonstrate the effectiveness
of our joint 2D and 3D SSL approach. We improve plain 2D
Deep-ClusterV2 and SwAV by a significant margin and also
surpass various modern 2D and 3D SSL approaches.

Introduction
Creating large-scale medical image datasets for training neural networks is a major obstacle due to the complexity of
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14426

