The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fast Fluid Simulation via Dynamic Multi-Scale Gridding
Jinxian Liu1 , Ye Chen1 , Bingbing Ni1 * , Wei Ren2 , Zhenbo Yu1 , Xiaoyang Huang1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
Huawei Hisilicon
{liujinxian, chenye123, nibingbing}@sjtu.edu.cn
renwei.ai@huawei.com, {yuzhenbo, huangxiaoyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

observed data is an attractive alternative to traditional simulators, due to that learning-based methods often show better generalization ability and are more extensible. There
are some choices of fluid representations, among which Lagrangian representations based on particles are particularly
popular and widely used. However, a fluid sample usually
contains thousands of particles and even tens of thousands
of particles when the scene is complicated. To build a highprecision and physical-level fluid simulation system, convolutions are usually performed on each particle to facilitate particle-wise motion prediction. Although some efficient convolution operators (Thomas et al.; Ummenhofer
et al.) have been proposed, performing convolutions on such
kinds of irregular data is still expensive, especially when the
number of particles is large. We can sacrifice some precision
and achieve a significant speedup in some application-level
scenarios that only pursue visual fidelity simulation such as
animation and the human-computer interaction.

Recent works on learning-based frameworks for Lagrangian
(i.e., particle-based) fluid simulation, though bypassing iterative pressure projection via efficient convolution operators,
are still time-consuming due to excessive amount of particles. To address this challenge, we propose a dynamic multiscale gridding method to reduce the magnitude of elements
that have to be processed, by observing repeated particle motion patterns within certain consistent regions. Specifically,
we hierarchically generate multi-scale micelles in Euclidean
space by grouping particles that share similar motion patterns/characteristics based on super-light motion and scale estimation modules. With little internal motion variation, each
micelle is modeled as a single rigid body with convolution
only applied to a single representative particle. In addition, a
distance-based interpolation is conducted to propagate relative motion message among micelles. With our efficient design, the network produces high visual fidelity fluid simulations with the inference time to be only 4.24 ms/frame (with
6K fluid particles), hence enables real-time human-computer
interaction and animation. Experimental results on multiple
datasets show that our work achieves great simulation acceleration with negligible prediction error increase.

To this end, we develop a dynamic multi-scale gridding
method and modify the second-order Runge-Kutta for faster
and high visual fidelity fluid simulation. The framework of
our method is shown in Figure 1. During training, we generate multi-scale micelles by grouping particles that share
similar motion patterns for training data based on the Octree generation algorithm. Specifically, we first partition all
particles in Euclidean space into eight octants. Then we define a physical quantity named velocity-entropy to describe
the chaos (i.e., the degree of internal motion variation) of
each octant. We iteratively partition the space into multiscale octants/grids/micelles until the chaos of all octants
is lower than a threshold and return the depth of octant to
which each particle belongs. Through this procedure, a Lagrangian fluid sample is divided into multi-scale local areas and each area contains particles that share similar motion patterns. Next, we approximately take each micelle as
a rigid body, and perform the efficient Continuous Convolution (Ummenhofer et al.) on each micelle by taking its
gravity center as the center point and particles in this micelle as neighbors. Fast linear interpolation between gravity
centers and fluid particles is applied to propagate message
between micelle features and extract particle-wise features.
Finally, we construct a lightweight ConvNet to learn fluid
mechanics. However, computing velocity-entropy is timeconsuming for inference. Hence we train the ConvNet to

Introduction
Simulations of complex physics are invaluable to many science and engineering disciplines, e.g., computational fluid
dynamics, computer graphics. A wide range of physical processes such as the motion of water-like fluids shows its great
application value in animation and the human-computer interaction. These applications put forward high requirements
for the efficiency of simulation systems.
As we know, most physical processes such as fluid mechanics are described by partial differential equations. Traditional fluid simulators usually design numerical solvers
to solve the Navier-Stokes equations. However, such methods require substantial computational resources and are hard
to extend. Thereby, many works (Li et al.; Ummenhofer
et al.; Tompson et al.; Morton et al.; Battaglia et al.; Mrowca
et al.; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al.; Kim et al.) seek learningbased methods for help. Training simulators directly from
* Corresponding Author: Bingbing Ni.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1675

