The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multi-Modality Deep Network for Extreme Learned Image Compression
Xuhao Jiang1 , Weimin Tan1 , Tian Tan1 , Bo Yan1 * , Liquan Shen2
1

School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shanghai Collaborative
Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Communication, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
20110240011@fudan.edu.cn, wmtan@fudan.edu.cn, tant21@m.fudan.edu.cn, byan@fudan.edu.cn, jsslq@163.com

Abstract
Image-based single-modality compression learning approaches have demonstrated exceptionally powerful encoding and decoding capabilities in the past few years , but suffer from blur and severe semantics loss at extremely low bitrates. To address this issue, we propose a multimodal machine learning method for text-guided image compression, in
which the semantic information of text is used as prior information to guide image compression for better compression performance. We fully study the role of text description in different components of the codec, and demonstrate
its effectiveness. In addition, we adopt the image-text attention module and image-request complement module to better
fuse image and text features, and propose an improved multimodal semantic-consistent loss to produce semantically complete reconstructions. Extensive experiments, including a user
study, prove that our method can obtain visually pleasing results at extremely low bitrates, and achieves a comparable or
even better performance than state-of-the-art methods, even
though these methods are at 2× to 4× bitrates of ours.

Figure 1: Visual comparisons of the proposed TGIC and
some state-of-the-art methods (HiFiC (Mentzer et al. 2020),
VVC (ITU-T and ISO/IEC 2020), BPG (Bellard 2015) and
the work of Xie et al. (Xie, Cheng, and Chen 2021)).

whose textures may not be semantically consistent with the
original image, as shown in Fig. 1. The text-to-image synthesis task is currently receiving a lot of attention, which
generates semantically consistent images from text descriptions. Inspired by this task, multi-modality image compression may have great advantages at low bitrates. The corresponding text provides the high-level image semantic information, which can be used as prior information to assist
image compression. Specifically, the text describes a rough
content of the image and its local features, such as, color,
location, shape, etc. This semantic information can be used
to assist in reconstructing images, which can help save image bits. In addition, under the guidance of text semantic information, the multi-modality model can generate visually
pleasing results that are more semantically consistent with
the original image, as shown in Fig. 1. Note that the text description occupies very few bits and can be transmitted to
the decoder side at marginal bandwidth cost. Even for low
bitrates (0.2 bpp), text uses less than one-twentieth of the
bits used by images on datasets (Wah et al. 2011; Nilsback
and Zisserman 2008).
In this paper, a text-guided image compression (TGIC)
generative adversarial network is proposed, in which the text
description is utilized as prior information to assist in image compression. TGIC can produce better results compared
with other methods, even if we use a much lower bitrate.
For the image encoding, based on the image-text attention
(ITA) module, text information is introduced into the codec

Introduction
During the past decades, image data on the Internet shows
an explosive growth, bringing huge challenges for data storage and transmission. To meet this ever-increasing requirements, low-bitrate lossy image compression is a promising way to save storage and transmission bandwidth. Traditional image compression algorithms, e.g., Better Portable
Graphics (BPG) (Bellard 2015) and Versatile Video Coding (VVC) (ITU-T and ISO/IEC 2020), are widely used in
practice. However, they will cause serious blocking artifacts
due to block-based processing at low bitrates. Therefore, exploring better methods for extreme image compression is urgently needed.
Recently, many single-modality learned methods (Xie,
Cheng, and Chen 2021; Mentzer et al. 2020) have been proposed. However, they also fail to reconstruct satisfactory results at extremely low bitrates. Specifically, they may generate blurry results due to limited bits, or utilize Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) to produce sharp results
* Corresponding author: Bo Yan. This work is supported by
NSFC (Grant No.: U2001209, 61902076) and Natural Science
Foundation of Shanghai (21ZR1406600).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1033

