The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Dynamic Multi-Behavior Sequence Modeling for Next Item Recommendation
Junsu Cho1 , Dongmin Hyun2 , Dong won Lim3 , Hyeon jae Cheon3 , Hyoung-iel Park3 , Hwanjo Yu1 *
1

Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Republic of Korea
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH, Republic of Korea
3
GS Retail, Republic of Korea
{junsu7463, dm.hyun}@postech.ac.kr, {dlaehddnjs99, redhat2k, hi.park}@gmail.com, hwanjoyu@postech.ac.kr

Abstract

purchase. Compared to the single-behavior data, the multibehaviors of users provide diverse perspectives of user interests, which conjointly imply the context of user interests and
causal relationships between the user behaviors (Xia et al.
2022). For learning such various information and effectively
utilizing it to the next item recommendation, the sequence
modeling for multi-behavior sequences needs to consider
some unique characteristics of multi-behavior sequences.
In this paper, we first address the characteristics of multibehavior sequences that should be considered in SRSs: 1)
The data distribution of each behavior type is imbalanced.
For example, users usually perform more clicks than add-tocarts or purchases. 2) The multi-behavior sequences involve
heterogeneous information about user interests, so each can
provide complementary information in predicting the users’
next item. For example, purchase data implies the user’s general preferences while recent click data indicates the category of the item the user is currently looking for. 3) The key
information involved in each type of behavior sequence and
its importance is personalized to the user. For example, a
behavior sequence may indicate the user interest on an item
category, brand or price, or it may not be important, depending on the user’s intention for that behavior. Therefore, the
model should be able to extract necessary information from
a behavior sequence according to the user. 4) There are correlations between the behavior sequences. In other words,
important information of a behavior sequence may be determined according to the information of other sequences. For
example, if a user recently clicked on items in similar categories, it is also likely to affect on the purchase sequence.
The existing SRS models, for single-behavior or multibehavior sequences, do not take into account the characteristics of multi-behavior sequences addressed above in
depth. For example, a single unified sequence for the multibehavior data is unmanageably too long to contain a sufficient amount of sparse behaviors (). In addition, it is difficult
to learn heterogeneous and personalized information from
the various types of behavior sequences with some coarsegrained vector representations (Shen, Ou, and Li 2022).
To this end, this paper proposes two novel modeling methods that captures the characteristics of multi-behavior sequences mentioned above, named DyMuS and DyMuS+ .
Our proposing methods encode each behavior sequences and
combine them, rather than handling a single sequence con-

Sequential Recommender Systems (SRSs) aim to predict the
next item that users will consume, by modeling the user interests within their item sequences. While most existing SRSs
focus on a single type of user behavior, only a few pay attention to multi-behavior sequences, although they are very common in real-world scenarios. It is challenging to effectively
capture the user interests within multi-behavior sequences,
because the information about user interests is entangled
throughout the sequences in complex relationships. To this
end, we first address the characteristics of multi-behavior sequences that should be considered in SRSs, and then propose
novel methods for Dynamic Multi-behavior Sequence modeling named DyMuS, which is a light version, and DyMuS+ ,
which is an improved version, considering the characteristics.
DyMuS first encodes each behavior sequence independently,
and then combines the encoded sequences using dynamic
routing, which dynamically integrates information required
in the final result from among many candidates, based on correlations between the sequences. DyMuS+ , furthermore, applies the dynamic routing even to encoding each behavior sequence to further capture the correlations at item-level. Moreover, we release a new, large and up-to-date dataset for multibehavior recommendation. Our experiments on DyMuS and
DyMuS+ show their superiority and the significance of capturing the characteristics of multi-behavior sequences.

Introduction
In the era of information overload, Recommender Systems
(RSs) have played an important role in helping users to discover which items to consume from a large amount of items,
by modeling the user interests. As the user interests on items
drift over time, Sequential Recommender Systems (SRSs)
(Zhou et al. 2022; Cho et al. 2021b; Hyun et al. 2022) which
capture the sequential dynamics of user interests have shown
outstanding performance.
Although there have been many studies for SRSs, most
of them consider a single type of behavior and only a few
studies take into account multi-behavior sequences. In realworld scenarios, however, users often take several kinds
of behaviors such as click, add-to-cart, add-to-favorite, and
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4199

