The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Beyond Graph Convolutional Network: An Interpretable Regularizer-Centered
Optimization Framework
Shiping Wang1,2 , Zhihao Wu1,2 , Yuhong Chen1,2 , Yong Chen3 *
1

2

College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University, China
Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Network Computing and Intelligent Information Processing, Fuzhou University, China
3
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
shipingwangphd@163.com, zhihaowu1999@gmail.com, yhchen2320@163.com, alphawolf.chen@gmail.com.
Abstract

mantics from neighbors according to the network topology,
which are revealed to be the most critical component.
Although GCN has behaved well in many machine learning tasks, lots of studies have pointed out its certain drawbacks and made efforts for further improvements. Bo et al.
(Bo et al. 2021) indicated that the propagation mechanism
could be considered as a special form of low-pass filter, and
presented a GCN with an adaptive frequency. Zhang et al.
(Zhang et al. 2021) argued that most GCN-based methods
ignored the global information and proposed SHNE, which
leveraged the structure and feature similarity to capture latent semantics. Wang et al. (Wang et al. 2020) revealed that
the original GCN aggregated information from node neighbors inadequately, and then developed a multi-channel GCN
by utilizing feature-based semantic graph. In spite of the performance boosts of these GCN variants, they didn’t establish
a generalized framework, i.e., these approaches understood
and enhanced GCN from certain and non-generalizable perspectives, thereby they are exceedingly difficult to be further
developed, and with limited interpretability.
Consequently, it is expected to construct a unified framework for various GCNs with better interpretability; however,
it is a pity that this kind of work is still in shortage. Zhao and
Akoglu (Zhao and Akoglu 2020) linked GCN and Graphregularized PCA (GPCA), and then proposed a multi-layer
network by stacking the GPCA layers. Zhu et al. (Zhu et al.
2021) attempted to interpret existing GCN-based methods
with a unified optimization framework, under which they devised an adjustable graph filter for a new GCN variant. Yang
et al. (Yang et al. 2021) designed a family of graph convolutional layers inspired by the updating rules of two typical
iterative algorithms. Although these efforts have contributed
to better understanding of GCNs, they only explained GCNs
in partial aspects, promoting the expectation of a more comprehensive analysis of GCNs.
To tackle the aforementioned issues, this paper induces an
interpretable regularizer-centered optimization framework,
which provides a novel perspective to digest various GCNs,
i.e., this framework captures the common essential properties of existing state-of-the-art GCN variants and could defines them just by devising different regularizers. Moreover,
in light of the analyses on current representative GCNs, we
find that most of the existing approaches only consider capturing the topological regularization, while the feature-based

Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have been attracting
widespread attentions due to their encouraging performance
and powerful generalizations. However, few work provide a
general view to interpret various GCNs and guide GCNs’ designs. In this paper, by revisiting the original GCN, we induce an interpretable regularizer-centerd optimization framework, in which by building appropriate regularizers we can
interpret most GCNs, such as APPNP, JKNet, DAGNN, and
GNN-LF/HF. Further, under the proposed framework, we devise a dual-regularizer graph convolutional network (dubbed
tsGCN1 ) to capture topological and semantic structures from
graph data. Since the derived learning rule for tsGCN contains an inverse of a large matrix and thus is time-consuming,
we leverage the Woodbury matrix identity and low-rank approximation tricks to successfully decrease the high computational complexity of computing infinite-order graph convolutions. Extensive experiments on eight public datasets demonstrate that tsGCN achieves superior performance against quite
a few state-of-the-art competitors w.r.t. classification tasks.

Introduction
Owing to the powerful ability to aggregate neighborhood information, Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) has been
successfully applied to diverse domains, such as computer
vision (Chen et al. 2019; Nie et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022),
recommender systems (Xu et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2022), privacy preserving (Hu et al. 2022), and traffic forecasting (Yu,
Yin, and Zhu 2018; Chen et al. 2020b). Rooted in a series
of theoretical foundations, GCN extends convolution operations to the non-Euclidean spaces and effectively propagates
label signals, and therefore its variants have been extensively
employed for a variety of graph-related tasks, including classification (Zhang et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2022; Chen et al.
2023; Wu et al. 2022), clustering (Fan et al. 2020; Zhu and
Koniusz 2021) and link prediction (Chen et al. 2020a; Halliwell 2022). In a nutshell, GCN generates embeddings with
the well-established graph convolutional layers gathering se* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Its code is available at https://github.com/ZhihaoWu99/tsGCN
and the supplementary material is uploaded to https://arxiv.org/abs/
2301.04318.

4693

