The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Data Imputation with Iterative Graph Reconstruction
Jiajun Zhong, Ning Gui* , Weiwei Ye
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, China
214711110@csu.edu.cn, ninggui@csu.edu.cn, 634948676@qq.com

Abstract

downstream tasks(Jäger, Allhorn, and Bießmann 2021). Machine learning methods such as k-nearest neighbors (Troyanskaya et al. 2001) and matrix completion (Hastie et al.
2015) can capture higher-order interactions between data
from both sample and feature perspectives. However, they
normally make strong assumptions about data distribution
or missing data mechanisms and hardly generalize to unseen samples (You et al. 2020). Some solutions, e.g. MIRACLE (Kyono et al. 2021), try to discover causal relations
between features which are only small parts of all possible relations. GINN (Spinelli, Scardapane, and Uncini 2020)
discovers relations between samples while failing to model
relations between samples and features. These methods typically fall short since they do not employ a data structure that
can simultaneously capture the intricate relations in features,
samples, and their combination.
A graph is a data structure that can describe relationships between entities. It can model complex relations between features and samples without restricting predefined
heuristics. Several Graph Neural Networks(GNNs)-based
approaches have been recently proposed for graph-based
data imputation. Those approaches generally transform tabular data into a bipartite graph with samples and features
viewed as two types of nodes and the observed feature values as edges (Berg, Kipf, and Welling 2017; You et al. 2020).
However, due to a lack of sample relations, those solutions
commonly treat all samples equally and only rely on different GNN algorithms to learn this pure bipartite graph. They
fail to use one basic observation, “similar sample should give
more information about missing values”. The observation,
we argued, demands us to differentiate the importance of
samples during the graph learning process.
Fig. 1 highlights the importance and difficulty in using the
latent samples relations for data imputation. The tabular data
with some missing data(Fig. 1a) can be easily transformed
into a bipartite graph (Fig. 1b) and learned with GNNs solutions. However, if we know the ground-truth samples, we
can form so-called friend networks by connecting similar
samples with additional edges, shown in Fig. 1b. If we can
fully exploit the friend network(by IGRM), the MAE of data
imputation significantly drops, as shown in Fig. 1c. It clearly
shows the importance of adopting the friend network. However, the large portion of missing data makes it hard to acquire accurate relations among samples. The cosine similar-

Effective data imputation demands rich latent “structure”
discovery capabilities from “plain” tabular data. Recent advances in graph neural networks-based data imputation solutions show their structure learning potentials by translating tabular data as bipartite graphs. However, due to a lack
of relations between samples, they treat all samples equally
which is against one important observation: “similar sample
should give more information about missing values.” This paper presents a novel Iterative graph Generation and Reconstruction framework for Missing data imputation(IGRM). Instead of treating all samples equally, we introduce the concept: “friend networks” to represent different relations among
samples. To generate an accurate friend network with missing
data, an end-to-end friend network reconstruction solution is
designed to allow for continuous friend network optimization
during imputation learning. The representation of the optimized friend network, in turn, is used to further optimize the
data imputation process with differentiated message passing.
Experiment results on eight benchmark datasets show that
IGRM yields 39.13% lower mean absolute error compared
with nine baselines and 9.04% lower than the second-best.
Our code is available at https://github.com/G-AILab/IGRM.

Introduction
Due to diverse reasons, missing data becomes a ubiquitous
problem and It can introduce an amount of bias and make
most machine learning methods inapplicable (Bertsimas,
Pawlowski, and Zhuo 2017). Missing data has been tackled by direct deletion or by data imputation. Deletion-based
methods discard incomplete samples and result in the loss
of important information especially when the missing ratio
is high (Luo et al. 2018). Data imputation is more plausible
as it estimates missing data with values based on some statistical or machine learning techniques (Lin and Tsai 2020)
and allows downstream machine learning methods normal
operation with the “completed” data (Muzellec et al. 2020).
Existing imputation methods discover latent relations in
tabular data from different angles and normally with diverse
assumptions. Simple statistical methods are feature-wise imputation, ignoring relations among features and might bias
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11399

