The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Causes of Stability in Dynamic Coalition Formation
Niclas Boehmer1 , Martin Bullinger2 , Anna Maria Kerkmann3
2

1
Algorithmics and Computational Complexity, Technische Universität Berlin
School of Computation, Information and Technology, Technische Universität München
3
Institut für Informatik, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf
niclas.boehmer@tu-berlin.de, martin.bullinger@in.tum.de, anna.kerkmann@hhu.de

Abstract

in the sense that, since a coalition structure is either stable
or not, we are only interested in finding these stable structures. The underlying assumption here is that we operate
in a centralized system where a (desirable) coalition structure can be created by a central authority. This paradigm has
only recently been complemented by interpreting deviations
of agents as a dynamic process. The goal here is to reach
stable coalition structures through decentralized individual
decisions (Brandt, Bullinger, and Wilczynski 2021; Brandt,
Bullinger, and Tappe 2022). Second, utility functions are
static. To demonstrate the implications of this assumption,
we describe a run-and-chase example, which is present in
many classes of hedonic games. Consider a situation where
there are only the two agents Alice and Bob. Alice wants
to be alone in her coalition, whereas Bob wants to be in a
joint coalition with Alice. It is clear that in the two possible
coalition structures, there is always an agent who wants to
change their situation. From a centralized perspective, this
simply means that no coalition structure has the prospect of
stability. In a distributed, dynamic setting where utilities are
static, the following occurs indefinitely: Whenever Alice and
Bob are in a joint coalition, then Alice leaves the coalition to
be alone. However, whenever Alice and Bob are in two separate coalitions, then Bob joins Alice. In practice, such an infinite situation is unreasonable: After playing run-and-chase
for a while, either Alice or Bob are likely to change their
behavior and therefore their preferences. On the one hand,
Bob might get frustrated because he is constantly left by Alice and therefore stops his efforts to join her. On the other
hand, Alice could realize the high effort that Bob makes to
be in a coalition with her and feels sufficient appreciation
to eventually accept Bob in her coalition. In both scenarios,
we reach a state that is stable because of the history of the
coalition formation process.

We study the formation of stable outcomes via simple dynamics in cardinal hedonic games, where the utilities of agents
change over time depending on the history of the coalition
formation process. Specifically, we analyze situations where
members of a coalition decrease their utility for a leaving
agent (resent) or increase their utility for a joining agent (appreciation). We show that in contrast to classical dynamics,
for resentful or appreciative agents, dynamics are guaranteed
to converge under mild conditions for various stability concepts. Thereby, we establish that both resent and appreciation
are strong stability-driving forces.

1

Introduction

Coalition formation is a vibrant topic in multi-agent systems that has been continuously researched during the last
decades. It concerns the question of dividing a set of agents,
for example, humans or machines, into disjoint coalitions
such as research teams. Agents carry preferences over these
coalition structures. A common assumption is that externalities, that is, the coalition structure outside one’s own
coalition, play no role. This is captured in the prominent
framework of hedonic games. Moreover, the desirability of
a coalition structure is usually measured with respect to stability. Abstractly speaking, a coalition structure is stable if
there is no agent or set of agents that can perform a beneficial deviation by joining existing coalitions or by forming
new coalitions.
There are two specific properties of hedonic games crucially influencing past research. First, the number of possible coalitions an agent can be part of is exponentially large.
Therefore, a repeatedly considered challenge is to come up
with reasonable succinctly representable settings. It is very
prominent in this context to aggregate utilities from cardinal
valuations of other agents. Second, most established stability
concepts suffer from non-existence under strong restrictions
which often leads to computational boundaries such as hardness of the decision problem whether a stable state exists.
Much of the research has therefore focused on identifying
suitable conditions guaranteeing stable states.
The dominant coalition formation framework is static in
two dimensions. First, stability is usually a static concept

In this paper, we model situations where the history influences the agents’ utilities, offering a new perspective on
the reachability of stable coalition structures. We study a dynamic coalition formation process where agents perform deviations based on stability concepts. However, in contrast
to previous work on dynamics, we assume that a deviation
has an effect on the perception of the deviator, resulting in
agents changing their utility for the deviator. We distinguish
two approaches. First, an agent might act resentfully in the
sense that, like Bob, she lowers her utility for an agent aban-

Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5499

