The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On the Complexity of PAC Learning in Hilbert Spaces
Sergei Chubanov
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Germany
sergei.chubanov@de.bosch.com

Abstract

the context of our paper, proper learning means learning a
polyhedron defined by t halfspaces (t-polyhedron), under
the assumption that there exists a t-polyhedron consistently
classifying the entire instance space. Similarly to the previous publications with which we compare our results, we
assume that the halfspaces defining a hypothetical groundtruth polyhedron do not contain any instance of the instance
space in their γ-margins, for some γ > 0.
Consistent polyhedral separation is a well-known problem which has been proved to be intractable even in the case
t = 2, as we have already mentioned. Despite to the NPhardness of exact separation with a given number of inequalities in finite-dimensional spaces, there are different nontrivial results concerning exponential bounds on the running
time of learning algorithms; see (Gottlieb et al. 2018). Our
contribution to this line of research is the following: First,
we propose a new algorithm allowing to improve existing
bounds on the running time of PAC learning algorithms for
the finite-dimensional case. Second, our algorithm is applicable to infinite-dimensional Hilbert spaces, in which case
it guarantees similar complexity bounds in terms of a model
of computation including inner products as elementary operations.
To the best of our knowledge, the current tightest bounds
for both proper and improper learning have been obtained
in (Gottlieb et al. 2018). There, the authors proposed algorithms for both proper and improper learning of polyhedral
concepts in finite-dimensional spaces. A follow-up work related to (Gottlieb et al. 2018) appeared recently in (Gottlieb
et al. 2022) with some corrections of the previous work. For
a more exact comparison, we give a brief summary of their
performance bounds compared to ours:
• (Gottlieb et al. 2022):
– Running time for proper classification:

We study the problem of binary classification from the point
of view of learning convex polyhedra in Hilbert spaces, to
which one can reduce any binary classification problem. The
problem of learning convex polyhedra in finite-dimensional
spaces is sufficiently well studied in the literature. We generalize this problem to that in a Hilbert space and propose an
algorithm for learning a polyhedron which correctly classifies at least 1 − ε of the distribution, with a probability of at
least 1 − δ, where ε and δ are given parameters. Also, as a
corollary, we improve some previous bounds for polyhedral
classification in finite-dimensional spaces.

Introduction
In general, the classification problem we are dealing with
can be formulated as follows: Find a binary classifier which
consistently classifies the training data such that the number of elementary operations involved in the description of
the classifier is as small as possible. The intuition behind
restricting the complexity of the classifier is based on the
well-known Occam’s razor principle; it has been proved (see
e.g. (Blumer et al. 1987, 1989)) that there is a relationship
between the complexity of a classifier and its prediction accuracy, in the sense of the probably approximately correct
(PAC) classification.
We study this problem from the point of view of polyhedral classification, where the concept class to be learned
consists of polyhedra in a given inner-product space. Polyhedral separability is always realizable by choosing a suitable kernel; i.e., our results are universally applicable to the
general case of binary classification.
One should note that, unless P = N P, we cannot hope
for a polynomial-time method for finding a polyhedral classifier defined by the minimum possible number of halfspaces
because even the problem of polyhedral separation in finitedimensional spaces by means of two halfspaces is NP-hard
(Megiddo 1996).
Our results and related work. We propose an algorithm
for both proper and improper learning of polyhedral concepts in inner-product spaces that can be finite-dimensional
Euclidean spaces or infinite-dimensional Hilbert spaces. In

mO(tγ

−2

log(γ −1 ))

,

where m is the sample complexity.
– Running time for improper classification:
mO(γ

−2

log(γ −1 ))

,

– Sample complexity:
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

m = O(Dε−1 log2 (ε−1 ) + log(δ −1 )),
7202

