The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Double Doubly Robust Thompson Sampling
for Generalized Linear Contextual Bandits
Wonyoung Kim1 , Kyungbok Lee2 , Myunghee Cho Paik2, 3 *
1

Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University
2
Department of Statistics, Seoul National University
3
Shepherd23 Inc.
wk2389@columbia.edu, turtle107@snu.ac.kr, myungheechopaik@snu.ac.kr
Abstract

variance of a reward is related to its mean and the regret
bound typically depends on the lower bound of the variance,
κ. Faury et al. (2020) demonstrated the regret bound free of
κ for a logistic case.
When we focus√ on the dependence of d on the regret
bound, an Õ(κ−1 dT ) regret bound has been achieved by
Li, Lu, and Zhou (2017), where Õ denotes big-O notation up
to logarithmic
√factors. For logistic models, Jun et al. (2021)
achieved Õ( dT ). These two methods used the approach
of Auer (2002) whose main idea is to carefully compose independent samples to develop an estimator and derive the
bound using this independence. However, to maintain independence, the developed estimator ignores many observed
rewards. Despite of this limitation, no existing algorithms
have achieved a regret bound sublinear in d without using
the approach of Auer (2002). We propose a novel contextual√bandit algorithm for generalized linear rewards with
Õ( κ−1 dT ) in several practical cases. To our knowledge,
this regret bound is firstly achieved without relying on the
approach of Auer (2002).
Our proposed algorithm is the first
√ among LinTS variants with a regret bound of order d for linear or generalized linear payoff. The proposed algorithm is equipped with
a novel estimator called double doubly robust (DDR) estimator which is a subclass of doubly robust (DR) estimators
with a tighter error bound than conventional DR estimators.
The DR estimators use contexts from unselected arms after imputing predicted responses using a class of imputation
estimators. Based on these estimators, Kim, Kim, and Paik
(2021) have recently proposed √
a LinTS variant for linear rewards which achieves an Õ(d T ) regret bound for several
practical cases. With our proposed DDR estimator, we develop a novel LinTS variant for generalized linear
√ rewards
which improves the regret bound by a factor of d.
We also demonstrate a logarithmic cumulative regret
bound under a margin condition. Obtaining bounds under
this margin condition is challenging because
it requires a
√
tight prediction error bound of order 1/ t for each round
t. Our DDR estimator, which has a tighter error bound than
DR estimators, enables us to derive a logarithmic cumulative
regret bound under the margin condition.
In our experiments, we demonstrate that our proposed
algorithm performs better with less a priori knowledge

We propose a novel algorithm for
pgeneralized linear contextual bandits (GLBs) with an Õ( κ−1 ϕ−1 T ) regret over T
rounds where ϕ is the minimum eigenvalue of the covariance of contexts and κ is a lower bound of the variance of
rewards. In several identified cases of ϕ−1 = O(d), where
d is the dimension of contexts, our result is the first regret
bound√for generalized linear bandits (GLBs) achieving the
Previous
order d without discarding the observed rewards.
√
approaches achieve the regret bound of order d by discarding the observed rewards, whereas our algorithm achieves
the bound incorporating contexts from all arms in our double doubly robust (DDR) estimator. The DDR estimator is
a subclass of doubly robust estimator but with a tighter error bound. We also provide an O(κ−1 ϕ−1 log(N T ) log T )
regret bound for N arms under a probabilistic margin condition. This is the first regret bound under the margin condition
for linear models or GLMs when contexts are different for
all arms but coefficients are common. We conduct empirical
studies using synthetic data and real examples, demonstrating
the effectiveness of our algorithm.

Introduction
In multi-armed bandits (MABs), a learner repeatedly
chooses an action or arm from action sets given in an environment and observes the reward for the chosen arm. The
goal is to find a rule for choosing arms to maximize the expected cumulative rewards. A linear contextual bandit is an
MAB with context vectors for each arm in which the expected reward is a linear function of the corresponding context vector. Popular contextual bandit algorithms include upper confidence bound (Abbasi-Yadkori, Pál, and Szepesvári
(2011), LinUCB) and Thompson sampling (Agrawal and
Goyal (2013), LinTS) whose theoretical properties have
been studied (Auer 2002; Chu et al. 2011; Abbasi-Yadkori,
Pál, and Szepesvári 2011; Agrawal and Goyal 2014). More
recently, extensions to generalized linear models (GLMs)
have received significant attention. The study by Filippi et al.
(2010) is one of the pioneering studies to propose contextual
bandits for GLMs with regret analysis. Abeille and Lazaric
(2017) extended LinTS to GLM rewards. In the GLM, the
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8300

