The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Attribute and Structure Preserving Graph Contrastive Learning
Jialu Chen, Gang Kou*
School of Business Administration, Faculty of Business Administration, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics
lukac@smail.swufe.edu.cn, kougang@swufe.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2020b; Hassani and Khasahmadi
2020). Typically, GCL methods first generate multiple views
for each instance through various data augmentation strategies, and then adopt graph neural networks as the backbone
encoder to obtain the corresponding representations for contrastive objectives. Researchers usually improve the performance and generalizability of GCL models by designing
novel data augmentation strategies (Zhu et al. 2021b; You
et al. 2021), or adjusting suitable contrastive objectives (Sun
et al. 2019; Peng et al. 2020b; Jiao et al. 2020).
While the success of GCLs, they ignore a key weakness
that built in the backbone encoder they use, i.e., homophily
assumption of graph neural networks, where nodes within
the same class tend to connect with each other. Since graphs
with different level of homophily are widespread in real
world, the homophily assumption may not always be satisfied, which restrict the performance of GNNs on general
data (Pei et al. 2020). Thus, exisiting GCLs based on graph
neural network encoder could also suffer from this issue and
thus lead to impaired performance. Hence, a natural question
emerges: When the knowledge of labels and downstream
tasks are unavailable, how to design the framework of contrastive learning so that it could capture comprehensive information for graphs with different levels of homophily?
Several recent works have studied dealing with graphs
with different homophily level in a supervised manner. For
example, Pei et al. (2020) proposes a geometric aggregation scheme for graph neural networks to overcome neighborhood structural information losing and long-range dependencies in non-homophilous graphs lacking. Zhu et al.
(2020a) combines a set of key designs that can boost learning from the graph structure in heterophily into a model. Jin
et al. (2021a) designs a universal propagation mechanism
which learns node embeddings by adaptively fusing information from 1-hop, 2-hop, and kNN neighbors. Jin et al.
(2021b) develops a feature preserving aggregation which
adaptively integrates graph structure and node attributes by
incoporating attribute graph. Lim et al. (2021) collects and
introduces non-homophilous datasets from a variety of application areas, and proposes a simple scalable learning
method for non-homophilous graphs.
However, designing graph contrastive learning methods
for graphs with different level of homophily could be challenging. First, adaptive views which could distinguish the

Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) has drawn much research
interest due to its strong ability to capture both graph structure
and node attribute information in a self-supervised manner.
Current GCL methods usually adopt Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) as the base encoder, which typically relies on the homophily assumption of networks and overlooks node similarity in the attribute space. There are many scenarios where
such assumption cannot be satisfied, or node similarity plays
a crucial role. In order to design a more robust mechanism, we
develop a novel attribute and structure preserving graph contrastive learning framework, named ASP, which comprehensively and efficiently preserves node attributes while exploiting graph structure. Specifically, we consider three different
graph views in our framework, i.e., original view, attribute
view, and global structure view. Then, we perform contrastive
learning across three views in a joint fashion, mining comprehensive graph information. We validate the effectiveness
of the proposed framework on various real-world networks
with different levels of homophily. The results demonstrate
the superior performance of our model over the representative baselines.

Introduction
Graph representation learning (GRL), which aims to learn
low-dimensional representations for graphs, has shown its
great potential for various application areas, such as graph
matching (Li et al. 2019), physics (Shlomi, Battaglia, and
Vlimant 2021), chemistry (Do, Tran, and Venkatesh 2018)
and biology (Zitnik, Agrawal, and Leskovec 2018). Due to
the scarcity of task-specific labeled graph data, recent research efforts for GRL methods have been devoted to selfsupervised learning on graphs, where only limited or no labels are needed (Xie et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022). Among
all these methods, graph contrastive learning (GCL), which
successfully applys contrastive learning from the field of vision and language to graph data, has drawn considerable
research attention. By maximizing the agreement between
jointly sampled positive views and drawing apart the distance between negative views, GCL methods have achieved
promising results on many graph-based tasks (Veličković
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7024

