The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Bayesian Optimization-Based Combinatorial Assignment*
Jakob Weissteiner1,3† , Jakob Heiss2,3† , Julien Siems1† and Sven Seuken1,3
1

University of Zurich
2
ETH Zurich
3
ETH AI Center
weissteiner@ifi.uzh.ch, jakob.heiss@math.ethz.ch, juliensiems@gmail.com, seuken@ifi.uzh.ch

Abstract

A mechanism that allows agents to report values for bundles
rather than just for individual items can achieve significantly
higher efficiency. However, this also implies that agents’
preferences are exponentially-sized (i.e., for m items there
are 2m different bundles), which implies that agents cannot
report values for all bundles. Therefore, the key challenge in
combinatorial assignment is the design of a preference elicitation (PE) algorithm that is (i) practically feasible w.r.t.
elicitation costs and (ii) smart, i.e., it should elicit the information that is “most useful” for achieving high efficiency.

We study the combinatorial assignment domain, which includes combinatorial auctions and course allocation. The
main challenge in this domain is that the bundle space grows
exponentially in the number of items. To address this, several papers have recently proposed machine learning-based
preference elicitation algorithms that aim to elicit only the
most important information from agents. However, the main
shortcoming of this prior work is that it does not model a
mechanism’s uncertainty over values for not yet elicited bundles. In this paper, we address this shortcoming by presenting a Bayesian optimization-based combinatorial assignment
(BOCA) mechanism. Our key technical contribution is to integrate a method for capturing model uncertainty into an iterative combinatorial auction mechanism. Concretely, we design
a new method for estimating an upper uncertainty bound that
can be used to define an acquisition function to determine
the next query to the agents. This enables the mechanism
to properly explore (and not just exploit) the bundle space
during its preference elicitation phase. We run computational
experiments in several spectrum auction domains to evaluate
BOCA’s performance. Our results show that BOCA achieves
higher allocative efficiency than state-of-the-art approaches.

1

1.1

Iterative Combinatorial Auctions (ICAs)

While the PE challenge is common to all combinatorial assignment problems, it has been studied most intensely in the
CA domain (Sandholm and Boutilier 2006). In CAs with
general valuations, the amount of communication needed
to guarantee full efficiency is exponential in the number
of items (Nisan and Segal 2006). Thus, practical CAs cannot provide efficiency guarantees. In practice, iterative combinatorial auctions (ICAs) are therefore employed, where
the auctioneer interacts with bidders over rounds, eliciting
a limited (and thus practically feasible) amount of information, aiming to find a highly efficient allocation. ICAs
are widely used; e.g., for the sale of licenses to build offshore wind farms (Ausubel and Cramton 2011). The provision of spectrum licenses via the combinatorial clock auction (CCA) (Ausubel, Cramton, and Milgrom 2006) has generated more than $20 billion in total revenue (Ausubel and
Baranov 2017). Thus, increasing the efficiency of such realworld ICAs by only 1% point translates into monetary gains
of hundreds of millions of dollars.

Introduction

Many economic problems require finding an efficient combinatorial assignment of multiple indivisible items to multiple agents. Popular examples include combinatorial auctions (CAs), combinatorial exchanges (CEs), and combinatorial course allocation. In CAs, heterogeneous items are allocated among a set of bidders, e.g., for the sale of spectrum
licenses (Cramton 2013). In CEs, items are allocated among
agents who can be sellers and buyers at the same time, e.g.,
for the reallocation of catch shares (Bichler, Fux, and Goeree 2019). In course allocation, course seats are allocated
among students at universities (Budish 2011).
In all these domains, agents have preferences over bundles of items. In particular, agents’ preferences may exhibit complementarities and substitutabilities among items.

1.2

ML-Powered Preference Elicitation

In recent years, researchers have used machine learning
(ML) to design smart PE algorithms. Most related to this paper is the work by Brero, Lubin, and Seuken (2018, 2021),
who developed the first practical ML-powered ICA that outperforms the CCA. The main idea of their mechanism is
two-fold: first, they train a separate support vector regression model to learn each bidder’s full value function from
a small set of bids; second, they solve an ML-based winner
determination problem (WDP) to determine the allocation
with the highest predicted social welfare, and they use this
allocation to generate the next set of queries to all bidders.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* The full paper including appendix is available on arXiv via:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.14698.
†
These authors contributed equally.

5858

