The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Practical Disruption of Image Translation Deepfake Networks
Nataniel Ruiz1 , Sarah Adel Bargal2 , Cihang Xie3 , Stan Sclaroff1
1
Boston University
Georgetown University
3
University of California, Santa Cruz
nruiz9@bu.edu, sarah.bargal@georgetown.edu, cixie@ucsc.edu, sclaroff@bu.edu
2

Abstract
By harnessing the latest advances in deep learning, imageto-image translation architectures have recently achieved impressive capabilities. Unfortunately, the growing representational power of these architectures has prominent unethical uses. Among these, the threats of (1) face manipulation
(“DeepFakes”) used for misinformation or pornographic use
(2) “DeepNude” manipulations of body images to remove
clothes from individuals, etc. Several works tackle the task of
disrupting such image translation networks by inserting imperceptible adversarial attacks into the input image. Nevertheless, these works have limitations that may result in disruptions that are not practical in the real world. Specifically,
most works generate disruptions in a white-box scenario, assuming perfect knowledge about the image translation network. The few remaining works that assume a black-box scenario require a large number of queries to successfully disrupt
the adversary’s image translation network. In this work we
propose Leaking Transferable Perturbations (LTP), an algorithm that significantly reduces the number of queries needed
to disrupt an image translation network by dynamically repurposing previous disruptions into new query efficient disruptions.

Figure 1: Our approach (LTP) protects face images from being manipulated by an image translation deepfake network.
After applying an imperceptible filter on the input image, the
deepfake system is forced to generate a corrupted output.

allow for transformation of images such as making someone smile and making them appear older or younger, among
other interventions. In parallel, image translation networks
have been re-purposed to generate nude pictures of clothed
bodies in what is called a “DeepNude” transformation.
These technologies can be used in malicious ways to produce undesirable content of someone without their consent.
This concern has already materialized in several ways, including creating non-consensual pornographic footage and
producing videos with fake political speeches. Attempts to
detect manipulated media are underway and there is an
“arms race” between detecting deepfakes (Rossler et al.
2019; Yang, Li, and Lyu 2019; Li and Lyu 2019; Wang et al.)
and evasion of deepfake detection (Neekhara et al. 2020;
Gandhi and Jain 2020). Instead of detecting deepfakes after the fact, there is work (Ruiz, Bargal, and Sclaroff 2020;
Yeh et al. 2020; Aneja, Markhasin, and Niessner 2021) that
proposes using white-box adversarial attacks to protect an
image from modification by disrupting the functioning of
image translation networks. While these works assume that
one has access to the model’s structure, weights and gradients, in a real scenario, there is a high probability that these
might not be accessible. In contrast, in this work, we focus on the black-box scenario where we solely have limited
query access to the deepfake model instead of unlimited access to the model and its internals.
An image translation-based online deepfake generation
service usually allows for API queries where a user sends
an image and receives the translated output (e.g. FaceApp,
DeepNude). This is an instance of the image translation

Introduction
Since its inception as an encoder-decoder based faceswapping technique (Güera and Delp 2018) the term “deepfake” has adopted a broader meaning and can be used
to refer to any altered media of someone’s likeness. Recently there have been remarkable advances in face modification algorithms and controllable face synthesis (Thies
et al. 2016, 2018; Wiles, Sophia K., and Zisserman 2018;
Kim et al. 2018; Ranjan et al. 2018; Usman et al. 2019;
Geng, Cao, and Tulyakov 2019; Nguyen-Phuoc et al. 2019;
Ghosh et al. 2020). Some algorithms only need a single
image and can create modified versions of that person under different poses, expressions, lighting and other attribute
changes (Choi et al. 2018; Pumarola et al. 2018; Choi et al.
2019). The most advanced algorithms can create puppeteering videos using as few as one image (Zakharov et al.
2019; Tewari et al. 2020). This few-shot deepfake technology based on image translation networks has gained popularity in the mainstream with apps such as FaceApp that
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14478

