The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Unsupervised Paraphrasing under Syntax Knowledge
Tianyuan Liu, Yuqing Sun* , Jiaqi Wu, Xi Xu, Yuchen Han, Cheng Li, Bin Gong
School of Software, Shandong University
zodiacg@foxmail.com, sun yuqing@sdu.edu.cn, oofelvis@163.com,
{sidxu,hanyc}@mail.sdu.edu.cn, 609172827@qq.com, gb@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract

Simple English Wikipedia serves as a helpful resource for
kids or second-language educations. Since this kind of resources requires a lot of human efforts, the syntax controlled
paraphrasing could be an alternative way to provide the good
quality sentences to such resources.
For the syntax controlled paraphrase generation, there are
two aspects: the conformation on the structure-level syntax
in the template and the word-level syntax soundness of the
generated sentence. The former refers to the high level structure of the sentence, such as the order of core components
and clauses. The representative way to achieve this goal is to
disentangle the semantic and syntax guidance in paraphrase
generation. Some works discard the structural information
when encoding the original sentence by removing the word
position information in sentence (Huang and Chang 2021).
Since the syntax structure guidance is encoded in an implicit
way, the paraphrase generator do not check the syntax enforcement explicitly, leading to possible grammatical mistakes in the results. To explicitly evaluate the syntax conformation, some works use a pretrained parser to evaluate
the generated sentences and feed the result to the network
as a syntactic indicator for training the model (Kumar et al.
2020). These methods emphasize the consistency of the generated text at the top level of syntax template without the explicit word level control in the generation process. Thus, it
is difficult to ensure the word level syntactic soundness of
the generated paraphrase. But the word-level syntax soundness plays an important role for the generated sentence. For
example, in the downstream application of adversarial example generation, a paraphrase with wrong grammar would
be easily identified and rejected by the attacked model.
Another kind of representative approaches focuses on the
word level syntax soundness of the generated paraphrase.
Casas et al. adopt the dependency parsing tree as the form
of syntax template. It explicitly traverses the parsing tree
and iteratively generates the paraphrase (Casas, Fonollosa,
and Costa-jussà 2020). Since the dependency parsing trees
provides direct word level syntax relationships, the method
generates paraphrase with good syntax quality. However, the
generated paraphrases have the semantics problem as the
sentence may be drifted from the original sentence meaning.
Thus, it is not applicable for many downstream applications.
Inspired by the theory of syntagmatic and paradigmatic
relations in linguistics (Bowman et al. 2016), we propose

The soundness of syntax is an important issue for the paraphrase generation task. Most methods control the syntax of
paraphrases by embedding the syntax and semantics in the
generation process, which cannot guarantee the syntactical
correctness of the results. Different from them, in this paper
we investigate the structural patterns of word usages termed
as the word composable knowledge and integrate it into the
paraphrase generation to control the syntax in an explicit way.
This syntax knowledge is pretrained on a large corpus with
the dependency relationships and formed as the probabilistic functions on the word-level syntactical soundness. For the
sentence-level correctness, we design a hierarchical syntax
structure loss to quantitatively verify the syntactical soundness of the paraphrase against the given dependency template.
Thus, the generation process can select the appropriate words
with consideration on both semantics and syntax. The proposed method is evaluated on a few paraphrase datasets. The
experimental results show that the quality of paraphrases by
our proposed method outperforms the compared methods, especially in terms of syntax correctness.

Introduction
The paraphrase task aims to generate different expressions
having the similar meanings with a given text (McKeown
1983). It requires both understanding the semantics of original text and generating a proper sentence, which is regarded
as an advanced natural language processing task. There are
some supervised (Li et al. 2019) and unsupervised paraphrasing methods (Wieting, Mallinson, and Gimpel 2017).
But they do not consider the syntax correctness, which
makes the generated sentences not applicable for many human centered downstream tasks.
In recent years, the syntax controlled paraphrase problem catches much attention from the academia (Kumar et al.
2020; Iyyer et al. 2018). Since there are more and more
applications demanding the syntax correctness of the paraphrases, such as text summarization (Zhao et al. 2018), machine translation (Zhou, Sperber, and Waibel 2019), and text
simplification (Coster and Kauchak 2011) and recommendation (Xie et al. 2022). For example, a simplified text like
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13273

