The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Generalized Cell Type Annotation and Discovery for Single-Cell RNA-Seq Data
Yuyao Zhai1 * , Liang Chen4 * , Minghua Deng1, 2, 3†
1

School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
2
Center for Statistical Science, Peking University
3
Center for Quantitative Biology, Peking University
4
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
zhaiyuyao@stu.pku.edu.cn, chenliang260@huawei.com, dengmh@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

and Yanai 2018; Xie et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2021). However, this assumption is difficult to satisfy for data in the
wild. To take into account a more realistic situation, many
researchers have begun to settle the open-set scenario, that
is Cr ⊂ Ct (Kimmel and Kelley 2020; Lotfollahi et al. 2022;
Chen et al. 2022a,b). For ease of understanding, we define
the cell types shared by the reference and target data as seen
cell types and the cell types that only exist in the target data,
but not in the reference data, as novel cell types.
Under the open-set assumption, many methods have been
continuously proposed to solve this cell annotation problem,
setting a goal whereby target cells are either labeled with
seen cell types or uniformly classified into an “unassigned”
group (De Kanter et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2021). Although they
have achieved remarkable progress, simply annotating cells
from novel cell types with an “unassigned” label is not conducive to subsequent downstream analysis, and it is universally vital to cluster them according to different cell types.
Besides, the distribution shift of gene expression between
reference and target data, namely batch effect, also affects
annotation accuracy of the model (Shaham et al. 2017; Wang
et al. 2019b; Lakkis et al. 2021). Thus, this paper focuses on
a realistic and challenging scenario for cell annotation called
generalized cell type annotation and discovery where cells
in novel cell types are given cluster labels instead of “unassigned.” Naturally, it can be argued that we could use the
annotation methods for an open-set scenario to find “unassigned” cells first and then use clustering methods to divide
them into groups. However, we show that such a two-step
approach does not work well in practice. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a new annotation strategy dedicated to addressing this new setting in an end-to-end framework.
Here, we propose a novel method called scGAD for Generalized cell type Annotation and Discovery. It efficiently
achieves label transfer over seen cell types and group packing of novel cell types. First, we build the intrinsic correspondences on seen and novel cell types by retrieving geometrically and semantically mutual nearest neighbors as anchor pairs. To reduce the potential negative impact of incorrectly identified anchors, we introduce a connection-aware
attention mechanism to weigh the supervision of anchors.
To transfer the known label information from reference data
to target data and aggregate the new semantic knowledge
only in the target data, we design a soft anchor-based self-

The rapid development of single-cell RNA sequencing
(scRNA-seq) technology allows us to study gene expression
heterogeneity at the cellular level. Cell annotation is the basis
for subsequent downstream analysis in single-cell data mining. Existing methods rarely explore the fine-grained semantic knowledge of novel cell types absent from the reference
data and usually susceptible to batch effects on the classification of seen cell types. Taking into consideration these limitations, this paper proposes a new and practical task called
generalized cell type annotation and discovery for scRNAseq data. In this task, cells of seen cell types are given class
labels, while cells of novel cell types are given cluster labels
instead of a unified “unassigned” label. To address this problem, we carefully design a comprehensive evaluation benchmark and propose a novel end-to-end algorithm framework
called scGAD. Specifically, scGAD first builds the intrinsic correspondence across the reference and target data by
retrieving the geometrically and semantically mutual nearest neighbors as anchor pairs. Then we introduce an anchorbased self-supervised learning module with a connectivityaware attention mechanism to facilitate model prediction capability on unlabeled target data. To enhance the inter-type
separation and intra-type compactness, we further propose a
confidential prototypical self-supervised learning module to
uncover the consensus category structure of the reference and
target data. Extensive results on massive real datasets demonstrate the superiority of scGAD over various state-of-the-art
clustering and annotation methods.

Introduction
As more and more well-annotated scRNA-seq reference data
become available, many new automatic annotation methods
sprung up in order to simplify the cell annotation process on
unlabeled target data (Cao et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020b,c;
Yuan, Chen, and Deng 2022). On this basis, assume that Cr
and Ct represent the label sets of reference data and target
data, respectively. In earlier developed cell annotation methods, it is assumed that all cell types in the target data need
to be present in the reference data, that is Ct ⊆ Cr (Wagner
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5402

