The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Structured Case-Based Reasoning for
Inference-Time Adaptation of Text-to-SQL Parsers
Abhijeet Awasthi, Soumen Chakrabarti, Sunita Sarawagi
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, India
{awasthi,soumen,sunita}@cse.iitb.ac.in

Abstract
Inference-time adaptation methods for semantic parsing are
useful for leveraging examples from newly-observed domains
without repeated fine-tuning. Existing approaches typically
bias the decoder by simply concatenating input-output example pairs (cases) from the new domain at the encoder’s input in
a Seq-to-Seq model. Such methods cannot adequately leverage
the structure of logical forms in the case examples. We propose StructCBR, a structured case-based reasoning approach,
which leverages subtree-level similarity between logical forms
of cases and candidate outputs, resulting in better decoder decisions. For the task of adapting Text-to-SQL models to unseen
schemas, we show that exploiting case examples in a structured manner via StructCBR offers consistent performance
improvements over prior inference-time adaptation methods
across five different databases. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to attempt inference-time adaptation of Textto-SQL models, and harness trainable structured similarity
between subqueries.

Introduction
Natural language interfaces to databases (Zelle and Mooney
1996; Tang and Mooney 2000; Popescu, Etzioni, and Kautz
2003) enable access to structured information for users who
are not familiar with languages like SQL by parsing user
provided text-queries into executable SQLs. Text-to-SQL semantic parsing is a challenging task that not only demands
robust natural language understanding but simultaneously
requires reasoning over the schema structure of the databases.
Databases containing similar information (e.g. census in various countries) may be designed using diverse schema structures, thus making it hard for the model to generalize across
schemas unseen during training. Hence, Text-to-SQL models
often struggle to parse text queries for a new schema in a zeroshot manner (Suhr et al. 2020; Lee, Polozov, and Richardson
2021; Hazoom, Malik, and Bogin 2021). In practice, a small
number of Text-to-SQL examples in the target schema are
often essential for successful model adaptation. However,
finetuning a Text-to-SQL model for each new database is
not generally practical, for the following reasons: (i) Huge
variation in database schema makes it tedious to collect sufficiently large finetuning datasets for each schema, while
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12536

finetuning on small datasets is unavoidably fraught with over–
fitting, catastrophic forgetting, and instability w.r.t. random
seeds. (ii) Finetuning may take considerable time, preventing
fast incorporation of new data into the model. (iii) Often,
a single large-footprint model serves multiple clients with
diverse databases at the same time. Fine-tuning a separate
model for each database is considered too resource-intensive
in such multi-tenant scenarios.
Therefore, we focus on fast online adaptation of Textto-SQL models without parameter updates, until the next
cycle of finetuning is deemed feasible. Recently, case-based
reasoning (CBR), which utilizes a memory of past labeled
examples as cases, has emerged as a promising paradigm of
inference-time adaptation without finetuning (Das et al. 2020,
2021; Pasupat, Zhang, and Guu 2021; Gupta et al. 2021).
CBR has been found effective for tasks like knowledge graph
completion (KGC) (Das et al. 2020), question answering over
knowledge bases (KBQA) (Das et al. 2021), task-oriented
semantic parsing (Pasupat, Zhang, and Guu 2021; Gupta
et al. 2021), translation (Khandelwal et al. 2021), and
text-based games (Atzeni et al. 2022). However, many prior
CBR approaches designed around Seq2Seq architectures
simply concatenate input-output cases with the current input
at the encoder (Das et al. 2021; Pasupat, Zhang, and Guu
2021; Gupta et al. 2021). These methods do not leverage the
structure of logical forms (query plan trees) in case examples.
In response, we propose StructCBR, a structured CBR
approach that directly exploits sub-tree level similarities
between the candidate outputs and the case examples
for adapting a Text-to-SQL model to a new schema. We
start with SmBoP (Rubin and Berant 2021), a recent
semi-auto-regressive architecture that decodes query trees
bottom-up, respecting the structure of SQL grammar
production rules, instead of left-to-right token-level decoding
in Seq2Seq models (Guo et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020;
Scholak et al. 2021; Scholak, Schucher, and Bahdanau
2021). We implement a novel structured case memory
lookup module to boost scores of promising candidate
trees using sub-tree level similarity with case trees under
similar input context. This similarity is trainable. We show
that explicitly-learned structured memory lookup leads
to more accurate transfer from cases, compared to prior
inference-time adaptation methods such as ConcatCBR and

