The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Unbalanced CO-optimal Transport
Quang Huy Tran1,2 , Hicham Janati3 , Nicolas Courty1 , Rémi Flamary2 ,
Ievgen Redko4 , Pinar Demetci5, 6 , Ritambhara Singh5, 6
1
Université Bretagne Sud, IRISA
CMAP, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris
3
LTCI, Télécom Paris, IP Paris
4
Univ. Lyon, UJM-Saint-Etienne, CNRS, UMR 5516
5
Center for Computational Molecular Biology, Brown University
6
Department of Computer Science, Brown University
{quang-huy.tran, nicolas.courty}@univ-ubs.fr, hicham.janati@telecom-paris.fr,
remi.flamary@polytechnique.edu, ievgen.redko@univ-st-etienne.fr,
pinardemetci@gmail.com, ritambhara@brown.edu
2

Abstract
Optimal transport (OT) compares probability distributions by
computing a meaningful alignment between their samples. COoptimal transport (COOT) takes this comparison further by
inferring an alignment between features as well. While this approach leads to better alignments and generalizes both OT and
Gromov-Wasserstein distances, we provide a theoretical result
showing that it is sensitive to outliers that are omnipresent
in real-world data. This prompts us to propose unbalanced
COOT for which we provably show its robustness to noise in
the compared datasets. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first such result for OT methods in incomparable spaces.
With this result in hand, we provide empirical evidence of this
robustness for the challenging tasks of heterogeneous domain
adaptation with and without varying proportions of classes
and simultaneous alignment of samples and features across
single-cell measurements.

Introduction
The last decade has witnessed many successful applications
of optimal transport (OT) (Monge 1781; Kantorovich 1942)
in machine learning, namely in domain adaptation (Courty
et al. 2016), generative adversarial networks (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017), classification (Frogner et al. 2015),
dictionary learning (Rolet, Cuturi, and Peyré 2016), semisupervised learning (Solomon et al. 2014). When the supports of the probability measures lie in the same ground
metric space, it is natural to use the distance defined by the
metric to induce the cost, which leads to the famous Wasserstein distance (Villani 2003). When they do not, one can rely
on the idea of Gromov-Hausdorff distance (Gromov 1981)
and its equivalent reformulations (Gromov 1999; Kalton and
Ostrovskii 1999; Burago, Burago, and Ivanov 2001), and
adapt them to the setting of metric measure spaces (Gromov
1999). This results in, for example, the Gromov-Wasserstein
(GW) distance (Mémoli 2007, 2011; Sturm 2012), which
has been widely used in many applications, namely in shape
matching (Mémoli 2011), comparing kernel matrices (Peyré,
Cuturi, and Solomon 2016), graphs (Vayer et al. 2019; Xu
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10006

et al. 2019; Xu, Luo, and Carin 2019), computational biology
(Demetci et al. 2022), heterogeneous domain adaptation (Yan
et al. 2018), correspondence alignment (Solomon et al. 2016),
machine translation (Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola 2018).
By construction, the GW distance can only provide the
sample alignment that best preserves the intrinsic geometry of
the distributions and, as such, compares square pairwise relationship matrices. The CO-Optimal transport (COOT) (Redko
et al. 2020; Chowdhury et al. 2021) goes beyond these limits by simultaneously learning two independent (feature and
sample) correspondences, and thus provides greater flexibility
over the GW distance in terms of usage and interpretability.
First, it allows us to measure similarity between arbitrary-size
matrices. An interesting use case is, for instance, on tabular
data, which are usually expressed as a matrix whose rows
represent samples and columns represent features. For the
GW distance, the similarity or distance matrix (or any square
matrix derived from the data) must be calculated in advance
and the effect of the individual variables is lost during this
computation. On the other hand, COOT can bypass this step
as it can use either the tabular data directly or the similarity
matrices as inputs. Second, COOT provides both sample and
feature correspondences. These feature correspondences are
also interpretable and allow to recover relations between the
features of two different datasets even when they do not lie
in the same space.
Similar to classical OT, COOT enforces hard constraints on
the marginal distributions both between samples and features.
These constraints lead to two main limitations: (1) imbalanced datasets where samples or features are re-weighted
cannot be accurately compared; (2) mass transportation must
be exhaustive: outliers, if any, must be matched regardless
of the cost they induce. To circumvent these limitations, we
propose to relax the mass preservation constraints in the
COOT distance and study a broadly applicable and general
OT framework that includes several well-studied cases presented in Table 1.
Related work. To relax the OT marginal constraints, a
straightforward solution is to control the difference between
the marginal distributions of the transportation plan and the

