The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Constraint Optimization over Semirings∗
A. Pavan 1 , r Kuldeep S. Meel2 , r N. V. Vinodchandran 3 , r Arnab Bhattacharyya2
1
Iowa State University
National University of Singapore
3
University of Nebraska-Lincoln

2

1

Abstract

Introduction

Classically, propositional formulae are interpreted over the
Boolean semiring B = ({F, T}, ∨, ∧, F, T) which is the standard semantics for the logical truth. In this setting, the variables take one of the two values T (true) or F (false). However, it is natural to extend the semantics to other semirings.
Here, the idea is to interpret logical formulae when the variables take values over a semiring K = (K, +, ·, 0, 1). Such
interpretations provide richer information beyond the truth
or falsity of a statement and have applications in several areas such as databases, AI, logic, and security (see (Imieliński
and Lipski Jr 1989; Fuhr and Rölleke 1997; Zimányi 1997;
Cui, Widom, and Wiener 2000; Cui 2002; Grädel and Tannen 2020) and references therein). In particular, semiring
provenance analysis has been successfully applied in several software systems, such as Orchestra and Propolis (see,
e.g., (Amsterdamer, Deutch, and Tannen 2011; Deutch et al.
2014; Foster, Green, and Tannen 2008; Green 2011; Tannen
2013)).
Examples of semirings that are studied in the literature include Viterbi semiring, fuzzy semiring, min-max or access
control semiring, and tropical semiring. Semantics over the
Viterbi semiring V = ([0, 1], max, ·, 0, 1) has applications
in database provenance, where x ∈ [0, 1] is interpreted as
a confidence score (Grädel and Tannen 2020; Green, Karvounarakis, and Tannen 2007; Tannen 2017; Grädel and
Mrkonjic 2021), in probabilistic parsing, in probabilistic
CSPs, and in Hidden Markov Models (Viterbi 1967; Klein
and Manning 2003; Bistarelli, Montanari, and Rossi 1995).
The access control semiring can be used as a tool in security specifications (Grädel and Tannen 2020). Other semirings of interest include the tropical semiring, used in cost
analysis and algebraic formulation for shortest path algorithms (Mohri 2002), and fuzzy semirings used in the context of fuzzy CSPs (Bistarelli, Montanari, and Rossi 1995).
Optimization problems over Boolean interpretations have
been central in many application as well as foundation areas.
Indeed, the classical satisfiability problem is determining
whether a formula φ(x1 , · · · , xn ) has an interpretation/assignment over the Boolean semiring that evaluates to True.
Even though semiring semantics naturally appear in a variety of applications, the optimization problems over semirings, other than the Boolean semiring, have not received

Interpretations of logical formulas over semirings (other than
the Boolean semiring) have applications in various areas of
computer science including logic, AI, databases, and security. Such interpretations provide richer information beyond
the truth or falsity of a statement. Examples of such semirings
include Viterbi semiring, min-max or access control semiring, tropical semiring, and fuzzy semiring.
The present work investigates the complexity of constraint
optimization problems over semirings. The generic optimization problem we study is the following: Given a propositional
formula ϕ over n variable and a semiring (K, +, ·, 0, 1), find
the maximum value over all possible interpretations of ϕ over
K. This can be seen as a generalization of the well-known
satisfiability problem (a propositional formula is satisfiable
if and only if the maximum value over all interpretations/assignments over the Boolean semiring is 1). A related problem is to find an interpretation that achieves the maximum
value. In this work, we first focus on these optimization problems over the Viterbi semiring, which we call optConfVal
and optConf.
We first show that for general propositional formulas in negation normal form, optConfVal and optConf are in FPNP . We
then investigate optConf when the input formula ϕ is represented in the conjunctive normal form. For CNF formulae,
we first derive an upper bound on the value of optConf as
a function of the number of maximum satisfiable clauses. In
particular, we show that if r is the maximum number of satisfiable clauses in a CNF formula with m clauses, then its
optConf value is at most 1/4m−r . Building on this we establish that optConf for CNF formulae is hard for the complexity class FPNP[log] . We also design polynomial-time approximation algorithms and establish an inapproximability
for optConfVal. We establish similar complexity results for
these optimization problems over other semirings including
tropical, fuzzy, and access control semirings.

∗

The authors decided to forgo the old convention of alphabetical
ordering of authors in favor of a randomized ordering, denoted by
r . The publicly verifiable record of the randomization is available
at https://www.aeaweb.org/journals/policies/random-author-order/
search
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4070

