The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Optimistic Whittle Index Policy: Online Learning for Restless Bandits
Kai Wang* †1 , Lily Xu* †1 , Aparna Taneja2 , Milind Tambe1,2
1

Harvard University
2
Google Research
{kaiwang, lily xu}@g.harvard.edu, {aparnataneja, milindtambe}@google.com

Abstract

Even when the transition dynamics are given, planning
an optimal policy for RMABs is PSPACE-hard (Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis 1994) due to the state-dependent reward and combinatorial action space. To compute an approximate planning solution to RMABs, the Whittle index
policy (Whittle 1988) defines a “Whittle index” for each arm
as an estimate of the future value if acted upon, then acts on
the arms with the K largest indices. The Whittle index policy is shown to be asymptotically optimal (Weber and Weiss
1990) and is commonly adopted as a scalable solution to
RMAB problems (Hsu 2018; Kadota et al. 2016).
However, in many real-world applications of RMABs,
transition dynamics are often unknown in advance. The
learner must strategically query arms to learn the underlying
transition probabilities while simultaneously achieving high
reward. Accordingly, in this paper we focus on the challenge
of online learning in RMABs with unknown transitions. We
focus on the Whittle index policy due to its scalability and
consider a fixed-length episodic RMAB setting.

Restless multi-armed bandits (RMABs) extend multi-armed
bandits to allow for stateful arms, where the state of each
arm evolves restlessly with different transitions depending on
whether that arm is pulled. Solving RMABs requires information on transition dynamics, which are often unknown upfront. To plan in RMAB settings with unknown transitions,
we propose the first online learning algorithm based on the
Whittle index policy, using an upper confidence bound (UCB)
approach to learn transition dynamics. Specifically, we estimate confidence bounds of the transition probabilities and
formulate a bilinear program to compute optimistic Whittle indices using these estimates.
Our algorithm, UCWhittle,
√
achieves sublinear O(H T log T ) frequentist regret to solve
RMABs with unknown transitions in T episodes with a constant horizon H. Empirically, we demonstrate that UCWhittle leverages the structure of RMABs and the Whittle index
policy solution to achieve better performance than existing
online learning baselines across three domains, including one
constructed from a real-world maternal and childcare dataset.

Main contributions We present UCWhittle, an upper confidence bound (UCB) algorithm that uses the Whittle index
policy to achieve the first sublinear frequentist regret guarantee for RMABs. Our algorithm maintains confidence bounds
for every transition probability across all arms based on prior
observations. Using these bounds, we define a bilinear program to solve for optimistic transition probabilities — the
transition probabilities that yield the highest future reward.
These optimistic transition probabilities enable us to compute an optimistic Whittle index for each arm to inform a
Whittle index policy. Our UCWhittle algorithm leverages
the structure of RMABs and the Whittle index solution to
decompose the policy across individual arms, greatly reducing the computational cost of finding an optimistic solution
compared to other UCB-based solutions (Auer and Ortner
2006; Jaksch, Auer, and Ortner 2010).
Theoretically, we analyze the frequentist regret of
UCWhittle. The frequentist regret is the worst-case regret
incurred from unknown transition dynamics; in contrast, the
Bayesian regret is the regret averaged over all possible transitions from a prior distribution. In this paper, we define regret in terms of the relaxed Lagrangian of the RMAB —
to make the objective tractable — which upper bounds the
primal RMAB problem. We show that UCWhittle achieves

Introduction
Restless multi-armed bandits (RMABs) (Whittle 1988) generalize multi-armed bandits by introducing states for each
arm. RMABs are commonly used to model sequential
scheduling problems with limited resources such as in clinical health (Villar, Bowden, and Wason 2015), online advertising (Meshram, Gopalan, and Manjunath 2016), and
energy-efficient scheduling (Borkar et al. 2017). As with
stochastic combinatorial bandits (Chen, Wang, and Yuan
2013), the RMAB learner must repeatedly pull K out of N
arms at each timestep. Unlike stochastic bandits, the reward
distribution of each arm in an RMAB depends on that arm’s
state, which transitions based on a Markov decision process
(MDP) depending on whether the arm is pulled. These problems are called “restless” as arms may change state regardless of whether they are pulled. The reward at each timestep
is the sum of rewards across all arms, including arms not
acted upon.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work done during an internship at Google Research.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10131

