The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Counterfactual Dynamics Forecasting — a New Setting of Quantitative Reasoning
Yanzhu Liu, Ying Sun, Joo-Hwee Lim
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R) & Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore
liu yanzhu@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, suny@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, joohwee@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract

Rodriguez 2021), graph data (Bajaj et al. 2021) and so on.
The task targets on the interpretability of machine learning
algorithm. Counterfactual data augmentation aims to generate more training instances by sampling from a counterfactual data distribution (Kaushik, Hovy, and Lipton 2019)
(Pitis, Creager, and Garg 2020). Counterfactual treatment
effect estimation infers the expected difference between outcomes with and without the treatment assignment from observational data (Lu et al. 2020). Only partial observation
on potential outcomes can be made because individual instances cannot receive and refuse intervention assignment
simultaneously. Moreover, the intervention is not independent. It is affected by instance features and latent exogenous
variables. Counterfactual regret minimization solving Imperfect Information Games aims to plan the successive strategy under uncertainty about the opponent’s information (Li
et al. 2019). However, none of these problem statements focus on simulating the procedure of human rethinking, which
consists of three aspects: a) there is factual observation as
reference or demonstration; b) limited differences lie between factual and counterfactual initial conditions; c) the
imagination world can be described as a dynamical system
of multiple subjects with continuous evolution and instantaneous interactive events between them.

Rethinking and introspection are important elements of human intelligence. To mimic these capabilities, counterfactual
reasoning has attracted attention of AI researchers recently,
which aims to forecast the alternative outcomes for hypothetical scenarios (“what-if”). However, most existing approaches
focused on qualitative reasoning (e.g., causal-effect relationship). It lacks a well-defined description of the differences between counterfactuals and facts, as well as how these differences evolve over time. This paper introduces a new problem
formulation — counterfactual dynamics forecasting — which
is described in middle-level abstraction under the structural
causal models (SCM) framework and derived as ordinary differential equations (ODEs) as low-level quantitative computation. Based on it, we propose a method to infer counterfactual dynamics considering the factual dynamics as demonstration. The experimental results on two dynamical systems
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction
“It may happen that small differences in the initial conditions produce very great ones in the final phenomena” —
Henri Poincaré, 1908
Looking back to the past, we often imagine how things
could have been different if the situation was changed. With
regret or relief, we learn the lessons for better future decisions. While the estimation of the antecedents’ development
are often not accurate in human brains, in fact, optimists’
and pessimists’ assessment might be worlds apart. Recently,
Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) has engaged in imitating this important capability of human intelligence. Although it is challenging to equip AI agents with the counterfactual imagination, by nature they have advantages of precise and large-scale computation.
The term “counterfactual” has been used to define several
different tasks in machine learning field. Counterfactual Explanation (Verma, Dickerson, and Hines 2020) seeks to provide the explanations that what changes in the input (e.g.,
visual features) are needed to alter the decision of the machine (e.g., predicted class labels). The inputs can be images
(Sauer and Geiger 2021), tabular vectors (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2017), sequential actions (Tsirtsis, De, and

Therefore, this paper defines a new problem formulation
— counterfactual dynamics forecasting. In this task, a data
instance is a pair of sequences: one is the factual observation, and the other is the counterfactual series to be estimated based on its first slot. The two initial slots of factual
sequence and counterfactual sequence differ in a constrained
extent. The research (Byrne 2019) classifies counterfactuals into four types: additive, subtractive, better-world and
worse-world. Such categorization is based on the evidence
of psychology and cognitive science about human reasoning. On the basis of this study, we explore further the feasible categorization in the context of quantitative reasoning.
By formulating the differences between initial values of factual and counterfactual series, we characterize three types
of counterfactuals as observation counterfactuals (Type I),
covariate counterfactuals (Type II) and subtractive counterfactuals (Type III). Figure 1 gives an illustration of counterfactual types by using a bouncing ball system as example.
Figure 1a shows the factual trajectories of three balls. The
observation variables include location and velocity of each

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1764

