The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Formal Metareasoning Model of Concurrent Planning and Execution
Amihay Elboher1 , Ava Bensoussan1 , Erez Karpas2 ,
Wheeler Ruml3 , Shahaf S. Shperberg1 , Eyal Shimony1
1

Ben-Gurion University, Israel
2
Technion, Israel
3
University of New Hampshire, USA
{amihaye,avabe,shperbsh}@post.bgu.ac.il, karpase@technion.ac.il, shimony@cs.bgu.ac.il, ruml@cs.unh.edu
Abstract

achieve the agent’s goal thus involves starting to act before
planning is complete. However, when an action is executed,
plans that are not consistent with this action may become invalid, thus incurring the risk of never reaching the goal. This
risk is most significant when actions are irreversible. However, even when an action can be reversed, the time spent
executing a reversible action (and potentially its inverse action) might still cause the invalidation of plans. For example,
taking the commuter train invalidates the partial plan of taking a taxi, as there will not be enough time to take the train
in the opposite direction to still catch the taxi and reach the
airport before the deadline. Thus, if the planner fails to elaborate the partial plan of riding the train into a complete plan
that reaches the airport on time, the agent will miss its flight.
This paper proposes a disciplined method for making execution decisions while handling such tradeoffs when allocating
search effort in situated planning.

Agents that plan and act in the real world must deal with the
fact that time passes as they are planning. When timing is
tight, there may be insufficient time to complete the search
for a plan before it is time to act. By commencing execution
before search concludes, one gains time to search by making planning and execution concurrent. However, this incurs
the risk of making incorrect action choices, especially if actions are irreversible. This tradeoff between opportunity and
risk is the problem addressed in this paper. Our main contribution is to formally define this setting as an abstract metareasoning problem. We find that the abstract problem is intractable. However, we identify special cases that are solvable in polynomial time, develop greedy solution algorithms,
and, through tests on instances derived from search problems,
find several methods that achieve promising practical performance. This work lays the foundation for a principled timeaware executive that concurrently plans and executes.

1

The idea of starting to perform actions in the real world
(also known as base-level actions) before completing the
search goes back at least as far as Korf’s (1990) real-time
A*. The difference from the real-time search setting is that
our scenario is more flexible: the agent does not have a predefined time at which the next action must be executed.
Rather, it can choose when base-level actions should be executed in order to maximize the probability of successful
and timely execution. Note that we assume that the world
is deterministic. The only uncertainty we model concerns
how long planning will take and the time it will take the
as-yet-unknown resulting plan to reach a goal state, i.e., we
only consider uncertainty at the meta-level. Our setting is
also different from the interleaving of planning and execution in order to account for stochastic actions or partial observability, which has been a part of practical applications
of planning since the early days of Shakey the robot (Fikes,
Hart, and Nilsson 1972) and later (e.g., Ambros-Ingerson,
Steel et al. (1988); Haigh and Veloso (1998); Lemai and Ingrand (2004); Nourbakhsh (1997)). Our main contribution is
defining the above issues as a formal problem of decisionmaking under uncertainty, in the sense defined by Russell
and Wefald (1991). Attempting this formalization for a fully
realistic search algorithm appears daunting, even under our
assumption of a deterministic world. We thus begin from
the formal (AE)2 model (for Allocating Effort when Actions
Expire) of Shperberg et al. (2019), which formalizes situated

Introduction

In the real world, time passes as agents plan. For example, an
agent that needs to get to the airport may have two options:
take a taxi or ride a commuter train. Each of these options
can be thought of as a partial plan to be elaborated into a
complete plan before execution can start. Clearly, the agent’s
planner should only elaborate the partial plan that involves
the train if that can be done before the train leaves. Note,
however, that in general this may require delicate scheduling of search effort across multiple competing partial plans.
Elaborating the example, suppose the planner has two partial
plans that are each estimated to require five minutes of computation to elaborate into complete plans. If only six minutes
remain until they both expire, then we would want the planner to allocate almost all of its remaining planning effort to
one of them, rather than to fail on both. Issues like these
have been the focus of previous work on situated temporal
planning (Cashmore et al. 2018; Shperberg et al. 2019).
In this paper, we consider the design of a bolder agent
that can begin the execution of actions before a complete
plan to a goal has been found. Consider a further extension of the example in which the estimated time to complete each plan is seven minutes. The only apparent way to
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12427

