The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CrysGNN: Distilling Pre-trained Knowledge to Enhance Property Prediction for
Crystalline Materials
Kishalay Das1 , Bidisha Samanta1 , Pawan Goyal1 , Seung-Cheol Lee2 ,
Satadeep Bhattacharjee2 , Niloy Ganguly1,3
1
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India.
Indo Korea Science and Technology Center, Bangalore, India.
3
L3S, Leibniz University of Hannover, Germany.
kishalaydas@kgpian.iitkgp.ac.in, bidisha@iitkgp.ac.in, pawang@cse.iitkgp.ac.in seungcheol.lee@ikst.res.in,
s.bhattacharjee@ikst.res.in, niloy@cse.iitkgp.ac.in
2

Abstract

example, in order to encode the neighbourhood structural
information around a node (atom), GNN based approaches
(Xie and Grossman 2018; Chen et al. 2019; Louis et al. 2020;
Park and Wolverton 2020; Schmidt et al. 2021) gained some
popularity in this domain. Understanding the importance of
many-body interactions, ALIGNN (Choudhary and DeCost
2021) incorporates bond angular information into their encoder module and became SOTA for a large range of property
predictions. However, as different properties expressed by a
crystalline material are a complex function of different inherent structural and chemical properties of the constituent
atoms, it is extremely difficult to explicitly incorporate them
into the encoder architecture. Moreover, data sparsity across
properties is a known issue (Das et al. 2022; Jha et al. 2019),
which makes these models difficult to train for all the properties. To circumvent this problem we adopt the concept of
self-supervised pre-training (Devlin et al. 2018; Trinh, Luong, and Le 2019; Chen et al. 2020a,b; He et al. 2020; Hu
et al. 2020a,b; Qiu et al. 2020; You et al. 2020) for crystalline
materials which enables us to leverage a large amount of
untagged material structures to learn the complex hidden features which otherwise are difficult to identify.
In this paper, we introduce a graph pre-training method which
captures (a) connectivity of different atoms, (b) different
atomic properties and (c) graph similarity from a large set of
unlabeled data. To this effect, we curate a new large untagged
crystal dataset with 800K crystal graphs and undertake a
pre-training framework (named CrysGNN) with the dataset.
CrysGNN learns the representation of a crystal graph by initiating self-supervised loss at both node (atom) and graph
(crystal) level. At the node level, we pre-train the GNN model
to reconstruct the node features and connectivity between
nodes in a self-supervised way, whereas at the graph level,
we adopt supervised and contrastive learning to learn structural similarities between graph structures using the space
group and crystal system information of the crystal materials
respectively.
We subsequently distill important structural and chemical information of a crystal from the pre-trained CrysGNN model
and pass it to the property predictor. The distillation process provides wider usage than the conventional pretrainfinetuning framework as transferring pre-trained knowledge
to a property predictor and finetuning it requires a similar

In recent years, graph neural network (GNN) based approaches
have emerged as a powerful technique to encode complex
topological structure of crystal materials in an enriched representation space. These models are often supervised in nature
and using the property-specific training data, learn relationship between crystal structure and different properties like
formation energy, bandgap, bulk modulus, etc. Most of these
methods require a huge amount of property-tagged data to
train the system which may not be available for different properties. However, there is an availability of a huge amount
of crystal data with its chemical composition and structural
bonds. To leverage these untapped data, this paper presents
CrysGNN, a new pre-trained GNN framework for crystalline
materials, which captures both node and graph level structural information of crystal graphs using a huge amount of
unlabelled material data. Further, we extract distilled knowledge from CrysGNN and inject into different state of the art
property predictors to enhance their property prediction accuracy. We conduct extensive experiments to show that with
distilled knowledge from the pre-trained model, all the SOTA
algorithms are able to outperform their own vanilla version
with good margins. We also observe that the distillation process provides a significant improvement over the conventional
approach of finetuning the pre-trained model. We have released the pre-trained model along with the large dataset of
800K crystal graph which we carefully curated; so that the pretrained model can be plugged into any existing and upcoming
models to enhance their prediction accuracy.

Introduction
Fast and accurate prediction of different material properties is
a challenging and important task in material science. In recent
times there has been an ample amount of data driven works
(Seko et al. 2015; Pilania, Gubernatis, and Lookman 2015;
Lee et al. 2016; De Jong et al. 2016; Seko et al. 2017; Isayev
et al. 2017; Ward et al. 2017; Lu et al. 2018; Im et al. 2019) for
predicting crystal properties which are as accurate as theoretical DFT [Density functional Theory] based approaches (Orio,
Pantazis, and Neese 2009), however, much faster than it.
The architectural innovations of these approaches towards
accurate property predictions come from incorporating specific domain knowledge into a deep encoding module. For
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7323

