The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DeCOM: Decomposed Policy for Constrained Cooperative Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning
Zhaoxing Yang, Haiming Jin∗ , Rong Ding, Haoyi You, Guiyun Fan, Xinbing Wang, Chenghu Zhou
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{yiannis, jinhaiming, dingrong, yuri-you, fgy726, xwang8}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhouchsjtu@gmail.com

Abstract
In recent years, multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
has presented impressive performance in various applications.
However, physical limitations, budget restrictions, and many
other factors usually impose constraints on a multi-agent system (MAS), which cannot be handled by traditional MARL
frameworks. Specifically, this paper focuses on constrained
MAS where agents work cooperatively to maximize the expected team-average return under various constraints on expected team-average costs, and develops a constrained cooperative MARL framework, named DeCOM, for such MAS. In
particular, DeCOM decomposes the policy of each agent into
two modules, which empowers information sharing among
agents to achieve better cooperation. In addition, with such
modularization, the training algorithm of DeCOM separates
the original constrained optimization into an unconstrained
optimization on reward and a constraints satisfaction problem
on costs. DeCOM then iteratively solves these problems in
a computationally efficient manner, which makes DeCOM
highly scalable. We also provide theoretical guarantees on the
convergence of DeCOM’s policy update algorithm. Finally,
we conduct extensive experiments to show the effectiveness
of DeCOM with various types of costs in both moderate-scale
and large-scale (with 500 agents) environments that originate
from real-world applications.

Introduction
Recent years have seen great success of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) in unconstrained multi-agent systems
(MAS), such as video games (Hughes et al. 2018; Jaques
et al. 2019; Baker et al. 2020), and many others. However, in
practice, a MAS usually works under various constraints introduced by physical limitations, budget restrictions, as well
as requirements on certain performance metrics. For example,
to avoid collisions, robot swarms have to keep distances from
obstacles and between each other above a threshold (Luo,
Sun, and Kapoor 2020). As another example, the fairness
of power consumption among sensors has to be maintained
above a certain level for the sustainability of distributed sensor networks (Xu, Zhong, and Wang 2020).
In practice, many constrained MAS are cooperative in nature, where agents cooperatively maximize the team-average

return under constraints on certain types of team-average
costs. Such cooperation exists in the above robot swarms
and sensor networks, as well as other real-world scenarios,
such as managing a fleet of ridesharing vehicles (Lin et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2022) where the unfairness among drivers’
incomes has to be upper bounded for sufficient driver satisfaction. Inevitably, such joint requirement of cooperation and
constraint satisfaction calls for new decision-making mechanisms. Therefore, in this paper, we aim to develop a MARL
framework specifically tailored for constrained cooperative
MAS.
One intuitive solution is to directly extend existing singleagent constrained reinforcement learning (Achiam et al. 2017;
Tessler, Mankowitz, and Mannor 2019; Chow et al. 2019;
Le, Voloshin, and Yue 2019) to our multi-agent setting, by
utilizing a centralized controller to compute the joint actions
of all agents. However, it is hard to scale such approach to
MAS with a large number of agents. Instead, we achieve
scalability by adopting the centralized training decentralized
execution framework (Foerster et al. 2016a), where each
agent is equipped with a local policy that makes decisions
without the coordination from any central controller.
However, it is usually challenging for decentralized decision making to achieve cooperation. To address this challenge,
we propose a novel constrained cooperative MARL framework, named DeCOM1 , which facilitates agent cooperation
by appropriate information sharing among them. Specifically,
DeCOM decomposes an agent’s local policy into a base policy and a perturbation policy, where the former outputs the
agent’s base action and shares it with other agents, and the
latter aggregates other agents’ base actions to compute a
perturbation. DeCOM then combines the base action and
the perturbation to obtain the agent’s final action. Such base
action sharing mechanism provides an agent timely and necessary information about others, which helps the agent better
regulate its actions for cooperation.
Furthermore, in our constrained MAS setting, agents’ optimal policies correspond to the optimal solution of a constrained optimization which is intractable to solve directly.
DeCOM addresses this issue by training the base policy to optimize the return and the perturbation policy to decrease the

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The name DeCOM comes from Decomposed policy for
Constrained cOoperative MARL.

10861

