The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Anomaly Segmentation for High-Resolution Remote Sensing Images
Based on Pixel Descriptors
Jingtao Li1, Xinyu Wang2*, Hengwei Zhao1, Shaoyu Wang1, Yanfei Zhong1

1 State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing, Wuhan University, P. R. China
2 School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University, P. R. China

{JingtaoLi, wangxinyu, whu_zhaohw, wangshaoyu, zhongyanfei}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Anomaly segmentation in high spatial resolution (HSR) remote sensing imagery is aimed at segmenting anomaly patterns of the earth deviating from normal patterns, which plays
an important role in various Earth vision applications. However, it is a challenging task due to the complex distribution
and the irregular shapes of objects, and the lack of abnormal
samples. To tackle these problems, an anomaly segmentation
model based on pixel descriptors (ASD) is proposed for
anomaly segmentation in HSR imagery. Specifically, deep
one-class classification is introduced for anomaly segmentation in the feature space with discriminative pixel descriptors.
The ASD model incorporates the data argument for generating virtual abnormal samples, which can force the pixel descriptors to be compact for normal data and meanwhile to be
diverse to avoid the model collapse problems when only positive samples participated in the training. In addition, the
ASD introduced a multi-level and multi-scale feature extraction strategy for learning the low-level and semantic information to make the pixel descriptors feature-rich. The proposed ASD model was validated using four HSR datasets and
compared with the recent state-of-the-art models, showing its
potential value in Earth vision applications.

Figure 1: Anomaly segmentation example for HSR remote sensing images using proposed model. In the forest
scene, the common forest pattern is considered as normal,
and the abnormal objects such as diseased trees (the first
row) and the house in the forest (the second row) are identified as anomalies.
anomaly segmentation in HSR imagery because of the
unique characteristics when compared to the industrial and
medical images used in most anomaly segmentation tasks,
which have a regular structure. The objects in HSR images
typically have a more complex spatial distribution and large
radiation differences within the same class. Furthermore,
since HSR images can be captured in different angles and
heights, the objects always have multiple scales and show
rotation invariance. These characteristics make anomaly
segmentation for HSR images a challenging task.
The mainstream anomaly segmentation models detect
anomalies in the image space, where the anomaly score is
computed based on the image pixel values. Typical examples are the autoencoder (AE)-based models (Zavrtanik,
Kristan, and Skoˇcaj 2021; Gong et al. 2019) and the generative adversarial network (GAN)-based models (Ngoetal.
2019; Zenatietal. 2018b). AE-based models assume that
normal samples can be reconstructed more easily than the
anomalous ones and the reconstruction error indicates the

Introduction
Anomaly segmentation is aimed at segmenting the anomaly
patterns which deviate from the normal patterns (Pimentel
et al. 2014; Pang et al. 2021). Due to the lack of abnormal
samples, anomaly segmentation is a challenging task, but
plays an important role in many computer vision applications, including medical analysis (Fernando et al. 2021), industrial defect detection (Bergmann et al. 2019), video surveillance (Liu, Li, and Poczos 2018), and environmental
monitoring (Miau and Hung 2020).
Anomaly segmentation in high spatial resolution (HSR)
remote sensing images (e.g., Figure 1) is a powerful tool for
environmental monitoring (Miau and Hung 2020; Wang et
al. 2019). Despite this, few related works have focused on
*
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Code is available at https://github.com/Jingtao-Li-CVer/ASD.

4426

