The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Pessimism for Reinforcement Learning
Edoardo Cetin1 , Oya Celiktutan1
1

King’s College London
edoardo.cetin@kcl.ac.uk, oya.celiktutan@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract

multiple, independently-initialized networks and optimize
the agent’s behavior over the minimum value of the relative outputs (Fujimoto, Van Hoof, and Meger 2018). Empirically, this strategy consistently yields pessimistic target
performance measures, avoiding overestimation bias propagating through the TD-learning target bootstraps. However,
this approach directly links the critic’s parameterization to
bias counteraction and appears to suffer from suboptimal exploration due to underestimation bias (Ciosek et al. 2019).
Based on these observations, we propose Generalized
Pessimism Learning (GPL), a new strategy that learns to
counteract biases by optimizing a new dual objective. GPL
makes use of an explicit penalty to correct the critic’s target
predictions. We design this penalty as a weighted function
of epistemic uncertainty, computed as the expected Wasserstein distance between the return distributions predicted by
the critic. We learn the penalty’s weight with dual TDlearning, a new procedure to estimate and counteract any
arising bias in the critic’s predictions with dual gradient descent. GPL is the first method to freely learn unbiased performance targets throughout training.
We extend GPL by introducing pessimism annealing, a
new procedure motivated by the principle of optimism in the
face of uncertainty (Brafman and Tennenholtz 2002). This
procedure leads the agent to adopt risk-seeking behavior, by
utilizing a purposely biased estimate of the performance in
the initial training stages. This allows it to trade expected
immediate performance for improved directed exploration,
incentivizing the visitation of states with high uncertainty
from which it would gain more information.
We incorporate GPL with the Soft Actor-Critic (SAC)
(Haarnoja et al. 2018a,b) and Data-regularized Q (DrQ) algorithms (Yarats, Kostrikov, and Fergus 2021; Yarats et al.
2021), yielding GPL-SAC and GPL-DrQ. On challenging
Mujoco tasks from OpenAI Gym (Todorov, Erez, and Tassa
2012; Brockman et al. 2016), GPL-SAC outperforms both
model-based (Janner et al. 2019) and model-free (Chen et al.
2021) state-of-the-art algorithms, while being more computationally efficient. For instance, in the Humanoid environment GPL-SAC recovers a score of 5000 in less than 100K
steps, more than nine times faster than regular SAC. Additionally, on pixel-based environments from the DeepMind
Control Suite (Tassa et al. 2018), GPL-DrQ provides significant performance improvements from the recent state-of-

Off-policy deep reinforcement learning algorithms commonly compensate for overestimation bias during temporaldifference learning by utilizing pessimistic estimates of the
expected target returns. In this work, we propose Generalized Pessimism Learning (GPL), a strategy employing a novel
learnable penalty to enact such pessimism. In particular, we
propose to learn this penalty alongside the critic with dual
TD-learning, a new procedure to estimate and minimize the
magnitude of the target returns bias with trivial computational
cost. GPL enables us to accurately counteract overestimation
bias throughout training without incurring the downsides of
overly pessimistic targets. By integrating GPL with popular
off-policy algorithms, we achieve state-of-the-art results in
both competitive proprioceptive and pixel-based benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Sample efficiency and generality are two directions in which
reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms are still lacking, yet,
they are crucial for tackling complex real-world problems
(Mahmood et al. 2018). Consequently, many RL milestones
have been achieved through simulating large amounts of
experience and task-specific parameter tuning (Mnih et al.
2013; Silver et al. 2017). Recent off-policy model-free
(Chen et al. 2021) and model-based algorithms (Janner et al.
2019) advanced RL’s sample-efficiency on several benchmark tasks. We attribute such improvements to two main
linked advances: more expressive models to capture uncertainty and better strategies to counteract detrimental biases
from the learning process. These advances yielded the stabilization to adopt more aggressive optimization procedures,
with particular benefits in lower data regimes.
Modern policy gradient algorithms learn behavior by optimizing the expected performance as predicted by the critic,
a trained parametric model of the agent’s performance in
the environment. Within this process, overestimation bias
naturally arises from the maximization performed over the
critic’s performance predictions, and consequently, also over
the critic’s possible errors. In the context of off-policy RL,
the critic is trained to predict the agent’s future returns via
temporal difference (TD-) learning. A common strategy to
counteract overestimation is to parameterize this model with
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6971

