The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Flow-Based Robust Watermarking with Invertible Noise Layer for Black-Box
Distortions
Han Fang1 , Yupeng Qiu1 , Kejiang Chen2 * , Jiyi Zhang1 , Weiming Zhang2 , Ee-Chien Chang1 *
1

National University of Singapore
University of Science and Technology of China
fanghan@nus.edu.sg, qiu yupeng@u.nus.edu, chenkj@ustc.edu.cn, jiyizhang@u.nus.edu, zhangwm@ustc.edu.cn,
changec@comp.nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract
Deep learning-based digital watermarking frameworks have
been widely studied recently. Most existing methods adopt an
“encoder-noise layer-decoder”-based architecture where the
embedding and extraction processes are accomplished separately by the encoder and the decoder. However, one potential
drawback of such a framework is that the encoder and the decoder may not be well coupled, resulting in the fact that the
encoder may embed some redundant features into the host
image thus influencing the invisibility and robustness of the
whole algorithm. To address this limitation, this paper proposes a flow-based robust watermarking framework. The basic component of such framework is an invertible up-downsampling neural block that can realize the embedding and extraction simultaneously. As a consequence, the encoded feature could keep high consistency with the feature that the
decoder needed, which effectively avoids the embedding of
redundant features. In addition, to ensure the robustness of
black-box distortion, an invertible noise layer (INL) is designed to simulate the distortion and is served as a noise layer
in the training stage. Benefiting from its reversibility, INL
is also applied as a preprocessing before extraction to eliminate the distortion, which further improves the robustness of
the algorithm. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of the proposed framework in terms of visual quality
and robustness. Compared with the state-of-the-art architecture, the visual quality (measured by PSNR) of the proposed
framework improves by 2dB and the extraction accuracy after JPEG compression (QF=50) improves by more than 4%.
Besides, the robustness against black-box distortions can be
greatly achieved with more than 95% extraction accuracy.

(a) The architecture of END-based framework.

(b) The architecture of flow-based framework.

Figure 1: The network comparison of END and flow-based
framework.
can be losslessly recovered when the watermarked signal
has been distorted. In pursuit of robustness, traditional algorithms often embed watermarks in transform domain coefficients, commonly in the discrete cosine transform (DCT)
domain (Ko et al. 2020), discrete wavelet transform (DWT)
domain (Daren et al. 2001) and discrete Fourier transform
(DFT) domain (Urvoy, Goudia, and Autrusseau 2014).
With the success of deep learning in many applications, deep-learning-based watermarking frameworks (Mun
et al. 2017, 2019; Ahmadi et al. 2020) have recently been
proposed. The main backbone of such frameworks is an
autoencoder-like architecture which contains an encoder, a
noise layer, and a decoder (END), as shown in Fig. 1 (a).
The encoder aims to embed the watermark message into the
host image. The noise layer distorts the watermarked image
with several differentiable distortions. The decoder tries to
extract the watermark message from the distorted images.
Based on the joint training of these three components, robustness can be well guaranteed.
Although the whole framework could be trained end-toend in an automatic way, it suffers from the potential drawback that the encoder may not be well coupled with the decoder. The consequent result is that the encoder may embed
redundant features that are useless for decoding, thus limiting the performance of the framework. In addition, most
of the existing noise layers are designed for white-box distortions (differentiable/non-differentiable), such as Gaussian
noise, JPEG compression, print-shooting, etc. These distortions have been studied extensively, so that they can be sim-

Introduction
Robust digital watermarking is widely used for copyright
protection and leaking source tracing. By embedding invisible watermark signals, the watermarked carrier is endowed with authorized information. When a copyright dispute arises from an illegal copy, we can extract the watermark for copyright authentication. The most important property of robust watermarking is robustness, which greatly affects the applicability of the algorithm. Robustness refers to
the ability to resist distortion, i.e., whether the watermark
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5054

