The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Uncertainty-Aware Image Captioning
Zhengcong Fei, Mingyuan Fan, Li Zhu, Junshi Huang*
Xiaoming Wei, Xiaolin Wei
Meituan
Beijing, China
{feizhengcong, fanmingyuan, zhuli09, huangjunshi}@meituan.com
{weixiaoming, weixiaolin02}@meituan.com
Abstract
It is well believed that the higher uncertainty in a word of
the caption, the more inter-correlated context information is
required to determine it. However, current image captioning
methods usually consider the generation of all words in a sentence sequentially and equally. In this paper, we propose an
uncertainty-aware image captioning framework, which parallelly and iteratively operates insertion of discontinuous candidate words between existing words from easy to difficult
until converged. We hypothesize that high-uncertainty words
in a sentence need more prior information to make a correct decision and should be produced at a later stage. The resulting non-autoregressive hierarchy makes the caption generation explainable and intuitive. Specifically, we utilize an
image-conditioned bag-of-word model to measure the word
uncertainty and apply a dynamic programming algorithm
to construct the training pairs. During inference, we devise
an uncertainty-adaptive parallel beam search technique that
yields an empirically logarithmic time complexity. Extensive
experiments on the MS COCO benchmark reveal that our approach outperforms the strong baseline and related methods
on both captioning quality as well as decoding speed.

Figure 1: Illustration of autoregressive, non-autoregressive,
and uncertainty-aware image captioning. AIC model generates the next word conditioned on the given image and
all preceding subsentence, while NAIC model outputs all
words in one shot. Comparatively, UAIC considers a caption generation in several stages and various discontinuous
words are generated parallelly in each stage. words in blue
indicate newly generated words at the current stage. Interestingly, UAIC allows informative words (e.g., people, field)
generated before the no-informative words (e.g., in, with).

Introduction
Image captioning, which aims to generate textual descriptions of input images, is a critical task in multimedia analysis
(Stefanini et al. 2021). Previous works in this area are mostly
based on an encoder-decoder paradigm (Vinyals et al. 2015;
Xu et al. 2015; Rennie et al. 2017; Anderson et al. 2018;
Huang et al. 2019; Cornia et al. 2020; Pan et al. 2020; Fei
2022; Li et al. 2022; Yang, Liu, and Wang 2022), where a
convolution-neural-network-based image encoder first process an input image into visual representations, and then
a recursive-neural-network or Transformer-based language
decoder produces a corresponding caption based on these
extracted features. The generation process usually relies on
a chain-rule factorization and is performed in an autoregressive manner, i.e., words by words from left to right. Although this paradigm brings performance superiority, high
latency during inference becomes a grave disadvantage in
some real-time applications. To this end, non-autoregressive

image captioning (NAIC) models are proposed to improve
decoding speed by predicting every word in parallel (Gu
et al. 2018; Fei 2019, 2021b). This advantage comes at a
sacrifice on performance since modeling next word is trickier when not conditioned on sufficient contexts.
Intensive efforts have been devoted to non-autoregressive
image captioning to seek a better trade-off between inference time and captioning performance. Generally, approaches can be roughly divided into two lines. The first line
of work leverages the iterative decoding framework to break
the independence assumption, which first generates an initial
caption and then refines iteratively by taking both the given
image and the results of the last iteration as input (Gao et al.
2019; Jason et al. 2018). The other line of work tries to modify the Transfomer structure to better capture dependency
and position information by leveraging extra autoregressive
layers in the decoder (Fei 2019; Guo et al. 2020). Besides,
(Fei 2020) introduces latent variables to eliminate the modal
gap and develop a more powerful probabilistic framework to

* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

614

