The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Coreset Learning Reality Check
Fred Lu1, 2, 3 , Edward Raff1, 2, 3 , James Holt3
1
Booz Allen Hamilton
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
3
Laboratory for Physical Sciences
Lu Fred@bah.com, Raff Edward@bah.com, holt@lps.umd.edu
2

Abstract

which indicates the level of representation of that point in
the linear model.

Subsampling algorithms are a natural approach to reduce data
size before fitting models on massive datasets. In recent years,
several works have proposed methods for subsampling rows
from a data matrix while maintaining relevant information for
classification. While these works are supported by theory and
limited experiments, to date there has not been a comprehensive evaluation of these methods. In our work, we directly
compare multiple methods for logistic regression drawn from
the coreset and optimal subsampling literature and discover
inconsistencies in their effectiveness. In many cases, methods
do not outperform simple uniform subsampling.

Recently a number of works proposed coresets for logistic
regression which target quantity (1). A coreset consists of a
set of m ≪ n weighted points whose objective function approximates that of the full dataset for any β. More precisely,
if there is a subset C of the data consisting of xc1 , . . . , xcm
and weights w1 , . . . , wm , such that for all β ∈ Rd ,
m
X

wi f (yci x⊤
ci β) − L(β; X, y) ≤ ϵ · L(β; X, y)

i=1

then the points form an (1 + ϵ)-coreset of X.

Introduction

The coreset literature suggests sampling strategies, known as
sensitivity sampling, over the rows in X so that with probability 1 − δ the resulting subsample is a (1 + ϵ)-coreset. The
sensitivity can be viewed intuitively as the worst-case influence of a given data point on the objective over all values of
β. Points which are highly influential should be more likely
to be sampled into the coreset. While the sensitivity is intractable because it involves optimizing over all values of β,
various strategies are used to approximate (and more specifically, upper-bound) the sensitivity in order to sample data.
These include k-means clustering (Huggins, Campbell, and
Broderick 2016), leverage scores (Munteanu et al. 2018),
and row norms (Tolochinsky and Feldman 2018). Using theoretical frameworks based on (Feldman and Langberg 2011;
Braverman et al. 2016), probabilistic bounds are derived to
relate a given subsample size m to ϵ and δ (for example, the
minimum m needed to achieve some ϵ).

It has become common, even routine, for researchers to have
massive datasets in reach for modeling and prediction. Using standard machine learning tools for datasets with over
millions of observations n or thousands of features d is challenging when many algorithms have superlinear scaling with
the data dimensions. In terms of time and resources, even
training a simple linear model becomes an expensive endeavor.
A natural workaround for excessively large data is to subsample a set of rows m without losing significant information. The specific form of information to be preserved, and
hence the best strategy to accomplish this, depends on the
task. In the logistic regression setting, we have a data matrix X ∈ Rn×d , labels y ∈ {−1, 1}n , and a loss function
f (x) = log(1 + e−x ), and the goal is to find the weights
β ⋆ which minimizes the objective function L(β; X, y) =
P
n
⊤
i=1 f (yi xi β). There are three natural quantities which a
subsampling method may choose to approximate:

Because the primary quantity of interest has been approximating the objective function, attention has not been given
to how the minimizer β̂C of the coreset objective relates to
β̂M LE . In particular, the standard (1 + ϵ)-coreset needs to
hold for all β, whereas we may only be interested in the approximation performance of the coreset in a neighborhood
of β̂M LE . Recently the statistics literature on optimal subsampling has investigated this area by focusing on target (2).
Wang, Zhu, and Ma (2018) proposes a subsampling procedure with conditions where β̂C converges to β̂M LE . While
the asymptotic performance of such procedures has been
studied (Wang, Zhu, and Ma 2018; Ting and Brochu 2018),

1. The model fit, measured as the sum of validation losses
2. The maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) β̂M LE
3. The model’s performance on unseen data
By subsampling, a practitioner will fit a logistic regression
over only m points instead of n. Each of the m points is
permitted an instance weight wi for the fitting procedure,
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8940

