The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Equity Promotion in Public Transportation
Anik Pramanik1∗ , Pan Xu1∗ , Yifan Xu2∗
1 Department of Computer Science, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, USA
2 School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China

ap2645@njit.edu, pxu@njit.edu, xyf@seu.edu.cn

other hand, many of them live relatively far away from public transits and need to walk a long distance to even the
nearest bus and/or metro stops. The difficulty in access to
public transport creates a great deal of trouble and inconvenience for these poverty-stricken families and contributes to
many social inequalities (DeGood and Schwartz 2016). One
recent example is the radically unequal access to COVID-19
vaccines in the early stage of rollout in 2021, where it had
been widely reported that vaccination rate of Black People
was greatly lagging behind that of White counterparts, and
one of the main causes was the obstacle in access to public
health providers (Blackstock and Blackstock 2021; Stolberg
2021; Abcarian 2021; Jones 2021).

Abstract
There are many news articles reporting the obstacles confronting poverty-stricken households in access to public transits. These barriers create a great deal of inconveniences for
these impoverished families and more importantly, they contribute a lot of social inequalities. A typical approach addressing the issue is to build more transport infrastructure
to offer more opportunities to access the public transits especially for those deprived communities. Examples include
adding more bus lines connecting needy residents to railways
systems and extending existing bus lines to areas with low
socioeconomic status. Recently, a new strategy is proposed,
which is to harness the ubiquitous ride-hailing services to connect disadvantaged households with the nearest public transportations. Compared with the former infrastructure-based solution, the ride-hailing-based strategy enjoys a few exclusive
benefits such as higher effectiveness and more flexibility.
In this paper, we propose an optimization model to study how
to integrate the two approaches together for equity-promotion
purposes. Specifically, we aim to design a strategy of allocating a given limited budget to different candidate programs
such that the overall social equity is maximized, which is defined as the minimum covering ratio among all pre-specified
protected groups of households (based on race, income, etc.).
We have designed a linear-programming (LP) based rounding
algorithm, which proves to achieve an optimal approximation
ratio of 1 − 1/𝑒. Additionally, we test our algorithm against a
few baselines on real data assembled by outsourcing multiple
public datasets collected in the city of Chicago. Experimental
results confirm our theoretical predictions and demonstrate
the effectiveness of our LP-based strategy in promoting social
equity, especially when the budget is insufficient.

The traditional way to improve the access to public transits includes creating more bus lines connecting needy residents to railway systems, extending existing bus lines to
deprived communities, and increasing the frequency and service hours of transit providers, to name a few. Recently, local
officials are weighing the option of integrating the popular
ride-hailing services offered by Uber and Lyft to the existing toolkit to combat the last-mile problem (Jin, Kong, and
Sui 2019; Kong, Zhang, and Zhao 2020). One example is to
establish an auxiliary subsidized program to allocate reimbursed ride-hailing trips to needy households to help them
access to the near transit stations. Compared with the traditional solutions, ride-hailing services enjoy benefits such as
more flexibility and mobility (can be requested via mobile
apps upon needed) and a lower cost in general. Additionally,
ride-hailing-based program can help effectively target needy
households, especially when they sparsely and remotely scatter over a large area where traditional means are either cost
prohibitive or ineffective.

Introduction
We consider the last-mile problem in public transportation.
There are roughly 20% of households that are at or below the
federal poverty line lack access to a car, and the percentage
can get as high as 33% among the low-income African and
Latino population (Berube, Deakin, and Raphael 2006). For
these impoverished families: On the one hand, they rely on
the public transportation as the only travel option for daily
activities such commuting to work, shopping, etc.; on the

There are a few challenging issues in the last-mile problem,
including how to craft eligibility to identify the set of qualified needy households, how to set subsidizing guidelines for
ride-hailing services for people under different spatial and
financial conditions, how to design routes and schedules of
new bus lines, and how to split limited budget to different approaches. For policy-related issues, existing literatures have
already proposed a few answers. For example, DeGood and
Schwartz (2016) outlined eligibility spatial criteria among
other financial factors as follows: walking distance to the
nearest bus lines should fall between [0.25, 3.5] miles and to

∗ These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11890

