The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Lottery Pools: Winning More by Interpolating Tickets without Increasing Training
or Inference Cost
Lu Yin* 1 , Shiwei Liu* 12† , Meng Fang3 , Tianjin Huang1 , Vlado Menkovski1 , Mykola Pechenizkiy1
1

Eindhoven University of Technology
2
University of Texas at Austin
3
University of Liverpool
l.yin@tue,nl, s.liu3@tue.nl, meng.fang@liverpool.ac.uk, t.huang@tue.nl, v.menkovski@tue.nl, m.pechenizkiy@tue.nl

Abstract
Lottery tickets (LTs) is able to discover accurate and sparse
subnetworks that could be trained in isolation to match the performance of dense networks. Ensemble, in parallel, is one of
the oldest time-proven tricks in machine learning to improve
performance by combining the output of multiple independent
models. However, the benefits of ensemble in the context of
LTs will be diluted since ensemble does not directly lead to
stronger sparse subnetworks, but leverages their predictions
for a better decision. In this work, we first observe that directly
averaging the weights of the adjacent learned subnetworks
significantly boosts the performance of LTs. Encouraged
by this observation, we further propose an alternative way
to perform an “ensemble” over the subnetworks identified
by iterative magnitude pruning via a simple interpolating
strategy. We call our method Lottery Pools. In contrast to
the naive ensemble which brings no performance gains to
each single subnetwork, Lottery Pools yields much stronger
sparse subnetworks than the original LTs without requiring
any extra training or inference cost. Across various modern
architectures on CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet, we show that
our method achieves significant performance gains in both,
in-distribution and out-of-distribution scenarios. Impressively,
evaluated with VGG-16 and ResNet-18, the produced sparse
subnetworks outperform the original LTs by up to 1.88% on
CIFAR-100 and 2.36% on CIFAR-100-C; the resulting dense
network surpasses the pre-trained dense-model up to 2.22%
on CIFAR-100 and 2.38% on CIFAR-100-C. Our source code
can be found at https://github.com/luuyin/Lottery-pools.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have revolutionized various
machine learning fields with expressive performance (LeCun et al. 1989; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016; Silver et al.
2016; Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Brown et al. 2020; Radford
et al. 2021; Fedus, Zoph, and Shazeer 2021; Jumper et al.
2021). While achieving increasingly compelling results, a
large concern is the massive parameter count that in billions, even trillions resulting heavy burden on environmental
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10945

and financial systems (Garcı́a-Martı́n et al. 2019; Schwartz
et al. 2020; Patterson et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022). That
motivates many techniques toward the efficiency of DNNs.
Among them, sparsity is a leading approach that largely preserves the model performance while achieving appealing
compression rates (Mozer and Smolensky 1989; Han, Mao,
and Dally 2015; Molchanov et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2022;
Chen et al. 2022; Sun et al. 2021; Yuan et al. 2021). A recent
work on the Lottery Tickets (LTs) (Frankle and Carbin 2018)
discovers the existence of sparse subnetworks within a standard network which can be trained in isolation to match the
accuracy of the dense counterpart. These lottery tickets are
empirically obtained by iterative magnitude pruning (IMP) at
the random dense initialization or early training points called
“rewinding” (Frankle et al. 2020). Since being proposed, LTs
has become the leading approach to reducing model size
while preserving accuracy.
However, LTs is a rather costly process involving multiple
iterations of pruning-and-retraining, and once the subnetworks at the target sparsity are reached, the previous subnetworks with lower sparsity are commonly discarded, leading
to a big waste of computation. One of the traditional ways that
can directly benefit from multiple models in machine learning
is ensemble. Ensemble (Hansen and Salamon 1990; Levin,
Tishby, and Solla 1990; Fort, Hu, and Lakshminarayanan
2019) is well-known for its compelling performance improvements over independently trained, single networks by combining the predictions of the latter. Yet, ensemble does not
directly lead to stronger sparse subnetworks but leverages
their predictions to make a better decision. Hence, the benefits of ensemble in the context of LTs will be diluted.
In this paper, we build an efficient and accurate alternative to the naive LTs ensemble that yields subnetworks
outperforming the original LTs by a large margin in both,
in-distribution and out-of-distribution scenarios. We first observe that directly interpolating weights of the adjacent LTs
subnetworks improves the performance of LTs. Inspired by
this observation, we sequentially interpolate the weights of
the natural “byproducts” of LTs (i.e., the previous subnetworks identified by IMP) with the target subnetwork if they
improve accuracy on held-out data, following the recent
emerging weight averaging techniques (Izmailov et al. 2018;
Wortsman et al. 2022; Rame et al. 2022). This simple interpo-

