The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DRGCN: Dynamic Evolving Initial Residual for Deep
Graph Convolutional Networks
Lei Zhang* , Xiaodong Yan* , Jianshan He, Ruopeng Li, Wei Chu
Ant Group, Beijing, China
{xiaobei.zl, qiqing.yxd, yebai.hjs, ruopeng.lrp, weichu.cw}@antgroup.com

Abstract

2018; He et al. 2020). Motivated by deep neural networks
from other areas such as computer vision (He et al. 2016),
where deeper models commonly have superior performance
than shallow ones, researchers have made great progress on
the design of deeper GCN structures. Intuitively, the deep
version of GCNs has the ability to aggregate knowledge
from remote hops of neighbors for target nodes. But it fails
because these models end up with severe over-smoothing
(Li, Han, and Wu 2018) issue, which shows that after too
many rounds of the aggregation process, the representations
of nodes converge to the same pattern and become indistinguishable.
Several research efforts have been devoted to tackling
the over-smoothing issue. Data augmentation strategies proposed from works like DropEdge (Rong et al. 2020) and
GRAND (Feng et al. 2020) can be used as general techniques for various graph convolution networks. Recently,
the residual connection is proved to be a powerful strategy
to solve the over-smoothing issue. JKNet (Xu et al. 2018)
employs a dense skip connection to combine information of
all layers for final node representation. APPNP (Klicpera,
Bojchevski, and Günnemann 2019) proposes initial residual
in the context of Personalized PageRank (Page et al. 1999)
to constructs a skip connection to the initial representation.
However, these models achieve their best results with shallow layers, and the performance drops when networks become deeper. GCNII (Chen et al. 2020) goes further with
the initial residual by introducing identity mapping, and alleviates the over-smoothing issue while achieving new stateof-the-art results on various tasks.
However, all of the previous works using residual connection treat residual weight as a fixed hyperparameter for all
layers and nodes. The node personalization and layer correlation are ignored. Consequently, they are quite sensitive to
datasets (Figure 1, left), the model depths (Figure 1, middle),
and the scale of training sizes (Figure 1, right).
Intuitively, because different nodes may have different
initial representations and local topology information, personalizing residual weight for each node makes sense. Moreover, shallow layers still memory the information from the
initial representation, which means we do not need to fetch
much information by initial residual for them. On the other
hand, as the layer goes deeper, we should fetch more information from the initial representation to prevent noise.

Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have been proved to
be very practical to handle various graph-related tasks. It
has attracted considerable research interest to study deep
GCNs, due to their potential superior performance compared with shallow ones. However, simply increasing network depth will, on the contrary, hurt the performance due
to the over-smoothing problem. Adding residual connection
is proved to be effective for learning deep convolutional neural networks (deep CNNs), it is not trivial when applied
to deep GCNs. Recent works proposed an initial residual
mechanism that did alleviate the over-smoothing problem in
deep GCNs. However, according to our study, their algorithms are quite sensitive to different datasets. In their setting,
the personalization (dynamic) and correlation (evolving) of
how residual applies are ignored. To this end, we propose a
novel model called Dynamic evolving initial Residual Graph
Convolutional Network (DRGCN). Firstly, we use a dynamic
block for each node to adaptively fetch information from the
initial representation. Secondly, we use an evolving block to
model the residual evolving pattern between layers. Our experimental results show that our model effectively relieves
the problem of over-smoothing in deep GCNs and outperforms the state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods on various benchmark datasets. Moreover, we develop a mini-batch version of
DRGCN which can be applied to large-scale data. Coupling
with several fair training techniques, our model reaches new
SOTA results on the large-scale ogbn-arxiv dataset of Open
Graph Benchmark (OGB). Our reproducible code is available
on GitHub.

Introduction
Graph representation learning is the main task for graphstructured data. Graph Convolution Networks (GCNs) (Kipf
and Welling 2017) and its attentional variants (e.g., GAT)
(Veličković et al. 2018) have been shown to be quite successful especially on graph representation learning tasks.
These models are powerful on node classification (Kipf and
Welling 2017), link prediction (Berg, Kipf, and Welling
2017) and clustering (Chiang et al. 2019) tasks, because of
their remarkable ability to iteratively aggregate information
from graph neighborhoods. GCNs also achieve great success on applications like recommender system (Ying et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11254

