The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Where Will Players Move Next? Dynamic Graphs and Hierarchical Fusion for
Movement Forecasting in Badminton
Kai-Shiang Chang, Wei-Yao Wang, Wen-Chih Peng
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
{kevin5260523.cs05, sf1638.cs05}@nctu.edu.tw, wcpeng@cs.nycu.edu.tw

Abstract

individuals on the field (Wang et al. 2020; Melton and MacCharles 2021; Qian 2022), which has not only brought about
the growing demand of sports analytics, but has also drawn
researchers’ attention to the flourishing and profitable sports
market.
In this paper, we focus on turn-based sports and use badminton as the demonstration example. Various studies related to badminton have been carried out to collect badminton data, such as retrieving information from videos
(Hsu et al. 2019; Cao et al. 2021; Yoshikawa et al. 2021) or
sensors (Chiu et al. 2020; Steels et al. 2020). Based on the
collected data, several applications have been developed to
analyze tactic performance (Wang 2022), e.g., shot influence
(Wang et al. 2021, 2022a), an analysis system (Chu et al.
2022), and stroke forecasting (Wang et al. 2022b). However,
in badminton, as a fast-paced sport, in addition to returning strokes, players’ movements on the court are also a vital
factor of simulating tactics, which has not been addressed in
prior works. Players with effective movements can reach the
shuttle faster before it drops below the net, which enables
them to return an aggressive stroke and take the dominant
position (Decathlon 2022). Therefore, players and coaches
can take advantage of movement forecasting since the movements on the court reflect the physical ability and the defensive position habit. Players can therefore be trained to be
familiar with where to catch the shuttle and where to defend
based on the specific situation1 .
Figure 1 illustrates an example of movement forecasting.
Given the locations of two players and the shot type they
performed in a rally, the player on the right has several options of shot type and location to return the shot and move
back to defense, while the player on the left also has multiple choices of location to catch the shuttle based on the
location the opponent is returning to. For example, when
the left player returns a net shot to the right court, the right
player can either also return a net shot and take a defense
position closer to the net to prepare for another net shot, or
can return a lob to the back court and move to the center of
the half court to prepare for a smash. In general, movement
forecasting can be viewed as the more challenging task since
the goal consists of not only stroke forecasting (Wang et al.
2022b), but also the movements of players.

Sports analytics has captured increasing attention since analysis of the various data enables insights for training strategies, player evaluation, etc. In this paper, we focus on predicting what types of returning strokes will be made, and
where players will move to based on previous strokes. As this
problem has not been addressed to date, movement forecasting can be tackled through sequence-based and graph-based
models by formulating as a sequence prediction task. However, existing sequence-based models neglect the effects of
interactions between players, and graph-based models still
suffer from multifaceted perspectives on the next movement.
Moreover, there is no existing work on representing strategic relations among players’ shot types and movements. To
address these challenges, we first introduce the procedure of
the Player Movements (PM) graph to exploit the structural
movements of players with strategic relations. Based on the
PM graph, we propose a novel Dynamic Graphs and Hierarchical Fusion for Movement Forecasting model (DyMF)
with interaction style extractors to capture the mutual interactions of players themselves and between both players
within a rally, and dynamic players’ tactics across time. In
addition, hierarchical fusion modules are designed to incorporate the style influence of both players and rally interactions. Extensive experiments show that our model empirically outperforms both sequence- and graph-based methods
and demonstrate the practical usage of movement forecasting.
Code is available at https://github.com/wywyWang/CoachAIProjects/tree/main/Movement%20Forecasting.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the rapid advancement of technology has
brought great convenience for data collection and has increased data diversity, which has revolutionized sports analytics for conducting various applications. For example, the
National Basketball Association (NBA) has installed multiple cameras on every court to collect granular data on players’ movements. These data are used to analyze the different views for recommending winning strategies, avoiding
player injury, and scouting (Petra 2020). On the other hand,
the size of the sports analytics market is expected to expand
21.3% from 2021 to 2028 (Research 2021). Evidently, effective analysis benefits the promising performance of teams or
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

6998

Related work is in Appendix A due to space limitation.

