The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Misspecification in Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Joar Skalse, Alessandro Abate
Oxford University, Department of Computer Science
joar.skalse@cs.ox.ac.uk, aabate@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

There are two primary motivations for IRL. The first motivation is to use IRL as a tool for imitation learning (e.g.
Hussein et al. 2017). For these applications, it is not fundamentally important whether the learnt reward function actually corresponds to the true intentions of the demonstrator,
as long as it helps the imitation learning process. The second
motivation is to use IRL to understand an agent’s preferences
and motives (e.g. Hadfield-Menell et al. 2016). From this
perspective, the goal is to learn a reward that captures the
demonstrator’s true intentions. This paper was written with
mainly the second motivation in mind.
An IRL algorithm must make assumptions about how the
preferences of an agent relate to its behaviour. Most IRL algorithms are based on one of three models; optimality, Boltzmann rationality, or causal entropy maximisation. These behavioural models are very simple, whereas the true relationship between a person’s preferences and their actions of
course is incredibly complex. In fact, there are observable
differences between human data and data synthesised using
these standard assumptions (Orsini et al. 2021). This means
that the behavioural models are misspecified, which raises
the concern that they might systematically lead to flawed inferences if applied to real-world data.
In this paper, we study how robust the behavioural models
in IRL are to misspecification. To do this, we first introduce
a theoretical framework for analysing misspecification robustness in IRL. We then derive a number of formal tools
for inferring the misspecification robustness of IRL models,
and apply these tools to exactly characterise what forms of
misspecification the standard IRL models are (or are not) robust to. Our analysis is general, as it is carried out in terms
of behavioural models, rather than algorithms, which means
that our results will apply to any algorithm based on these
models. Moreover, the tools we introduce can also be used
to easily derive the misspecification robustness of new behavioural models, beyond those we consider in this work.
The motivation behind this work is to provide a theoretically principled understanding of whether and when IRL
methods are (or are not) applicable to the problem of inferring a person’s (true) preferences and intentions. Human
behaviour is very complex, and while a behavioural model
can be more or less accurate, it will never be realistically
possible to create a behavioural model that is completely
free from misspecification (except possibly for in narrow do-

The aim of Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) is to infer a reward function R from a policy π. To do this, we need
a model of how π relates to R. In the current literature, the
most common models are optimality, Boltzmann rationality,
and causal entropy maximisation. One of the primary motivations behind IRL is to infer human preferences from human behaviour. However, the true relationship between human preferences and human behaviour is much more complex
than any of the models currently used in IRL. This means that
they are misspecified, which raises the worry that they might
lead to unsound inferences if applied to real-world data. In
this paper, we provide a mathematical analysis of how robust different IRL models are to misspecification, and answer
precisely how the demonstrator policy may differ from each
of the standard models before that model leads to faulty inferences about the reward function R. We also introduce a
framework for reasoning about misspecification in IRL, together with formal tools that can be used to easily derive the
misspecification robustness of new IRL models.

Introduction
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) is an area of machine learning concerned with inferring what objective an
agent is pursuing based on the actions taken by that agent
(Ng and Russell 2000). IRL roughly corresponds to the notion of revealed preferences in psychology and economics,
since it aims to infer preferences from behaviour (Rothkopf
and Dimitrakakis 2011). IRL has many possible applications. For example, it has been used in scientific contexts,
as a tool for understanding animal behaviour (Yamaguchi
et al. 2018). It can also be used in engineering contexts;
many important tasks can be represented as sequential decision problems, where the goal is to maximise a reward
function over several steps (Sutton and Barto 2018). However, for many complex tasks, it can be very challenging to
manually specify a reward function that incentivises the intended behaviour. IRL can then be used to learn a good reward function, based on demonstrations of correct behaviour
(e.g. Abbeel, Coates, and Ng 2010; Singh et al. 2019). Overall, IRL relates to many fundamental questions about goaldirected behaviour and agent-based modelling.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15136

