The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

An Improved Algorithm For Online Min-Sum Set Cover
Marcin Bienkowski,1 Marcin Mucha 2
1

University of Wroclaw
University of Warsaw
marcin.bienkowski@cs.uni.wroc.pl, mucha@mimuw.edu.pl
2

Abstract

In the Min-Sum Set Cover (MSSC) problem, which
serves as a theoretical model for this problem, there is a universe U of n elements, and a set of m users, where the t-th
user has a set of preferred elements Rt ⊆ U . The goal is
to find a fixed permutation of n elements, which minimizes
the sum of users’ dissatisfaction, where the dissatisfaction of
user t is the position of the first element from Rt in the permutation. This measures (in a perhaps simplistic way) how
far a user has to scroll till an interesting item is found. This
problem and its variants have been thoroughly studied in the
approximation algorithms community: the best polynomialtime solution is a 4-approximation (Bar-Noy et al. 1998) and
this approximation factor is tight unless P = NP (Feige,
Lovász, and Tetali 2004).
In this paper, we study an online variant of the MSSC
problem, where an algorithm has to maintain a permutation
of n elements, and preferred sets appear in an online manner.
Upon seeing a set Rt , an algorithm (i) first has to pay an access cost equal to the position of the first element from Rt ;
(ii) may reorder the list arbitrarily, paying the Kendall tau
distance between old and new permutation (minimal number
of swapped adjacent elements).1 This setting captures a frequent case where the service (e.g., a shop) is learning user
preferences on the fly and has to react accordingly, without
knowing the preferences of future users.

We study a fundamental model of online preference aggregation, where an algorithm maintains an ordered list
of n elements. An input is a stream of preferred sets
R1 , R2 , . . . , Rt , . . . . Upon seeing Rt and without knowledge of any future sets, an algorithm has to rerank elements
(change the list ordering), so that at least one element of Rt
is found near the list front. The incurred cost is a sum of the
list update costs (the number of swaps of neighboring list elements) and access cost (the position of the first element of
Rt on the list). This scenario occurs naturally in applications
such as ordering items in an online shop using aggregated
preferences of shop customers. The theoretical underpinning
of this problem is known as Min-Sum Set Cover.
Unlike previous work that mostly studied the performance of
an online algorithm A LG in comparison to the static optimal solution (a single optimal list ordering), in this paper, we
study an arguably harder variant where the benchmark is the
provably stronger optimal dynamic solution O PT (that may
also modify the list ordering). In terms of an online shop,
this means that the aggregated preferences of its user base
evolve with time. We construct a computationally efficient
randomized algorithm whose competitive ratio (A LG-to-O PT
cost ratio) is O(r2 ) and prove the existence of a deterministic
O(r4 )-competitive algorithm. Here, r is the maximum cardinality of sets Rt . This is the first algorithm whose ratio does
not depend on n: the previously best algorithm for this prob√
lem was O(r3/2 · n)-competitive and Ω(r) is a lower bound
on the performance of any deterministic online algorithm.

1

1.1

Competitive Ratio

To measure the effectiveness of online algorithms we use
one of the standard yardsticks, namely competitive analysis (Borodin and El-Yaniv 1998), and we compare the overall cost of an online algorithm A LG to an optimal (offline)
solution O PT on the same input instance I. We emphasize
that we compare our algorithm to an optimal solution that
can also change the permutation dynamically.
An algorithm A LG is c-competitive if there exists ξ such
that for any input instance I, it holds that A LG(I) ≤ c ·
O PT(I) + ξ. The competitive ratio of A LG is the infimum of

Introduction

We focus on the problem of maintaining an ordered (ranked)
list of elements and updating the order to better reflect the
preferences of users. This problem occurs naturally in an online shop that has to present a list of items in some order
to users. Items that a user is interested in should be placed
sufficiently close to the list beginning: otherwise, a user
has to scroll down, which could degrade the overall experience and reduce customer retention. Similar phenomena
occur not only in online shopping (Derakhshan et al. 2020),
but also in ordering results from a web search for a given
keyword (Dwork et al. 2001; Agichtein, Brill, and Dumais
2018), or ordering news and advertisements.

1

A careful reader may observe that the same cost measure is applied both to accessing the first element and to swapping two adjacent list elements. This choice is made to make the model coherent
with the previous papers. However, one can easily set the swapping cost to an arbitrary constant: by the expense of small constant
factors, these variants are reducible to our problem using standard
rent-or-buy approaches (Karlin et al. 1994).

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6815

