The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Layout Representation Learning with Spatial and Structural Hierarchies
Yue Bai1 * , Dipu Manandhar3 , Zhaowen Wang4 , John Collomosse4 , Yun Fu1,2
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University
2
Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University
3
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey
4
Adobe Research

Abstract

Dense
graph

We present a novel hierarchical modeling method for layout representation learning, the core of design documents
(e.g., user interface, poster, template). Existing works on layout representation often ignore element hierarchies, which is
an important facet of layouts, and mainly rely on the spatial bounding boxes for feature extraction. This paper proposes a Spatial-Structural Hierarchical Auto-Encoder (SSHAE) that learns hierarchical representation by treating a hierarchically annotated layout as a tree format. On the one
side, we model SSH-AE from both spatial (semantic views)
and structural (organization and relationships) perspectives,
which are two complementary aspects to represent a layout.
On the other side, the semantic/geometric properties are associated at multiple resolutions/granularities, naturally handling complex layouts. Our learned representations are used
for effective layout search from both spatial and structural
similarity perspectives. We also newly involve the tree-edit
distance (TED) as an evaluation metric to construct a comprehensive evaluation protocol for layout similarity assessment,
which benefits a systematic and customized layout search. We
further present a new dataset of POSTER layouts which we
believe will be useful for future layout research. We show
that our proposed SSH-AE outperforms the existing methods achieving state-of-the-art performance on two benchmark
datasets. Code is available at github.com/yueb17/SSH-AE.

Sparse
tree

Figure 1: Layouts contain several elements with nested containment and alignments as highlighted by bounding boxes.
They are modelled as graphs: elements as nodes and their
relationships as edges. Previous works treat all nodes equivalently as a dense graph ignoring the structural characteristic. We propose to utilize rich hierarchy information and
construct a sparse tree leading to a discriminative representation. Different colors mean different element levels.
lationships of contained elements. In our work, we refer to
visual characteristics as term “spatial” and relational patterns among different elements as “structural” and learn
layout representation from these two aspects. Both the spatial and structural aspects are critical in practice. For example, when users want to explore design variations with similar content, spatial aspect is more important as it provides
cues on how the designs are perceived visually (Bylinskii
et al. 2017; O’Donovan, Agarwala, and Hertzmann 2014).
On the another hand, when users want to customize designs arrangement, structural properties such as groupings
and alignments are critical aspects as these relationships and
structure define the blueprint of layout (Yang et al. 2017).
The spatial and structural aspects are seen as an orthogonal pair as any content can be designed into any layout formats. However, both of them exhibit a hierarchical characteristic, decomposed into a multi-level format. Concretely,
for spatial aspect, the elements in a layout typically have
varying spatial sizes and attain the most visual salience when
being viewed at a certain spatial resolution: larger elements
(e.g., toolbar and teaser image) serve as an outline forming
the top of a hierarchy; smaller elements contain detailed contents relevant to larger elements forming the bottom levels of
a hierarchy. Similarly, for structural aspect, a sample hierarchy can be constructed based grouping geometric relation-

Introduction
Layout design is widely used in user interface (UI), graphics
templates, architecture plan, etc. Given the increasing number of these creative products with diverse layout designs
available to users, it is important to have scalable approaches
to represent the layout in a customized fashion which benefits downstream tasks such as searching, and recommendation. There are recent works (Deka et al. 2017; Patil et al.
2021; Liu et al. 2018; Manandhar, Ruta, and Collomosse
2020; Patil et al. 2020; Li et al. 2019) on layout representation learning which aim to represent a layout sample as a
latent vector to support various tasks.
Different from typical visual data, layout is a special data
type featuring both visual characteristics and topological re* Corresponding author: bai.yue@northeastern.edu; Work done
during the author’s internship at Adobe Research.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

206

