The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Revisiting Unsupervised Local Descriptor Learning
Wufan Wang1 , Lei Zhang1 , Hua Huang2∗
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University
{wwf20, leizhang}@bit.edu.cn, huahuang@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract

local descriptors from unlabelled patches is more flexible
and has lately attracted lots of research attention.
Essentially, supervised and unsupervised local descriptor
learning share the same procedure: first construct training
tuples involving matching and non-matching patches (e.g.,
the triplet tuple hanchor, positive, negativei), then calculate
a loss function defined over the tuples and minimize it.
The difference between the two types of approaches lies in
whether patch labels are available to guide the tuple construction, which also accounts for their performance gap.
Therefore, the key to bridging this performance gap for unsupervised approaches is constructing accurate training tuples, which implies two requirements: accurately describing
pairwise patch relationships, and fully capturing the patch
variations undergoing in real-world scenarios.
The state-of-the-art unsupervised approach (Fan et al.
2021) relies on heuristic rules to construct tuples: the positive samples in the tuples are generated by applying heuristic geometric transformation rules to the original patch, i.e.,
the anchor sample. Although the generated positive pairs
(i.e., positives) have relatively accurate pairwise relationships which enable fast model convergence, the heuristic
rules fall short to simulate the diverse and complicated realworld transformations due to their limited capability. As a
result, the constructed tuples with unrealistic patch variations can considerably hinder the CNN model from learning
accurate class decision boundaries.
A possible solution to ameliorate the problem is utilizing
the clustering-based approach (Xie, Girshick, and Farhadi
2016; Caron et al. 2018). Starting with a randomly initialized CNN model, it first uses the CNN model to cluster samples and then constructs tuples with the estimated pseudolabels to train the CNN model. The clustering and optimization processes are conducted alternately to progressively improve the model. Since all samples come from the training
dataset, the positives constructed by such an approach naturally embody more realistic patch variations and allow to
learn more powerful models. However, the clustering-based
approach suffers from inaccurate pairwise relationships inferred by the less powerful CNN model at the early learning
period, leading to impaired model performance and slower
convergence than the rule-based approach.
Although neither approach can achieve the desired performance, we observe that the rule-based approach has the

Constructing accurate training tuples is crucial for unsupervised local descriptor learning, yet challenging due to the absence of patch labels. The state-of-the-art approach constructs
tuples with heuristic rules, which struggle to precisely depict real-world patch transformations, in spite of enabling fast
model convergence. A possible solution to alleviate the problem is the clustering-based approach, which can capture realistic patch variations and learn more accurate class decision
boundaries, but suffers from slow model convergence. This
paper presents HybridDesc, an unsupervised approach that
learns powerful local descriptor models with fast convergence
speed by combining the rule-based and clustering-based approaches to construct training tuples. In addition, HybridDesc also contributes two concrete enhancing mechanisms:
(1) a Differentiable Hyperparameter Search (DHS) strategy to
find the optimal hyperparameter setting of the rule-based approach so as to provide accurate prior for the clustering-based
approach, (2) an On-Demand Clustering (ODC) method to reduce the clustering overhead of the clustering-based approach
without eroding its advantage. Extensive experimental results
show that HybridDesc can efficiently learn local descriptors
that surpass existing unsupervised local descriptors and even
rival competitive supervised ones.

Introduction
Computing feature descriptors for image patches around interest points serves as the cornerstone of many computer vision tasks, such as image retrieval (Radenović, Tolias, and
Chum 2019), object detection (Ren and Li 2016) and augmented reality (Piao and Kim 2019). The goal is to construct
a discriminative feature space where matching patches are
projected to neighboring locations while non-matching ones
are mapped apart from each other.
Recently, supervised local descriptors based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved remarkable performance. However, the heavy reliance of these approaches on class-wise labels (or pairwise matching/nonmatching labels) greatly hinders their application in many
scenarios where patch annotations are costly to acquire (e.g.,
medical or hyperspectral images). On the contrary, learning
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2680

