The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CoMAE: Single Model Hybrid Pre-training on Small-Scale RGB-D Datasets
Jiange Yang1 , Sheng Guo2 , Gangshan Wu1 , Limin Wang1 *
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
MYbank, Ant Group, China
{jiangeyang.jgy, guosheng1001}@gmail.com, {gswu, lmwang}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

Large-scale supervised pre-training

Current RGB-D scene recognition approaches often train two
standalone backbones for RGB and depth modalities with
the same Places or ImageNet pre-training. However, the pretrained depth network is still biased by RGB-based models which may result in a suboptimal solution. In this paper, we present a single-model self-supervised hybrid pretraining framework for RGB and depth modalities, termed
as CoMAE. Our CoMAE presents a curriculum learning
strategy to unify the two popular self-supervised representation learning algorithms: contrastive learning and masked
image modeling. Specifically, we first build a patch-level
alignment task to pre-train a single encoder shared by two
modalities via cross-modal contrastive learning. Then, the
pre-trained contrastive encoder is passed to a multi-modal
masked autoencoder to capture the finer context features from
a generative perspective. In addition, our single-model design without requirement of fusion module is very flexible and robust to generalize to unimodal scenario in both
training and testing phases. Extensive experiments on SUN
RGB-D and NYUDv2 datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of our CoMAE for RGB and depth representation learning.
In addition, our experiment results reveal that CoMAE is a
data-efficient representation learner. Although we only use
the small-scale and unlabeled training set for pre-training,
our CoMAE pre-trained models are still competitive to the
state-of-the-art methods with extra large-scale and supervised RGB dataset pre-training. Code will be released at
https://github.com/MCG-NJU/CoMAE.

CoMAE: small-scale
self-supervised pre-training

RGB
fusion
design

result

RGB
RGB & depth
depth

Transformer
Encoder

depth

(a) Traditional two-stream fusion paradigm (b) Our single-model paradigm

Figure 1: Comparison of RGB-D scene recognition pipeline.
(a) Traditional methods often use supervised pre-training to
initialize CNNs and train two separate networks for RGB
and depth modalities. Then, these two networks are combined with a fusion module to yield final recognition results.
(b) Our CoMAE presents single-model and self-supervised
pre-training for RGB and depth two modalities with a Transformer encoder. Our pre-trained singel-model encoder could
be deployed for unimodal or multimodal input due its flexibility of self-attention operation.

and the diversity of objects and their correlations. Therefore, with the widespread use of cost-affordable depth sensors, e.g., Kinect, the research community has witnessed the
advancement of RGB-D scene recognition (Silberman et al.
2012; Song, Lichtenberg, and Xiao 2015). The depth modality can provide the cues on the shape of a local geometry and
is less sensitiveness to illumination changes and texture variation compared with RGB in this task.
As shown in Fig. 1, the most straightforward method
for RGB-D scene recognition (Zhu, Weibel, and Lu 2016;
Xiong, Yuan, and Wang 2021; Du et al. 2021) is to train
two separate networks (CNNs) for two modalities, and combine their results with some fusion modules to yield the final recognition results. In this paradigm, depth data is expected to learn fine and complementary geometrical features
to enhance the performance of RGB CNN. However, data
scarcity is an important issue for depth modality and training
from scratch is prone to over-fitting. Therefore, some methods (Zhu, Weibel, and Lu 2016) try to use RGB pre-trained
models on ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) or Places (Zhou
et al. 2014) to initialize the depth CNNs to mitigate this issue. Yet, the modality gap between RGB and depth makes

Introduction
Thanks to the flourishing development of deep learning, a
series of vision tasks, including image classification (He
et al. 2016), object detection (Ren et al. 2017), and semantic
segmentation (Chen et al. 2018), have achieved impressive
success by learning discriminative features in an end-to-end
manner. Scene recognition (Zhou et al. 2014; Wang et al.
2017) is a more challenging task that could benefit from
these object-centric understanding. However, it also tends to
depend on more representative features than object-centric
tasks due to illumination changes, complex spatial layout,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3145

