The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robust Neuro-Symbolic Goal and Plan Recognition
Leonardo Amado1 , Ramon Fraga Pereira2,3 , Felipe Meneguzzi4,1
1

Pontifical Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
2
University of Manchester, England, UK
3
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
4
University of Aberdeen, Scotland, UK
leonardo.amado@edu.pucrs.br, ramon.fragapereira@manchester.ac.uk, felipe.meneguzzi@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract

2020; Amado, Mirsky, and Meneguzzi 2022). Learning approaches deal well with noisy data (Kim et al. 2011; Schlimmer and Granger 1986), creating robust models capable of
accurate predictions with missing or noisy data. Inspired
by such developments, we develop novel recognition approaches that mitigate low and faulty observability, solving both goal and plan recognition problems simultaneously,
combining planning heuristics and learning models into a
novel class of neuro-symbolic approaches. On the learning side, we train a predictive statistical model of the most
likely next states given a set of state observations. We combine such predictive models with symbolic heuristics for
goal recognition to predict relevant states towards a goal
hypothesis given a sequence of observations. In the resulting approaches, the predictive models address the two most
common flaws in observations in goal and plan recognition: missing and noisy observations. This allows us to fill
in missing observations and rebuild the sequence of states of
a complete plan from an initial state to a goal state. While
completing missing observations, we detect faulty (noisy)
observations and build state sequences that do not necessarily comply with all observations.

Goal Recognition is the task of discerning the intended goal
agent aims to achieve given a sequence of observations,
whereas Plan Recognition consists of identifying the plan
to achieve such intended goal. Regardless of the underlying
techniques, most recognition approaches are directly affected
by the quality of the available observations. In this paper,
we develop neuro-symbolic recognition approaches that can
combine learning and planning techniques, compensating for
noise and missing observations using prior data. We evaluate our approaches in standard human-designed planning domains as well as domain models automatically learned from
real-world data. Empirical experimentation shows that our
approaches reliably infer goals and compute correct plans in
the experimental datasets. An ablation study shows that we
outperform existing approaches that rely exclusively on the
domain model, or exclusively on machine learning, in problems with both noisy observations and low observability.

Introduction
Plan Recognition is the task of inferring the actual plan an
observed agent is performing to achieve a goal, given a domain model and a partial, and possibly noisy, sequence of
observations (Carberry 2001; Ramı́rez and Geffner 2009;
Sukthankar et al. 2014; Mirsky, Keren, and Geib 2021).
Such task arises in a multitude of different areas, including natural language processing (Geib and Steedman 2007),
elder-care (Geib 2002), multi-agent systems (Shvo, Sohrabi,
and McIlraith 2018), epistemic problems (Shvo et al. 2020)
and more (Granada et al. 2017; Wayllace et al. 2020; Shvo
and McIlraith 2020). Real-world recognition problems impose limitations on the quality and quantity of the observations from an agent’s plan, resulting in observations missing parts of the underlying plan or including spurious observations from silent errors in the sensors. While recent
approaches have substantially improved performance under
partial observability and noisy (spurious) observations (ZhiXuan et al. 2020; Pereira, Oren, and Meneguzzi 2020; Santos et al. 2021), these problems remains a challenge.
Recent work on Goal and Plan Recognition use learned
models to assist planning-based approaches in modeling domain knowledge (Pereira et al. 2019; Zhuo et al.

We empirically evaluate our approaches in standard handcrafted planning domain models, as well as in image-based
learned domain models, showing their effectiveness at recognizing both goals and plans. We compare the optimality of the computed plans and the precision of the predicted goals in scenarios with missing and faulty observations against the seminal recognition approaches of Ramı́rez
and Geffner (2009; 2010). In learned domain models, the
seminal recognition approaches struggle to achieve high precision, as the number of returned goals is usually very large.
Our approaches achieve high precision in all evaluated domains, excelling in learned domains with a precision increase of up to 60%, including problems with noisy observations. We show that our approaches can compute complete
optimal plans in most problems, resulting in reliable plan
recognition approaches. An ablation study shows the impact
of the learning component and the symbolic component on
the overall performance of our approaches. This showcases
the potential for neuro-symbolic approaches for goal and
plan recognition, combining the robustness of learned predictive models and the generalization provided by heuristic
search guided by informed heuristics.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11937

