The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

How to Cut a Discrete Cake Fairly
Ayumi Igarashi
The University of Tokyo,
igarashi@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

connected piece (Stromquist 1980; Su 1999; Woodall 1980).
Note that the connectivity constraint is crucial in various
contexts, particularly when the resource has temporal or spacial structure.
In many application domains, the resource may be indivisible. For example, time is often divided into discrete
time units, such as scheduled shifts and research seminars.
As another example, land may be divided into discrete land
plots, due to geographical or historical constraints. A discrete version of the cake-cutting problem has been considered in several papers recently (Bilò et al. 2019; Bouveret
et al. 2017; Marenco and Tetzlaff 2014; Suksompong 2019).
In this framework, the indivisible items are aligned on a path
and each agent is allocated to a connected bundle of items.
In allocation of indivisible resources, envy-freeness is not
guaranteed. Indeed, in the case of one item and two agents,
one agent necessarily receives nothing and therefore envies
the other. Nevertheless, the objective can be naturally relaxed via approximations. An approximate notion of envyfreeness, called envy-freeness up to one good (EF1), has
been intensively investigated in recent years (Budish 2011).
EF1 allows agents to envy other agents but the envy can be
eliminated after removing one item from others’ bundles.
Several algorithms achieve EF1 within the standard setting
of fair division of indivisible items (Lipton et al. 2004; Caragiannis et al. 2016). For agents with monotone valuations,
the envy-cycle algorithm in Lipton et al. (2004) returns an
EF1 division. For agents with monotone additive valuations,
an allocation maximizing the Nash product of agents’ valuations satisfies EF1 (Caragiannis et al. 2016). Can we achieve
EF1 under the connectivity constraint of a path?
This question was partially answered by Bilò et al. (2019).
They showed that an EF1 connected division exists for any
monotone valuations when there are at most four agents.
They followed Su’s approach (Su 1999) using Sperner’s
lemma: The possible divisions of the path can be encoded by
the vertices of a triangulated (n − 1)-dimensional simplex;
see Figure 1 for an illustration with n = 3. Each agent colors each vertex with the index of the most preferred bundle
of the partition represented by each vertex. Sperner’s lemma
then implies the existence of a small simplex labeled with
distinct agents and colored with different indices of bundles.
Loosely speaking, this simplex corresponds to a sequence of
“similar” divisions, each of which satisfies different agents

Cake-cutting is a fundamental model of dividing a heterogeneous resource, such as land, broadcast time, and advertisement space. In this study, we consider the problem of dividing a discrete cake fairly in which the indivisible goods are
aligned on a path and agents are interested in receiving a connected subset of items. We prove that a connected division
of indivisible items satisfying a discrete counterpart of envyfreeness, called envy-freeness up to one good (EF1), always
exists for any number of agents n with monotone valuations.
Our result settles an open question raised by Bilò et al. (2019),
who proved that an EF1 connected division always exists for
the number of agents n ⩽ 4. Moreover, the proof can be extended to show the following (1) “secretive” and (2) “extra”
versions: (1) for n agents with monotone valuations, the path
can be divided into n connected bundles such that an EF1 assignment of the remaining bundles can be made to the other
agents for any selection made by the “secretive agent”; (2)
for n + 1 agents with monotone valuations, the path can be
divided into n connected bundles such that when any “extra
agent” leaves, an EF1 assignment of the bundles can be made
to the remaining agents.

1

Introduction

Imagine a group of researchers scheduling time slots for
meetings. Their preferences may be heterogeneous: for
example, one researcher may prefer a morning meeting,
whereas another may prefer an afternoon meeting. This situation raises the question: how can we allocate time slots
fairly? This problem falls within the field of the well-known
cake-cutting problem, in which the cake, often represented
by the unit interval [0, 1], has to be divided between n
agents with different preferences. Here, the term “cake” is
a metaphor for a heterogeneous divisible resources, such as
land or time.
A central notion of fairness in the literature is envyfreeness (Foley 1967), which requires that each agent receives their personal best piece out of the allocated pieces.
In this scenario, no agent wishes to replace their allocated
portion with that of any other agent. The classical result
shows that under mild assumptions on the agents’ preferences, there is an envy-free division offering each agent a
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5681

