The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Tight Performance Guarantees of Imitator Policies with Continuous Actions
Davide Maran, Alberto Maria Metelli, Marcello Restelli
Politecnico di Milano
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32 20133, Milan, Italy
{davide.maran, albertomaria.metelli, macrello.restelli}@polimi.it

Abstract

demonstrated behavior. Instead, IRL has the more ambitious
goal of reconstructing a reward function that justifies the expert’s behavior. Thus, it aims at representing the expert’s intent rather than their behavior. In this sense, IRL is more
challenging than BC, as its output, the reward function, is a
more powerful tool that succeeds in being deployed even in
the presence of a modification of the environment.
Although IL techniques have been successfully applied to
a large variety of real-world applications (e.g., Asfour et al.
2008; Geng, Lee, and Hülse 2011; Rozo, Jiménez, and Torras 2013; Likmeta et al. 2021), their theoretical understanding in terms of performance of the imitation policy is currently limited. Recently, in (Xu, Li, and Yu 2020), a first
analysis of the error bounds has been provided for BC and
Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (Ho and Ermon
2016). However, these results involve the presence of an f divergence (Rényi et al. 1961), usually total variation (TV)
or KL-divergence, between the expert’s policy and the imitator one. Consequently, they are significant only when the action space is finite, while becoming vacuous for experts with
continuous actions. To further argue on the limitation of this
analysis, consider the case in which BC is reduced to minimize the mean squared error (MSE) between the expert’s
action and the imitator one. Even in this simple scenario, as
we shall see, the current analysis based on TV cannot relate
MSE with the performance of the imitator policy. This represents a relevant limitation since many of the applications
of IL are naturally defined with continuous-actions context.

Behavioral Cloning (BC) aims at learning a policy that mimics the behavior demonstrated by an expert. The current theoretical understanding of BC is limited to the case of finite
actions. In this paper, we study BC with the goal of providing
theoretical guarantees on the performance of the imitator policy in the case of continuous actions. We start by deriving a
novel bound on the performance gap based on Wasserstein
distance, applicable for continuous-action experts, holding
under the assumption that the value function is Lipschitz continuous. Since this latter condition is hardy fulfilled in practice, even for Lipschitz Markov Decision Processes and policies, we propose a relaxed setting, proving that value function
is always Hölder continuous. This result is of independent
interest and allows obtaining in BC a general bound for the
performance of the imitator policy. Finally, we analyze noise
injection, a common practice in which the expert’s action is
executed in the environment after the application of a noise
kernel. We show that this practice allows deriving stronger
performance guarantees, at the price of a bias due to the noise
addition.

1

Introduction

The degree of interaction of the human in the ecosystem
of artificial intelligence is progressively becoming more and
more prominent (Zanzotto 2019). In this setting, the human
plays the role of an expert that, with different tools, interacts
with the artificial agents and allows the agent to leverage
their knowledge to improve, quicken, and make the learning
process more effective (Jeon, Milli, and Dragan 2020).
Imitation Learning (IL, Osa et al. 2018) can be considered one of the simplest forms of interaction between a human and an artificial agent. This kind of interaction is unidirectional since the human expert provides the agent with
a set of demonstrations of behavior that is optimal w.r.t. an
unknown objective. The agent, on its part, aims to learn a
behavior as close as possible to the demonstrated one. Classically, we distinguish between two realizations of IL: Behavioral Cloning (BC, Bain and Sammut 1995) and Inverse
Reinforcement Learning (IRL, Arora and Doshi 2021). BC
aims at mimicking the behavior of the agent by recovering a policy that matches as much as possible the expert’s

Original Contributions In this paper, we aim to take a
step forward to a more comprehensive theoretical understanding of BC. Specifically, we devise error bounds that
relate the performance difference J πE ´J πI between the expert’s policy πE and the imitator one πI to their divergence.
Our bounds are based on the Wasserstein distance (Villani
2009) and, for this reason, are meaningful even in the presence of continuous-action spaces (Section 3). Our work contains the following contributions:
1. We will prove a performance bound for standard BC
in case of Lipschitz reward-transition for the MDP (see
(Rachelson and Lagoudakis 2010)) and Lipschitz continuity of the value function.
2. Since the latter assumption is often violated in practice,1 ,

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9073

It is well-known that the value function is Lipschitz continuous

