The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Safeguarded Learned Convex Optimization
Howard Heaton* 1 , Xiaohan Chen* 2 , Zhangyang Wang2 , Wotao Yin3
1

2

Typal Research, Typal LLC
Department of Electrical and Computer and Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin
3
Alibaba US, DAMO Academy, Decision Intelligence Lab

Abstract

low) have linear convergence to a sparse signal when training finds proper parameters, i.e. it is possible they converge.
This work addresses the inquiry:

Applications abound in which optimization problems must be
repeatedly solved, each time with new (but similar) data. Analytic optimization algorithms can be hand-designed to provably solve these problems in an iterative fashion. On one
hand, data-driven algorithms can “learn to optimize” (L2O)
with much fewer iterations and similar cost per iteration as
general-purpose optimization algorithms. On the other hand,
unfortunately, many L2O algorithms lack converge guarantees. To fuse the advantages of these approaches, we present
a Safe-L2O framework. Safe-L2O updates incorporate a safeguard to guarantee convergence for convex problems with
proximal and/or gradient oracles. The safeguard is simple and
computationally cheap to implement, and it is activated only
when the data-driven L2O updates would perform poorly
or appear to diverge. This yields the numerical benefits of
employing machine learning to create rapid L2O algorithms
while still guaranteeing convergence. Our numerical examples show convergence of Safe-L2O algorithms, even when
the provided data is not from the distribution of training data.

Can a safeguard be added to L2O algorithms to guarantee
convergence without significantly hindering performance?
A safeguard is anything that identifies when a “bad” L2O
update (due to poorly trained parameters, lack of generalization, out-of-distribution inputs, or any other reasons) would
occur and what to do in place of that “bad” update. Informally, what a safeguard does can be summarized by generating a sequence {xk } with updates of the form

L2O Update
if update is “good”
k+1
x
=
(1)
Fallback Update otherwise.
We provide an affirmative answer to the question for convex
problems with gradient and/or proximal oracles by providing such a safeguard and replacing “bad” L2O updates with
updates from analytic methods. Since a trade-off is formed
between per iteration costs and ensuring convergence, below
we clarify properties for a “practical” L2O safeguard.

Introduction
Solving scientific computing problems often requires use
of efficient optimization algorithms. Data-driven algorithms
can execute in far fewer iterations and with similar cost per
iteration as state-of-the-art general purpose algorithms. Inspired by one such algorithm, ISTA, (Gregor and LeCun
2010) proposed treating entries in fixed matrices/vectors of
the algorithm as learnable parameters that can vary by iteration. These entries were fine-tuned to obtain optimal performance on a data set for a fixed number of iterations. Empirically, this approach converged with a roughly a 20-fold
reduction in computational cost compared to the original analytic algorithm. Related works also showed numerical success (reviewed below). These efforts open the door to a new
class of algorithms and analyses. Analytic optimization results often provide worst-case convergence rates, and limited theory exists pertaining to instances drawn from a common distribution. Most L2O methods have little or no convergence guarantees, especially on data distinct from what is
seen in training. Indeed, LISTA and ALISTA (reviewed be-

1. The safeguard should ensure certain forms of worst-case
convergence similar to analytic algorithms.
2. The safeguard must only use known quantities related to
convex problems (e.g. objective values, gradient norms).
3. Both L2O and Safe-L2O schemes should perform identically on “good” data with comparable per-iteration costs.
4. The safeguard should kick in only when “bad” L2O updates would otherwise occur.
The core challenge is to create a simple safeguard that
kicks in only when needed. Unlike classic optimization algorithms, exceptional L2O algorithms do not necessarily exhibit the behavior that each successive iterate is “better” than
the current iterate (i.e. are not monotonically improving).
Loosely speaking, this means there are cases where an L2O
scheme that gets “worse” for a couple iterates yields a better
final output than an L2O scheme that is required to get “better” at each iterate. The intuition behind why this can be acceptable is we are interested in the final output of the L2O algorithm and L2O schemes may learn “shortcuts.” From this
insight, we deduce a safeguard should exhibit a form of trailing behavior, i.e. measure progress of previous iterates and

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7848

