The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DisGUIDE: Disagreement-Guided Data-Free Model Extraction
Jonathan Rosenthal1 , Eric Enouen2 * , Hung Viet Pham3† , Lin Tan1
1
Purdue University
The Ohio State University
3
York University
rosenth0@purdue.edu, enouen.9@osu.edu, hvpham@yorku.ca, lintan@purdue.edu
2

Abstract

tim (Tramèr et al. 2016). These techniques expose possible
attacks so one can deploy defenses to protect the models.
Traditional model extraction techniques require some related data to query the victim model (Orekondy, Schiele,
and Fritz 2019). Recent techniques (Truong et al. 2021;
Kariyappa, Prakash, and Qureshi 2021) introduce data-free
model extraction, where no related training data is required
to steal models. Data-free approaches are more general and
practical because valuable models are often trained on private data to which attackers have no access. Otherwise, attackers could train their own model if the data was publicly
available. Data-free approaches address this challenge by
creating synthetic samples to query the victim model.
Data-Free Model Extraction (Truong et al. 2021), henceforth DFME, and MAZE (Kariyappa, Prakash, and Qureshi
2021) adapt techniques used in knowledge distillation (Fang
et al. 2019; Micaelli and Storkey 2019) to generate synthetic
data to train clone models for model extraction. They train
a generator to learn what samples maximize the difference
between the victim and the clone to create better samples to
learn from and use approximation techniques to estimate the
victim model’s hidden gradient. This gradient is then passed
to the generator to update its weights, so it will create better
samples for the clone model to copy the victim model. These
techniques are used in the soft-label setting, where the victim model returns the confidence values of all class labels
(i.e., softmax outputs).
The recent paper Data-Free Model Stealing (Sanyal, Addepalli, and Babu 2022), henceforth DFMS, extends datafree model extraction to the more practical and complex
hard-label setting, where the victim returns only the predicted class label instead of confidence values of all labels.
This paper achieves state-of-the-art performance in both the
hard-label and soft-label settings. They introduce a novel
GAN framework combined with pretraining on a generated
synthetic dataset to improve the clone’s final accuracy.
Despite the promises of data-free model extraction, existing approaches suffer from poor model accuracy. For example, on the CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky and Hinton 2009)
dataset with 100 classes, the clone models extracted by existing approaches only achieve an accuracy of 43.56% (Sanyal,
Addepalli, and Babu 2022) (Section ).
In addition, these data-free model extraction techniques
require a large query budget because the generated sam-

Recent model-extraction attacks on Machine Learning as a
Service (MLaaS) systems have moved towards data-free approaches, showing the feasibility of stealing models trained
with difficult-to-access data. However, these attacks are ineffective or limited due to the low accuracy of extracted models
and the high number of queries to the models under attack.
The high query cost makes such techniques infeasible for online MLaaS systems that charge per query.
We create a novel approach to get higher accuracy and
query efficiency than prior data-free model extraction techniques. Specifically, we introduce a novel generator training
scheme that maximizes the disagreement loss between two
clone models that attempt to copy the model under attack.
This loss, combined with diversity loss and experience replay,
enables the generator to produce better instances to train the
clone models. Our evaluation on popular datasets CIFAR-10
and CIFAR-100 shows that our approach improves the final
model accuracy by up to 3.42% and 18.48% respectively. The
average number of queries required to achieve the accuracy of
the prior state of the art is reduced by up to 64.95%. We hope
this will promote future work on feasible data-free model extraction and defenses against such attacks.

Introduction
Many deployed machine learning models are accessible via
a pay-per-query system (Tramèr et al. 2016). It is profitable
for an adversary to steal these models for either theft or reconnaissance (Jagielski et al. 2020). For theft, the goal is
to avoid continued payment to the model owner by copying
the original model under attack, also known as the victim
model, into another model, referred to as a clone model. For
reconnaissance, the goal is to set up a base for further attacks
on a proprietary model or data. White-box attacks apply to
the clone model as a proxy to uncover the training data or
parameters of the victim model (Papernot et al. 2017; Shumailov et al. 2021). Recent techniques propose model extraction attacks, which attempt to copy victim model functionality into a clone model via black-box queries to the vic* The work was done when Eric was at Purdue University.
†
The work was done when Hung was at the University of Waterloo.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9614

