The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

The Expressive Power of Ad-Hoc Constraints for Modelling CSPs
Ruiwei Wang and Roland H.C. Yap
School of Computing, National University of Singapore,
13 Computing Drive, 117417, Singapore
{ruiwei,ryap}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

(GAC) on ad-hoc constraints. However, there is less work
studying the constraint expressive power that can be useful
for modelling CSPs, such as the constraint succinctness and
the cost of operations/queries on constraints. In this paper,
we investigate ad-hoc constraints with a knowledge compilation (KC) approach which has been mainly developed
to study Boolean functions (Darwiche and Marquis 2002).
Note that although we use a KC approach, we are concerned
about questions arising from modelling CSPs which do not
normally occur in the KC literature.
To solve a problem using CSP solvers, one needs to model
the problem as constraints, where ad-hoc constraints provide
the most modelling flexibility. However, there are many different choices for the ad-hoc constraints and their specific
representation. A basic question we address is when is an
ad-hoc constraint defined with a certain representation worse
than another one. For this, we first use 15 families of constraints to analyze 14 existing ad-hoc constraints, showing
ad-hoc constraints have very different properties, e.g. some
can model a constraint family in polysize while others cannot. Going further, we give a complete map of succinctness
for the 14 ad-hoc constraints.
Besides primitive constraints, constraint modelling languages (Nethercote et al. 2007; Frisch et al. 2008) also provide a higher level of modelling, such as the use of logical
operators to combine constraints. We study whether the adhoc constraints can provide tractable conjunction, disjunction, negation, projection and conditioning operations. This
can give guidance on how to model combinations of constraints in a CSP solver supporting certain ad-hoc constraints
taking into account tractability considerations.
In addition, we may want to ask various queries on the
constraints in a CSP model. For instance, we may want
to count the solutions/tuples of a constraint (Pesant 2005)
or check whether some constraints are equivalent. We also
study whether the ad-hoc constraints provide tractable consistency, entailment, validity, implicant, equivalence, counting and model enumeration queries.
In summary, we present a KC approach to investigate
the succinctness of ad-hoc constraints and associated operations/queries. Our results deepen our understanding of the
fundamental properties of ad-hoc constraints. It also helps
to give insights into when a certain ad-hoc constraint can be
used given the context of its usage.

Ad-hoc constraints (also called generic constraints) are
important for modelling Constraint Satisfaction Problems
(CSPs). Many representations have been proposed to define
ad-hoc constraints, such as tables, decision diagrams, binary
constraint trees, automata and context-free grammars. However, prior works mainly focus on efficient Generalized Arc
Consistency (GAC) propagators of ad-hoc constraints using
the representations. In this paper, we ask a more fundamental question which bears on modelling constraints in a CSP
as ad-hoc constraints, how the choice of constraints and operations affect tractability. Rather than ad-hoc constraints and
their GAC propagators, our focus is on their expressive power
in terms of succinctness (polysize) and cost of operations/
queries (polytime). We use a large set of constraint families
to investigate the expressive power of 14 existing ad-hoc constraints. We show a complete map of the succinctness of the
ad-hoc constraints. We also present results on the tractability of applying various operations and queries on the ad-hoc
constraints. Finally, we give case studies illustrating how our
results can be useful for questions in the modelling of CSPs.

Introduction
A wide range of combinatorial problems in real life can be
modelled with Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSPs) using a diverse of constraints. We will focus on ad-hoc constraints (also called generic constraints) that can be defined
with various representations, such as tables (Bessière and
Régin 1997; Lecoutre 2011; Lecoutre, Likitvivatanavong,
and Yap 2015; Wang et al. 2016; Demeulenaere et al. 2016;
Verhaeghe, Lecoutre, and Schaus 2017; Wang and Yap 2019,
2020), automatas (Pesant 2004; Quimper and Walsh 2006;
Cheng, Xia, and Yap 2012), context-free grammars (Sellmann 2006; Quimper and Walsh 2006, 2007; Kadioglu and
Sellmann 2008), decision diagrams (Cheng and Yap 2010;
Gange, Stuckey, and Szymanek 2011; Perez and Régin
2014; Vion and Piechowiak 2018; Verhaeghe, Lecoutre, and
Schaus 2018, 2019), and binary constraint trees (Wang and
Yap 2022b). Ad-hoc constraints are very useful for modelling specific constraints which do not fit well with common global constraints.
Many algorithms (Yap, Xia, and Wang 2020) have been
proposed to efficiently enforce Generalized Arc Consistency
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4104

