The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Scalable Spatiotemporal Graph Neural Networks
Andrea Cini * 1 , Ivan Marisca * 1 , Filippo Maria Bianchi 2,3 , Cesare Alippi 1,4
1

The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, Università della Svizzera italiana
2
UiT the Arctic University of Norway
3
NORCE Norwegian Research Centre
4
Politecnico di Milano
{andrea.cini, ivan.marisca}@usi.ch, filippo.m.bianchi@uit.no, cesare.alippi@usi.ch
Abstract

Temporal embedding:

Neural forecasting of spatiotemporal time series drives both
research and industrial innovation in several relevant application domains. Graph neural networks (GNNs) are often
the core component of the forecasting architecture. However,
in most spatiotemporal GNNs, the computational complexity
scales up to a quadratic factor with the length of the sequence
times the number of links in the graph, hence hindering the
application of these models to large graphs and long temporal
sequences. While methods to improve scalability have been
proposed in the context of static graphs, few research efforts
have been devoted to the spatiotemporal case. To fill this gap,
we propose a scalable architecture that exploits an efficient
encoding of both temporal and spatial dynamics. In particular, we use a randomized recurrent neural network to embed
the history of the input time series into high-dimensional state
representations encompassing multi-scale temporal dynamics. Such representations are then propagated along the spatial
dimension using different powers of the graph adjacency matrix to generate node embeddings characterized by a rich pool
of spatiotemporal features. The resulting node embeddings
can be efficiently pre-computed in an unsupervised manner,
before being fed to a feed-forward decoder that learns to map
the multi-scale spatiotemporal representations to predictions.
The training procedure can then be parallelized node-wise by
sampling the node embeddings without breaking any dependency, thus enabling scalability to large networks. Empirical
results on relevant datasets show that our approach achieves
results competitive with the state of the art, while dramatically reducing the computational burden.

ESN

...

ESN

...

1

Spatial embedding:

...
...
...

MLP

i.i.d. samples

ESN

Figure 1: Overview of the forecasting framework. Lightgrey boxes denote training-free components. At first, an
Echo-State Network (ESN) – with shared parameters across
nodes – encodes multi-scale temporal dynamics. Then, K
graph shift operators are used to propagate spatial information. The resulting K + 1 representations are concatenated
and fed to an MLP to predict the next H node observations.

techniques rely on subsampling graphs to reduce the computational requirements of the training procedure, e.g., (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Zeng et al. 2019). However,
sampling the node-level observations as if they were i.i.d.
can break relational (spatial) dependencies in static graphs
and it is even more problematic in the dynamic case, as dependencies occur also across the temporal dimension. Indeed, complex temporal and spatial dynamics that emerge
from the interactions across the whole graph over a long
time horizon, can be easily disrupted by perturbing such spatiotemporal structure with subsampling. As an alternative,
precomputing aggregated features over the graph allows for
factoring out spatial propagation from the training phase in
certain architetures (Frasca et al. 2020). However, similarly
to the subsampling approach, extending this method to the
spatiotemporal case is not trivial as the preprocessing step
must account also for the temporal dependencies besides the
graph topology.
In this paper, we propose a novel scalable encoder-

Introduction

As graph neural networks (GNNs; Scarselli et al. 2008; Bacciu et al. 2020) are gaining more traction in many application fields, the need for architectures scalable to large graphs
– such as those associated with large sensor networks – is
becoming a pressing issue. While research to improve the
scalability of models for static graph signals has been very
prolific (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Chiang et al.
2019; Zeng et al. 2019; Frasca et al. 2020), little attention
has been paid to the additional challenges encountered when
dealing with discrete-time dynamical graphs, i.e., spatiotemporal time series. Several of the existing scalable training
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7218

