The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Frame-Level Label Refinement for
Skeleton-Based Weakly-Supervised Action Recognition
Qing Yu,1 Kent Fujiwara2
1

The University of Tokyo, Japan
2
LINE Corporation, Japan
1
yu@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp, 2 kent.fujiwara@linecorp.com

Abstract
In recent years, skeleton-based action recognition has
achieved remarkable performance in understanding human
motion from sequences of skeleton data, which is an important medium for synthesizing realistic human movement in
various applications. However, existing methods assume that
each action clip is manually trimmed to contain one specific
action, which requires a significant amount of effort for annotation. To solve this problem, we consider a novel problem
of skeleton-based weakly-supervised temporal action localization (S-WTAL), where we need to recognize and localize
human action segments in untrimmed skeleton videos given
only the video-level labels. Although this task is challenging due to the sparsity of skeleton data and the lack of contextual clues from interaction with other objects and the environment, we present a frame-level label refinement framework based on a spatio-temporal graph convolutional network
(ST-GCN) to overcome these difficulties. We use multiple instance learning (MIL) with video-level labels to generate the
frame-level predictions. Inspired by advances in handling the
noisy label problem, we introduce a label cleaning strategy
of the frame-level pseudo labels to guide the learning process. The network parameters and the frame-level predictions
are alternately updated to obtain the final results. We extensively evaluate the effectiveness of our learning approach on
skeleton-based action recognition benchmarks. The state-ofthe-art experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
method can recognize and localize action segments of the
skeleton data.

Figure 1: Illustration of S-WTAL. One example of the training data is a video stream of skeleton data, consisting of several action segments, i.e., walk and lift, and transition frames
denoted as background (BG). In the proposed S-WTAL task,
the model needs to detect each action segment at frame-level
from only the video-level labels. In other words, the framelevel ground truth is not available.
skeleton data have also attracted considerable attention. As
these methods are more focused on the posture of humans,
skeleton-based methods have strong generalization ability
and adaptability to complicated backgrounds (Vemulapalli,
Arrate, and Chellappa 2014; Du, Wang, and Wang 2015;
Tang et al. 2018). Skeleton-based models benefit from a
number of advantages, such as strong robustness to variations in position, scale, and viewpoint, by utilizing the 3D
coordinate positions of multiple key body joints to perform
AR (Zheng et al. 2018).
Conventional skeleton-based AR methods try to classify
trimmed action clips, each containing a single action, into
activity categories. However, acquiring such trimmed action
clips requires an enormous amount of manual labor. This
may not scale efficiently with the growing set of data size,
total video length, and activity categories. The variance in
the timestamps of each action (i.e., the beginning and ending
of each action) among annotators can also affect the quality of the dataset. On the other hand, it is much simpler for
a human to offer a few labels that sum up the content of
an untrimmed sequence. These video-level labels are generally referred to as weak labels, and can be used to train AR
models that identify and localize activities in untrimmed se-

Introduction
With the rise of demand from applications such as virtual
reality and gaming, 3D skeleton motion data has become an
important medium for understanding and synthesizing realistic human motion. Although skeleton motion data require
dedicated apparatus for acquisition, the processed data can
be directly applied to various characters to perform human
movements. Moreover, marker-less 3D human motion capture from images is starting to make the acquisition of skeleton motion data easier without complex camera arrays and
studios (Hasler et al. 2009; Habermann et al. 2019, 2020).
Recently, along with the growing interest in skeleton data
itself, various action recognition (AR) methods based on
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3322

