The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Optimal Pathfinding on Weighted Grid Maps
Mark Carlson1 , Sajjad K. Moghadam2
Daniel D. Harabor1 , Peter J. Stuckey1 , Morteza Ebrahimi2
1

Department of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Monash University
2
University of Tehran
mark.carlson@minuskelvin.net
{daniel.harabor, peter.stuckey}@monash.edu
{sajjad.moghadam, mo.ebrahimi}@ut.ac.ir

Abstract

Problem Model

In many computer games up to hundreds of agents navigate in
real-time across a dynamically changing weighted grid map.
Pathfinding in these situations is challenging because the
grids are large, traversal costs are not uniform, and because
each shortest path has many symmetric permutations, all of
which must be considered by an optimal online search. In
this work we introduce Weighted Jump Point Search (JPSW),
a new type of pathfinding algorithm which breaks weighted
grid symmetries by introducing a tiebreaking policy that allows us to apply effective pruning rules in symmetric regions.
We show that these pruning rules preserve at least one optimal path to every grid cell and that their application can yield
large performance improvements for optimal pathfinding. We
give a complete theoretical description of the new algorithm,
including pseudo-code. We also conduct a wide-ranging experimental evaluation, including data from real games. Results indicate JPSW is up to orders of magnitude faster than
the nearest baseline, online search using A*.

We have a grid map of H × W cells. For each cell we have
an associated terrain cost t ∈ R+ . A move is a transition
from one grid cell to another adjacent grid cell. Each move is
represented as a vector ⃗
m and has a corresponding direction
and a magnitude. We distinguish between orthogonal
moves
√
⃗o of length 1 and diagonal moves d⃗ of length 2.
Cost model: In our work the cost of moving from one
grid cell to another adjacent grid cell is equal to the magnitude of the corresponding move vector multiplied by the
weighted average terrain cost, considering all the tiles intersected during the move action. For example, the cost of an
orthogonal move, such as from s to o in Figure 1 (left), is
equal to the average terrain cost of cells s and o. The cost
of a diagonal move meanwhile, such as s to d in Figure 1
(left), is the weighted average of all four cells√touching the
diagonal move, s, u, o and d, multiplied by 2 (since any
non-point agent will intersect all four cells). We use notation | ⟨s, d⟩ | to denote the (weighted) cost of move from s
to d. Other cost models are also possible and have been considered elsewhere; e.g., multiply the magnitude of the move
vector by the terrain type of the destination tile, or taking the
average of the source and destination tiles only. The ideas
presented here are applicable to these other cost models. A
special case, which we refer to as uniform cost, are grids
where every cell is either traversable with unit terrain cost
or non-traversable with infinite cost.
A path p of m moves is given by a sequence of m grid
cells ⟨n0 , . . . , nm ⟩ where ni is adjacent to ni+1 by move
Pm−1
mi . The path length |p| = i=1 | ⟨ni , ni+1 ⟩ |, the sum of
⃗
the costs of each move along the path. We also define paths
by a starting node and sequence of moves, e.g. n0 + k ⃗
m is a
path of k moves in direction ⃗
m starting from cell n0 .

Introduction
Practical approaches to 2D path finding in games or robotic
applications often represent the navigable area as grid map.
Path finding then becomes finding a sequence of grid cells
to visit to move from a start cell to a target cell.
A main challenge in grid pathfinding is symmetry, since
there are usually many paths of identical cost from a start
to target. Jump Point Search (JPS) (Harabor and Grastien
2012) is an online and optimal algorithm that prunes symmetric grid paths and which can be orders of magnitude
faster than standard A* search (Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael
1968). Although widely used in computer games and robot
navigation, JPS is limited to uniform cost maps with only
traversable or non-traversable tiles.
In this paper we extend JPS to grid maps with terrains of
different costs. We show that a straightforward extension of
JPS to this new domain incurs substantial overhead costs.
We then introduce a new and efficient algorithm, Weighted
Jump Point Search (JPSW), to effectively prune the search
space. We show that JPSW is optimal and online and up to
an order of magnitude faster than its nearest competitor, a
conventional and online A* search.

Related Work
Pathfinding is an intensely studied topic in the research literature, with many efficient algorithms having been suggested.
In this section we give a brief overview of related works in
this area. A main observation is that, despite a wealth of research, none of the currently available techniques are able to
accelerate optimal weighted grid pathfinding in online settings, where terrain costs are subject to change. In computer
game applications, where such setups are common and opti-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12373

