The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Symbolic Replay: Scene Graph as Prompt for Continual Learning on VQA Task
Stan Weixian Lei1 * , Difei Gao1 * , Jay Zhangjie Wu1 , Yuxuan Wang1 ,
Wei Liu2 , Mengmi Zhang3 , Mike Zheng Shou1†
1

Show Lab, National University of Singapore
2
Tencent Data Platform
3
CFAR and I2R, Agency for Science, Technology, and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
{weixian.lei,zhangjiewu,yuxuan.wang}@u.nus.edu, {daniel.difei.gao,mike.zheng.shou}@gmail.com,
wl2223@columbia.edu, Mengmi@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract

New Demand collect
data

𝒊-th Read texts in images

VQA is an ambitious task aiming to answer any image-related
question. However, in reality, it is hard to build such a system
once for all since the needs of users are continuously updated,
and the system has to implement new functions. Thus, Continual Learning (CL) ability is a must in developing advanced
VQA systems. Recently, a pioneer work split a VQA dataset
into disjoint answer sets to study this topic. However, CL
on VQA involves not only the expansion of label sets (new
Answer sets). It is crucial to study how to answer questions
when deploying VQA systems to new environments (new
Visual scenes) and how to answer questions requiring new
functions (new Question types). Thus, we propose CLOVE,
a benchmark for Continual Learning On Visual quEstion
answering, which contains scene- and function-incremental
settings for the two aforementioned CL scenarios. In terms
of methodology, the main difference between CL on VQA
and classification is that the former additionally involves expanding and preventing forgetting of reasoning mechanisms,
while the latter focusing on class representation. Thus, we
propose a real-data-free replay-based method tailored for CL
on VQA, named Scene Graph as Prompt for Symbolic Replay. Using a piece of scene graph as a prompt, it replays
pseudo scene graphs to represent the past image, along with
correlated QA pair. A unified VQA model is also proposed to
utilize the current and replayed data to enhance its QA ability.
Finally, experimental results reveal the challenges in CLOVE
and demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

New Data
update
Collect scene text param.
related data

𝒊-th Model
Train the model
for the new task

(a)
Shop

Sports

Office

…
Q: Where is the elevator in
this picture?
A: On the left.

Q: What are the men
holding?
A: Ski poles.

Q: Is there a laptop in
this office?
A: No.

Scene-incremental Learner
(b)
Attribute Recognition

Knowledge Reasoning
Knowledge graph:
1. Trees can produce
Oxygen.
…
Knowledge graph:
1. Tree can produce Oxygen.
2. Bus can transport people.

Scene Text Recognition

…

Q: What color is the snow Q: What object can be used to
board on the right?
transport people?
A: Yellow.
A: Bus.

OCR:
[“NOKIA”, “1”,
“2”, … “*”, “#”]

Q: What is the brand of
this phone?
A: Nokia.

Function-incremental Learner
(c)

Figure 1: (a) An AI continuously receives new demands
and is updated with collected data. (b) A scene-incremental
learner adapts to new scenes for deployment. (c) A functionincremental learner acquires new functions over time.

Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed tremendous successes in
achieving state-of-the-art performance on VQA tasks by CV
and NLP communities (Anderson et al. 2018; Lu et al. 2019;
Su et al. 2019; Jiang et al. 2020; Gao et al. 2020; Chen et al.
2020). Despite the remarkable success, current VQA systems are usually trained on specific datasets and then fixed
for use. However, in real applications, user’s demands are
always updated, as is shown in Fig. 1 (a). The VQA system
is expected to continuously learn the knowledge, when it is
deployed to new scenes or is required to add new functions.

In the CV community, various approaches have been studied actively to tackle continual learning for image classification (Rebuffi et al. 2017), where a model is trained sequentially on a set of images with disjoint labels. In this setting,
a model continually enhances one ability (i.e., recognition)
over one modality (i.e., vision) and mainly learns the representation for each class. In VQA, a model is required to
adapt to new environments (e.g., shop, office, etc.) or learn
new abilities (e.g., attribution recognition, knowledge reasoning, etc.) according to the changing demands, as shown
in Fig 1 (b) and (c). As such, CL in VQA is different from
the aforementioned image classification that a model continually learns new ablities over multi-modalities and focuses
more on the reasoning. Thus, it is crucial to study Continual

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1250

