The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Parameter-Efficient Model Adaptation for Vision Transformers
Xuehai He1 , Chuanyuan Li2 , Pengchuan Zhang2 , Jianwei Yang2 , Xin Eric Wang1
1

UC Santa Cruz,
Microsoft Research at Redmond
{xhe89,xwang366}@ucsc.edu, {chunyl,penzhan,jianwyan}@microsoft.com
2

Abstract

0.75
Ours

Accuracy (%)

In computer vision, it has achieved great transfer learning
performance via adapting large-scale pretrained vision models (e.g., vision transformers) to downstream tasks. Common
approaches for model adaptation either update all model parameters or leverage linear probes. In this paper, we aim to
study parameter-efficient model adaptation strategies for vision transformers on the image classification task. We formulate efficient model adaptation as a subspace training problem and perform a comprehensive benchmarking over different efficient adaptation methods. We conduct an empirical
study on each efficient model adaptation method focusing on
its performance alongside parameter cost. Furthermore, we
propose a parameter-efficient model adaptation framework,
which first selects submodules by measuring local intrinsic
dimensions and then projects them into subspace for further
decomposition via a novel Kronecker Adaptation (KAdaptation) method. We analyze and compare our method with a
diverse set of baseline model adaptation methods (including
state-of-the-art methods for pretrained language models). Our
method performs the best in terms of the tradeoff between
accuracy and parameter efficiency across 20 image classification datasets under the few-shot setting and 7 image classification datasets under the full-shot setting.

(10!.#+ , 68.92%)

(10'.#! , 65.49%)
Full-model
Fine-tuning

0.65

( 10!.!' , 66.32%)
Linear-probing

Adapter-tuning

(10&.+#, 65.08%)
Compacter

( 10!.*# , 62.77%)

0.70

0.60
0.55

Lora

( 10$.($ , 61.48%)

0.50

Number of trainable parameters

Figure 1: The tradeoff between accuracy and parameter
numbers of various model adaptation methods. The results
are measured using the vision transformer (ViT-B-224/32)
via CLIP pretraining across the average of 20 image classification datasets. Our method places in the topleft corner
and achieves the best tradeoff between accuracy and parameter efficiency. The color of points and numbers denote the
performance-efficiency (PE) metric (higher is better).
learning (Houlsby et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2021; Zaken, Ravfogel, and Goldberg 2021; Mahabadi, Henderson, and Ruder
2021; He et al. 2021), we aim to study the parameterefficient model adaptation strategy for vision transformers.
Conventional wisdom for transfer learning in our computer
vision community is fine-tuning all model parameters or
leveraging linear probes. However, performing full-model
fine-tuning of pretrained ViTs may incur both financial and
environmental costs (Patterson et al. 2021), requires a high
computational budget, and becomes increasingly infeasible
as the model size continuously grows. Another go-to strategy is performing linear-probing by stacking an additional
trainable multi-layer perceptron (MLP) layer in the end. It is
parameter-efficient yet suboptimal in terms of performance.
Ideally, we hope to design model adaptation strategies that
can achieve the best tradeoff between efficiency and effectiveness (see Figure 1) — optimizing adaptation parameterefficiency while allowing for the model to maintain the effectiveness of transfer learning on downstream vision tasks,
especially the image classification task.
To this end, we ask an essential question: what are the
general guidelines one should adopt while adapting large-

Introduction
In the last few years, large-scale vision models and language models pretrained on web-scale data have seen a great
surge of interest with promising performance (Radford et al.
2019; Devlin et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019).
Meanwhile, aided by the rapid gains in hardware, their sizes
keep growing rapidly. Currently, vision transformers (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) (ViTs) with billions of parameters such
as ViT-Large (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) have been released.
It is expected that pretrained vision models with even larger
orders of magnitude will emerge in the foreseeable future.
These large-scale pretrained models are powerful when
transferred to downstream vision tasks. However, deploying
many independent instances of fine-tuned models can also
cause substantial storage and deployment costs and hinder
the applicability of large-scale ViTs to real-world problems.
Motivated by this and the importance of parameter-efficient
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

817

