The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Simple Unified Approach to Testing High-Dimensional Conditional
Independences for Categorical and Ordinal Data
Ankur Ankan, Johannes Textor
Data Science, Institute for Computing and Information Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
{ankur.ankan, johannes.textor}@ru.nl

Abstract
Conditional independence (CI) tests underlie many approaches
to model testing and structure learning in causal inference.
Most existing CI tests for categorical and ordinal data stratify the sample by the conditioning variables, perform simple
independence tests in each stratum, and combine the results.
Unfortunately, the statistical power of this approach degrades
rapidly as the number of conditioning variables increases. Here
we propose a simple unified CI test for ordinal and categorical
data that maintains reasonable calibration and power in high
dimensions. We show that our test outperforms existing baselines in model testing and structure learning for dense directed
graphical models while being comparable for sparse models.
Our approach could be attractive for causal model testing because it is easy to implement, can be used with non-parametric
or parametric probability models, has the symmetry property,
and has reasonable computational requirements.

Introduction
Scientific claims should be falsifiable. In causal inference, falsifiable claims can be read off graphical causal models using
graphical criteria. Many types of graphical models including DAGs, MAGs, undirected graphical models, and chain
graphs imply conditional independences (CIs). Therefore,
statistical CI tests play an important role in model testing and
structure learning – which itself can be seen as a sequence of
iterative model tests and post-hoc modifications performed
by an algorithm.
Unfortunately, compared to simple (unconditional) independence testing, CI testing is much harder; for example, a
non-parametric CI test for continuous data that is both calibrated and has power does not exist (Bergsma 2004; Shah,
Peters et al. 2020). Some assumptions therefore need to be
imposed on the relationships between the involved variables.
A large amount of work has been done on quantifying conditional dependence using measures such as mutual information
(Cover 1999), the Hilbert-Schmidt independence criterion
(Gretton et al. 2005), and distance covariance (Székely et al.
2007); see also Josse and Holmes (2014) for an overview.
A wide variety of CI tests has been proposed based on concepts such as ranks (Weihs, Drton, and Meinshausen 2018),
kernel methods (Pfister et al. 2018), copulas (Kojadinovic
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12180

and Holmes 2009), knock-off sampling (Watson and Wright
2021), nearest neighbors (Berrett and Samworth 2019), and
generalized covariance measures (Shah, Peters et al. 2020).
Due to the prominent role of the structure learning problem
in the causal inference literature, CI tests are often developed
and evaluated with structure learning in mind. In applied
literature, however, structure learning is not yet widely used
and graphical causal models are often constructed by hand.
For example, a recent review of the use of DAGs in health
research (Tennant et al. 2020) found hundreds of papers in
which DAGs were constructed, mainly to inform covariate
adjustment strategies. Perhaps surprisingly, none of these
DAG models was tested against the dataset it was supposed
to represent, posing a severe risk for inferences based on
these models – it seems unlikely that researchers can come
up with a correct graphical structure based on their intuition
and domain knowledge alone.
We suspect that perceived or real issues with existing CI
tests are part of the reason that DAG model testing and structure learning aren’t more widely used. We argue that a CI test
for practical use should have the following properties:
1. it should be simple in the sense that it is based on elementary statistical concepts that most researchers are familiar
with;
2. it should be symmetric – tests of X ⊥ Y | Z and Y ⊥
⊥ X | Z should deliver the same result;
3. it should be computationally efficient since even for handconstructed models, it can be necessary to perform hundreds of tests (at least one per missing edge); and
4. it should have reasonable calibration and power in realworld data.
For continuous data, one could argue that all these conditions are fulfilled by a simple test where we perform two
regressions (not necessarily linear ones) E[X | Z] and
E[Y | Z], and determine the correlation between their residuals, which should be 0 under CI if our regressions accurately
model the conditional expectation (Thoemmes, Rosseel, and
Textor 2018). Unfortunately, many important datasets do not
consist of only continuous variables. CI testing for categorical and ordinal data has received considerably less attention
in the literature, perhaps because from a theoretical point of
view, it appears to be a much simpler problem: CI testing for
such data can be done by essentially stratifying the sample

