The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ECO-3D: Equivariant Contrastive Learning for Pre-training
on Perturbed 3D Point Cloud
Ruibin Wang, Xianghua Ying* , Bowei Xing, Jinfa Yang
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE)
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
{robin wang, xhying, xingbowei, jinfayang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

generalized features under point clouds having random perturbations such as noise, occlusion, etc. Since the perturbations normally exist in real-world 3D scans and require huge
human effort to eliminate, enabling contrastive learning on
perturbed data has significant practical meanings.
To investigate the contrastive learning on perturbed point
clouds, we pre-train PointNet (Qi et al. 2017) following the
most employed contrastive framework (Chen et al. 2020b)
on both clean and perturbed ModelNet40 (Wu et al. 2015).
The pre-trained encoders are then fine-tuned to perform the
classification task and compared with the baseline which
is trained in fully-supervised settings. The experimental results are illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). For the clean dataset, finetuning the pre-trained networks generally converges to better classification accuracy than the fully-supervised baseline. However, the results on the perturbed dataset are completely different. Fine-tuning performance is worse than
fully-supervised training. The performance decrease is observed under more than one perturbation. It seems that the
contrastive framework not only fails to facilitate useful feature extraction from the perturbed point clouds but learns
harmful features, causing lower accuracy than the baseline.
To find out why contrastive learning fails on the perturbed
point clouds, we visualize the features of training and testing
data learned via the supervised and contrastive framework.
As in Fig. 1(b), under the supervised framework, the features
of testing and training data are more dispersedly distributed
under the ② perturbed dataset than the ① clean dataset. This
can be easily explained since the random perturbations lead
to the testing data having perturbations unseen in the training data, thus increasing the training and testing domain gap.
More surprisingly, we observe that such a domain gap is further enlarged under the contrastive framework③. We think it
may be because the contrastive enhanced features can hardly
generalize to testing data due to the domain gap thus leading to even worse domain gaps. Therefore, we try to enable
contrastive learning on the perturbed point clouds by first
closing the domain gap. A simple method is to manually
delete the perturbations. However, this requires huge efforts
and can hardly be generalized to different perturbations.
In this work, we design a novel Variational AutoEncoder
(VAE) architecture to close the domain gap in the embedded space. The proposed VAE is composed of a hierarchical
encoder to progressively map the perturbed data into low

In this work, we investigate contrastive learning on perturbed
point clouds and find that the contrasting process may widen
the domain gap caused by random perturbations, making
the pre-trained network fail to generalize on testing data.
To this end, we propose the Equivariant COntrastive framework which closes the domain gap before contrasting, further introduces the equivariance property, and enables pretraining networks under more perturbation types to obtain
meaningful features. Specifically, to close the domain gap, a
pre-trained VAE is adopted to convert perturbed point clouds
into less perturbed point embedding of similar domains and
separated perturbation embedding. The contrastive pairs can
then be generated by mixing the point embedding with different perturbation embedding. Moreover, to pursue the equivariance property, a Vector Quantizer is adopted during VAE
training, discretizing the perturbation embedding into one-hot
tokens which indicate the perturbation labels. By correctly
predicting the perturbation labels from the perturbed point
cloud, the property of equivariance can be encouraged in the
learned features. Experiments on synthesized and real-world
perturbed datasets show that ECO-3D outperforms most existing pre-training strategies under various downstream tasks,
achieving SOTA performance for lots of perturbations.

Introduction
Contrastive learning has been widely accepted as a selfsupervised technique to learn representations in a label-free
manner and achieved promising results in image domain
(Wu et al. 2018; Van den Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018; Tian,
Krishnan, and Isola 2020; He et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020b).
Recently, the 2D contrastive paradigm has been successfully
applied in 3D domain (Xie et al. 2020; Sanghi 2020; Alliegro et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2021; Afham et al. 2022), learning meaningful representations of point clouds. These methods usually perform augmented transformations on each
point cloud to generate the positive pairs and regard different point clouds as negative pairs. Despite learning useful
features under the pre-aligned clean datasets such as ModelNet40 (Wu et al. 2015) and ShapeNet (Yi et al. 2016), we
find that existing contrastive frameworks may fail to extract
* Xianghua Ying is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2626

