The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Socially Optimal Non-discriminatory Restrictions for Continuous-Action Games
Michael Oesterle1 , Guni Sharon2
1

2

Institute for Enterprise Systems, University of Mannheim, Germany
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M University
michael.oesterle@uni-mannheim.de, guni@tamu.edu

Abstract

tions) for undesirable behavior. Normative Systems (Andrighetto et al. 2013) derive such rewards and sanctions
from norms, while Vickrey–Clarke–Groves (VCG) mechanisms (Nisan and Ronen 2004) attribute to each player the
marginal social cost of its actions.
Reward-shaping methods generally make two assumptions which limit their applicability:

We address the following mechanism design problem: Given
a multi-player Normal-Form Game (NFG) with a continuous action space, find a non-discriminatory (i.e., identical for
all players) restriction of the action space which maximizes
the resulting Nash Equilibrium with respect to a fixed social utility function. First, we propose a formal model of a
Restricted Game and the corresponding restriction optimization problem. We then present an algorithm to find optimal
non-discriminatory restrictions under some assumptions. Our
experimental results with Braess’ Paradox and the Cournot
Game show that this method leads to an optimized social utility of the Nash Equilibria, even when the assumptions are not
guaranteed to hold. Finally, we outline a generalization of our
approach to the much wider scope of Stochastic Games.

1. Rewards can be changed at will, and players simply accept the new reward function. This assumption is feasible
in stylized settings, but involves an arbitrary amount of
additional incentives (money) when applied in real-world
settings.
2. It is both possible and ethically justifiable to discriminate
between players by shaping their reward functions differently. On top of ethical issues, this approach might not be
applicable whenever players are not identifiable.

Introduction
Consider a multi-player game with an additional social utility function over the joint actions. Assuming that the players are self-interested and learn independently, they might
converge to joint actions (“user equilibria”) which are suboptimal, both from their own perspective (e.g., with respect
to Pareto efficiency) and from the viewpoint of social welfare (Cigler and Faltings 2011). This can be demonstrated in
minimal setups (see Examples 1 and 2), but it is also common in real-world settings (Ding and Song 2012; Acemoglu
et al. 2016; Memarzadeh, Moura, and Horvath 2020).
While the challenge of reconciling selfish optimization
and overall social utility in multi-player settings has long
been known (Roughgarden and Tardos 2002; Andelman,
Feldman, and Mansour 2009), it has become increasingly
relevant with the rise of ubiquitous autonomous agents and
automated decision-making in recent years as advancements
in deep reinforcement learning have enabled agents to learn
very effective (but still selfish) policies not only in welldefined games but also in multi-agent systems with large,
complex, and unknown environments (Du and Ding 2021;
Gronauer and Diepold 2021).
A common solution method for this problem involves
reward shaping, where players’ utility functions are altered by giving them additional positive rewards for socially desirable behavior and negative rewards (i.e., sanc-

We propose a novel solution for closing the gap between
user equilibrium and social optimum, based on shaping
the action space available to the players at any given time
(as commonly done by regulating governmental entities).
Therefore, players continue to optimize their own objective
function over the restricted action space. This motivates the
problem of finding an optimal non-discriminatory restriction of the players’ action space, i.e., a restriction which is
identical for all players and maximizes the social utility of a
stable joint action.
In this paper, we analyze the problem of finding socially optimal restrictions for Normal-Form Games (NFG):
We define the concept of a Restricted Game (RG) and
present a novel algorithm denoted Socially Optimal ActionSpace Restrictor (SOAR) which finds optimal restrictions
via an exhaustive Breadth-First Search over the restriction
space, assuming that (a) there is always a Nash Equilibrium,
and (b) there is an oracle function which produces such a
Nash Equilibrium for a given restriction. We then demonstrate the algorithm’s performance using two well-known
game-theoretic problems—Braess’ Paradox and the Cournot
Game. Our experiments show that applying SOAR can find
favorable outcomes even when we relax the assumptions.
Finally, we outline how the approach developed for (stateless) multi-player Normal-Form Games is also applicable to
Stochastic Games with state transitions.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11638

