The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Control Policies for Stochastic Systems with Reach-Avoid Guarantees
Ðord̄e Žikelić1 * , Mathias Lechner2 * , Thomas A. Henzinger1 , Krishnendu Chatterjee1
1

Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
djordje.zikelic@ist.ac.at, mlechner@mit.edu, tah@ist.ac.at, krishnendu.chatterjee@ist.ac.at

Abstract
We study the problem of learning controllers for discretetime non-linear stochastic dynamical systems with formal
reach-avoid guarantees. This work presents the first method
for providing formal reach-avoid guarantees, which combine
and generalize stability and safety guarantees, with a tolerable probability threshold p ∈ [0, 1] over the infinite time
horizon in general Lipschitz continuous systems. Our method
leverages advances in machine learning literature and it represents formal certificates as neural networks. In particular, we
learn a certificate in the form of a reach-avoid supermartingale (RASM), a novel notion that we introduce in this work.
Our RASMs provide reachability and avoidance guarantees
by imposing constraints on what can be viewed as a stochastic
extension of level sets of Lyapunov functions for deterministic
systems. Our approach solves several important problems – it
can be used to learn a control policy from scratch, to verify
a reach-avoid specification for a fixed control policy, or to
fine-tune a pre-trained policy if it does not satisfy the reachavoid specification. We validate our approach on 3 stochastic
non-linear reinforcement learning tasks.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved impressive results
in solving non-linear control problems, resulting in an interest to deploy RL algorithms in safety-critical applications.
However, most RL algorithms focus solely on optimizing
expected performance and do not take safety constraints into
account (Sutton and Barto 2018). This raises concerns about
their applicability to safety-critical domains in which unsafe
behavior can lead to catastrophic consequences (Amodei et al.
2016; García and Fernández 2015). Complicating matters,
models are usually imperfect approximations of real systems
that are obtained from observed data, thus models often need
to account for uncertainty which is modelled via stochastic
disturbances. Formal safety verification of policies learned
via RL algorithms and design of learning algorithms that take
safety constraints into account have thus become very active
research topics.
Reach-avoid constraints are one of the most common and
practically relevant constraints appearing in safety-critical
* Equal Contribution.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11926

applications that generalize both reachability and safety constraints (Summers and Lygeros 2010). Given a target region
and an unsafe region, the reach-avoid constraint requires
that a system controlled by a policy converges to the target region while avoiding the unsafe region. For instance, a
lane-keeping constraint requires a self-driving car to reach its
destination without leaving the allowed car lanes (Vahidi and
Eskandarian 2003). In the case of stochastic control problems,
reach-avoid constraints are also specified by a minimal probability with which the system controlled by a policy needs to
satisfy the reach-avoid constraint.
In this work, we consider discrete-time stochastic control
problems under reach-avoid constraints. Following the recent trend that aims to leverage advances in deep RL to safe
control, we propose a learning method that learns a control
policy together with a formal reach-avoid certificate in the
form of a reach-avoid supermartingale (RASM), a novel notion that we introduce in this work. Informally, an RASM
is a function assigning nonnegative real values to each state
that is required to strictly decrease in expected value until the
target region is reached, but needs to strictly increase for the
system to reach the unsafe region. By carefully choosing the
ratio of the initial level set of the RASM and the least level
set that the RASM needs to attain for the system to reach the
unsafe region (here we use the standard level set terminology
of Lyapunov functions (Haddad and Chellaboina 2011)), we
obtain a formal reach-avoid certificate. The name of RASMs
is chosen to emphasize the connection to supermartingale
processes in probability theory (Williams 1991). Our RASMs
significantly generalize and unify the stochastic control barrier functions which are a standard certificate for safe control
of stochastic systems (Prajna, Jadbabaie, and Pappas 2007)
and ranking supermartingales that certify probability 1 reachability and stability in (Lechner et al. 2022).
Contributions. This work presents the first control method
that provides formal reach-avoid guarantees for control of
stochastic systems with a specified probability threshold over
the infinite time horizon in Lipschitz continuous systems. In
contrast, the existing approaches to control under reach-avoid
constraints are only applicable to finite horizon settings, polynomial stochastic systems or to deterministic systems (see
the following section for an overview of related work). Moreover, our method simultaneously learns the control policy
and the RASM certificate in the form of neural networks

