The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Untargeted Attack against Federated Recommendation Systems
via Poisonous Item Embeddings and the Defense
Yang Yu1,2 , Qi Liu1,2 * , Likang Wu1,2 , Runlong Yu1,2 , Sanshi Lei Yu1,2 , Zaixi Zhang1,2
1

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application,
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
{yflyl613, wulk, yrunl, zaixi}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn, meet.leiyu@gmail.com
Abstract

data (McMahan et al. 2017). Several studies have applied FL
to train privacy-preserving federated recommendation (FedRec) systems (Lin et al. 2021; Liang, Pan, and Ming 2021).
Unfortunately, FL is known to be vulnerable to poisoning
attacks (Bhagoji et al. 2019; Bagdasaryan et al. 2020; Cao,
Jia, and Gong 2021). Its decentralized training procedure allows the attacker to arbitrarily modify the local training data
or the uploaded gradient to achieve certain malicious goals.
Based on the goal of the attacker, poisoning attacks can be
classified into targeted and untargeted attacks. In the FedRec
scenario, previous studies mainly focus on targeted attacks
that try to promote certain target items (Zhang et al. 2022a;
Rong et al. 2022). The untargeted attack that aims to degrade
the overall performance of the FedRec system is still less explored (Wu et al. 2022). In fact, without an effective defense
mechanism, the untargeted attack can continuously disrupt
the user experience of the system, which will lead to severe
losses of customers and revenue for the service provider (Li
et al. 2016). Thus, it is necessary to explore the untargeted
attack and its defense for FedRec systems.
The untargeted poisoning attack against FedRec systems
faces several critical challenges. First, the attack method
must be effective even with a small fraction of malicious
clients. Considering that a recommender system usually has
millions of users, it is impractical for the attacker to control
a large number of clients. Second, the attacker can only access a small set of data stored on the malicious clients as the
clients never share their local training data in the FL framework. Since existing poisoning attack methods against centralized recommendation model learning usually require a
strong knowledge of the full training data (Fang et al. 2018;
Wu et al. 2021a), they are infeasible in the FedRec scenario.
Third, the untargeted attack aims to degrade the overall performance of FedRec systems on arbitrary inputs. It is more
challenging than the targeted attack that only manipulates
the model output on certain target items. Fourth, many recommenders are trained on implicit user feedback with heavy
noise, which makes them robust to malicious perturbation to
a certain degree (Yu and Qin 2020; Wang et al. 2021).
To address these challenges, in this paper, we first propose
a novel untargeted model poisoning attack method named
ClusterAttack, which can effectively degrade the overall performance of FedRec systems with a small fraction of malicious clients. Its main idea is to upload poisonous gradients

Federated recommendation (FedRec) can train personalized
recommenders without collecting user data, but the decentralized nature makes it susceptible to poisoning attacks. Most
previous studies focus on the targeted attack to promote certain items, while the untargeted attack that aims to degrade
the overall performance of the FedRec system remains less
explored. In fact, untargeted attacks can disrupt the user experience and bring severe financial loss to the service provider.
However, existing untargeted attack methods are either inapplicable or ineffective against FedRec systems. In this paper,
we delve into the untargeted attack and its defense for FedRec
systems. (i) We propose ClusterAttack, a novel untargeted attack method. It uploads poisonous gradients that converge the
item embeddings into several dense clusters, which make the
recommender generate similar scores for these items in the
same cluster and perturb the ranking order. (ii) We propose
a uniformity-based defense mechanism (UNION) to protect
FedRec systems from such attacks. We design a contrastive
learning task that regularizes the item embeddings toward a
uniform distribution. Then the server filters out these malicious gradients by estimating the uniformity of updated item
embeddings. Experiments on two public datasets show that
ClusterAttack can effectively degrade the performance of FedRec systems while circumventing many defense methods,
and UNION can improve the resistance of the system against
various untargeted attacks, including our ClusterAttack.

Introduction
Over recent years, personalized recommender systems have
been widely used to alleviate the information overload problem for users (Wu et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020; Jin et al. 2020).
Most conventional recommenders are trained on centralized
user data, which has the risk of data leakage and raises privacy concerns (Wu et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2020). Moreover, some privacy regulations, such as GDPR1 and CCPA2 ,
make it more difficult to collect user data for centralized
model training. Federated learning (FL) is a decentralized
training paradigm that enables multiple clients to collaboratively learn a global model without sharing their local
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://gdpr-info.eu
2
https://oag.ca.gov/privacy/ccpa

4854

