The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

STL-Based Synthesis of Feedback Controllers Using Reinforcement Learning
Nikhil Kumar Singh and Indranil Saha
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kanpur
{nksingh, isaha}@cse.iitk.ac.in

Abstract

Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL). In recent times, Deep
Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has been extremely popular in solving highly complex problems such as solving
Atari (Mnih et al. 2015) and Go (Silver et al. 2017), making BiPedal Robots walk (Lillicrap et al. 2016), learning
visuomotor controllers for robots (Levine et al. 2016), and
many more. The success of DRL in solving those complex problems is attributed to well-defined reward functions.
Thus, designing correct reward functions (Sutton and Barto
2018) is extremely important for synthesizing DRL-based
controllers.
Several papers have considered the RL-based methods for
synthesizing feedback controllers (e.g. (Lillicrap et al. 2016;
Levine and Koltun 2013; Deisenroth, Neumann, and Peters 2013; Fulton and Platzer 2018; Hafner and Riedmiller
2011)). In this approach, the reward function is designed
by a control engineer having complete knowledge of the
system dynamics. As the system becomes high-dimensional
and highly nonlinear, designing a correct reward function in
this manner becomes prohibitively hard. For control engineers, it would have been significantly more convenient if
they could write the specification of the closed-loop system
in a formal language, and the reward could be generated automatically from this specification.
In the recent past, Signal Temporal Logic (STL) (Donzé
and Maler 2010) has been used widely in capturing realtime specifications for synthesizing controllers for complex
CPSs (Singh and Saha 2021; Raman et al. 2014; Raman et al.
2015). The robustness semantics of STL makes it a potential candidate for being used for specification-based reward
generation in controller synthesis through DRL. An STLbased reward can efficiently perform temporal aggregation,
which is difficult to achieve in a hand-crafted reward function. However, the classical quantitative semantics (Donzé
and Maler 2010), (Jaksic et al. 2018) of STL often leads
to improper rewards, which in turn may lead to the synthesis of sub-optimal controllers. This is because the pointbased classical semantics suffer from the shadowing problem (Várnai and Dimarogonas 2020), where an increase in
the robustness of an individual sub-specification does not influence the robustness of the full specification computed by
the AND operator, except for the case when it is minimum.
Of late, researchers have proposed several new semantics of STL that attempt to incorporate aggregate no-

Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has the potential to be
used for synthesizing feedback controllers (agents) for various complex systems with unknown dynamics. These systems are expected to satisfy diverse safety and liveness properties best captured using temporal logic. In RL, the reward
function plays a crucial role in specifying the desired behaviour of these agents. However, the problem of designing
the reward function for an RL agent to satisfy complex temporal logic specifications has received limited attention in the
literature. To address this, we provide a systematic way of
generating rewards in real-time by using the quantitative semantics of Signal Temporal Logic (STL), a widely used temporal logic to specify the behaviour of cyber-physical systems. We propose a new quantitative semantics for STL having several desirable properties, making it suitable for reward
generation. We evaluate our STL-based reinforcement learning mechanism on several complex continuous control benchmarks and compare our STL semantics with those available in
the literature in terms of their efficacy in synthesizing the controller agent. Experimental results establish our new semantics to be the most suitable for synthesizing feedback controllers for complex continuous dynamical systems through
reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Feedback controllers form the core of any safety-critical
cyber-physical systems (CPSs). The traditional approaches
for synthesizing feedback controllers rely on the availability
of a mathematical model of the dynamical system whose behaviour the controller is supposed to regulate. However, for
complex dynamical systems, the creation of a faithful mathematical model poses a tremendous challenge to the control engineers. Reinforcement learning (RL) provides an alternative for synthesizing feedback controllers in the form
of a controller agent for complex systems without precise
mathematical models. The agent interacts with the dynamical system in a simulation environment providing a faithful
but complex system model that is not suitable for controller
synthesis using traditional control-theoretic procedures.
A deep neural network can be used as the agent in
RL, and in that case, the learning procedure is called the
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15118

