The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

RGBD1K: A Large-Scale Dataset and Benchmark for RGB-D Object Tracking
Xue-Feng Zhu1 , Tianyang Xu1 , Zhangyong Tang1 , Zucheng Wu1 ,
Haodong Liu1 , Xiao Yang1 , Xiao-Jun Wu1 * , Josef Kittler2
1

School of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, Jiangsu, P.R. China
2
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey, Guildford, GU2 7XH, UK
xuefeng zhu95@163.com; {tianyang.xu; wu xiaojun}@jiangnan.edu.cn; j.kittler@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract

ened to include RGB-D videos. An RGB-D data is comprised of a three-channel RGB image and a single-channel
depth map. Compared to conventional RGB-only tracking,
the additional depth maps of RGB-D videos provide supplementary spatial information that facilitates object tracking in complicated scenarios (Bagautdinov, Fleuret, and
Fua 2015; Meshgi et al. 2016). Nevertheless, the existing RGB-D tracking methods generally build upon highperformance RGB-only trackers, adopting the depth information in the online tracking stage to support reasoning
about partially occluded targets, and re-detection of disappearing targets (Camplani et al. 2015; Kart, Kamarainen,
and Matas 2018; Hannuna et al. 2019).
However, RGB-D trackers are not evolving as swiftly as
RGB-only trackers (Kristan et al. 2019, 2020, 2021). The
main reason is the lack of training data for RGB-D tracking.
The publicly available annotated RGB-D videos cannot support offline training of an RGB-D tracking network. More
specifically, while the existing datasets for RGB-only trackers contain thousands of video sequences with millions of
annotated frames, the existing RGB-D datasets contain only
416 video sequences in total.
Recently, a new RGB-D tracking dataset named DepthTrack as well as an offline trained RGB-D tracker DeT have
been made public (Yan et al. 2021b). However, the training
set of DepthTrack contains only 150 videos captured in realistic scenarios. The vast majority of the RGB-D training
data used for the development of tracker DeT was generated
from RGB-only tracking datasets using monocular depth estimation techniques. The real training data collected by the
depth camera occupies only a very small proportion. The
performance of a deep RGB-D tracker trained in this way
depends largely on the quality of the monocular depth estimation used for reconstructing the depth information. In
summary, the existing RGB-D data is far from sufficient to
promote the rapid development of RGB-D tracking.
In order to further motivate the investigation of RGBD tracking, and its use, we collect a new RGB-D dataset
named RGBD1K. RGBD1K contains 1,050 sequences with
about 2.5M frames in total. Of these, 1,000 videos are reserved for training and 50 videos for testing. For the training
videos, considering the annotation cost as well as the fact
that the top one-fifth of frames of a long-term video contains representative visual and depth appearance variations

RGB-D object tracking has attracted considerable attention
recently, achieving promising performance thanks to the symbiosis between visual and depth channels. However, given
a limited amount of annotated RGB-D tracking data, most
state-of-the-art RGB-D trackers are simple extensions of
high-performance RGB-only trackers, without fully exploiting the underlying potential of the depth channel in the offline training stage. To address the dataset deficiency issue,
a new RGB-D dataset named RGBD1K is released in this
paper. The RGBD1K contains 1,050 sequences with about
2.5M frames in total. To demonstrate the benefits of training on a larger RGB-D data set in general, and RGBD1K in
particular, we develop a transformer-based RGB-D tracker,
named SPT, as a baseline for future visual object tracking
studies using the new dataset. The results, of extensive experiments using the SPT tracker demonstrate the potential of
the RGBD1K dataset to improve the performance of RGBD tracking, inspiring future developments of effective tracker
designs. The dataset and codes will be available on the project
homepage: https://github.com/xuefeng-zhu5/RGBD1K.

Introduction
Visual Object Tracking (VOT) aims at detecting the position and scale of an object of interest in every frame of a
video. The tracking capability plays a significant role in the
gamut of perceptual functionalities in computer vision and
pattern recognition (Xue et al. 2020; Griffiths et al. 2017;
Smeulders et al. 2013). The development of visual object
tracking techniques has been ongoing for decades. In recent years in particular, with the access to large-scale annotated datasets, such as GOT10K (Huang, Zhao, and Huang
2019), TrackingNet (Muller et al. 2018), LaSOT (Fan et al.
2019), etc., the development of advanced visual object trackers has been accelerated by deep learning. Trained offline,
using millions of labelled video frames, tracking networks
are capable to learn robust feature representations, resulting
in remarkable performance improvements, compared with
conventional online learning methods (Kristan et al. 2019,
2020, 2021).
Recently, with the widespread availability of low-cost
RGB-D sensors, the task of visual object tracking has broad* Xiao-Jun Wu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3870

