The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Verifying the Geometric Robustness of Large-Scale Neural Networks
Fu Wang1 , Peipei Xu2 , Wenjie Ruan1 * , Xiaowei Huang2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QF, UK
Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3BX, UK
{fw377, w.ruan}@exeter.ac.uk, {peipei.xu, xiaowei.huang}@liverpool.ac.uk

Abstract

common and applicable in the physical world but have been
less studied (Zhang et al. 2023b). There is no efficient solution for searching the worst-case adversarial transformation
with provable guarantees for large-scale DNNs. Engstrom
et al. (2019) showed that, although adversarial geometric
transformation can be discovered through the random pick,
it is a highly non-convex task that gradient-ascent-based adversarial attacks perform poorly. Pei et al. (2017) adopt the
exhaustive search to find the worst-case transformation that
alters the target model’s prediction, but its computational
complexity grows exponentially with the dimension of the
considered transformations. Some researchers have adopted
verification techniques (Weng et al. 2018; Singh et al. 2019;
Cohen, Rosenfeld, and Kolter 2019) to analyse geometric
transformations.Relaxation-based approaches (Weng et al.
2018; Balunović et al. 2019; Mohapatra et al. 2020) require
the Lp -norm based constraint on pixel space for an input example. However, as shown in Fig. 1, geometric transformation can significantly change the values of the pixels, leading
to severe violence against the constraint in the pixel space
while still preserving human imperceptibility. Therefore,
the scalability of Lp norm-based verification is limited for
dealing with geometric transformation. Recently, Fischer,
Baader, and Vechev (2020); Li et al. (2021) showed that
randomised smoothing could be utilised to verify robustness against a single geometric transform, but their methods
cannot handle the combination of multiple geometric transformations. In addition, current methods can only provide a
verifiable lower bound for verification purposes but cannot
identify the worst-case geometric transformation that would
actually minimise the model’s confidence and potentially alter its prediction.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are known to be vulnerable
to adversarial geometric transformation. This paper aims to
verify the robustness of large-scale DNNs against the combination of multiple geometric transformations with a provable guarantee. Given a set of transformations (e.g., rotation,
scaling, etc.), we develop GeoRobust, a black-box robustness analyser built upon a novel global optimisation strategy, for locating the worst-case combination of transformations that affect and even alter a network’s output. GeoRobust can provide provable guarantees on finding the worstcase combination based on recent advances in Lipschitzian
theory. Due to its black-box nature, GeoRobust can be deployed on large-scale DNNs regardless of their architectures,
activation functions, and the number of neurons. In practice,
GeoRobust can locate the worst-case geometric transformation with high precision for the ResNet50 model on ImageNet in a few seconds on average. We examined 18 ImageNet classifiers, including the ResNet family and vision
transformers, and found a positive correlation between the
geometric robustness of the networks and the parameter numbers. We also observe that increasing the depth of DNN is
more beneficial than increasing its width in terms of improving its geometric robustness. Our tool GeoRobust is available
at https://github.com/TrustAI/GeoRobust.

Introduction
Although deep neural networks have achieved human-level
performance, concerns are raised about their safety and reliability (Huang et al. 2020; Ruan et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2022; Ruan, Yi, and Huang 2021; Wu et al. 2020). In computer vision tasks, while deep learning models are known
to be vulnerable to adversarial perturbations in pixel values (Szegedy et al. 2014; Croce and Hein 2020; Yin, Ruan,
and Fieldsend 2022; Mu et al. 2021, 2022), Engstrom et al.
(2019) show that a slight rotation of an input example
can also fool DNNs. Although modern DNNs are believed
to be able to learn geometric information from training
data (Bakry et al. 2016), they are not yet invariant to simple
adversarial geometric transformations (Zhang et al. 2020).
Although additive adversarial perturbation has received
tremendous attention, geometric transformations are more

In this paper, we develop a novel black-box evaluation framework, GeoRobust, to study the geometric robustness, i.e., the robustness of the model against adversarial geometric transformations. GeoRobust takes advantage
of both recent developments in Lipschitzian optimisation
methods (Jones, Perttunen, and Stuckman 1993; Gablonsky 2001) that provide provable guarantees on locating the
worst-case transformation and the efficient parallel computation on Graphic Processing Units (GPUs). The workflow
of GeoRobust is presented in Fig. 1. Given a set of geometric transformations and an input example, GeoRobust
converges to the worst-case combination for minimising an

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15197

