The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Competition, Alignment, and Equilibria in Digital Marketplaces
Meena Jagadeesan, Michael I. Jordan, Nika Haghtalab
University of California, Berkeley
mjagadeesan@berkeley.edu, jordan@cs.berkeley.edu, nika@berkeley.edu

Abstract

participation harder to achieve and intuitively places greater
constraints on the recommendation algorithms. This raises
the questions: how does competition impact the recommendation algorithms chosen by digital platforms? How does
competition affect the quality of service for users?
Conventional wisdom tells us that competition benefits
users. In particular, users vote with their feet by choosing the
platform on which they participate. The fact that users have
this power forces the platforms to fully cater to user choices
and thus improves user utility. This phenomenon has been
formalized in classical markets where firms produce homogenous products (Baye and Kovenock 2008), where competition
has been established to perfectly align market outcomes with
user utility. Since user wellbeing is central to the healthiness
of a market, perfect competition is traditionally regarded as
the “gold standard” for a healthy marketplace: this conceptual principle underlies measures of market power (Lerner
1934) and antitrust policy (Gellhorn 1975).
In contrast, competition has an ambiguous relationship
with user wellbeing in digital marketplaces, where digital
platforms are data-driven and compete via recommendation
algorithms that rely on data from user interactions. Informally
speaking, these marketplaces exhibit an interdependency between user utility, the platforms’ choices of recommendation
algorithms, and the collective choices of other users. In particular, the size of a platform’s user base impacts how much data
the platform has and thus the quality of its service; as a result,
an individual user’s utility level depends on the number of
users that the platform has attracted thus far. Having a large
user base enables a platform to have an edge over competitors
without fully catering to users, which casts doubt on whether
classical alignment insights apply to digital marketplaces.
The ambiguous role of competition in digital
marketplaces—which falls outside the scope of our
classical understanding of competition power—has gained
center stage in policymaking discourse. Indeed, several policy reports (Stigler Committee 2019; Crémer, de Montjoye,
and Schweitzer 2019) have been dedicated to highlighting
ways in which the structure of digital marketplaces differs
from that of classical markets. For example, these reports
suggest that data accumulation can encourage market
tipping, leaving users vulnerable to harm (as we discuss at
the end of Section 1.1). Yet, no theoretical foundation has
emerged to formally examine the market structure of digital

Competition between traditional platforms is known to improve user utility by aligning the platform’s actions with user
preferences. But to what extent is alignment exhibited in datadriven marketplaces? To study this question from a theoretical
perspective, we introduce a duopoly market where platform
actions are bandit algorithms and the two platforms compete
for user participation. A salient feature of this market is that
the quality of recommendations depends on both the bandit
algorithm and the amount of data provided by interactions
from users. This interdependency between the algorithm performance and the actions of users complicates the structure
of market equilibria and their quality in terms of user utility. Our main finding is that competition in this market does
not perfectly align market outcomes with user utility. Interestingly, market outcomes exhibit misalignment not only when
the platforms have separate data repositories, but also when
the platforms have a shared data repository. Nonetheless, the
data sharing assumptions impact what mechanism drives misalignment and also affect the specific form of misalignment
(e.g. the quality of the best-case and worst-case market outcomes). More broadly, our work illustrates that competition in
digital marketplaces has subtle consequences for user utility
that merit further investigation.1

1

Introduction

Recommendation systems are the backbone of numerous
digital platforms—from web search engines to video sharing websites to music streaming services. To produce highquality recommendations, these platforms rely on data which
is obtained through interactions with users. This fundamentally links the quality of a platform’s services to how well the
platform can attract users.
What a platform must do to attract users depends on the
amount of competition in the marketplace. If the marketplace has a single platform—such as Google prior to Bing
or Pandora prior to Spotify—then the platform can accumulate users by providing any reasonably acceptable quality of
service given the lack of alternatives. This gives the platform
great flexibility in its choice of recommendation algorithm.
In contrast, the presence of competing platforms makes user
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
See https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.14423 for the full version.

5689

