The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fully Dynamic Online Selection through Online Contention Resolution Schemes
Vashist Avadhanula1 , Andrea Celli2 , Riccardo Colini-Baldeschi1 , Stefano Leonardi3 , Matteo
Russo3
1

Core Data Science, Meta, London, UK
Department of Computing Sciences, Bocconi University, Milan, Italy
3
Department of Computer, Control and Management Engineering Antonio Ruberti, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy
vas1089@gmail.com, andrea.celli2@unibocconi.it, rickuz@fb.com, leonardi@diag.uniroma1.it, mrusso@diag.uniroma1.it
2

Abstract

budget. Moreover, there might be various kinds of restrictions on the subset of reviewers that are assigned at each
time step. Finally, the objective function might not only be
the sum of the rewards (weights) we observe, if, for example,
the decision maker has a utility function with “diminishing
return” property.
To model the general class of sequential decision problems described above, we introduce fully dynamic online selection problems. This model generalizes online selection
problems (Chekuri, Vondrák, and Zenklusen 2011), where
elements arrive online in an adversarial order and algorithms
can use a priori information to maximize the weight of the
selected subset of elements, subject to combinatorial constraints (such as matroid, matching, or knapsack).
In the classical version of the problem (Chekuri, Vondrák,
and Zenklusen 2011), once an element is selected, it will affect the combinatorial constraints throughout the entire input
sequence. This is in sharp contrast with the fully dynamic
version, where an element will affect the combinatorial constraint only for a limited time interval, which we name activity time of the element. For example, a new task can be
matched to a reviewer as soon as she is done with previously assigned tasks, or an agent can buy a new good as
soon as the previously bought goods are perished. A large
class of Bayesian online selection (Kleinberg and Weinberg
2012), prophet inequality (Hajiaghayi, Kleinberg, and Sandholm 2007), posted price mechanism (Chawla et al. 2010),
and stochastic probing (Gupta and Nagarajan 2013) problems that have been studied in the classical version of online selection can therefore be extended to the fully dynamic
setting. Note that in the dynamic algorithms literature, fully
dynamic algorithms are algorithms that deal with both adversarial insertions and deletions (Demetrescu et al. 2010). We
could also interpret our model in a similar sense since elements arrive online (are inserted) according to an adversarial
order, and cease to exist (are deleted) according to adversarially established activity times.
A successful approach to online selection problems is
based on Online Contention Resolution Schemes (OCRSs)
(Feldman, Svensson, and Zenklusen 2016). OCRSs use a
priori information on the values of the elements to formulate a linear relaxation whose optimal fractional solution upper bounds the performance of the integral offline optimum.
Then, an online rounding procedure is used to produce a so-

We study fully dynamic online selection problems in an adversarial/stochastic setting that includes Bayesian online selection, prophet inequalities, posted price mechanisms, and
stochastic probing problems subject to combinatorial constraints. In the classical “incremental” version of the problem,
selected elements remain active until the end of the input sequence. On the other hand, in the fully dynamic version of the
problem, elements stay active for a limited time interval, and
then leave. This models, for example, the online matching of
tasks to workers with task/worker-dependent working times,
and sequential posted pricing of perishable goods. A successful approach to online selection problems in the adversarial
setting is given by the notion of Online Contention Resolution
Scheme (OCRS), that uses a priori information to formulate
a linear relaxation of the underlying optimization problem,
whose optimal fractional solution is rounded online for any
adversarial order of the input sequence. Our main contribution is providing a general method for constructing an OCRS
for fully dynamic online selection problems. Then, we show
how to employ such OCRS to construct no-regret algorithms
in a partial information model with semi-bandit feedback and
adversarial inputs.

Introduction
Consider the case where a financial service provider receives
multiple operations every hour/day. These operations might
be malicious. The provider needs to assign them to human
reviewers for inspection. The time required by each reviewer
to file a reviewing task and the reward (weight) that is obtained with the review follow some distributions. The distributions can be estimated from historical data, as they depend
on the type of transaction that needs to be examined and on
the expertise of the employed reviewers. To efficiently solve
the problem, the platform needs to compute a matching between tasks and reviewers based on the a priori information
that is available. However, the time needed for a specific review, and the realized reward (weight), is often known only
after the task/reviewer matching is decided.
A multitude of variations to this setting are possible. For
instance, if a cost is associated with each reviewing task, the
total cost for the reviewing process might be bounded by a
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6693

