The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Few-Shot 3D Point Cloud Semantic Segmentation via Stratified Class-Specific
Attention Based Transformer Network
Canyu Zhang, Zhenyao Wu, Xinyi Wu, Ziyu Zhao, Song Wang
University of South Carolina, USA
{canyu, zhenyao, xinyiw, ziyuz}@email.sc.edu, songwang@cec.sc.edu

Abstract

By using a few labeled support examples as guidance,
few-shot learning can well address these two limitations
and has been shown to be effective in image segmentation (Zhang et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019a; Vinyals et al.
2016). Specifically, by taking the sample to be segmented as
a query, one can compute a prototype using the labeled support data and then perform the segmentation of the query by
measuring the distance between the prototype and query features similar. This can be extended to point-cloud segmentation as shown in Figure 1(a). Recently, AttMPTI (Zhao,
Chua, and Lee 2021) made the first attempt to deploy fewshot method for point cloud semantic segmentation by leveraging a graph network to compute the distances between
the prototype and point features in query, as shown in Figure 1(b). However, this method is computationally expensive
– in practice, a point cloud usually contains a large number
of points, leading to very large graph. Another issue of this
method comes from the use of a pooling operation for computing the prototype – it limits the representation of the support samples (Zhang et al. 2021). Since both global features
and local features are essential for semantic segmentation,
the prototype after pooling operation cannot fully capture
diverse local semantic information from support and it may
introduce noises when the feature is squeezed.
To address these issues, we propose a novel few-shot
learning method for point cloud semantic segmentation by
using a transformer network (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020), which
has strong capability to learn long-range data dependencies
via self-attention. After extracting the features from both
support and query point clouds, we apply transformer to explore the class-specific relationship between the support and
query. Without the pooling operation, we can get a dense relationship between all support category points and points in
the query. Recently, CNN-based models (Huang et al. 2017;
Lotter, Sorensen, and Cox 2017; Gong et al. 2014) show better performance via multi-scale technology. Following this
idea, we represent the query (point cloud) in three different
scales, and feed them into three transformer layers as shown
in Figure 1(c). In this way, the distances between the query
and support features are computed in a hierarchical way,
which help the model learn both coarse- and fine-grained
relationships. Resulting features are then aggregated to produce the final perdition of the query sample.
For performance evaluation, we conduct comprehensive

3D point cloud semantic segmentation aims to group all
points into different semantic categories, which benefits important applications such as point cloud scene reconstruction
and understanding. Existing supervised point cloud semantic
segmentation methods usually require large-scale annotated
point clouds for training and cannot handle new categories.
While a few-shot learning method was proposed recently to
address these two problems, it suffers from high computational complexity caused by graph construction and inability
to learn fine-grained relationships among points due to the
use of pooling operations. In this paper, we further address
these problems by developing a new multi-layer transformer
network for few-shot point cloud semantic segmentation. In
the proposed network, the query point cloud features are aggregated based on the class-specific support features in different scales. Without using pooling operations, our method
makes full use of all pixel-level features from the support
samples. By better leveraging the support features for fewshot learning, the proposed method achieves the new stateof-the-art performance, with 15% less inference time, over
existing few-shot 3D point cloud segmentation models on the
S3DIS dataset and the ScanNet dataset. Our code is available
at https://github.com/czzhang179/SCAT.

Introduction
Usually produced by a 3D scanner, (3D) point clouds play
an important role in many computer vision and computer
graphics applications. Given a complex scene, the captured
point cloud may mix many different objects, structures and
background. For better scene reconstruction and understanding, a critical step is point cloud semantic segmentation
which classifies each point into its underlying semantic category. Recent state-of-the-art methods for point cloud semantic segmentation are mainly based on supervised deep learning (Li et al. 2018; Qi et al. 2016; Hu et al. 2020a; Liu et al.
2019, 2021; Xu et al. 2021). However, these methods have
two major limitations: 1) they rely on large-scale training
data, which require costly and laborious manual annotation,
and 2) the trained model cannot segment new categories that
are not seen during the training process.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3410

