The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

The Effect of Preferences in Abstract Argumentation under a Claim-Centric View
Michael Bernreiter, Wolfgang Dvořák, Anna Rapberger, Stefan Woltran
Institute of Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Austria
{mbernrei,dvorak,arapberg,woltran}@dbai.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

of many structured argumentation formalisms (Modgil and
Prakken 2018; Dung, Kowalski, and Toni 2009) and has received increasing attention in the literature (Horty 2002; Baroni and Riveret 2019; Dvořák and Woltran 2020; Rocha and
Cozman 2022). A simple yet powerful generalization of AFs
that allow for claim-based evaluation are Claim-augmented
AFs (CAFs) (Dvořák and Woltran 2020), where each argument is assigned a claim. Semantics for CAFs can be obtained by evaluating the underlying AF before inspecting the
claims of the acceptable arguments in the final step. CAFs
serve as an ideal target formalism for ASPIC+ (Modgil and
Prakken 2018) and other formalisms which utilize abstract
argumentation semantics whilst also considering the claims
of the arguments in the evaluation. Moreover, CAF semantics capture semantics of logic programs without the need of
additional mappings (Rapberger 2020), in contrast to classical AF-instantiations (Caminada et al. 2015). Thus, we obtain a direct correspondence between claim-extensions in the
CAF and conclusion-extensions in the original formalism.

In this paper, we study the effect of preferences in abstract argumentation under a claim-centric perspective. Recent work
has revealed that semantical and computational properties can
change when reasoning is performed on claim-level rather
than on the argument-level, while under certain natural restrictions (arguments with the same claims have the same outgoing attacks) these properties are conserved. We now investigate these effects when, in addition, preferences have to be
taken into account and consider four prominent reductions to
handle preferences between arguments. As we shall see, these
reductions give rise to different classes of claim-augmented
argumentation frameworks, and behave differently in terms
of semantic properties and computational complexity. This
strengthens the view that the actual choice for handling preferences has to be taken with care.

1

Introduction

Arguments vary in their plausibility. Research in formal argumentation has taken up this aspect in both quantitative
and qualitative terms (Li, Oren, and Norman 2011; Atkinson
et al. 2017). Indeed, preferences are nowadays a standard
feature of many structured argumentation formalisms (Modgil and Prakken 2013; Cyras and Toni 2016). At the same
time, there are numerous generalizations of abstract Argumentation Frameworks (AFs) (Dung 1995) that consider the
impact of preferences on the abstract level, be it in terms
of argument strength (Kaci et al. 2021; Modgil 2009), preferences between values (Atkinson and Bench-Capon 2021),
or weighted arguments/attacks (Bistarelli and Santini 2021).
In AFs in which conflicts are expressed as a binary relation
between arguments (attack relation), the incorporation of
preferences typically results in the deletion or reversion of
attacks. Deciding acceptability of arguments via argumentation semantics is thus reflected in terms of the modified
attack relation (Kaci et al. 2021).
The difference in argument strength and the resulting
modification of the attack relation naturally influences the
acceptability of the arguments’ conclusion (the claim of the
argument). Claim acceptance in argumentation systems, i.e.,
the evaluation of commonly acceptable statements while
disregarding their particular justifications, is an integral part

Although the acceptance of claims is closely related to argument acceptance, there are subtle differences as observed
in (Dvořák and Woltran 2020; Prakken and Vreeswijk 2002;
Modgil and Prakken 2018) stemming from the fact that
claims can appear as conclusion of several different arguments. As a consequence, several properties of AF semantics cannot be taken for granted when considered in
terms of the arguments’ claims. For instance, the property
of I-maximality, i.e., ⊆-maximality of extensions, which
gives insights into the expressiveness of semantics (Dunne
et al. 2015) and skeptical argument justification (Baroni
and Giacomin 2007) is not satisfied by most CAF semantics (Dvořák, Rapberger, and Woltran 2020). Furthermore,
the additional level of claims causes a rise in the computational complexity of standard decision problems (in particular, verification is one level higher in the polynomial hierarchy as for standard AFs), see (Dvořák et al. 2021). Luckily, these drawbacks can be alleviated by taking fundamental
properties of the attack relation into account: the basic observation that attacks typically depend on the claim of the
attacking arguments gives rise to the central class of wellformed CAFs. This class satisfies that all arguments with
the same claim attack the same arguments; thus modeling
a very natural behavior of arguments that is common to all
leading structured argumentation formalisms and instantia-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6253

