The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Effective and Stable Role-Based Multi-Agent Collaboration by Structural
Information Principles
Xianghua Zeng1 , Hao Peng1 , Angsheng Li1, 2
1

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China;
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China.
{zengxianghua, penghao, angsheng}@buaa.edu.cn, liangsheng@gmail.zgclab.edu.cn.

Abstract

state-action space, making the CTDE challenging to learn
efficiently, especially when the number of agents is large
(Samvelyan et al. 2019). A valid solution is integrating roles
to decompose tasks in multi-agent systems, where each role
is associated with a particular subtask and a role policy in
the restricted state-action space (DeLoach and Garcı́a-Ojeda
2010; Bonjean et al. 2014; Sun, Liu, and Dong 2020).
The key is bringing forward a set of roles to decompose the cooperative task effectively. The typical methods
to predefine task decomposition or roles (Lhaksmana, Murakami, and Ishida 2018; Sun, Liu, and Dong 2020) require
prior knowledge (subtask-specific rewards or role responsibilities) that is unavailable in practice. It is impractical to
automatically learn an appropriate set of roles from scratch,
equivalent to learning in the joint state-action space with
substantial explorations (Wilson, Fern, and Tadepalli 2010;
Wang et al. 2020). Instead of learning roles from scratch,
RODE (Wang et al. 2021b) proposed to use the clustering technology to achieve role discovery in the joint action space. However, the performance of the RODE depends
heavily on practical experience due to its high sensitivity
to parameters of adopted clustering algorithms, such as the
cluster number of K-means, the maximum and minimum
cluster number of X-means, and the neighborhood radius
and density threshold of DBSCAN 1 . Because practical task
decomposition is not always well-defined a priori or changing, current role-based methods (Sun, Liu, and Dong 2020;
Wang et al. 2020, 2021b) cannot guarantee effective role discovery without manual assistance.
This paper proposes a mathematical Structural
Information principles-based Role Discovery method,
namely SIRD, and then presents a SIRD optimizing MARL
framework, namely SR-MARL, for multi-agent collaboration. The crucial insight is that, instead of flat clustering,
the SIRD transforms role discovery into hierarchical
action space clustering. We firstly construct a weighted,
undirected, and complete action graph, whose vertices
represent actions, edges represent action correlations, and
edge weight quantifies the functional correlation between
actions with respect to achieving team targets. Secondly,

Role-based learning is a promising approach to improving the performance of Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL). Nevertheless, without manual assistance, current role-based methods cannot guarantee stably discovering
a set of roles to effectively decompose a complex task, as they
assume either a predefined role structure or practical experience for selecting hyperparameters. In this article, we propose a mathematical Structural Information principles-based
Role Discovery method, namely SIRD, and then present a
SIRD optimizing MARL framework, namely SR-MARL,
for multi-agent collaboration. The SIRD transforms role discovery into a hierarchical action space clustering. Specifically, the SIRD consists of structuralization, sparsification,
and optimization modules, where an optimal encoding tree is
generated to perform abstracting to discover roles. The SIRD
is agnostic to specific MARL algorithms and flexibly integrated with various value function factorization approaches.
Empirical evaluations on the StarCraft II micromanagement
benchmark demonstrate that, compared with state-of-the-art
MARL algorithms, the SR-MARL framework improves the
average test win rate by 0.17%, 6.08%, and 3.24%, and reduces the deviation by 16.67%, 30.80%, and 66.30%, under
easy, hard, and super hard scenarios.

Introduction
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
has broadly been applied to a variety of complex decisions, such as games (Nowé, Vrancx, and Hauwere 2012;
Vinyals et al. 2019), sensor networks (Zhang and Lesser
2011), social network (Peng et al. 2022), emergent tool
usage (Baker et al. 2020), etc. There are two significant
challenges in cooperative MARL: scalability that the joint
state-action space grows exponentially with the number of
agents (Yang and Wang 2020), and partial observability,
which necessitates decentralized policies based on local
action-observation histories because of communication constraints (Nguyen, Nguyen, and Nahavandi 2020). Hence, the
paradigm of Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) (Oliehoek, Spaan, and Vlassis 2008; Kraemer and Banerjee 2016; Mahajan et al. 2019) is designed
to deal with the above challenges. However, the centralized training requires searching agent policies in the joint

1
Although recently proposed methods (Karami and Johansson
2014; Zhang et al. 2022), achieving automatical parameters search,
introduces significant computational overhead, which is not conducive to real-time decision-making.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11772

