The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Context-Aware Safe Medication Recommendations with Molecular Graph and
DDI Graph Embedding
Qianyu Chen1 , Xin Li * 1 , Kunnan Geng1 , Mingzhong Wang2
1

Beijing Institute of Technology
University of the Sunshine Coast
{qychen,xinli,3120190993}@bit.edu.cn, mwang@usc.edu.au
2

Abstract
Molecular structures and Drug-Drug Interactions (DDI) are
recognized as important knowledge to guide medication recommendation (MR) tasks, and medical concept embedding
has been applied to boost their performance. Though promising performance has been achieved by leveraging Graph Neural Network (GNN) models to encode the molecular structures of medications or/and DDI, we observe that existing
models are still defective: 1) to differentiate medications with
similar molecules but different functionality; or/and 2) to
properly capture the unintended reactions between drugs in
the embedding space. To alleviate this limitation, we propose Carmen, a cautiously designed graph embedding-based
MR framework. Carmen consists of four components, including patient representation learning, context information
extraction, context-aware GNN, and DDI encoding. Carmen
incorporates the visit history into the representation learning of molecular graphs to distinguish molecules with similar topology but dissimilar activity. Its DDI encoding module is specially devised for the non-transitive interaction DDI
graphs. The experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate
that Carmen achieves remarkable performance improvement
over state-of-the-art models and can improve the safety of
recommended drugs with proper DDI graph encoding.

Figure 1: Testosterone (left) and Estradiol (right).

embedding spaces by measuring the “distance” between
visits and medications. Due to the extreme complexity of
EHR data and insufficient labeled data in MR tasks, learning appropriate representation for each medical concept
is not trivial. Therefore, most existing approaches incorporate some existing medical “knowledge”, among which
molecular structures of medications are the most important, to enhance medical representation learning. The study
of the molecular structures can be traced back to “molecular descriptors” [Mauri et al. 2006] and “molecular fingerprints” [Rogers and Hahn 2010; Duvenaud et al. 2015],
which are shallow models with mathematical conversions
and algorithms. Recent work started to focus on applying
deep models to represent molecular structures. [Shin et al.
2019] developed a model which ingests SMILES strings and
uses a self-attention mechanism to learn the drug structure.
With graph neural networks (GNN), the topology structure
of the molecules is applied to the models, such as [Yang et al.
2021], which proposed Dual Molecular Graph Encoders to
learn molecular representations.
Molecular-based medication representation methods rely
on graph representations of molecules, where atoms and
bonds are represented by nodes and edges, respectively.
However, converting molecules into graphs inevitably induces information loss as similar molecules might be
converted to the same graph structure. In particular, the
graph structures of pairs of stereoisomers are the same,
even though they have different functionalities. Furthermore, as most existing methods simply adopt vanilla GNNs
for molecular graph encoding, they encode medications
with similar molecular graphs closer to the embedding
space. Unfortunately, medications with similar molecular graphs or similar molecular 3D structures do not always indicate they have similar functionality. Fig. 1 illustrates that T estosterone and Estradiol, which are two
medications with completely different functionalities. With

Introduction
To benefit from the escalating growth of the volume of
electronic health records (EHR), many deep learning models [Shang et al. 2019a,b; Choi et al. 2017, 2016b; Yang
et al. 2021; Choi et al. 2016a] have been proposed to
mine EHR efficiently. Specifically, a promising and essential application in healthcare is medication recommendation
(MR) [Yang et al. 2021; Shang et al. 2019b,a], which aims
at recommending medication combinations for patients according to their history EHR.
Medical concept representation, which represents and
preserves the relationship between medical concepts in lowdimensional subspaces, has been adopted to aid deep learning models to improve the prediction accuracy and efficiency for MR tasks and has a substantial impact on the
performance of MR models. With proper medical concept
embedding, the recommendations can be achieved in the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7053

