The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

People Taking Photos That Faces Never Share: Privacy Protection and Fairness
Enhancement from Camera to User
Junjie Zhu1 , Lin Gu2 , Xiaoxiao Wu1 , Zheng Li3 , Tatsuya Harada5 , Yingying Zhu4 *
1

Shenzhen University
RIKEN, The University of Tokyo
3
Stockton University
4
University of Texas, Arlington
5
The University of Tokyo, RIKEN
zhujun4jie2021@email.szu.edu.cn, yingying.zhu@uta.edu, xxwu.eesissi@szu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Being aware of the negative aspects of AI on the society,
global legislative bodies actively call for actions to use AI
for the public good of humanity as well as ensuring global
sustainability set forth in the United Nation’s Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). For example, European Commission requires that all stakeholders partaking the AI system should ensure the respect for privacy and avoid unfair
bias throughout the system’s entire life cycle (AI 2019). To
establish Society5.0, Japan also claims that AI should be developed, utilised and implemented following the principles
of privacy protection and fairness (Secretariat et al. 2019).
In this avenue, we would like to discuss how to protect the privacy systematically for compliance with these
regulations. Particularly, we focus on an important type of
sensitive information-faces, that co-occurred with other objects captured by cameras. As shown in Figure 1, the earliest and most straightforward solution is directly obfuscating sensitive information by pixel-level processing such as
blur, pixelation or adding Gaussian noise. While effective,
these obfuscation methods either result in poor visual perception or leave negative efforts against consequent recognition algorithms (Cao et al. 2021). Generative methods offer an appealing way to replace the privacy information with
more realistic image. On the other hand, methods like adversarial methods (Yang et al. 2021b) and differential privacy method (Chamikara et al. 2020) to apply perturbation
to evade the recognition of a FR system.
Considering that when sharing photo with family or close
friends, it is necessary to allow user to acquire the original
images. To achieve this, an invertible face de-identification
algorithm (Cao et al. 2021) is recently proposed to encrypt
the images where the original original images could be restored with some passwords. Unfortunately, existing methods are so expensive that they can only be implemented on
the cloud or on personal workstations. The uploading of
captured original image to an encrypted site through public channels is exposed to the danger of being stolen by Bob,
as illustrated in Figure 1. This eavesdropping danger also
threats the password of (Cao et al. 2021).
In this article, we would like to share a systematic solution that protects the privacy in the entire lifecycle, from
camera to end user. As shown in Figure 2, we choose to en-

The soaring number of personal mobile devices and public
cameras poses a threat to fundamental human rights and ethical principles. For example, the stolen of private information such as face image by malicious third parties will lead
to catastrophic consequences. By manipulating appearance of
face in the image, most of existing protection algorithms are
effective but irreversible. Here, we propose a practical and
systematic solution to invertiblely protect face information in
the full-process pipeline from camera to final users. Specifically, We design a novel lightweight Flow-based Face Encryption Method (FFEM) on the local embedded system privately connected to the camera, minimizing the risk of eavesdropping during data transmission. FFEM uses a flow-based
face encoder to encode each face to a Gaussian distribution
and encrypts the encoded face feature by random rotating the
Gaussian distribution with the rotation matrix is as the password. While encrypted latent-variable face images are sent to
users through public but less reliable channels, password will
be protected through more secure channels through technologies such as asymmetric encryption, blockchain, or other sophisticated security schemes. User could select to decode an
image with fake faces from the encrypted image on the public channel. Only trusted users are able to recover the original
face using the encrypted matrix transmitted in secure channel.
More interestingly, by tuning Gaussian ball in latent space,
we could control the fairness of the replaced face on attributes
such as gender and race. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our solution could protect privacy and enhance fairness
with minimal effect on high-level downstream task.

1

Introduction

The prevalence of high-resolution cameras has generated unprecedented scale visual data, thus significantly stimulating
computer vision applications. While promoting the common
good, i.e., autonomous driving (Yurtsever et al. 2020), artificial intelligence (AI) has also raised ethical concerns. For
example, the leakage of privacy-sensitive information such
as faces, car plate number poses the threat of social media
profiles identification and tracking of user relations through
large-scale deep face recognition (FR) analysis.
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14646

