The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Incremental Image De-raining via Associative Memory
Yi Gu1 , Chao Wang2 , Jie Li2
1

2

Alibaba Cloud Computing Ltd.
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
luoyi.gy@alibaba-inc.com, lijiecs@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

time-consuming and computationally expensive. Therefore,
the model should effectively and efficiently learn a sequence
of datasets for iteration. Unfortunately, when datasets are sequentially and separately fed into the model for training, the
model inevitably encounters the catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen 1989). The network constantly forgets
the knowledge obtained from previous tasks whilst learning
new training samples. It results in an arbitrary degradation in
the model performance on historical learned mapping rules.
Catastrophic forgetting has been extensively studied on
the image classification task (Li and Hoiem 2017; Xiang
et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2021), while has been
tackled very recently in the image de-raining field (Zhou
et al. 2021). Due to the limitation of edge devices such as
mobile phones, current approach for incremental de-raining
focuses on exerting penalties on the weight modification
motivated by previous efforts on classification tasks. However, only constraining parameters is not strong enough to
maintain acquired knowledge, leading to too much plasticity (Douillard et al. 2021). Different from existing strategies
in image classification and de-raining, we do not solely or
mainly rely on the parameter importance. While it remains
unexplored in image de-raining, providing additional data to
augment the episodic memory may be considered. However,
because of constrained space overhead and training time,
this data-based approach is not practical and suitable for the
deployment of de-raining algorithms on compact systems.
In this paper, we investigate the incremental rain removal
for multiple datasets that is suitable for compact devices.
We argue the role of sample diversity in an episodic memory which implicitly affects feature representation in the
learning process, and propose a new memory management
scheme named Associative Memory (AM) to achieve incremental rain removal. We note that human associative
memory does not rely on mechanically memorizing data,
but tends to incorporate the acquired experience and summarize the correlation between two successively happening
events. This inspires us to build connections between distinct
data distributions. We propose to strengthen samples connecting tasks that fire synchronously. AM maintains a mapping memory capturing mappings between domains. When
adapting to new tasks, model learns to perform the task by
reusing inverse mappings which traces the current pathway
back to the historical data distribution to augment the sam-

While deep learning models have achieved the state-of-theart performance on single-image rain removal, most methods only consider learning fixed mapping rules on the single
synthetic dataset for lifetime. This limits the real-life application as iterative optimization may change mapping rules and
training samples. However, when models learn a sequence
of datasets in multiple incremental steps, they are susceptible to catastrophic forgetting that adapts to new incremental
episodes while failing to preserve previously acquired mapping rules. In this paper, we argue the importance of sample diversity in the episodes on the iterative optimization, and
propose a novel memory management method, Associative
Memory, to achieve incremental image de-raining. It bridges
connections between current and past episodes for feature reconstruction by sampling domain mappings of past learning
steps, and guides the learning to trace the current pathway
back to the historical environment without storing extra data.
Experiments demonstrate that our method can achieve better performance than existing approaches on both inhomogeneous and incremental datasets within the spectrum of highly
compact systems.

Introduction
Single image de-raining is a fundamental computer vision
problem which aims at removing undesirable rain-polluted
artifacts for better image quality. It serves as the basis for
other downstream applications such as tracking, detection
and segmentation (Kang, Lin, and Fu 2011; Kim et al. 2013;
Luo, Xu, and Ji 2015). Current state-of-the-art models (Li
et al. 2018a; Ren et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019a; Yang
and Lu 2019; Zhang, Sindagi, and Patel 2019) are typically
based on the deep neural network due to its superior performance. However, this success is conditioned on the auspicious setup, where all types of mapping rules are learned at
once and known for lifetime. This setting is quite limited for
real world applications.
In a more common scenario, the de-raining model is
trained on a single dataset with multiple mapping rules.
Whenever a new batch of datasets are collected and fed into
the model for iteration, the model has to be retrained on the
new dataset together with the old ones, which is undoubtedly
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

685

