The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Context-Aware Classifier for Semantic Segmentation
Zhuotao Tian1,4 , Jiequan Cui1 , Li Jiang2 , Xiaojuan Qi3 , Xin Lai1
Yixin Chen1 , Shu Liu4 , Jiaya Jia1,4
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
3
The University of Hong Kong
4
SmartMore Corporation

2

Abstract
Semantic segmentation is still a challenging task for parsing
diverse contexts in different scenes, thus the fixed classifier
might not be able to well address varying feature distributions during testing. Different from the mainstream literature
where the efficacy of strong backbones and effective decoder
heads has been well studied, in this paper, additional contextual hints are instead exploited via learning a context-aware
classifier whose content is data-conditioned, decently adapting to different latent distributions. Since only the classifier
is dynamically altered, our method is model-agnostic and can
be easily applied to generic segmentation models. Notably,
with only negligible additional parameters and +2% inference time, decent performance gain has been achieved on
both small and large models with challenging benchmarks,
manifesting substantial practical merits brought by our simple yet effective method. The implementation is available at
https://github.com/tianzhuotao/CAC.

1

Figure 1: Visualizations of latent features of Bed in different
scenes. Red, blue and green represent features belonging to
Bed in the left three images respectively, and gray denotes
the embeddings of the other co-occurring classes.

accurate predictions. To investigate the feasibility, we start
from an ideal scenario where the precise contextual hints are
provided to the classifier by the ground-truth label that enables forming perfect categorical feature prototypes to supplement the original classifier. As illustrated in Figure 4, the
classifier enriched with impeccable contextual priors significantly outperforms the baseline in both training and testing phases, certifying the superior performance upper bound
achieved by the context-aware classifier.
Yet, ground-truth label is not available during testing;
therefore, in an effort to approximate the aforementioned
oracle situation, we instead let the model learn to yield the
context-aware classifier by mimicking the predictions made
by the oracle counterpart. Nevertheless, treating elements
equally during the imitation process is found deficient, in
that the informative cues may be suppressed by those not
instructive. To alleviate this issue, the class-wise entropy is
leveraged to accommodate the learning process.
The proposed method is model-agnostic, thus it can be
applied to a wide collection of semantic segmentation models with generic encoder-decoder structures. To this end,
with our method, as shown in Figure 2, significant performance gains have been constantly brought to both small and
large models without compromising the model efficiency,
i.e., only about 2% increase on inference time and a few additional parameters, even boosting the small model OCRNet
(HR18) (Yuan and Wang 2018; Sun et al. 2019) to reach
higher performance than the competitors with much more
parameters. To summarize, our contributions are as follows.

Introduction

As a fundamental tool, semantic segmentation has profited
a wide range of applications (Zhang et al. 2022a; Tian et al.
2019). Recent advances regarding model structure for boosting segmentation performance are fastened to stronger backbones and decoder heads, focusing on delicate designs to
yield high-quality features, and then they all apply a classifier to make predictions.
However, the classifier in the recent literature is composed
of a set of parameters shared by all images, leading to an
inherent challenge during testing that the fixed parameters
are required to handle diverse contexts contained in various
samples with different co-occurring objects and scenes, e.g.,
domain adaptation (Xin Lai and Jia 2021) Even for pixels in
the same category, embeddings from different images cannot
be well clustered as shown in Figure 1, potentially inhibiting the segmentation performance with the fixed classifier.
This observation induces a pertinent question: whether the
classifier can be enriched with contextual information for
individual images.
Consequently, in this paper, we attempt to yield contextaware classifier whose content is data-conditioned, decently
describing different latent distributions and thence making

• We propose to learn the context-aware classifier whose
content varies according to different samples, instead of
a static one used in common practice.
• To make the context-aware classifier learning tractable,

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2438

