The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Approval-Based Voting with Mixed Goods
Xinhang Lu1 , Jannik Peters2 , Haris Aziz1 , Xiaohui Bei3 , Warut Suksompong4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales
2
Efficient Algorithms Research Group, Technische Universität Berlin
3
School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University
4
School of Computing, National University of Singapore

ible and divisible goods.1 This generality allows our model
to capture more features of the resource than either of the
previous models. For example, when reserving time slots,
it is possible that some hourly slots must be reserved as a
whole, while other slots can be booked fractionally. Likewise, in cache memory storage, certain files may need to be
stored in their entirety, whereas other files can be broken
into smaller portions. Combinations of divisible and indivisible goods have been examined in the context of fair division, where the resource is to be divided among interested
agents and the entire resource can be allocated (Bei et al.
2021a,b; Bhaskar, Sricharan, and Vaish 2021). By contrast,
we investigate mixed goods in a collective choice context,
where only a subset of the resource can be allocated but the
allocated resource is collectively shared by all agents.2
There are multiple criteria that one can use to select a
collective subset of resource based on the approval votes.
For example, one could try to optimize the social welfare—
the sum of the agents’ utilities—or the coverage—the number of agents who receive nonzero utility. A representation
criterion that has attracted growing interest is justified representation (JR) (Aziz et al. 2017). In multiwinner voting,
if there are n agents and k (indivisible) goods can be chosen, then JR requires that whenever a group of at least n/k
agents approve a common good, some agent in that group
must have an approved good in the selected set. A wellstudied strengthening of JR is extended justified representation (EJR), which says that for each positive integer t, if
a group of at least t · n/k agents approve no fewer than
t common goods (such a group is said to be t-cohesive),
some agent in that group must have no fewer than t approved
goods in the selected set. Aziz et al. (2017) showed that the
proportional approval voting (PAV) rule always outputs a set
of goods that satisfies EJR. In cake sharing, Bei et al. (2022)
adapted EJR by imposing the condition for every positive
real number t, and proved that the resulting notion is satisfied by the maximum Nash welfare (MNW) rule.3 Can we
unify the two versions of EJR for our generalized setting in

Abstract
We consider a voting scenario in which the resource to be
voted upon may consist of both indivisible and divisible
goods. This setting generalizes both the well-studied model
of multiwinner voting and the recently introduced model of
cake sharing. Under approval votes, we propose two variants of the extended justified representation (EJR) notion
from multiwinner voting, a stronger one called EJR for mixed
goods (EJR-M) and a weaker one called EJR up to 1 (EJR-1).
We extend three multiwinner voting rules to our setting—
GreedyEJR, the method of equal shares (MES), and proportional approval voting (PAV)—and show that while all
three generalizations satisfy EJR-1, only the first one provides
EJR-M. In addition, we derive tight bounds on the proportionality degree implied by EJR-M and EJR-1, and investigate the
proportionality degree of our proposed rules.

1

Introduction

In multiwinner voting—a “new challenge for social choice
theory”, as Faliszewski et al. (2017) put it—the goal is to
select a subset of candidates of fixed size from a given set
based on the voters’ preferences. The candidates could be
politicians vying for seats in the parliament, products to be
shown on a company website, or places to visit on a school
trip. A common way to elicit preferences from the voters is
via the approval model, wherein each voter simply specifies the subset of candidates that he or she approves (Kilgour 2010; Lackner and Skowron 2023). While (approvalbased) multiwinner voting has received substantial attention
from computational social choice researchers in the past few
years, a divisible analog called cake sharing was recently introduced by Bei, Lu, and Suksompong (2022). In cake sharing, the candidates correspond to a divisible resource such as
time periods for using a facility or files to be stored in cache
memory. Following the famous resource allocation problem
of cake cutting (Robertson and Webb 1998; Procaccia 2016),
this divisible resource is referred to as a “cake”.
In this paper, we study a setting that simultaneously generalizes both multiwinner voting and cake sharing, which
we call (approval-based) voting with mixed goods. Specifically, in our setting, the resource may consist of both indivis-

1

Since a “candidate” usually refers to an indivisible entity, we
use the term “good” instead from here on.
2
We henceforth use the term “agent” instead of “voter”.
3
See Appendix A in the extended version of their work. They
also noted that JR does not admit a natural analog for cake sharing,
since there is no discrete unit of cake.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5781

