The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Distantly-Supervised Named Entity Recognition with Adaptive
Teacher Learning and Fine-Grained Student Ensemble
Xiaoye Qu1 , Jun Zeng2 , Daizong Liu3 , Zhefeng Wang1 * , Baoxing Huai1 , Pan Zhou4*
1

Huawei Cloud
School of Software Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
Peking University
4
Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security, Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security, School of
Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{quxiaoye, wangzhefeng, huaibaoxing}@huawei.com, dzliu@stu.pku.edu.cn, {junzeng, panzhou}@hust.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Tom visits the White House with Washington

Distantly-Supervised Named Entity Recognition (DS-NER)
effectively alleviates the data scarcity problem in NER by
automatically generating training samples. Unfortunately, the
distant supervision may induce noisy labels, thus undermining the robustness of the learned models and restricting the
practical application. To relieve this problem, recent works
adopt self-training teacher-student frameworks to gradually
refine the training labels and improve the generalization ability of NER models. However, we argue that the performance of the current self-training frameworks for DS-NER
is severely underestimated by their plain designs, including
both inadequate student learning and coarse-grained teacher
updating. Therefore, in this paper, we make the first attempt
to alleviate these issues by proposing: (1) adaptive teacher
learning comprised of joint training of two teacher-student
networks and considering both consistent and inconsistent
predictions between two teachers, thus promoting comprehensive student learning. (2) fine-grained student ensemble
that updates each fragment of the teacher model with a
temporal moving average of the corresponding fragment of
the student, which enhances consistent predictions on each
model fragment against noise. To verify the effectiveness of
our proposed method, we conduct experiments on four DSNER datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that our
method significantly surpasses previous SOTA methods. The
code is available at https://github.com/zenhjunpro/ATSEN.

Gold Labels

B-PER

O

O

B-LOC

I-LOC

O

B-PER

Noisy Labels

B-PER

O

O

O

O

O

B-LOC

(a) An example of distant labels
Teachers

Students

Teacher

Teacher1
Teacher2
predictions
Consistent

Inconsistent

(b) Inadequate student learning

T-2

T-1

T Fine-grained

fragments

(c) Coarse-grained Ensemble

Figure 1: (a) White House and Washington are incomplete
and inaccurate labels. (b) Previous method only considers
the consistent prediction parts from teachers, leading to incomprehensible student learning. (c) Coarse-grained student
ensemble absorbs a whole student without further considering fine-grained fragments in the model.

supervised NER methods demand a large amount of highquality annotation, which is extremely labor-intensive and
time-consuming as NER demands token-level annotation.
To solve this problem, Distantly-Supervised Named Entity Recognition (DS-NER) has attracted increasing attention. It automatically annotates training data based on external knowledge such as easily-obtained dictionaries and
knowledge bases, which effectively relieves the annotation
difficulty. Unfortunately, such a distant labeling procedure
naturally introduces incomplete and inaccurate labels. As
depicted in Figure 1 (a), “White House” is unlabeled because the distant supervision source has limited coverage
of the entity mentions. Meanwhile, “Washington” is inaccurately labeled as this entity belongs to location types in
the distant supervision source. Due to the existence of such
noise in the distantly labeled data, straightforward application of supervised learning will yield deteriorated performance as deep neural models have a strong capacity of fitting the given noisy data. Thus, the robustness and generalization of learned DS-NER models are restricted.

Introduction
Named Entity Recognition (NER) aims to detect entity mentions in the text and classify them into predefined types,
such as person, location, and organization. It is a fundamental task in information extraction and benefits many downstream NLP applications (e.g., relation extraction (Cheng
et al. 2021), co-reference resolution (Clark and Manning
2016), entity linking (Gu et al. 2021) and event extraction
(Zhu et al. 2022)). In recent years, deep supervised models (Li et al. 2022; Gu et al. 2022; Li et al. 2020) have
achieved superior success in the NER field. However, these
* Zhefeng Wang and Pan Zhou are corresponding authors. The
first two authors contribute equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13501

Te

