The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Co-imitation: Learning Design and Behaviour by Imitation
Chang Rajani1,2 , Karol Arndt2 , David Blanco-Mulero2 , Kevin Sebastian Luck2,3 , Ville Kyrki2
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Finland,
Department of Electrical Engineering and Automation (EEA), Aalto University, Finland,
3
Finnish Center for Artificial Intelligence, Finland
chang.rajani@helsinki.fi, {karol.arndt, david.blancomulero, kevin.s.luck, ville.kyrki} @aalto.fi
2

Abstract
The co-adaptation of robots has been a long-standing research endeavour with the goal of adapting both body and
behaviour of a system for a given task, inspired by the natural evolution of animals. Co-adaptation has the potential to
eliminate costly manual hardware engineering as well as improve the performance of systems. The standard approach to
co-adaptation is to use a reward function for optimizing behaviour and morphology. However, defining and constructing such reward functions is notoriously difficult and often
a significant engineering effort. This paper introduces a new
viewpoint on the co-adaptation problem, which we call coimitation: finding a morphology and a policy that allow an
imitator to closely match the behaviour of a demonstrator. To
this end we propose a co-imitation methodology for adapting
behaviour and morphology by matching state distributions of
the demonstrator. Specifically, we focus on the challenging
scenario with mismatched state- and action-spaces between
both agents. We find that co-imitation increases behaviour
similarity across a variety of tasks and settings, and demonstrate co-imitation by transferring human walking, jogging
and kicking skills onto a simulated humanoid.

1

Figure 1: The proposed co-imitation algorithm (centre) is
able to faithfully match the gait of human motion capture
demonstrations (left) by optimizing both the morphology
and behaviour of a simulated humanoid. This is opposed to a
pure behavioural imitation learner (right) that fails to mimic
the human motion accurately.
with the advent of deep learning, new opportunities arose
for the efficient combination of deep reinforcement learning and evolutionary adaptation (Schaff et al. 2019; Luck,
Amor, and Calandra 2020; Hallawa et al. 2021; Luck, Calandra, and Mistry 2021). In contrast to fixed behaviour primitives or simple controllers with a handful of parameters
(Lan et al. 2021; Liao et al. 2019), deep neural networks
allow a much greater range of behaviours given a morphology (Luck, Amor, and Calandra 2020). Existing works in
co-adaptation, however, focus on a setting where a reward
function is assumed to be known, even though engineering
a reward function is a notoriously difficult and error-prone
task (Singh et al. 2019). Reward functions tend to be taskspecific, and even minor changes to the learner dynamics
can cause the agent to perform undesired behaviour. For
example, in the case of robotics, changing the mass of a
robot may affect the value of an action penalty. This means
that the reward needs to be re-engineered every time these
properties change. To overcome these challenges, we propose to reformulate co-adaptation by combining morphology adaptation and imitation learning into a common framework, which we name co-imitation 1 . This approach eliminates the need for engineering reward functions by leveraging imitation learning for co-adaptation, hence, allowing

Introduction

Animals undergo two primary adaptation processes: behavioural and morphological adaptation. An animal species
adapts, over generations, its morphology to thrive in its environment. On the other hand, animals continuously adapt
their behaviour during their lifetime due to environmental
changes, predators or when learning a new behaviour is advantageous. While the processes operate on different time
scales, they are closely interconnected and crucial elements
leading to the development of well-performing and highly
adapted organisms on earth. While research in robot learning has largely been focused on the aspects of behavioural
learning processes, a growing number of works have sought
to combine behaviour learning and morphology adaptation
for robotics applications via co-adaptation (Luck, Amor,
and Calandra 2020; Liao et al. 2019; Schaff et al. 2019; Ha
2019; Le Goff et al. 2022). Earlier works focused primarily on the use of evolutionary optimization techniques (Sims
1994; Pollack et al. 2000; Alattas, Patel, and Sobh 2019), but
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

6200

Find videos at https://sites.google.com/view/co-imitation

