The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Meta-Auxiliary Learning for Adaptive Human Pose Prediction
Qiongjie Cui1 , Huaijiang Sun1 * , Jianfeng Lu1 , Bin Li2 , Weiqing Li1
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
Tianjin AiForward Science and Technology Co., Ltd., China
cuiqiongjie@njust.edu.cn, sunhuaijiang@njust.edu.cn
lujf@njust.edu.cn, libin@aiforward.com, li weiqing@njust.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Predicting high-fidelity future human poses, from a historically observed sequence, is crucial for intelligent robots to
interact with humans. Deep end-to-end learning approaches,
which typically train a generic pre-trained model on external datasets and then directly apply it to all test samples,
emerge as the dominant solution to solve this issue. Despite
encouraging progress, they remain non-optimal, as the unique
properties (e.g., motion style, rhythm) of a specific sequence
cannot be adapted. More generally, once encountering outof-distributions, the predicted poses tend to be unreliable.
Motivated by this observation, we propose a novel test-time
adaptation framework that leverages two self-supervised auxiliary tasks to help the primary forecasting network adapt to
the test sequence. In the testing phase, our model can adjust
the model parameters by several gradient updates to improve
the generation quality. However, due to catastrophic forgetting, both auxiliary tasks typically have a low ability to automatically present the desired positive incentives for the final
prediction performance. For this reason, we also propose a
meta-auxiliary learning scheme for better adaptation. Extensive experiments show that the proposed approach achieves
higher accuracy and more realistic visualization.

Figure 1: Comparison of a classic deep end-to-end model
(top) with our approach (bottom) at test-time. Given a
sequence X1:T , typical approaches utilize the pre-trained
model obtained from large-scale datasets to generate the prediction Ỹ1:∆T , which is sub-optimal, as the internal information within the specific sample is ignored. By contrast,
our model learns to adapt to the unique properties of the test
sample via several meta-learning steps.
While the empirical result is encouraging, it is not optimal. In real-world applications, the inherent defects of the
existing DNN-based models (Ruiz et al. 2018; Gopalakrishnan et al. 2019; Barsoum et al. 2018; Kundu et al. 2019; Aliakbarian et al. 2021) cannot be overlooked, among which the
major one is that the features learned from external datasets
can hardly cover the unique attributes within a specific sequence, including motion style and rhythm, etc. In this case,
the model tends to focus on the dominant distribution in
training, while failing to take account of the unique patterns
of new test sequence (out-of-distribution), therefore, unreliable results may be yielded. This inability to adapt to the
internal properties of a given sequence hinders the realistic
application of the predictive algorithms (Yuan et al. 2020;
Mao et al. 2020; Shu et al. 2021).
To solve it, we propose a novel test-time adaptation (TTA)
approach. Concretely, our model falls into auxiliary learning, where the network consists of one primary task and
two self-supervised auxiliary ones. The primary task (Pri.)
focuses on mapping historical observations to the predicted
poses. The auxiliary task-1 (Aux.1) is a simple binary classifier to distinguish whether the input sequence is a scrambled

Introduction
Human pose forecasting, accurately predicting how a person will move in the near future, is a fundamental task in
computer vision, which has enormous potential in machine
intelligence, and human-robot interaction (Gui et al. 2018a;
Wang et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021; Sofianos et al. 2021).
Over the past few years, extensive literature has sprung
up exploring this fascinating topic, with deep-learning based
end-to-end approaches proving increasingly popular (Li
et al. 2020a; Gui et al. 2018b; Li et al. 2018, 2021). Researchers typically train on external large-scale datasets
(Ionescu et al. 2014) to achieve a generic pre-trained model,
which is then indiscriminately applied to all test sequences
with the same set of network weights in the inference
stage (Jain et al. 2016; Wei Mao 2021; Dang et al. 2021).
These approaches have extensively investigated this issue
from various perspectives, emerging as the mainstream solutions (Guo et al. 2022; Cui et al. 2021b).
* indicates corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6166

