The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

End-to-End Zero-Shot HOI Detection via
Vision and Language Knowledge Distillation
Mingrui Wu1,2† * , Jiaxin Gu3† , Yunhang Shen2 , Mingbao Lin2 ,
Chao Chen2 , Xiaoshuai Sun1,4,5‡
1

MAC Lab, School of Informatics, Xiamen University.
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent.
3
VIS, Baidu Inc.
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University.
5
Fujian Engineering Research Center of Trusted Artificial Intelligence Analysis and Application, Xiamen University.
mingrui0001@gmail.com, gujiaxin02@baidu.com, shenyunhang01@gmail.com, linmb001@outlook.com
aaronccchen@tencent.com, xssun@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract
Most existing Human-Object Interaction (HOI) Detection
methods rely heavily on full annotations with predefined
HOI categories, which is limited in diversity and costly to
scale further. We aim at advancing zero-shot HOI detection to detect both seen and unseen HOIs simultaneously.
The fundamental challenges are to discover potential humanobject pairs and identify novel HOI categories. To overcome
the above challenges, we propose a novel End-to-end zeroshot HOI Detection (EoID) framework via vision-language
knowledge distillation. We first design an Interactive Score
module combined with a Two-stage Bipartite Matching algorithm to achieve interaction distinguishment for humanobject pairs in an action-agnostic manner. Then we transfer the distribution of action probability from the pretrained
vision-language teacher as well as the seen ground truth to
the HOI model to attain zero-shot HOI classification. Extensive experiments on HICO-Det dataset demonstrate that our
model discovers potential interactive pairs and enables the
recognition of unseen HOIs. Finally, our EoID outperforms
the previous SOTAs under various zero-shot settings. Moreover, our method is generalizable to large-scale object detection data to further scale up the action sets. The source code
is available at: https://github.com/mrwu-mac/EoID.

Figure 1: CLIP shows promising zero-shot ability in detecting unseen actions (red) and unseen objects (e.g. tiger) with
seen actions (blue). The unseen and seen here denote the divisions under the zero-shot setting.

categories. However, they suffer from two major weaknesses: 1) excessive cost for new HOI dataset construction and 2) a lack of generalization for unseen actions. Previous works (Shen et al. 2018; Bansal et al. 2020; Liu,
Yuan, and Chen 2020; Hou et al. 2021b) attempted to overcome the above drawbacks via zero-shot learning. Most of
them are devoted to improving human-object visual representation (Hou et al. 2021b) and introducing language
model (Bansal et al. 2020; Liu, Yuan, and Chen 2020), ignoring the implicit relations between vision and language.
As a recent technological breakthrough, CLIP (Radford
et al. 2021) performs contrastive learning on 400 million
image-text pairs collected from the Web and shows impressive zero-shot transferability on over 30 classification
datasets. Some recent works also successfully transfer the
pretrained CLIP model to various downstream tasks such
as object detection (Gu et al. 2021), text-driven image manipulation (Patashnik et al. 2021) and semantic segmentation (Zhou, Loy, and Dai 2021). Compared to text embeddings simply extracted from pure language models, the text
embeddings learned jointly with visual images can better
encode the visual similarity between concepts (Gu et al.
2021). Inspired by this, we attempt to transfer vision and
language (V&L) knowledge of CLIP into the zero-shot HOI

Introduction
The task of Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection aims
to detect ⟨human, verb, object⟩ triplets, which simultaneously localizes human-object pairs and identifies the corresponding interactive actions. HOI detection plays an important role in many downstream visual understanding tasks,
especially for human-centric scenes, such as Image Captioning (Li et al. 2017) and Visual Question Answering (Goyal
et al. 2017).
Most of the existing works simply focus on improving action classification performances for predefined HOI
* Intern at Youtu Lab, Tencent. † Equal Contribution. Works
completed at Tencent. ‡ Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2839

