The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robust and Fast Measure of Information via Low-Rank Representation
Yuxin Dong1 , Tieliang Gong1 * , Shujian Yu2 , Hong Chen3 , Chen Li1
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
3
Huazhong Agricultural University, China
dongyuxin@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, adidasgtl@gmail.com, yusj9011@gmail.com, chenh@mail.hzau.edu.cn, cli@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

its multivariate extensions (Yu et al. 2019) successfully applied in various data science applications, ranging from classical dimensionality reduction and feature selection (Brockmeier et al. 2017; Álvarez-Meza et al. 2017) problems to
advanced deep learning problems such as network pruning (Sarvani et al. 2021) and knowledge distillation (Miles,
Rodrı́guez, and Mikolajczyk 2021).
Despite the empirical success of matrix-based Rényi’s entropy, it has been shown to be not robust against noises in
the data (Yu et al. 2019), because it cannot distinguish them
from linear combinations of informative features in highdimensional scenarios. Moreover, the exact calculation requires O(n3 ) time complexity with traditional eigenvalue
decomposition techniques e.g. CUR decomposition and QR
factorization (Mahoney and Drineas 2009; Watkins 2008),
greatly hampering its application in large scale tasks due to
the unacceptable computational cost.
Inspired by the success of min-entropy which uses the
largest outcome solely as a measure of information (Wan
et al. 2018; Konig, Renner, and Schaffner 2009), we seek for
a robust information quantity by utilizing low-rank representations of kernel matrices. Our new definition, termed lowrank matrix-based Rényi’s entropy (abbreviated as low-rank
Rényi’s entropy), fulfills the entire set of axioms provided
by Rényi (Rényi 1961) that a function must satisfy to be
considered a measure of information. Compared to the original matrix-based Rényi’s entropy, our low-rank variant is
more sensitive to informative perturbations caused by variation of the underlying probability distribution, while being more robust to uninformative ones caused by noises in
the data samples. Moreover, our low-rank Rényi’s entropy
can be efficiently approximated by random projection and
Lanczos iteration techniques, achieving substantially lower
time complexity than the trivial eigenvalue decomposition
approach. We theoretically analyze the quality of approximation results, and conduct large-scale experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of low-rank Rényi’s entropy as well
as the approximation algorithms. The main contributions of
this work are summarized as follows:
• We extend Giraldo et al.’s definition and show that a measure of entropy can be built upon the low-rank representation of the kernel matrix. Our low-rank definition
can be naturally extended to measure the interactions between multiple random variables, including joint entropy,

The matrix-based Rényi’s entropy allows us to directly quantify information measures from given data, without explicit
estimation of the underlying probability distribution. This intriguing property makes it widely applied in statistical inference and machine learning tasks. However, this information
theoretical quantity is not robust against noise in the data, and
is computationally prohibitive in large-scale applications. To
address these issues, we propose a novel measure of information, termed low-rank matrix-based Rényi’s entropy, based on
low-rank representations of infinitely divisible kernel matrices. The proposed entropy functional inherits the specialty
of of the original definition to directly quantify information
from data, but enjoys additional advantages including robustness and effective calculation. Specifically, our low-rank variant is more sensitive to informative perturbations induced by
changes in underlying distributions, while being insensitive
to uninformative ones caused by noises. Moreover, low-rank
Rényi’s entropy can be efficiently approximated by random
projection and Lanczos iteration techniques, reducing the
overall complexity from O(n3 ) to O(n2 s) or even O(ns2 ),
where n is the number of data samples and s ≪ n. We conduct large-scale experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of
this new information measure, demonstrating superior results
compared to matrix-based Rényi’s entropy in terms of both
performance and computational efficiency.

Introduction
The practical applications of traditional entropy measures
e.g. Shannon’s entropy (Shannon 1948) and Rényi’s entropy (Rényi 1961) have long been hindered by their heavy
reliance on the underlying data distributions, which are
extremely hard to estimate or even intractable in highdimensional spaces (Fan and Li 2006). Alternatively, the
matrix-based Rényi’s entropy proposed by (Sanchez Giraldo, Rao, and Principe 2014) treats the entire eigenspectrum of a normalized kernel matrix as a probability distribution, thus allows direct quantification from given data samples by projecting them in reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces
(RKHS) without the exhausting density estimation. This intriguing property makes matrix-based Rényi’s entropy and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7450

