The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

USER: Unsupervised Structural Entropy-Based Robust Graph Neural Network
Yifei Wang1 , Yupan Wang1 , Zeyu Zhang1 , Song Yang1 , Kaiqi Zhao1 , Jiamou Liu 1 *
1

School of Computer Science, The University of Auckland, New Zealand
{wany107, ywan980, zzha669, syan382}@aucklanduni.ac.nz, {kaiqi.zhao, jiamou.liu}@auckland.ac.nz

Abstract

(Kipf and Welling 2016; Wang et al. 2017; Pan et al. 2018;
Gao and Huang 2018; Veličković et al. 2019; Zhang et al.
2019; Wang et al. 2019a; Pan et al. 2019; Cui et al. 2020;
Mavromatis and Karypis 2021) attests to the advantage of
these models. Despite the successes above, the performance
of a GNN-based model hinges on reliable input graph data
(Jin et al. 2020b; Chen et al. 2020; Luo et al. 2021). Even
small perturbations in the input graph can lead to drastically
different encodings after the recursive aggregation scheme
.However, as (Wang et al. 2019b) discussed, the randomness of input graph is inevitable. The edges in the graph are
formed randomly, following an underlying intrinsic connectivity distribution of nodes. This distribution is highly inhomogeneous, with edges concentrated within some conglomerates of nodes, resulting in a community structure, as asserted by (Fortunato 2010). Each of these conglomerates is
called a community, and they have dense inner-connections
but sparse inter-connections. The community structure of a
network can be interpreted probabilistically as a fixed but
unknown edge distribution between any pair of nodes that
determines the community structure, yet we only observe a
sample from this distribution. This inherent randomness is
responsible for perturbations in the input graph that can interfere with the recursive aggregation scheme. To develop a
robust GNN that captures the intrinsic connectivity graph,
we need to overcome the challenges posed by the inherent randomness of the input graph. The first challenge is
to define an operational criterion that can alleviate the interference of graph randomness, specifically perturbations in
the edges. To address this challenge, we need to identify the
properties of a graph that can help us mitigate the effects
of undesirable perturbations. One approach to achieving this
is to generate a graph that reflects the underlying intrinsic
connectivity in the dataset, even in the absence of ground
truth labels. The second challenge involves developing an
unsupervised approach for learning a model that can generate such a graph. To do this, we need to define an objective
function that guides the model to reveal the intrinsic connectivity graph based on its properties. By addressing these
challenges, we can create an unsupervised/self-supervised
GNN that is robust to perturbations and can capture the intrinsic connectivity graph. For the first challenge, we will
address in Section that multiple “innocuous graphs” exist,
for which GNN can produce the same embeddings as the de-

Unsupervised/self-supervised graph neural networks (GNN)
are susceptible to the inherent randomness in the input graph
data, which adversely affects the model’s performance in
downstream tasks. In this paper, we propose USER, an unsupervised and robust version of GNN based on structural
entropy, to alleviate the interference of graph perturbations
and learn appropriate representations of nodes without label
information. To mitigate the effects of undesirable perturbations, we analyze the property of intrinsic connectivity and
define the intrinsic connectivity graph. We also identify the
rank of the adjacency matrix as a crucial factor in revealing
a graph that provides the same embeddings as the intrinsic
connectivity graph. To capture such a graph, we introduce
structural entropy in the objective function. Extensive experiments conducted on clustering and link prediction tasks under random-perturbation and meta-attack over three datasets
show that USER outperforms benchmarks and is robust to
heavier perturbations. 1

Introduction
Neural-based methods have become crucial for processing
complex graph data in various application areas such as social media mining, recommender systems, biological data
analysis, and traffic prediction. Graph representation learning (GRL) plays a central role in these methods by providing vectorized graph encodings that are essential for
downstream tasks like community detection, link prediction, node classification, and network visualization (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017a). Among the many GRL
methods that have emerged in recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017b; Kipf
and Welling 2017; Veličković et al. 2018) provide a powerful paradigm that extracts graph encodings through a recursive aggregation scheme (Kipf and Welling 2017). This aggregation scheme learns a node’s embedding using both the
node’s feature and the aggregated feature of its neighbors,
capturing the structural information of the graph. The outstanding performance of GNN-based models on many tasks
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Full proof, experimental details, and code of our work are
available at https://github.com/wangyifeibeijing/USER.

10235

