The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Adversarially Robust Sparse Networks via Weight Reparameterization
Chenhao Li1, 2 , Qiang Qiu1 , Zhibin Zhang1 , Jiafeng Guo1 , Xueqi Cheng1
1

CAS Key Lab of Network Data Science and Technology, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{lichenhao19b, qiuqiang, zhangzhibin, guojiafeng, cxq}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

natural training (Nakkiran 2019; Madry et al. 2018). The
required large network capacity limits the use in resourceconstrained environments, highlighting a need to consider
robustness under sparsity constraints. Unfortunately, despite
a plethora of work on compressed model performance on
clean data, there have been only a few studies on the robustness of compressed models under adversarial attacks.
Some early works have tried to generate both sparse and
robust networks (Rakin et al. 2019; Ye et al. 2019; Gui et al.
2019) by directly combining network pruning and adversarial training techniques. These works inherit heuristic pruning algorithms developed for natural training (Han et al.
2015), which drops connections in neural networks with the
lowest weight. However, these pruning methods incur poor
performance under adversarial scenarios when a relatively
high ratio is set. Specifically, since adversarially trained networks generally demand more non-zero parameters than naturally trained networks (Rakin et al. 2019; Ye et al. 2019),
the traditional penalty-based paradigm suffers from a contradiction between robustness and sparsity. For example, training with a strong penalty achieves high sparsity but hurts
robustness as the parameters deviate from the optima, while
a weak penalty maintains the performance but results in a
denser network, hence great pruning damage.
In this paper, we propose to address the above contradiction by decoupling network architecture between training
and inference. Specifically, we construct the training-time
structure by decomposing the original weights into two matrices/tensors, which are merged by element-wise multiplication during inference. Since the magnitude of the two factors is small, the trained network will have enough sparsity
to achieve low pruning damage when merging. At the same
time, we increase the trainable parameters, which helps to
improve robustness under high sparsity. Note that we optimize the parameters together with the robust objective, and
thus it is the same efficiency as the traditional training manner. The parameters are restored to the original structure during inference, so the model size and computational effort do
not increase.
In short, our proposed technique overcomes the contradiction between robustness and sparsity that the traditional penalty-based paradigm suffers. On the one hand, the
multiplication of two factors implicitly increases network
sparsity, thus reducing pruning damage under high prun-

Although increasing model size can enhance the adversarial
robustness of deep neural networks, in resource-constrained
environments, there exist critical sparsity constraints. While
the recent robust pruning technologies show promising direction to obtain adversarially robust sparse networks, they
perform poorly with high sparsity. In this work, we bridge
this performance gap by reparameterizing network parameters to simultaneously learn the sparse structure and the robustness. Specifically, we introduce Twin-Rep, which reparameterizes original weights into the product of two factors
during training and performs pruning on the reparameterized
weights to satisfy the target sparsity constraint. Twin-Rep implicitly adds the sparsity constraint without changing the robust training objective, thus can enhance robustness under
high sparsity. We also introduce another variant of weight
reparameterization for better channel pruning. When inferring, we restore the original weight structure to obtain compact and robust networks. Extensive experiments on diverse
datasets demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-theart results, outperforming the current sparse robust training
method and robustness-aware pruning method. Our code is
available at https://github.com/UCAS-LCH/Twin-Rep.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved extraordinary performance in various tasks. However, they are
highly vulnerable to adversarial examples crafted by adding
well-designed perturbations to natural examples (Szegedy
et al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015). Such
fragility becomes an obstacle to using DNNs in safetycritical environments such as face recognition (Deng et al.
2019) and autonomous driving (Bojarski et al. 2016). Numerous studies have proposed various adversarial defense
techniques for such threats. To date, adversarial training that
relies on training the network with adversarial examples has
been found to be the most effective (Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2015; Madry et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019; Wang
et al. 2019).
While adversarial training can significantly improve the
adversarial robustness of neural networks, it requires a larger
network capacity to achieve high robustness than that of
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8527

