The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Hierarchical Mean-Field Deep Reinforcement Learning for
Large-Scale Multiagent Systems
Chao Yu1, 2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
yuchao3@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

approximate the interactions within the population of agents
by pair-wise interactions between each central agent and the
average of its neighbors (or the overall population in the extreme case). While significantly reducing the complexity of
interactions among agents, the existing MFRL methods still
face the following downside issues. First, since all the existing methods approximate an agent’s interactions with its
neighbors merely by their average, the different influences
of each individual neighbor cannot be distinguished. This
can be problematic in some scenarios either when the agents
are not necessarily fully homogeneous, or when they are
homogeneous in terms of observations, action choices and
rewarding mechanisms etc., but possess different roles and
thus distinct importance in influencing their neighbors. For
example, in the prey and predator game, the importance of
each predator in the group can differ to a large extent during
the hunting process due to the dynamic change of their positions related to the prey. As such, it would be more efficient
for the predators to distinguish their dynamic influences during their collective decision-making process. Second, since
the MF approximation in the existing methods involves local
Taylor expansion with respect to each central agent and ignores the high-order terms, in principle it is only applicable
to modeling local interactions such that the approximation
error can be maintained in an acceptable range. As a result,
there lacks efficient coordination among those agents that
are not within the neighborhood of each other, leading to potentially inferior performance in the whole population level.
Last but not the least, the existing MFRL methods require
the availability of the global state or the actions of neighbors
for action selection in the execution process (Zhang et al.
2021). This premise significantly limits their applicability to
scenarios with prefect communication or global observability of the agents.

Learning for efficient coordination in large-scale multiagent
systems suffers from the problem of the curse of dimensionality due to the exponential growth of agent interactions. MeanField (MF)-based methods address this issue by transforming the interactions within the whole system into a single
agent played with the average effect of its neighbors. However, considering the neighbors merely by their average may
ignore the varying influences of each neighbor, and learning
with this kind of local average effect would likely lead to
inferior system performance due to lack of an efficient coordination mechanism in the whole population level. In this
work, we propose a Hierarchical Mean-Field (HMF) learning framework to further improve the performance of existing
MF methods. The basic idea is to approximate the average
effect for a sub-group of agents by considering their different influences within the sub-group, and realize populationlevel coordination through the interactions among different
sub-groups. Empirical studies show that HMF significantly
outperforms existing baselines on both challenging cooperative and mixed cooperative-competitive tasks with different
scales of agent populations.

Introduction
In many real-world Multi-Agent System (MAS) applications,
such as city-level traffic light control (Wang et al. 2020;
Chen et al. 2020), fleet management (Yu et al. 2019), multirobot systems (Zhou and Xu 2020; Xia, Yu, and Wu 2021),
and epidemics control (Libin et al. 2021; Dong, Yu, and Xia
2020), a large number of agents interact with each other to
achieve a certain goal in the same environment. Learning
for an optimal performance in this kind of large-scale systems is fundamentally challenging: each agent learning individually would normally perform poorly due to the high
non-stationarity caused by concurrent interactions and policy updates of the agents, while learning jointly over the
whole interactions would rapidly fail due to the huge joint
state-action space which grows exponentially in the scale of
agent population (Nguyen, Nguyen, and Nahavandi 2020).
Mean Field Reinforcement Learning (MFRL) methods (Luo et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2018; Guo et al. 2019;
Carmona, Laurière, and Tan 2019; Subramanian et al. 2020)

In this paper, we propose a Hierarchical Mean-Field
(HMF) deep reinforcement learning framework to alleviate
the overall large-scale MAS coordination problem by decomposing the whole population into a number of groups
and enabling two levels of coordinated learning processes
among the agents: the bottom level for intra-group coordination and the top level for inter-group coordination. In
specific, the value function of each agent is factorized into
the combination of a local part and a group-interaction MF
part. The agents take actions solely based on their local

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11744

