The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Reward-Based Negotiating Agent Strategies
Ryota Higa1,2 , Katsuhide Fujita2,3 , Toki Takahashi2,3 , Takumu Shimizu2,3 , Shinji Nakadai1,2
1
NEC Corporation, Japan
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology(AIST), Japan
3
Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, Japan
r-higaryouta@nec.com, katfuji@cc.tuat.ac.jp, {takahashi, shimizu}@katfuji.lab.tuat.ac.jp, nakadai@nec.com
2

Abstract

Agent strategies utilizing reinforcement learning (RL)
have attracted considerable research attention in bilateral
multi-issue negotiation because of their ability to adapt to
various scenarios and opponents (Bakker et al. 2019; Bagga
et al. 2020). According to existing RL research, the reward
is sufficient to drive behavior that exhibits abilities studied
in natural and artificial intelligence, including knowledge,
learning, perception, social intelligence, language, generalization and imitation (Silver et al. 2021). Existing studies
on negotiation architecture using RL incorporate the utility
function that is rich and provides concrete information. The
rewards of RL are considered as more generalized signals in
practice. Thus, when the utility of agents is uncertain or ordinal, the reward-based negotiating agent strategy using RL
is acceptable. This study focused on reward-based negotiation agent strategies by applying an end-to-end RL model
without the heuristic components requiring expert knowledge, experiments, or utility functions (Baarslag et al. 2014).
Thus, acceptance and bidding strategies can be learned without decoupling the negotiation strategy and concrete utility
information.
Versatile negotiating agent strategy (VeNAS) through
deep RL (Takahashi et al. 2022) is a data-driven negotiation strategy in which the reward function is defined by the
utility function. However, the limitation of VeNAS is that
the performance under the negotiation with large-sized domains decreases with the increase in the size of the output
space. This phenomenon can be attributed to the fact that
most learned negotiation strategies based on VeNAS cannot
reach an agreement with the opponents in the training phase.
Furthermore, the properties of the reward-based negotiation
strategy are yet to be comprehensively investigated.
This study proposed a reward-based negotiating agent
strategy through a multi-issue policy network. The policy
network, which is a fairly neural network (NN) architecture,
was trained to predict the optimal policy in policy-based
RL without incorporating utility functions. The characteristics of multi-issue negotiation domains were considered to
improve scalability to the domain size. Comparative studies have analyzed the significant properties of negotiation
strategies with RL. We detailed that policy-based learning
agents with issue-based representations achieve comparable
or higher utility than the state-of-the-art baselines with RL
and heuristics in large-sized domains.

This study proposed a novel reward-based negotiating agent
strategy using an issue-based represented deep policy network. We compared the negotiation strategies with reinforcement learning (RL) by the tournaments toward heuristicsbased champion agents in multi-issue negotiation. A bilateral
multi-issue negotiation in which the two agents exchange offers in turn was considered. Existing RL architectures for a
negotiation strategy incorporate rich utility function that provides concrete information even though the rewards of RL are
considered as generalized signals in practice. Additionally, in
existing reinforcement learning architectures for negotiation
strategies, both the issue-based representations of the negotiation problems and the policy network to improve the scalability of negotiation domains are yet to be considered. This study
proposed a novel reward-based negotiation strategy through
deep RL by considering an issue-based represented deep policy network for multi-issue negotiation. Comparative studies
analyzed the significant properties of negotiation strategies
with RL. The results revealed that the policy-based learning
agents with issue-based representations achieved comparable
or higher utility than the state-of-the-art baselines with RL
and heuristics, especially in the large-sized domains. Additionally, negotiation strategies with RL based on the policy
network can achieve agreements by effectively using each
step.

Introduction
Negotiation is essential for establishing cooperation and collaborations in multi-agent systems. Automated negotiation
has been used in various fields, including game theory, artificial intelligence, and social sciences (Kraus 2001; Jennings et al. 2001; Fatima, Kraus, and Wooldridge 2014).
These negotiation agents are used to assist humans in various critical tasks. These strategies are applied to collaborate in common real-world cases, such as e-markets (Bagga
et al. 2021) and cooperative behavior among robots (Inotsume et al. 2020). In the future, automated negotiators can
support trades among companies in the real world and be
used to construct effective and flexible supply chain networks (Mohammad et al. 2019). Therefore, the development
of automated negotiating agents for is critical.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11569

