The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AirFormer: Predicting Nationwide Air Quality in China with Transformers
Yuxuan Liang1 , Yutong Xia1 , Songyu Ke4,2 , Yiwei Wang1 , Qingsong Wen3
Junbo Zhang2 , Yu Zheng2 , Roger Zimmermann1
1
National University of Singapore, Singapore
JD Intelligent Cities Research & JD iCity, JD Technology, Beijing, China
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{yuxliang, songyu-ke,msjunbozhang, msyuzheng}@outlook.com;
{xiayutong618,qingsongedu}@gmail.com; {y-wang,rogerz}@comp.nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract
Air pollution is a crucial issue affecting human health and
livelihoods, as well as one of the barriers to economic growth.
Forecasting air quality has become an increasingly important
endeavor with significant social impacts, especially in emerging countries. In this paper, we present a novel Transformer
termed AirFormer to predict nationwide air quality in China,
with an unprecedented fine spatial granularity covering thousands of locations. AirFormer decouples the learning process into two stages: 1) a bottom-up deterministic stage that
contains two new types of self-attention mechanisms to efficiently learn spatio-temporal representations; 2) a top-down
stochastic stage with latent variables to capture the intrinsic
uncertainty of air quality data. We evaluate AirFormer with
4-year data from 1,085 stations in Chinese Mainland. Compared to prior models, AirFormer reduces prediction errors
by 5%∼8% on 72-hour future predictions. Our source code
is available at https://github.com/yoshall/airformer.

Figure 1: Distribution of 1,085 air quality stations in Chinese
mainland. Each station provides hourly air quality readings.

During the past decades, there has been a long-established
line of research conducted for air quality prediction, ranging
from classical dispersion models (Vardoulakis et al. 2003) to
data-driven models (Zheng et al. 2015; Yi et al. 2018). Considering the computational expense, they mostly focused on
predicting the air quality at a city scale with dozens of monitoring stations, e.g., there are 35 stations in Beijing. With
recent advances in deep learning, researchers started to explore nationwide air quality prediction, i.e., collectively predict on nearly two hundred stations in China using SpatioTemporal Graph Neural Networks (STGNNs) (Wang et al.
2020; Chen et al. 2021). STGNNs couple Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) with deep sequential models, e.g., Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs), in which GNNs are used to capture the spatial correlations among stations (i.e., dispersion),
and RNNs are utilized to learn the temporal dependencies.
Further, attention-based models, in particular Transformers, have become a strong alternative to capture spatial correlations in air quality data (Wang et al. 2021, 2022). They
have two major merits over STGNNs. First, they jointly capture short and long-term interactions among different places
at each layer, while STGNNs merely convolve the local surroundings. Second, the correlations of air quality between
locations is highly dynamic, changing over time (Liang et al.
2018; Cheng et al. 2018). Using transformers can naturally
address this issue (Wen et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2022).

Introduction
Air pollution refers to the release of air pollutants, such as
gases, dust, fumes, and odors, into the atmosphere that are
detrimental to human health and the environment. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), air pollution
is one of the leading causes of death in the world today, accounting for seven million fatalities per year (Vallero 2014).
Over 90% of people breathe air that contains more contaminants than the WHO’s recommended levels, with those in
emerging countries suffering the most, especially in China
with 1.4 billion people (Wang and Hao 2012).
To inform citizens about real-time air quality, many Chinese cities have built a number of air quality monitoring stations. These stations report time series readings every hour,
including the concentration of particulate matter (PM2.5 and
PM10 ), NO2 , etc. For instance, a 50 µg/m3 concentration of
PM2.5 refers to good air quality, indicating “a terrific day
to be active outside” according to the definition of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (Lin et al. 2018). Beyond
real-time monitoring, forecasting air quality also becomes
an increasingly important endeavor with the economic, ecologic, and human toll that air pollution takes, which significantly aids human health protection and policy-making.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14329

