The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Two Wrongs Don’t Make a Right:
Combating Confirmation Bias in Learning with Label Noise
Mingcai Chen, Hao Cheng, Yuntao Du, Ming Xu, Wenyu Jiang, Chongjun Wang*
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology at Nanjing University
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{chenmc, chengh, duyuntao, lygjwy}@smail.nju.edu.cn, xuming0830@gmail.com, chjwang@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

videMix calls an SSL algorithm named MixMatch (Berthelot et al. 2019), which minimizes the entropy of predictions on unlabeled examples through pseudo-labels. Such a
pipeline leverages mislabeled data, improving the robustness
to heavy and complex label noise.
However, we conclude that the two-stage pipeline suffers from two drawbacks. On the one hand, according to
Vapnik’s principle (Vapnik 1998; Chapelle, Scholkopf, and
Zien 2006),1 discarding possible noisy labels to construct an
SSL setting is inefficient. Specifically, some correct labels
are wrongly filtered. What’s more, incorrect labels may also
contain knowledge about the targets (Yu et al. 2018; Ishida
et al. 2017; Kim et al. 2019; Berthon et al. 2021). For example, when an airplane image is mislabeled as a bird, the noisy
label encodes the similarity information between the object
of interest and the “bird” class. On the other hand, when
introducing pseudo-labels during the SSL stage, confirmation bias (Tarvainen and Valpola 2017; Arazo et al. 2020)
appears: Those confident but wrong predictions would be
used to guide subsequent training, leading to a loop of selfreinforcing errors. Label noise, together with confirmation
bias, damage the performance.
To observe the erroneous pseudo-labeling, we draw the
training dynamics of a recent two-stage method DivideMix
(Li, Socher, and Hoi 2020) on the corrupted training set of
CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky 2012) (under 90% synthetic symmetric noise). In every epoch, examples are grouped according to the relationship between their predicted labels,
corrupted labels, and underlying ground-truth labels as in
Fig. 1(b). The yellow color indicates the examples whose
predicted labels agree with given noisy labels, i.e., III. predicted label = noisy label ̸= ground-truth. The small yellow
region at the bottom of Fig. 1(c) suggests that the model only
agrees with a small fraction of noisy labels. It’s because DivideMix would filter possible wrong labels and avoid fitting
them. On the other side, the red color indicates those predictions which fail to correct the noisy labels, i.e., IV. predicted
label ̸= noisy label and predicted label ̸= ground-truth. From
the red region at the top of Fig. 1(c), incorrect corrections
comprise a large part throughout the training process. Considering the wrong pseudo-labels would be used for self-

Noisy labels damage the performance of deep networks.
For robust learning, a prominent two-stage pipeline alternates between eliminating possible incorrect labels and semisupervised training. However, discarding part of noisy labels
could result in a loss of information, especially when the corruption has a dependency on data, e.g., class-dependent or
instance-dependent. Moreover, from the training dynamics
of a representative two-stage method DivideMix, we identify the domination of confirmation bias: pseudo-labels fail
to correct a considerable amount of noisy labels, and consequently, the errors accumulate. To sufficiently exploit information from noisy labels and mitigate wrong corrections, we
propose Robust Label Refurbishment (Robust LR)—a new
hybrid method that integrates pseudo-labeling and confidence
estimation techniques to refurbish noisy labels. We show that
our method successfully alleviates the damage of both label
noise and confirmation bias. As a result, it achieves state-ofthe-art performance across datasets and noise types, namely
CIFAR under different levels of synthetic noise and MiniWebVision and ANIMAL-10N with real-world noise.

Introduction
Given certain capacity, deep networks have the capability of
fitting arbitrary complex functions (Cybenko 1989). However, the randomization tests on common architectures (Edgington and Onghena 2007; Zhang et al. 2016; Arpit et al.
2017) show that they also easily fit training data with random labels. This phenomenon naturally raises the question
of how deep learning continues to succeed in the presence
of label noise.
Recently, the state-of-the-art two-stage methods have significantly improved noise robustness by incorporating SemiSupervised Learning (SSL) (Ding et al. 2018; Nguyen et al.
2019; Li, Socher, and Hoi 2020; Zhou, Wang, and Bilmes
2021). The pipeline of a representative algorithm DivideMix
(Li, Socher, and Hoi 2020) is shown in Fig. 1(a). In the first
stage, problematic labels are identified and removed according to the per-example loss, i.e., the so-called “small-loss
trick”. Therefore, the noisy dataset is divided into a labeled
subset and an unlabeled subset. In the second stage, Di* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
When solving a problem of interest, do not solve a more general problem as an intermediate step.

14765

