The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Behavior Estimation from Multi-Source Data for Offline Reinforcement Learning
Guoxi Zhang1 and Hisashi Kashima1,2
1

Graduate School of Inforamtics, Kyoto University
2
RIKEN Guardian Robot Project
guoxi@ml.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, kashima@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) have received rising interest due to its appealing data efficiency. The present study
addresses behavior estimation, a task that aims at estimating
the data-generating policy. In particular, this work considers a
scenario where data are collected from multiple sources. Neglecting data heterogeneity, existing approaches cannot provide good estimates and impede policy learning. To overcome
this drawback, the present study proposes a latent variable
model and a model-learning algorithm to infer a set of policies from data, which allows an agent to use as behavior policy the policy that best describes a particular trajectory. To
illustrate the benefit of such a fine-grained characterization
for multi-source data, this work showcases how the proposed
model can be incorporated into an existing offline RL algorithm. Lastly, with extensive empirical evaluation this work
confirms the risks of neglecting data heterogeneity and the
efficacy of the proposed model.

Figure 1: Example of multi-source trajectories (left) and behavior miss-specification (right). The green robot learns to
play basketball using data collected from the blue and green
demonstrators. The blue demonstrator prefers to pass the
ball to the other agent (policy 1), while the green demonstrator prefers to shoot (policy 2). A single estimate for the
behavior policy will place probability mass at regions not
covered by data.

Introduction
In offline reinforcement learning (RL) (Lange, Gabel, and
Riedmiller 2012), agents learn policies using existing data
without costly online interaction. Due to such data efficiency, offline RL becomes an intriguing paradigm for applications such as recommender systems (Chen et al. 2019)
and robot manipulation (Dasari et al. 2020).
Behavior estimation refers to the task of computing an estimate for data-generating policy. Such an estimate is an essential component of many offline RL algorithms. For example, the discounted COP-TD algorithm (Gelada and Bellemare 2019) and the OPPOSD algorithm (Liu et al. 2020)
requires such estimate for importance sampling, and the
BRAC-v algorithm (Wu, Tucker, and Nachum 2019) utilizes
it in behavior regularization. Hence, behavior estimation is
a premise for these algorithms to work in practice.
In particular, the present study addresses behavior estimation on data collected from multiple sources, which is
common when collecting demonstrations via crowdsourcing (Mandlekar et al. 2018, 2021). Because different sources
may prefer different actions, action distributions in such data
can be multi-modal. Figure 1 shows an minimalist example,
where the green robot learns from data generated by two

demonstrators. Because the blue and the green demonstrator prefers different actions, the empirical action distribution
has two modes for that state. Now consider the canonical approach for behavior estimation that assumes a single Gaussian policy for continuous problems. As illustrated by the
histogram in orange in Figure 1, neglecting data heterogeneity, the canonical approach fails to model the data well.
Perhaps surprisingly, this canonical approach is widely
adopted in literature (Gelada and Bellemare 2019; Liu et al.
2020; Pavse et al. 2020), and data heterogeneity has not receive much attention. While learning latent action spaces
using variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling
2014) seems to be a remedy (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup
2019; Zhou, Bajracharya, and Held 2020), the assumption
of Gaussian action prior limits its expressiveness.
The present study claims that, though the empirical action
distribution is multi-modal, each individual data source still
induces uni-modal action distributions. Thus, data heterogeneity can be properly modeled by inferring a set of policies from data and the assignments of trajectories to these
policies. In the example shown in Figure 1, this corresponds
to provide the agent with two policies and inferred assignments of trajectories. To this end, this work proposes a latent

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11201

