The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FastAMI — a Monte Carlo Approach to the Adjustment for Chance
in Clustering Comparison Metrics
Kai Klede, Leo Schwinn, Dario Zanca, Björn Eskofier
Machine Learning and Data Analytics Lab,
Friedrich-Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU)
{kai.klede, leo.schwinn, dario.zanca, bjoern.eskofier}@fau.de
Abstract

in the Adjusted Rand index (ARI) (Hubert and Arabie 1985)
and the Adjusted Mutual information (AMI) (Nguyen, Epps,
and Bailey 2010).
Romano et al. (2016) created an overview of those clustering comparison measures mentioned above and others. They
analyzed the relationships between these measures and formulated a guideline for which one to use in which situation.
Quoting directly from the abstract, the authors conclude that
ARI should be used when the reference clustering has
large equal-sized clusters; AMI should be used when
the reference clustering is unbalanced and there exist
small clusters.
However, it has been shown that the computational complexity of the adjusted mutual information is O(max(R, C)N ),
where R, C are the numbers of clusters in the clusterings
to be compared and N is the number of data points (Romano et al. 2014). For large datasets with many small clusters and few bigger clusters, which is exactly the domain
where the AMI should be used, its computation becomes difficult and often impractical. Many datasets originating from
different domains exhibit these characteristics, such as social
networks, collaboration networks, or web graphs (Leskovec
and Krevl 2014). In practice, many authors resort to the nonadjusted normalized mutual information (Tian et al. 2019;
Chunaev 2020; Karim et al. 2021), which is faster to compute, but does not account for random coincidences.
As a workaround, Lazarenko and Bonald (2021) proposed
to consider only pairwise permutations in the adjustment for
chance, i.e., to only adjust for clusterings where two individual samples exchanged their cluster labels. While this approach allows for faster computations (O(RC)), these pairwise permutations lead to a higher amount of shared information. In Figure 1 we show that the actual expected mutual
information (EMI) is overestimated by the pairwise EMI.
Consequently, the pairwise AMI systematically underestimates the AMI, and the results cannot be compared with
existing values. Even the relative order of cluster similarity
is affected, as shown in Table 1.
With FastAMI, we propose a Monte Carlo-based approach to enable AMI comparisons for large datasets with
small clusters1 . The presented method allows for finegrained control over its accuracy and addresses the short-

Clustering is at the very core of machine learning, and its applications proliferate with the increasing availability of data.
However, as datasets grow, comparing clusterings with an adjustment for chance becomes computationally difficult, preventing unbiased ground-truth comparisons and solution selection. We propose FastAMI, a Monte Carlo-based method
to efficiently approximate the Adjusted Mutual Information
(AMI) and extend it to the Standardized Mutual Information
(SMI). The approach is compared with the exact calculation
and a recently developed variant of the AMI based on pairwise permutations, using both synthetic and real data. In contrast to the exact calculation our method is fast enough to
enable these adjusted information-theoretic comparisons for
large datasets while maintaining considerably more accurate
results than the pairwise approach.

Introduction
Clustering comparison measures such as the mutual information or the Rand index are most commonly used
to validate clusterings when ground truth information is
available (Aggarwal and Reddy 2014). In the context of
graphs, the mutual information of the neighborhoods of
two nodes indicates their similarity and can predict missing
links (Hoffman, Steinley, and Brusco 2015; Shakibian and
Moghadam Charkari 2017). Another application is multipleclustering algorithms, which measure the mutual information or one of its variants to identify multiple qualitatively
different clustering solutions for a single dataset (Müller
et al. 2010; Wei et al. 2021). Other uses include categorical feature selection, where each feature is understood as a
cluster or for the solution selection in consensus clustering
(Lancichinetti and Fortunato 2012).
A well-known problem with these clustering comparison
measures is that they do not assume a constant baseline
value when comparing two random clustering partitions. Instead, they tend to be larger when the number of clusters approaches the number of data points (Nguyen, Epps, and Bailey 2009), leading to a bias towards smaller clusters when
used as an external validation criterion. To obtain a constant
baseline, these measures have been adjusted by their expectation value under random permutations of the cluster labels
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8317

Code at https://github.com/mad-lab-fau/fastami-benchmark

