The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Medical Image Segmentation by Selective
Entropy Constraints and Adaptive Semantic Alignment
Wei Feng1,2,3 , Lie Ju1,2,3 , Lin Wang1,2,3 , Kaimin Song4 , Xin Zhao4 , Zongyuan Ge1,2,3 ,*
1

Monash eResearch Center, Monash University
Monash Medical AI Group, Monash University
3
Airdoc Monash Research Centre, Monash University
4
Airdoc LLC
wei.feng@monash.edu, julie334600@gmail.com, wanglin.mailbox@gmail.com, kims75699@gmail.com,
zhaoxin@airdoc.com, zongyuan.ge@monash.edu
2

Abstract

image analysis, where clinical data may have significantly
different appearances as they are often acquired from different devices, different hospitals and different protocols. A
naive solution would be to let the doctor annotate the the
data of the new domain from scratch. However, in a clinical
scenario, even for experienced physicians, annotating large
amounts of medical image data is very time-consuming and
labour-intensive.
Recently, unsupervised domain adaptation(UDA) methods have received increasing attention, with the aim of improving the generalization performance of a model on the
target domain without re-annotating the target domain data,
using only the annotated source domain data. Most of the
current mainstream UDA methods use adversarial training
to perform distribution adaptation in the image or feature
space (Chen et al. 2020a; Tsai et al. 2018). Image-level UDA
methods typically use image translation techniques (Zhu
et al. 2017) to reduce the difference in appearance of images from the source and target domains. Feature-level UDA
methods learn domain invariant feature representations by
adversarial training (Luo et al. 2019; Feng et al. 2022). Considering that the spatial structure of the predicted outputs in
the source and target domains should be similar, some methods perform distribution adaptation in the output space (Tsai
et al. 2018).
However, due to the properties of cross-entropy loss,
which forces the network output to match the one-hot
ground truth label, the neural network may be mis-calibrated
and would output overconfident predictions (Guo et al.
2017; Zou et al. 2019). This phenomenon is exacerbated in
the presence of domain shifts, as the model only receives
supervision signals from the source domain during training
(Wang et al. 2020). For example, as shown in Fig. 1, the
state-of-the-art algorithm SIFA V2 (Chen et al. 2020a) on
the cross-modality cardiac segmentation dataset produced
overconfident (low entropy) segmentation results on the target image, which required explicit correction. Most adversarial training-based UDA methods do not address this problem properly.
To address the above problem, in this paper we propose a new unsupervised domain adaptation algorithm based
on selective entropy constraints and adaptive semantic

Generalizing a deep learning model to new domains is crucial for computer-aided medical diagnosis systems. Most existing unsupervised domain adaptation methods have made
significant progress in reducing the domain distribution gap
through adversarial training. However, these methods may
still produce overconfident but erroneous results on unseen
target images. This paper proposes a new unsupervised domain adaptation framework for cross-modality medical image segmentation. Specifically, We first introduce two data
augmentation approaches to generate two sets of semanticspreserving augmented images. Based on the model’s predictive consistency on these two sets of augmented images, we
identify reliable and unreliable pixels. We then perform a selective entropy constraints: we minimize the entropy of reliable pixels to increase their confidence while maximizing the
entropy of unreliable pixels to reduce their confidence. Based
on the identified reliable and unreliable pixels, we further
propose an adaptive semantic alignment module which performs class-level distribution adaptation by minimizing the
distance between same class prototypes between domains,
where unreliable pixels are removed to derive more accurate prototypes. We have conducted extensive experiments
on the cross-modality cardiac structure segmentation task.
The experimental results show that the proposed method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art comparison algorithms. Our code and data are available at https://github.com/
fengweie/SE ASA.

Introduction
Deep learning techniques have achieved breakthroughs in
various fields in recent years, including computer vision
(Oquab et al. 2014; Li et al. 2021), natural language processing (Collobert and Weston 2008; Yin et al. 2017), speech
recognition (Graves, Mohamed, and Hinton 2013; AbdelHamid et al. 2012), etc. However, when applied directly to
an unseen dataset with a different distribution, a well-trained
deep learning model often suffers from performance degradation due to distribution shifts (Djolonga et al. 2021). This
phenomenon is even more common in the field of medical
* Corresponding Author: zongyuan.ge@monash.edu.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

623

