The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fine-Grained Retrieval Prompt Tuning
Shijie Wang1 , Jianlong Chang2 , Zhihui Wang1 , Haojie Li1,3 * , Wanli Ouyang4 , Qi Tian2
1

International School of Information Science & Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Huawei Cloud & AI, China
3
College of Computer and Engineering, Shandong University of Science and Technology, China
4
SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, The University of Sydney, Australia
hjli@dlut.edu.cn
Abstract

Recently, the successful FGOR works fight against large
intra-class but small inter-class variances by designing specialized metric constraints (Teh 2020; Wang et al. 2019a;
Boudiaf et al. 2020) or locating object and even parts (Wei
et al. 2017; Zheng et al. 2018; Moskvyak et al. 2021). Although metric-based and localization-based works can learn
discriminative embeddings to identify fine-grained objects,
the FGOR model learned from last phase is still needed to
be fine-tuned on next phase endlessly, forcing the model
to adapt the fine-grained retrieval task. However, continually fine-tuning the FGOR model could result in convergence to suboptimal solutions especially when facing
limited-data regimes, inevitably limiting the retrieval performance (Huang et al. 2021; Zintgraf et al. 2019). Therefore,
a question naturally arises: is it possible that we can still
learn discriminative embeddings without fine-tuning the entire FGOR model? It is already answered yes by natural language processing (NLP) with prompt techniques.
Prompt-based learning (Liu et al. 2022) is a task-relevant
instruction prepended to the input to adapt the downstream
tasks to the frozen pre-trained models. Its key idea is to
reformulate the downstream tasks aided by an appropriate prompt design, making it close to those solved during the original pre-training. Thereby, prompt-based learning could utilize pre-trained models directly instead of finetuning them to adapt downstream tasks. Following this ideology, the vision-language pre-training task has been gradually developed, which diametrically obtains visual guidance
concepts from natural language via putting visual category
semantics into text inputs as prompts (Jia et al. 2021; Kamath et al. 2021; Radford et al. 2021). Though these works
achieve remarkable performance on many downstream vision tasks, their prompt tuning strategies are tailored for
the multi-modal model and thus inapplicable to fine-grained
vision models. Therefore, how to devise a prompt scheme
for fine-grained vision models to solve the issue of convergence to suboptimal solutions caused by fine-tuning the entire FGOR model is worthy of investigation.
To this end, we propose Fine-grained Retrieval Prompt
Tuning (FRPT), which equips with discriminative perturbation prompt (DPP), pre-trained backbone model, and
category-specific awareness head (CAH). FRPT merely
learns fewer parameters in DPP and CAH while freezing the
weights of backbone model, thus solving the convergence

Fine-grained object retrieval aims to learn discriminative representation to retrieve visually similar objects. However, existing top-performing works usually impose pairwise similarities on the semantic embedding spaces or design a localization sub-network to continually fine-tune the entire model
in limited data scenarios, thus resulting in convergence to
suboptimal solutions. In this paper, we develop Fine-grained
Retrieval Prompt Tuning (FRPT), which steers a frozen pretrained model to perform the fine-grained retrieval task from
the perspectives of sample prompting and feature adaptation.
Specifically, FRPT only needs to learn fewer parameters in
the prompt and adaptation instead of fine-tuning the entire
model, thus solving the issue of convergence to suboptimal
solutions caused by fine-tuning the entire model. Technically,
a discriminative perturbation prompt (DPP) is introduced and
deemed as a sample prompting process, which amplifies and
even exaggerates some discriminative elements contributing
to category prediction via a content-aware inhomogeneous
sampling operation. In this way, DPP can make the finegrained retrieval task aided by the perturbation prompts close
to the solved task during the original pre-training. Thereby,
it preserves the generalization and discrimination of representation extracted from input samples. Besides, a categoryspecific awareness head is proposed and regarded as feature adaptation, which removes the species discrepancies in
features extracted by the pre-trained model using categoryguided instance normalization. And thus, it makes the optimized features only include the discrepancies among subcategories. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our FRPT
with fewer learnable parameters achieves the state-of-the-art
performance on three widely-used fine-grained datasets.

Introduction
Fine-grained Object Retrieval (FGOR) is to retrieve images belonging to various subcategories of a certain metacategory (i.e., birds, cars and aircraft) and return images with
the same subcategory as the query image. However, retrieving visually similar objects is still challenging in practical
applications, especially when there exists large intra-class
variances but small inter-class differences. As a result, the
key to FGOR lies in learning the discriminative and generalizable embeddings to identify the visually similar objects.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2644

