The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Language-Assisted 3D Feature Learning for Semantic Scene Understanding
Junbo Zhang1 , Guofan Fan2 , Guanghan Wang1 , Zhengyuan Su1 , Kaisheng Ma1∗ , Li Yi1,3,4 *
1
Tsinghua University
Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
4
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
zhangjb21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, kaisheng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, ericyi@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

3D Scene

weak alignment

Text Descriptions

A lamp with a cone-shaped head.

Learning descriptive 3D features is crucial for understanding 3D scenes with diverse objects and complex structures.
However, it is usually unknown whether important geometric attributes and scene context obtain enough emphasis in an
end-to-end trained 3D scene understanding network. To guide
3D feature learning toward important geometric attributes
and scene context, we explore the help of textual scene descriptions. Given some free-form descriptions paired with 3D
scenes, we extract the knowledge regarding the object relationships and object attributes. We then inject the knowledge to 3D feature learning through three classification-based
auxiliary tasks. This language-assisted training can be combined with modern object detection and instance segmentation methods to promote 3D semantic scene understanding,
especially in a label-deficient regime. Moreover, the 3D feature learned with language assistance is better aligned with
the language features, which can benefit various 3D-language
multimodal tasks. Experiments on several benchmarks of 3Donly and 3D-language tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of
our language-assisted 3D feature learning. Code is available
at https://github.com/Asterisci/Language-Assisted-3D.

The pillow is on the top right of the bed.
This is a brown nightstand next to bed.
The bed in the center is a white rectangle.

Objects, Attributes, Relationships …

Figure 1: Text-scene pairs used in language-assisted 3D
feature learning. “Weak alignment” means that text-object
alignment annotations are not needed during training.
are very informative for identifying the object of interest.
We then ask the question: can free-form languages guide 3D
feature learning? We aim to imbue 3D feature learning with
weak supervision knowledge from language descriptions.
3D scene understanding should benefit from text descriptions in both context modeling and object attribute learning.
First, object relationships and context information in the language help understand the structure of the scene and localize
specific objects. For example, “the towel hanging on a rack”
and “the chair facing the door” provide spatial position and
pose information of the objects, which could guide the scene
understanding process when the towel and chair are hard to
detect. Second, the text descriptions contain rich attribute
information about the objects in a scene. For example, “a
brown wooden door” and “a small circular table” provide
color, shape and size information of the objects, which help
to understand their semantic and geometric nature.
To emphasize the two types of features mentioned above,
we design a language-assisted 3D feature learning paradigm
to introduce the language prior into 3D features. Previous
2D-language joint representation learning methods, such as
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), achieve similar objectives by
aligning the global features from the 2D encoder and language encoder. However, unlike 2D images, 3D scenes are
much more complex and contain a richer variety of geometry and objects. One text description corresponds to only
a few objects and a small part of the scene. Moreover, the
amount of 3D-language data pairs is very small compared to
image-text pairs mined from the web. Therefore, we propose
to parse the text descriptions into scene graphs (Armeni et al.
2019; Wald et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021a) with object cat-

Introduction
Computer vision community has studied 3D semantic scene
understanding for a long time. Remarkable progress has
been made in detecting 3D objects (Qi et al. 2019; Xie et al.
2020) or segmenting 3D instances (Jiang et al. 2020; Vu
et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2021c). Most of these works struggle for learning effective 3D features to depict geometric attributes of objects as well as scene context. Though these
features are commonly believed to be crucial for semantic scene understanding, it is not clear whether a network
is truly emphasizing these features while being end-to-end
trained for a specific 3D task.
Our goal is to improve the learning process so that these
important 3D features can be explicitly emphasized. And our
idea comes from the following observation: humans could
concisely summarize the key geometric attributes of an object as well as its surrounding context with a short natural
language description (see Figure 1) and these descriptions
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3445

