The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Don’t Be So Sure! Boosting ASR Decoding via Confidence Relaxation
Tomer Wullach, Shlomo E. Chazan
OriginAI, Ramat-Gan, Israel
tomerw, shlomi@originai.co

Abstract
Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) systems frequently use
a search-based decoding strategy aiming to find the best attainable transcript by considering multiple candidates. One
prominent speech recognition decoding heuristic is beam
search, which seeks the transcript with the greatest likelihood
computed using the predicted distribution. While showing
substantial performance gains in various tasks, beam search
loses some of its effectiveness when the predicted probabilities are highly confident, i.e., the predicted distribution is
massed for a single or very few classes. We show that recently proposed Self-Supervised Learning (SSL)-based ASR
models tend to yield exceptionally confident predictions that
may hamper beam search from truly considering a diverse set
of candidates. We perform a layer analysis to reveal and visualize how predictions evolve, and propose a decoding procedure that improves the performance of fine-tuned ASR models. Our proposed approach does not require further training
beyond the original fine-tuning, nor additional model parameters. In fact, we find that our proposed method requires significantly less inference computation than current approaches.
We propose aggregating the top M layers, potentially leveraging useful information encoded in intermediate layers, and
relaxing model confidence. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach by conducting an empirical study on varying amounts of labeled resources and different model sizes,
showing consistent improvements in particular when applied
to low-resource scenarios.

Figure 1: The evolution of confidence throughout the top 12
transformer layers of Wav2vec 2.0 Large fine-tuned on 960
hours of Librispeech. The confidence increases at the top
layers, ultimately reaching exceptionally high levels.

Recently proposed SSL ASR models commonly employ a
greedy decoding strategy, selecting the token with the highest predicted probability at each time step (Baevski et al.
2020; Hsu et al. 2021). This approach is potentially suboptimal as sequences of high quality might be disregarded.
Consequently, researchers often maintain a search-based decoder such as beam search (Baevski et al. 2020; Chen et al.
2021; Hsu et al. 2021), showing substantial performance
gains, in particular when fused with a Language Model
(LM) (Hsu et al. 2021; Baevski et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021;
Gulati et al. 2020).
Beam search considers several alternatives by maintaining the B partial sequences with the highest conditional
probability at each decoding step, where B is commonly referred to as Beam Width. Although enabling easy, straightforward decoding, beam search might be prone to biases
when predictions are highly confident. In that case, the predicted probability distribution at each time step is massed to
very few tokens, thus, reducing the relevancy of the beam
width, as a small number of candidates dominate all others. Consequently, highly confident predictions might prevent the algorithm from truly considering multiple alternatives.
From another perspective, previous works have shown

Introduction
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) has been widely adopted in
a variety of tasks (Devlin et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019, 2020b;
Baevski et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020a) and has shown to be
capable of producing representation that can be effectively
utilized for downstream tasks. Models trained via SSL leverage a massive amount of unlabeled data during pre-training,
and are further tuned for specific tasks using a significantly
smaller amount of labeled data. In recent years, SSL has
been employed for speech processing tasks (Baevski et al.
2020; Hsu et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2020a; Van den Oord,
Li, and Vinyals 2018), utilizing transformer encoders layers (Vaswani et al. 2017) creating context-aware representations.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13780

