The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On Total-Order HTN Plan Verification with Method Preconditions
– An Extension of the CYK Parsing Algorithm
Songtuan Lin1 , Gregor Behnke2 , Simona Ondrčková3 , Roman Barták3 , Pascal Bercher1
1

School of Computing, The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
2
ILLC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
3
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic
{songtuan.lin, pascal.bercher}@anu.edu.au, g.behnke@uva.nl, {ondrckova, bartak}@ktiml.mff.cuni.cz
Abstract

ones in the IPC 2020 on HTN Planning. In spite of the significance, most existing HTN plan verification approaches
(e.g., see the work by Behnke, Höller, and Biundo (2017),
by Barták et al. (2020), and by Höller et al. (2022)) have no
special treatments for TO problems, and the only one having
such an optimization is by Barták et al. (2021b).
The core of our TO plan verification approach is the CYK
parsing algorithm (Sakai 1961), which can be employed here
because a TOHTN planning problem is semantically equivalent to a context-free grammar (CFG) (Höller et al. 2014; Lin
and Bercher 2022), and hence, the TOHTN plan verification
problem is essentially the parsing problem for CFG. However, that result by Höller et al. (2014) does not take into
account so-called method preconditions which occur quite
often in practice in many TOHTN planning benchmarks and
thus also become an obstacle to directly applying the CYK
algorithm to plan verification. Consequently, we will extend
the standard CYK algorithm to adapt method preconditions.
The idea of viewing an HTN plan verification problem
as a parsing problem is widely used. For instance, Barták,
Maillard, and Cardoso (2018) and Barták et al. (2020) exploited the connection between HTN planning problems
and attributed grammars and proposed a parsing-based plan
verification approach for general HTN planning problems,
which can also be used to correct flawed HTN plans (Barták
et al. 2021a) and is then extended to have a special treatment for the TO setting (Barták et al. 2021b). Notably, their
treatment for TOHTN planning problems did not leverage
the fact that any TOHTN planning problem can be transformed into a simplified form (e.g., Chomsky Normal Form
(Chomsky 1959)) which can make the search happening in
verifying a plan more systematic, and hence, their approach
has several overheads. Unfortunately, those overheads are
mandatory because the approach takes into account some
additional state constraints. However, those state constraints
are rare in many TOHTN planning benchmarks. For this
reason, we are not concerned with such constraints, which
allows us to fully exploit the connection between TOHTN
planning problems and CFGs and thus develop a more efficient TO plan verification approach.

In this paper, we consider the plan verification problem for totally ordered (TO) HTN planning. The problem is proved to
be solvable in polynomial time by recognizing its connection
to the membership decision problem for context-free grammars. Currently, most HTN plan verification approaches do
not have special treatments for the TO configuration, and the
only one features such an optimization still relies on an exhaustive search. Hence, we will develop a new TOHTN plan
verification approach in this paper by extending the standard
CYK parsing algorithm which acts as the best decision procedure in general.

Introduction
The problem of plan verification is to decide whether a
given plan is a solution to a planning problem. The study
of this problem has drawn increasing attentions in the last
decade for its potential usages in benefiting the research on
planning. For instance, an independent plan verifier is vital in International Planning Competition (IPC) for verifying whether participating planner produces a correct plan.
Recently, several works have explored the possibility of
deploying plan verification techniques in Human-AI interaction. For example, Behnke, Höller, and Biundo (2017)
pointed out the connection between plan verification and
mixed-initial planning (Myers et al. 2003) where a planner shall iteratively adjust its output plan according to a
user’s change requests, and plan verification might also be
seen as an approach for planning domain validation (Lin and
Bercher 2021, 2023; Lin, Grastien, and Bercher 2023), i.e.,
deciding whether a planning domain is correctly modeled,
where a plan is given as a test case that is supposed to be
a solution to a planning problem, and a failed verification
indicates that there are some flaws in the domain.
In this paper, we consider the plan verification problem in
Hierarchical Task Network (HTN) planning (Erol, Hendler,
and Nau 1996; Geier and Bercher 2011; Bercher, Alford,
and Höller 2019). We particularly focus on a special class
of HTN planning problems called total-order (TO) HTN
planning problems which plays a prominent role in HTN
planning, as evidenced by the fact that TO planning problem benchmarks significantly outnumber partial-order (PO)

HTN Formalism
In order to explain how our TO plan verification approach
works, we first introduce the HTN formalism employed in

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12041

