The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Generalized Category Discovery with Decoupled Prototypical Network
Wenbin An1,3 , Feng Tian2,3 , Qinghua Zheng2,3 , Wei Ding4 , QianYing Wang5 , Ping Chen6
1

School of Automation Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Analytics
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Boston
5
Lenovo Research
6
Department of Engineering, University of Massachusetts Boston
wenbinan@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {fengtian,qhzheng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
{wei.ding,Ping.Chen}@umb.edu, wangqya@lenovo.com

Abstract
Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) aims to recognize
both known and novel categories from a set of unlabeled data,
based on another dataset labeled with only known categories.
Without considering differences between known and novel
categories, current methods learn about them in a coupled
manner, which can hurt model’s generalization and discriminative ability. Furthermore, the coupled training approach
prevents these models transferring category-specific knowledge explicitly from labeled data to unlabeled data, which can
lose high-level semantic information and impair model performance. To mitigate above limitations, we present a novel
model called Decoupled Prototypical Network (DPN). By formulating a bipartite matching problem for category prototypes,
DPN can not only decouple known and novel categories to
achieve different training targets effectively, but also align
known categories in labeled and unlabeled data to transfer
category-specific knowledge explicitly and capture high-level
semantics. Furthermore, DPN can learn more discriminative
features for both known and novel categories through our proposed Semantic-aware Prototypical Learning (SPL). Besides
capturing meaningful semantic information, SPL can also
alleviate the noise of hard pseudo labels through semanticweighted soft assignment. Extensive experiments show that
DPN outperforms state-of-the-art models by a large margin
on all evaluation metrics across multiple benchmark datasets.
Code and data are available at https://github.com/Lackel/DPN.

Introduction
Although modern machine learning methods have achieved
superior performance on many NLP tasks such as text classification, they usually fail to recognize novel categories from
newly collected unlabelled data. To cope with this limitation,
some task settings were proposed to discover novel categories
from unlabeled text (Lin, Xu, and Zhang 2020) or images (Yu
et al. 2022). Recently, Vaze et al. (2022) comprehensively
formalized these settings and proposed a task called Generalized Category Discovery (GCD). Since models trained
on a labeled dataset containing only known categories may
encounter newly collected unlabelled data with both known
and novel categories, GCD requires models to recognize both
known and novel categories from the unlabeled data without
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12527

any additional annotation, which can help to extend existing
category taxonomy and reduce significant labeling cost.
To discover novel categories from unlabeled data, current
methods (Lin, Xu, and Zhang 2020; Zhang et al. 2021b;
Vaze et al. 2022) usually employ two steps: pretraining on
labeled data for representation learning and then pseudolabel training on unlabeled data to discover categories. Although these methods can learn some discriminative features
for novel categories, they usually face following limitations.
First, these methods cannot transfer category-specific knowledge explicitly from labeled data to unlabeled data, which
can lose high-level semantic information and impair model
performance on known categories. Even though these methods can transfer some general knowledge implicitly through
the pretrained feature extractor, they usually fail to transfer
category-specific knowledge since they discard the pretrained
classifier after pre-training and cannot align known categories
in labeled and unlabeled data. Second, these methods cannot
decouple known and novel categories from unlabeled data
to achieve different training goals for them, which can hurt
model’s generalization and discriminative ability. Without
considering different training objectives for known and novel
categories, these methods simply treat them the same and
learn about them in a coupled unsupervised manner, which
can prevent models learning about discriminative features for
both known and novel categories.
In this paper, we first provide insight of different training
objectives for known and novel categories in GCD, which
is ignored by previous methods. Since we have both labeled and unlabeled data for known categories, we want
to exploit knowledge acquired from labeled data to improve
model’s generalization ability on these categories in a semisupervised manner. Meanwhile we have only unlabeled
data for novel categories, we mainly want to explore some
novel knowledge to improve model’s discriminative ability
on these categories in an unsupervised manner. So learning about known and novel categories with different training
approaches in a decoupled manner is crucial for GCD.
To cope with above challenges, we propose Decoupled Prototypical Network (DPN), a novel model which can transfer
category-specific knowledge explicitly and decouple known
and novel categories to achieve different training goals for
them. First, we formulate a bipartite matching problem for

