The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

On the Effectiveness of Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning
Zihao Fu1 , Haoran Yang2 , Anthony Man-Cho So2 ,
Wai Lam2 , Lidong Bing3 , Nigel Collier1
1

Language Technology Lab, University of Cambridge
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{zf268,nhc30}@cam.ac.uk,
{hryang,manchoso,wlam}@se.cuhk.edu.hk, l.bing@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

2019; Lan et al. 2020; Radford et al. 2018, 2019; Liu et al.
2019; Brown et al. 2020; Lewis et al. 2020; Raffel et al.
2020) has become one of the most promising techniques
for NLP in recent years. It achieves state-of-the-art performance on most of the NLP tasks. However, as the parameter number grows exponentially to billions (Brown et al.
2020) or even trillions (Fedus, Zoph, and Shazeer 2021), it
becomes very inefficient to save the fully fine-tuned parameters (He et al. 2021a) for each downstream task. Many recent research works propose a parameter-efficient (Houlsby
et al. 2019; Zaken, Ravfogel, and Goldberg 2021; He et al.
2021a) way to solve this problem by tuning only a small part
of the original parameters and storing the tuned parameters
for each task.
Apart from the efficiency of the parameter-efficient models, it has also been observed in many recent research works
that the parameter-efficient methods achieve surprisingly
good performance. These models are more stable (He et al.
2021b; Lee, Cho, and Kang 2019; Houlsby et al. 2019; Zaken, Ravfogel, and Goldberg 2021; Sung, Nair, and Raffel
2021; Liu et al. 2021; Ding et al. 2022) and even achieve
better overall scores than the fully fine-tuned models (Lee,
Cho, and Kang 2019; Houlsby et al. 2019; Zaken, Ravfogel,
and Goldberg 2021; Sung, Nair, and Raffel 2021; Liu et al.
2021; Xu et al. 2021; Guo, Rush, and Kim 2021; He et al.
2021a; Ding et al. 2022) on some tasks. Currently, it remains
unclear why the parameter-efficient models can improve the
stability and performance in many prevalent works. In this
paper, we first categorize the existing methods into three
categories (i.e. random approaches, rule-based approaches,
and projection-based approaches) depending on how they
choose the tunable parameters. Then, we define the generalized sparse fine-tuned model and illustrate that most of
the existing parameter-efficient models are actually a sparse
fine-tuned model. Afterwards, we introduce the widely used
pointwise hypothesis stability of the sparse fine-tuned model
and show theoretically that the sparsity actually controls the
upper bound of the stability. Based on the stability analysis,
we further give a theoretical analysis of the generalization
bound for the sparse fine-tuned model.
Though promising results have been achieved by existing parameter-efficient models, it still remains a challenging problem to select suitable parameters as it is an NPhard problem. Currently, the random (Lee, Cho, and Kang

Fine-tuning pre-trained models has been ubiquitously proven
to be effective in a wide range of NLP tasks. However,
fine-tuning the whole model is parameter inefficient as
it always yields an entirely new model for each task.
Currently, many research works propose to only fine-tune
a small portion of the parameters while keeping most of
the parameters shared across different tasks. These methods
achieve surprisingly good performance and are shown to
be more stable than their corresponding fully fine-tuned
counterparts. However, such kind of methods is still not
well understood. Some natural questions arise: How does
the parameter sparsity lead to promising performance? Why
is the model more stable than the fully fine-tuned models?
How to choose the tunable parameters? In this paper, we first
categorize the existing methods into random approaches,
rule-based approaches, and projection-based approaches
based on how they choose which parameters to tune. Then,
we show that all of the methods are actually sparse fine-tuned
models and conduct a novel theoretical analysis of them. We
indicate that the sparsity is actually imposing a regularization
on the original model by controlling the upper bound of
the stability. Such stability leads to better generalization
capability which has been empirically observed in a lot of
recent research works. Despite the effectiveness of sparsity
grounded by our theory, it still remains an open problem of
how to choose the tunable parameters. Currently, the random
and rule-based methods do not utilize task-specific data
information while the projection-based approaches suffer
from the projection discontinuity problem. To better choose
the tunable parameters, we propose a novel Second-order
Approximation Method (SAM) which approximates the
original problem with an analytically solvable optimization
function. The tunable parameters are determined by directly
optimizing the approximation function. We conduct extensive experiments on several tasks. The experimental results
show that our proposed SAM model outperforms many
strong baseline models and it also verifies our theoretical
analysis. The source code of this paper can be obtained from
https://github.com/fuzihaofzh/AnalyzeParameterEfficientFinetune

Introduction
Fine-tuning the model parameters for a specific task on a
pre-trained model (Peters et al. 2018; Kenton and Toutanova
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12799

