The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Domain Generalised Faster R-CNN
Karthik Seemakurthy1 , Charles Fox2 , Erchan Aptoula3 , Petra Bosilj1, 2
1

Lincoln Institute of Agri-Food Technology, University of Lincoln, United Kingdom.
2
School of Computer Science, University of Lincoln, United Kingdom.
3
Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences (VPALab), Sabanci University, Türkiye.
kseemakurthy@lincoln.ac.uk, chfox@lincoln.ac.uk, erchan.aptoula@sabanciuniv.edu, pbosilj@lincoln.ac.uk

Abstract
Domain generalisation (i.e. out-of-distribution generalisation)
is an open problem in machine learning, where the goal is
to train a model via one or more source domains, that will
generalise well to unknown target domains. While the topic
is attracting increasing interest, it has not been studied in
detail in the context of object detection. The established approaches all operate under the covariate shift assumption,
where the conditional distributions are assumed to be approximately equal across source domains. This is the first
paper to address domain generalisation in the context of object
detection, with a rigorous mathematical analysis of domain
shift, without the covariate shift assumption. We focus on
improving the generalisation ability of object detection by
proposing new regularisation terms to address the domain
shift that arises due to both classification and bounding box
regression. Also, we include an additional consistency regularisation term to align the local and global level predictions. The proposed approach is implemented as a Domain
Generalised Faster R-CNN and evaluated using four object
detection datasets which provide domain metadata (GWHD,
Cityscapes, BDD100K, Sim10K) where it exhibits a consistent performance improvement over the baselines. All the
codes for replicating the results in this paper can be found at
https://github.com/karthikiitm87/domain-generalisation.git

(a) Arvalis

(b) Ethz

(f) Aachen

(c) Inrae

(g) Hanover

(d) NAU

(e) UQ

(h) Foggy-Lindau

Figure 1: Samples from various training and testing domains
in the Global Wheat Head Detection (GWHD) (a)-(e) and
Cityscapes (f)-(h) datasets used in our experiments.

task, and there can be no guarantee that all deployment scenarios will be adequately represented. Domain generalisation
(DG) aims to learn a single, unchanging set of parameters
which are able to perform well on previously unseen domains.
This is achieved by training jointly on several domains and
ensuring that the domain-specific information is suppressed.
Unlike domain adaptation (DA)(Chen et al. 2018; Cai et al.
2021; Saito et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2020a; Li et al. 2020; Hsu
et al. 2020b; Li, Liu, and Yuan 2022; Hsu et al. 2020a; Rezaeianaran et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021), DG is useful when
the system needs to be deployed in an unknown setting, as
it addresses domain shift without requiring any additional
training data from the target domain, which often cannot be
obtained in advance even without annotations. In DA, parameters of a trained model are adapted by exploiting unlabelled
data from the target domain(s), however, in practice target
domain data is often sparse and unavailable. Despite this,
recent surveys of domain shift (Zhou et al. 2021; Koh et al.
2021) show that DA is still the more common approach for
addressing domain shift in object detection, with very little
work on DG for object detection (Liu, Song, and Ding 2020a;
Lin et al. 2021).
Furthermore, this is the first paper to systematically analyse domain shift for object detection without assuming the
covariate shift case. While the assumption that the conditional distributions are approximately equal was disputed
and addressed in classification (Zhao et al. 2020), techniques

Introduction
Object detection is the task of identifying and localising all
instances of a certain object in an image. Benchmark performances have increased significantly using deep learning
approaches (Jocher et al. 2020; Tan, Pang, and Le 2020; Liu
et al. 2016; Ren et al. 2015; Lin et al. 2017; Dai et al. 2016;
Lin et al. 2014). Factors such as viewpoint, background,
weather, and image quality increase the variations in object
appearance (autonomous farming and driving examples in
Fig. 1). The resulting distribution discrepancy between training and testing data is called domain shift and degrades model
performance at deployment (Recht et al. 2019; Hendrycks
and Dietterich 2019).
Although increasing the amount and diversity of training
data can can alleviate the impact of domain shift in theory,
image annotation remains an expensive and time consuming
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2180

