The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Tighter Robust Upper Bounds for Options via No-Regret Learning
Shan Xue1 , Ye Du2 * , Liang Xu1
1

School of Business Administration, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu, China
2
Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu, China
xueshanads123@gmail.com, henry,duye@gmail.com, arecxuliang1112@gmail.com

Abstract

ple of no-arbitrage pricing and risk-neutral probability, was
a milestone in the literature on option pricing. An implicit
assumption in the Black-Scholes framework is that the underlying asset price follows a geometric Brownian motion,
which is quite rigid. With this model setting, the stochastic
calculus can be utilized to obtain the explicit pricing formulas for European options. To make the option pricing theory work in practice, the follow-up studies attempt to reduce
or weaken the assumptions a pricing model depends on. In
one line of existing research on option pricing, numerous
models are introduced to deal with more general dynamics
of the underlying assets, such as the Heston model (Heston 1993), the Bates model (Bates 1996), the jump-diffusion
model (Kou 2002), among others. In the other line of the research, model-independent bounds are developed for various
options, such as (Hobson 1998; Brown, Hobson, and Rogers
2001; Chen and Yeh 2002; Hobson, Laurence, and Wang
2005a, 2005b; Chung and Chang 2007; Chen et al. 2008;
Laurence and Wang 2008; Laurence and Wang 2009; Hobson and Neuberger 2012; Kahalé 2016, 2017). DeMarzo,
Kremer, and Mansour (2006) first introduce the techniques
of no-regret learning to option pricing and provide upper
bounds for European call options. Following their work,
Gofer and Mansour (2011) apply the methodology to exotic option pricing. DeMarzo et al. (2016) exploit a new gradient trading strategy to derive upper bounds for European
options. Their results are robust in that they only depend on
the no-arbitrage principle. Based on the same trading strategy, Du, Xue, and Liu (2019) and Xue et al. (2022) develop
robust upper bounds for American options and various exotic options, respectively. Since robust option pricing only
requires the no-arbitrage principle, the robust bounds are
usually not very tight. Therefore, in this study, we investigate a novel no-regret learning strategy, which we call the
η-momentum trading strategy, to derive tighter robust upper
bounds for options.

Classic option pricing models, such as the Black-Scholes formula, often depend on some rigid assumptions on the dynamics of the underlying asset prices. These assumptions are inevitably violated in practice and thus induce the model risk.
To mitigate this, robust option pricing that only requires the
no-arbitrage principle has attracted a great deal of attention
among researchers. In this paper, we give new robust upper bounds for option prices based on a novel η-momentum
trading strategy. Our bounds for European options are tighter
for most common moneyness, volatility, and expiration date
setups than those presented in the existing literature. Our
bounds for average strike Asian options are the first closedform robust upper bounds for those options. Numerical simulations demonstrate that our bounds significantly outperform
the benchmarks for both European and Asian options.

Introduction
Option pricing has long been one of the most intriguing
problems in finance. An option is a financial contract that
allows its holder to purchase or sell a given underlying asset, such as a stock, for a predetermined price on or before
a predetermined date. The price and the date in the contract are known as the strike price and the expiration date,
respectively. For instance, a European call (or put) option
on a stock with strike price K and expiration date T gives
its holder the right to buy (or sell) the stock for a price K
at time T . Consequently, the European call (or put) option
has a payoff of max(ST − K, 0) (or max(K − ST , 0)) at
time T , where ST is the stock price at time T . Besides the
standard European options, various customized exotic options are traded in the over-the-counter market. Options are
widely used for hedging against potential price fluctuations
of the underlying asset as well as speculation. According
to the webpage of Chicago Board Options Exchange, the
largest U.S. options exchange, more than 1.5 billion stock
options have been traded in 2021. 1
The famous Nobel Prize-winning Black-Scholes formula
(Black and Scholes 1973), which is based on the princi-

Pricing and Learning. In the classic finance literature, the
seller (writer) of an option will use the underlying asset to
hedge her risk (i.e., use the underlying asset to replicate the
option). The cost of this replication process is actually the
price of the option. This dynamic hedging process can be exactly reframed as a learning process. The intuition is that the
more loss incurred by the seller, the more hedging position
she will take. Based on this simple observation, DeMarzo et

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.cboe.com/us/options/market statistics (last accessed on November 27, 2022).

5348

