The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Polysemantic Spoof Trace: A Multi-Modal
Disentanglement Network for Face Anti-spoofing
Kaicheng Li1, 2 , Hongyu Yang3 * , Binghui Chen, Pengyu Li, Biao Wang, Di Huang1, 2, 4
1

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, China
4
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University, China
{likaicheng, hongyuyang, dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn, chenbinghui@bupt.edu.cn, lipengyu007@gmail.com,
wangbiao225@foxmail.com
Abstract

they mainly perform analysis on the texture difference between the genuine faces and the spoofing ones, e.g., color
distortions, unnatural specular highlights, and Moiré patterns. The hand-crafted features, such as LBP (Boulkenafet,
Komulainen, and Hadid 2016; Freitas Pereira et al. 2012),
HOG (Tan et al. 2010), and motion patterns (Kollreider,
Fronthaler, and Bigun 2009; Bharadwaj et al. 2013), are utilized to highlight distinguishable clues in early attempts. In
recent years, deep models have been dominating this community. Diverse network structures, including Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) (Yang, Lei, and Li 2014), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Xu, Li, and Deng 2015),
and Transformer (George and Marcel 2021b) are adopted
to learn spoof-relevant spatial and/or temporal features. Additionally, a series of auxiliary tasks (Liu, Jourabloo, and
Liu 2018; Atoum et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2020a) are presented
for improved performance. Unfortunately, these methods are
elaborately designed for a certain type of attack, making
them not so competent for more complicated cases, e.g., a
wide variety of spoof types co-existing (Liu et al. 2019b).
On the other side, generative adversarial deep learning is investigated, and several disentanglement networks are built,
which aim to explicitly extract the most fundamental cues
in spoofing, i.e., spoof traces, from input faces (Liu, Stehouwer, and Liu 2020; Liu and Liu 2020). They exhibit great
potential for coping with both seen and unseen spoof scenarios. Besides, the disentangled spoof traces also reinforce the
interpretability of deep FAS models.

Along with the widespread use of face recognition systems,
their vulnerability has become highlighted. While existing
face anti-spoofing methods can be generalized between attack
types, generic solutions are still challenging due to the diversity of spoof characteristics. Recently, the spoof trace disentanglement framework has shown great potential for coping
with both seen and unseen spoof scenarios, but the performance is largely restricted by the single-modal input. This paper focuses on this issue and presents a multi-modal disentanglement model which targetedly learns polysemantic spoof
traces for more accurate and robust generic attack detection.
In particular, based on the adversarial learning mechanism,
a two-stream disentangling network is designed to estimate
spoof patterns from the RGB and depth inputs, respectively.
In this case, it captures complementary spoofing clues inhering in different attacks. Furthermore, a fusion module is
exploited, which recalibrates both representations at multiple stages to promote the disentanglement in each individual modality. It then performs cross-modality aggregation to
deliver a more comprehensive spoof trace representation for
prediction. Extensive evaluations are conducted on multiple
benchmarks, demonstrating that learning polysemantic spoof
traces favorably contributes to anti-spoofing with more perceptible and interpretable results.

Introduction
Face Recognition (FR) has been universally accepted and
employed in our daily life, involving a diversity of applications, such as mobile payment and access control. But along
with its fast popularization, face Spoofing Attacks (SAs, also
known as presentation attacks) have become an increasingly
critical issue. Generally, the attackers can grab faces of target individuals with cameras or from social networks, which
are then counterfeited as reprinted photos, replayed videos
or 3D masks for invasion. FR systems encounter enormous
threats when attackers masquerade as others. Correspondingly, Face Anti-Spoofing (FAS) is essential.
In the literature, an overwhelming majority of the studies detect SAs with RGB images or video frames, where

Indeed, it is always desirable that sufficient spoofing clues
can be captured by RGB cameras. However, due to the intrinsic limitations of the visible spectrum, it is intractable
to detect certain types of attacks only by texture analysis,
and sophisticated spoofing techniques, e.g., high-quality replayed videos and high-fidelity 3D masks, make this issue even severer. Considering that multi-modal data convey
richer information of faces, a number of efforts are made to
reinforce FAS by capturing more comprehensive features,
where hyper-spectral (Yi et al. 2014), thermal (George et al.
2019), near-infrared (Liu et al. 2021) and depth (Zhang et al.
2020b) images are exploited. With more comprehensive description, these methods prove superior to the ones based
on single-modal input (George and Marcel 2021a, 2020;

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1351

