The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Exploiting Multiple Abstractions in Episodic RL via Reward Shaping
Roberto Cipollone1 , Giuseppe De Giacomo1,2 , Marco Favorito3 , Luca Iocchi1 , Fabio Patrizi1
1
DIAG, Università degli Studi di Roma “La Sapienza”, Italy
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, U.K.
3
Banca d’Italia, Italy
{cipollone, degiacomo, iocchi, patrizi}@diag.uniroma1.it
giuseppe.degiacomo@cs.ox.ac.uk, marco.favorito@bancaditalia.it
2

Abstract

a sequence of smaller tasks (Brafman, De Giacomo, and Patrizi 2018; Icarte et al. 2018).
In order to improve sample efficiency, Hierarchical RL
approaches (Hutsebaut-Buysse, Mets, and Latré 2022) have
been proposed to decompose a complex problem into subtasks that are easier to solve individually. In this context, an
abstraction is a simplified, coarser model that reflects the
decomposition induced over the ground, more complex environment (Li, Walsh, and Littman 2006).
In this paper, we consider a linear hierarchy of abstractions of the Markov Decison Process (MDP) underlying the
target domain. Each layer in this hierarchy is a simplified
model, still represented as an MDP, of the one immediately
below. A simple example is that of an agent moving in a
map. The states of the ground MDP may capture the real
pose of the agent, as continuous coordinates and orientation.
The states of its abstraction, instead, may provide a coarser
description, obtained by coordinate discretization, semantic
map labelling (i.e., associating metric poses to semantic labels), or by projecting out state variables. Ultimately, such
a compression corresponds to partitioning the ground state
space into abstract states, implicitly defining a mapping from
the former to the latter. The action spaces of the two models can also differ, in general, as they would include the actions that are best appropriate for each representation. Simulators are commonly used in RL and robotics. Often, simply
though a different configuration of the same software, e.g.
noiseless or ideal movement actions, it is possible to obtain
a simplified environment which acts as an abstraction. Importantly, this simplified model also applies to a variety of
tasks that may be defined over the same domain.
By taking advantage of the abstraction hierarchy, we devise an approach which allows any off-policy RL algorithm
to efficiently explore the ground environment, while guaranteeing optimal convergence. The core intuition is that the
value function V̄ ∗ of the abstract MDP M̄ can be exploited
to guide learning on the lower model M. Technically, we
adopt a variant of Reward Shaping (RS), whose potential
is generated from V̄ ∗ . This way, when learning in M, the
agent is biased to visit first the states that correspond in M̄
to those that are preferred by the abstract policy, thus trying, in a sense, to replicate its behavior in M. In order to
guarantee effectiveness of the exploration bias, it is essential
that the transitions of M̄ are good proxies for the dynamics

One major limitation to the applicability of Reinforcement
Learning (RL) to many practical domains is the large number of samples required to learn an optimal policy. To address
this problem and improve learning efficiency, we consider a
linear hierarchy of abstraction layers of the Markov Decision
Process (MDP) underlying the target domain. Each layer is
an MDP representing a coarser model of the one immediately
below in the hierarchy. In this work, we propose a novel form
of Reward Shaping where the solution obtained at the abstract
level is used to offer rewards to the more concrete MDP, in
such a way that the abstract solution guides the learning in
the more complex domain. In contrast with other works in
Hierarchical RL, our technique has few requirements in the
design of the abstract models and it is also tolerant to modeling errors, thus making the proposed approach practical. We
formally analyze the relationship between the abstract models and the exploration heuristic induced in the lower-level
domain. Moreover, we prove that the method guarantees optimal convergence and we demonstrate its effectiveness experimentally.

1

Introduction

In Reinforcement Learning (RL), agents have no complete
model available to predict the outcomes of their actions.
Since coming up with a complete and faithful model of the
world is generally difficult, this allows for the wide applicability of RL algorithms. Nonetheless, such a lack of knowledge also demands a significant number of interactions with
the environment, before a (near-)optimal policy can be estimated. As a result, most of the successes of RL come
from the digital world (e.g., video games, simulated environments), especially those in which a large number of samples
can be easily generated, while applications to real environments, such as robotic scenarios, are still rare.
Many RL tasks are goal-oriented, which implies that
when the goal states are sparse, so are the rewards. This
is a well-known challenging scenario for RL, which further increases the amount of samples required. Unfortunately, sparse goal states are very common, as they may arise
in simple tasks, such as reaching specific configurations in
large state spaces, or, even in modest environments, for complex target behaviours, such as the successful completion of
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7227

