The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

VLTinT: Visual-Linguistic Transformer-in-Transformer
for Coherent Video Paragraph Captioning
Kashu Yamazaki* 1 , Khoa Vo* 1 , Quang Sang Truong1 , Bhiksha Raj2, 3 , Ngan Le1
1

AICV Lab, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas, USA
2
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA
3
Mohammed bin Zayed University of AI
{ kyamazak, khoavoho, sangt, thile}@uark.edu, bhiksha@cs.cmu.edu

Trans
Decoder
hidden states

Trans. XL

volleyball on a court.

Men are playing

Video Paragraph Captioning aims to generate a multi-sentence
description of an untrimmed video with multiple temporal
event locations in a coherent storytelling. Following the human
perception process, where the scene is effectively understood
by decomposing it into visual (e.g. human, animal) and nonvisual components (e.g. action, relations) under the mutual
influence of vision and language, we first propose a visuallinguistic (VL) feature. In the proposed VL feature, the scene
is modeled by three modalities including (i) a global visual
environment; (ii) local visual main agents; (iii) linguistic scene
elements. We then introduce an autoregressive Transformerin-Transformer (TinT) to simultaneously capture the semantic
coherence of intra- and inter-event contents within a video.
Finally, we present a new VL contrastive loss function to
guarantee the learnt embedding features are consistent with the
captions semantics. Comprehensive experiments and extensive
ablation studies on the ActivityNet Captions and YouCookII
datasets show that the proposed Visual-Linguistic Transformerin-Transform (VLTinT) outperforms previous state-of-the-art
methods in terms of accuracy and diversity. The source code is
made publicly available at: https://github.com/UARK-AICV/
VLTinT.

Global Env

hidden states

MART

Previous Event

Abstract

3D CNN
Global Env

Trans
Decoder

RNN

3D CNN
Current Event

Relevant Lang
Man, Crowd,
Stadium

Intra-event Connection

hidden states
HAM
Trans

VLTinT (ours)

Global Env

Trans
Decoder
Interaction

around them.

The crowd is cheering

Local Agent

Event Memory

Inter-event Connection

Figure 1: A high-level comparison between our VLTinT and
recent SOTA VPC methods. In the encoder, both TransformerXL (Dai et al. 2019) and MART (Lei et al. 2020) encode
visual features by applying 3D CNN-based backbone network
whereas our VLTinT encodes visual-linguistic feature by (i)
global visual environment, (ii) local visual main agents, (iii)
linguistic scene elements, and a fusion mechanism. In the
decoder, Transformer-XL uses recurrence to address context
fragmentation, MART uses a highly summarized memory to
remember history information whereas we propose to utilize
a transformer to model the contextual dependencies at both
intra- and inter-levels.

Introduction
Video captioning is the task of automatically generating a
caption for a video. An important branch of video captioning
is dense video captioning (DVC) (Krishna et al. 2017), which
requires generating a list of temporal event proposals and the
associated sentence description of each event to form a coherent paragraph description of a video. As a simplified version
of DVC, video paragraph captioning (VPC) (Park et al. 2019)
focuses on generating better paragraph captions given a set
of event segments in a video, which eases the requirement of
event proposal generation. In general, a VPC model consists
of two main components: an encoder to represent each event
segment as a feature; and a decoder to generate captions
while maintaining the consistency within each event and the
coherence among all sentences of the generated paragraph.
Videos contain rich semantic knowledge of multiple modalities, e.g., vision, text, speech, and non-speech audio. Understanding a video involves multiple factors such as a single

human actor, group of human actors, non-human actor, and
phenomenon (Vo et al. 2021b; Vo-Ho et al. 2021; Hutchinson
and Gadepally 2021; Vo et al. 2023). Examples of non-human
actors and phenomena performing action include dog chasing,
car running, and cloud floating. The existing VPC approaches
(Zhou et al. 2018; Dai et al. 2019; Lei et al. 2020) employ
CNN-based networks as a black-box to encode the video
feature, which could overlook the contributions of various
modalities in the semantic contents of a video. We observe
that human perception involves the interaction of vision and
language and propose VL Encoder to resolve this above
challenge. Our VL Encoder is based on two observations:

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3081

