The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Cluster-Guided Contrastive Graph Clustering Network
Xihong Yang1 , Yue Liu1 , Sihang Zhou2 , Siwei Wang1 , Wenxuan Tu1 , Qun Zheng3 ,
Xinwang Liu1 * , Liming Fang4 , En Zhu1†
1

2

College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
College of Intelligence Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China
4
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
yangxihong@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract

Benefiting from the intrinsic supervision information exploitation capability, contrastive learning has achieved
promising performance in the field of deep graph clustering recently. However, we observe that two drawbacks of the
positive and negative sample construction mechanisms limit
the performance of existing algorithms from further improvement. 1) The quality of positive samples heavily depends on
the carefully designed data augmentations, while inappropriate data augmentations would easily lead to the semantic drift
and indiscriminative positive samples. 2) The constructed
negative samples are not reliable for ignoring important clustering information. To solve these problems, we propose a
Cluster-guided Contrastive deep Graph Clustering network
(CCGC) by mining the intrinsic supervision information in
the high-confidence clustering results. Specifically, instead
of conducting complex node or edge perturbation, we construct two views of the graph by designing special Siamese
encoders whose weights are not shared between the sibling
sub-networks. Then, guided by the high-confidence clustering information, we carefully select and construct the positive
samples from the same high-confidence cluster in two views.
Moreover, to construct semantic meaningful negative sample pairs, we regard the centers of different high-confidence
clusters as negative samples, thus improving the discriminative capability and reliability of the constructed sample
pairs. Lastly, we design an objective function to pull close
the samples from the same cluster while pushing away those
from other clusters by maximizing and minimizing the crossview cosine similarity between positive and negative samples. Extensive experimental results on six datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of CCGC compared with the existing
state-of-the-art algorithms. The code and appendix of CCGC
are available at https://github.com/xihongyang1999/CCGC
on Github.

(a) GCA

(b) SCAGC

(c) Ours

(d) Ground truth

Figure 1: Visualization of the positive sample pairs selected
by (a) GCA (Zhu et al. 2021), (b) SCAGC, (Xia et al. 2022c)
and (c) the proposed method. The red dots denote the generated sample pairs. Specifically, if a point (i, j) is selected as
positive, the i-th sample from the first view and the j-th sample from the second view are integrated as a positive sample pair. (d) is the ground-truth cluster indicator. The sample
order is rearranged to make samples from the same cluster
beside each other. From the figures, we can find that our
proposed positive sample extraction mechanism is more discriminative than the existing algorithms. As a consequence,
the learned network is also more informative.

Introduction
Thanks to the strong representation learning capacity of the
graph data, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been successfully applied to various applications, such as node classification (Kipf and Welling 2017; Veličković et al. 2018;
Duan et al. 2022b; Wang et al. 2020, 2021d; Liu et al. 2022f;

Yang et al. 2022b), graph classification (Wang et al. 2018b;
Liu et al. 2021), time series analysis(Liu and Liu 2021; Liu,
Wu, and Liu 2022; Xie et al. 2022), knowledge graph(Liang
et al. 2022a,b), and so on. Among all the directions in graph
learning, deep graph clustering is a fundamental yet challenging unsupervised task, which has become a hot research
spot recently (Wang et al. 2019; Tu et al. 2020; Liu et al.

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10834

