The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Common Knowledge of Abstract Groups
Merlin Humml, Lutz Schröder
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany
{merlin.humml, lutz.schroeder}@fau.de

Abstract

argumentation. Consider, for example, the sentence ‘Doctors agree that smoking is bad for your health.’ We take this
sentence (maybe debatably) as making a statement about
common knowledge of all doctors. Encoding this claim as
a formula of the form CA ϕ where A is a finite set explicitly
enumerating all doctors is clearly neither feasible nor even
semantically desirable, as the statement is presumably meant
to hold without regard to exactly how many, and which, doctors are practising in the world at the moment. Rather, one
would want A to be given by the defining property of being
a doctor.

Epistemic logics typically talk about knowledge of individual agents or groups of explicitly listed agents. Often, however, one wishes to express knowledge of groups of agents
specified by a given property, as in ‘it is common knowledge among economists’. We introduce such a logic of common knowledge, which we term abstract-group epistemic
logic (AGEL). That is, AGEL features a common knowledge
operator for groups of agents given by concepts in a separate agent logic that we keep generic, with one possible
agent logic being ALC. We show that AGEL is E XP T IMEcomplete, with the lower bound established by reduction from
standard group epistemic logic, and the upper bound by a
satisfiability-preserving embedding into the full µ-calculus.
Further main results include a finite model property (not enjoyed by the full µ-calculus) and a complete axiomatization.

In the present paper, we introduce an epistemic logic
that allows precisely this: abstract-group epistemic logic
(AGEL) features a common knowledge operator for groups
of agents described by concepts in a dedicated agent logic.
We keep the technical development generic in the choice
of agent logic, subject to some technical requirements on
the agent logic that are satisfied, for instance, by the description logic ALC; so we can describe groups of agents
such as ‘doctors and pharmacists’ or ‘parents of teenagers’.
We note that we treat the agent logic as rigid, i.e. there
is no uncertainty about membership in the groups it describes. In other words, group descriptions are de re rather
than de dicto. We further illustrate the logic on a variant
of the muddy children puzzle where the number of participants is unspecified and potentially large. Our main results on AGEL are E XP T IME-completeness of the satisfiability problem; a bounded (specifically, doubly exponential)
model property; and a complete axiomatization. Technically,
we establish the lower complexity bound by a satisfiabilitypreserving translation of standard group epistemic logic (Fagin et al. 1995) into AGEL, and the upper bound by a
satisfiability-preserving translation of AGEL into the full
µ-calculus (i.e. ALC with inverse roles and fixpoint operators (Vardi 1998)). Use of the full µ-calculus avoids the exponential blow-up that would be incurred by a more naive
reverse translation of AGEL into group epistemic logic.
However, the full µ-calculus does not have the finite model
property (Vardi 1998; Streett 1982). Instead, we show the
bounded model property and completeness by means of a
filtered model construction that uses ideas from the finite
model construction for propositional dynamic logic (Fischer
and Ladner 1979; Blackburn, de Rijke, and Venema 2001),
in particular transitive closure of (small) canonical pseudo-

Introduction
Epistemic (modal) logic is concerned with the individual and
collective knowledge of agents. One of the most important
modalities for collective knowledge is common knowledge:
A fact ϕ is common knowledge in a given group of agents
if everyone in the group knows ϕ, and everyone knows that
everyone knows ϕ, etc. In the present work, our focus of
attention is on the involved notion of group of agents. The
most basic variant of the common knowledge operator, typically written C, refers to all agents in a predetermined finite set Ag that forms a parameter of the logic as a whole
(Fagin et al. 1995). In a more fine-grained variant, C can
be annotated with an explicitly given subset of the set of
agents: For A ⊆ Ag, CA ϕ says that ϕ is common knowledge
among the agents in A. For instance, if Alice and Bob are
legitimate participants in a communication protocol and ϕ
is a fact concerning a shared key, then ϕ would ideally be
common knowledge of Alice and Bob but not of a malicious third party Charlie – i.e. C{Alice,Bob} ϕ would hold but
C{Alice,Bob,Charlie} ϕ would not.
Listing agents in a group explicitly is appropriate in wellcontrolled settings such as the above, where the participants
in the epistemic situation are fixed and previously known.
In other application contexts, however, this may not always
be the case, in particular in statements found in real-world
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6434

