The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Scaling Up Dynamic Graph Representation Learning
via Spiking Neural Networks
Jintang Li1 , Zhouxin Yu1 , Zulun Zhu2 , Liang Chen1 * ,
Qi Yu , Zibin Zheng1 , Sheng Tian3 , Ruofan Wu3 , Changhua Meng3
2

1
Sun Yat-sen University
Rochester Institute of Technology
3
Ant Group
{lijt55, yuzhx6}@mail2.sysu.edu, {chenliang6, zhzibin}@mail.sysu.edu,
zz2023@g.rit.edu, qi.yu@rit.edu, {tiansheng.ts,ruofan.wrf,changhua.mch}@antgroup.com
2

Abstract

…
…

Recent years have seen a surge in research on dynamic graph
representation learning, which aims to model temporal graphs
that are dynamic and evolving constantly over time. However,
current work typically models graph dynamics with recurrent neural networks (RNNs), making them suffer seriously
from computation and memory overheads on large temporal
graphs. So far, scalability of dynamic graph representation
learning on large temporal graphs remains one of the major challenges. In this paper, we present a scalable framework, namely SpikeNet, to efficiently capture the temporal
and structural patterns of temporal graphs. We explore a new
direction in that we can capture the evolving dynamics of
temporal graphs with spiking neural networks (SNNs) instead
of RNNs. As a low-power alternative to RNNs, SNNs explicitly model graph dynamics as spike trains of neuron populations and enable spike-based propagation in an efficient
way. Experiments on three large real-world temporal graph
datasets demonstrate that SpikeNet outperforms strong baselines on the temporal node classification task with lower computational costs. Particularly, SpikeNet generalizes to a large
temporal graph (2.7M nodes and 13.9M edges) with significantly fewer parameters and computation overheads.

(a) Static
Graph
(a) Static
(a) Static Graph

…
…
𝑻!
𝑻!

𝑻𝒊#𝟏
𝑻𝒊#𝟏

(b) Temporal
(b)
TemporalGraph
graph

𝑻𝒊#𝟐
𝑻𝒊#𝟐

(b) Temporal Graph

Figure 1: An illustrative example of (a) static graph and (b)
temporal graph. A temporal graph is typically represented
as a series of graph snapshots, with network structure constantly evolving over time.

Over the past few years, graph neural networks (GNNs)
have emerged as highly successful tools for learning graphstructured data. The advances in GNNs have led to new
state-of-the-art results in numerous graph-based learning
tasks (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Chen et al.
2021). However, GNNs have been primarily developed for
dealing with static graphs while ignoring that the graph itself is dynamically evolving over time. So far, several efforts have been made to generalize current GNNs to temporal graphs by additionally considering the time dimension (Kazemi et al. 2020). The most established solution for
modeling temporal graphs is by extending sequence models to graph data. In this vein, recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) (Cho et al. 2014) are prominent methods that provide a natural choice to capture the temporal information for
these evolving graphs (Xu et al. 2019; Pareja et al. 2020;
Shi et al. 2021; Kumar, Zhang, and Leskovec 2019). In addition, self-attention (Xu et al. 2020), random walk (Sajjad,
Docherty, and Tyshetskiy 2019; Wang et al. 2021; Makarov
et al. 2021), and temporal point process (Lu et al. 2019; Zuo
et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2018) are some other approaches to
learn structural and temporal patterns simultaneously.
While current approaches have achieved promising results, there are some fundamental challenges when switching from static to temporal graphs. (i) Scalability: current research is mostly dominated by RNN-based methods, which
require a large number of memory cells to store temporal
contextual information (Sak, Senior, and Beaufays 2014)
and large amounts of training data to outperform even static
methods. As a result, they suffer from high overheads and
scale poorly as the number of time steps increases, espe-

Introduction
A graph is comprised of nodes and edges connected together
to model structures and relationships of objects in various
scientific and commercial fields (Hu et al. 2020; Chen et al.
2020). It is highly expressive and capable of representing
complex structures that are difficult to model, with prominent examples including social networks (Liu et al. 2020),
molecules graphs (Zhou et al. 2020), and transaction networks (Chen et al. 2020). In practice, graphs are often dynamic, meaning that nodes, edges, and attributes may evolve
constantly over time. Such graphs are typically referred to
as temporal graphs, in contrast to static graphs where nodes
and edges remain fixed over time (Kazemi et al. 2020). Figure 1 is an illustration of static and temporal graphs. The
temporal graph is usually represented as a sequence of graph
snapshots, while the static graph can be seen as a single
(static) observation of the temporal graph.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8588

