The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CertiFair: A Framework for Certified Global Fairness of Neural Networks
Haitham Khedr, Yasser Shoukry
University of California, Irvine
{hkhedr, yshoukry}@uci.edu

Abstract

of a NN classifier. In particular, we focus on the “global
individual fairness” property which states that a NN classification model is globally individually fair if all similar
pairs of inputs x, x′ are assigned the same class. We use a
feature-wise closeness metric instead of an ℓp norm to evaluate similarity between individuals, i.e, a pair x, x′ is similar if for all features i, |xi − x′i | ≤ δi . Given this fairness
notion, the objective of this paper is twofold. First, it aims
to provide a sound and complete formal verification framework that can automatically certify whether a NN satisfies
the fairness property or produces a concrete counterexample showing two inputs that are not treated fairly by the NN.
Second, this paper provides a training procedure for certified
fair training of NNs even when the training data is biased.

We consider the problem of whether a Neural Network (NN)
model satisfies global individual fairness. Individual Fairness
(defined in (Dwork et al. 2012)) suggests that similar individuals with respect to a certain task are to be treated similarly by the decision model. In this work, we have two main
objectives. The first is to construct a verifier which checks
whether the fairness property holds for a given NN in a classification task or provides a counterexample if it is violated,
i.e., the model is fair if all similar individuals are classified
the same, and unfair if a pair of similar individuals are classified differently. To that end, we construct a sound and complete verifier that verifies global individual fairness properties
of ReLU NN classifiers using distance-based similarity metrics. The second objective of this paper is to provide a method
for training provably fair NN classifiers from unfair (biased)
data. We propose a fairness loss that can be used during training to enforce fair outcomes for similar individuals. We then
provide provable bounds on the fairness of the resulting NN.
We run experiments on commonly used fairness datasets that
are publicly available and we show that global individual fairness can be improved by 96 % without a significant drop in
test accuracy.

1

Challenge: Several existing techniques focus on generalizing ideas from adversarial robustness to reason about
NN fairness (Yurochkin, Bower, and Sun 2020; Ruoss et al.
2020). By viewing unfairness as an adversarial noise that
can flip the output of a classifier, these techniques can certify the fairness of a NN locally, i.e., in the neighborhood
of a given individual input. In contrast, this paper focuses on
global fairness properties where the goal is to ensure that the
NN is fair with respect to all the similar inputs in its domain.
Such a fundamental difference precludes the use of existing
techniques from the literature on adversarial robustness and
calls for novel techniques that can provide provable fairness
guarantees.

Introduction

Neural Networks (NNs) have become an increasingly central component of modern decision-making systems, including those that are used in sensitive/legal domains such
as crime prediction (Brennan, Dieterich, and Ehret 2009),
credit assessment (Dua and Graff 2017), income prediction (Dua and Graff 2017), and hiring decisions. However,
studies have shown that these systems are prone to biases
(Mehrabi et al. 2021b) that deem their usage unfair to unprivileged users based on their age, race, or gender. The bias
is usually either inherent in the training data or introduced
during the training process. Mitigating algorithmic bias has
been studied in the literature (Zhang, Lemoine, and Mitchell
2018; Xu et al. 2018; Mehrabi et al. 2021a) in the context of
group and individual fairness. However, the fairness of the
NN is considered only empirically on the test data with the
hope that it represents the underlying data distribution.
Unlike the empirical techniques for fairness, we are interested to provide provable certificates regarding the fairness

This work: We introduce CertiFair, a framework for certified global fairness of NNs. This framework consists of two
components. First, a verifier that can prove whether the NN
satisfies the fairness property or produce a concrete counterexample that violates the fairness property. This verifier
is motivated by the recent results in the “relational verification” problem (Barthe, Crespo, and Kunz 2011) where the
goal is to verify hyperproperties that are defined over pairs
of program traces. Our approach is based on the observation
that the global individual fairness property (1) can be seen
as a hyperproperty and hence we can generalize the concept
of product programs to product NNs that accepts a pair of
inputs (x, x′ ), instead of a single input x, and generates two
independent outputs for each input. A global fairness property for this product NN can then be verified using existing
NN verifiers. Moreover, inspired by methods in certified ro-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8237

