The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Channel Regeneration: Improving Channel Utilization for Compact DNNs
Ankit Sharma and Hassan Foroosh
Computational Imaging Lab
Department of Computer Science, University of Central Florida
Orlando, USA
ankit.sharma285@knights.ucf.edu, Hassan.Foroosh@ucf.edu

Abstract
Overparameterized deep neural networks have redundant
neurons that do not contribute to the network’s accuracy. In
this paper, we introduce a novel channel regeneration technique that reinvigorates these redundant channels of efficient
architectures by re-initializing its batch normalization scaling
factor γ. This re-initialization of BN γ of these channels promotes regular weight updates during training. Furthermore,
we show that channel regeneration encourages the channels
to contribute equally to the learned representation and further
boosts the generalization accuracy. We apply our technique
at regular intervals of the training cycle to improve channel
utilization. The solutions proposed in previous works either
raise the total computational cost or increase the model complexity. Integrating the channel regeneration technique into
the training methodology of efficient architectures requires
minimal effort and comes at no additional cost in size or
memory. Extensive experiments on several image classification benchmarks and on semantic segmentation task demonstrate the effectiveness of applying the channel regeneration
technique to compact architectures.

1

wo RG

with RG

1.4

Avg Grad (10−1 )

1.2
1

Channel
Regeneration
at 20th epoch

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

Inhibited channel has no gradient
update after 15th epoch

0
0 20

50

100

150

200

Epochs

Figure 1: The graph plots the average gradient update of
an inhibited channel with and without channel regeneration(RG). Under the standard training routine, the channel
has no weight update after the 15th epoch as the average
gradient drops to zero. This limits the contribution of the
corresponding filter to the network output. To address this
problem of under utilization of network resources, channel regeneration restores inhibited (inactive) channels/filters
and thereby ensuring a consistent gradient update for all the
channels.

Introduction

The recent success of large deep neural networks in fundamental computer vision tasks (Redmon and Farhadi 2017;
Ren et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2018; He et al. 2016; Simonyan
and Zisserman 2015) has accelerated the demand for deploying them commercially. However, overparameterized deep
neural networks(DNN) have a large number of redundant
neurons that do not contribute to the network output. Contemporary works have addressed this issue by pruning these
ineffective neurons/channels from the network (Liu et al.
2017; Lin et al. 2020; He et al. 2018; Li et al. 2020). However, pruning results in an overall drop in accuracy. Another
approach is to revitalize these irrelevant channels (Shao et al.
2020). Increasing channel utilization encourages more channels to contribute to boosting accuracy and improving generalization. In this work, we focus on the latter.
Previous works on improving the resource utilization of
DNNs have proposed solutions that modify the conventional
CNN building blocks such as convolutional layers and optimizers (Qiao et al. 2019) or add a self-organizing map in

the training pipeline for increasing channel utilization (Baddar et al. 2021). Another line of work investigates the effect
of the standard batch normalization(BN) layer on channels
participation to the learned feature representations (Shao
et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2019). However, these works either
increase the total training computational cost (Shao et al.
2020; Huang et al. 2019; Baddar et al. 2021) or require modifying existing off-the-shelf network models limiting their
usage (Shao et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2019; Qiao et al. 2019).
We improve the channel utilization of compact DNNs at no
additional computational cost during training or at inference.
A trained deep neural network suffers from the phenomenon of filter level sparsity wherein a large number of
feature channels are inactive and always produce small val-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2218

