The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DHGE: Dual-View Hyper-Relational Knowledge Graph Embedding for Link
Prediction and Entity Typing
Haoran Luo, Haihong E* , Ling Tan, Gengxian Zhou, Tianyu Yao, Kaiyang Wan
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
{luohaoran, ehaihong}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

Marie Curie
subject_of

In the field of representation learning on knowledge graphs
(KGs), a hyper-relational fact consists of a main triple and
several auxiliary attribute-value descriptions, which is considered more comprehensive and specific than a triple-based
fact. However, currently available hyper-relational KG embedding methods in a single view are limited in application
because they weaken the hierarchical structure that represents
the affiliation between entities. To overcome this limitation,
we propose a dual-view hyper-relational KG structure (DHKG) that contains a hyper-relational instance view for entities and a hyper-relational ontology view for concepts that
are abstracted hierarchically from the entities. This paper defines link prediction and entity typing tasks on DH-KG for
the first time and constructs two DH-KG datasets, JW44K6K, extracted from Wikidata, and HTDM based on medical
data. Furthermore, we propose DHGE, a DH-KG embedding
model based on GRAN encoders, HGNNs, and joint learning.
DHGE outperforms baseline models on DH-KG, according to
experimental results. Finally, we provide an example of how
this technology can be used to treat hypertension. Our model
and new datasets are publicly available.

1

receive

Nobel Prize in Physics

relation_of

object_of

Hyper-relational
Fact
a1_of

v1_of

a2_of a3_of

v2_of

year

1903

together_with

Pierre Curie

v3_of
Antoine Henri Becquerel

Figure 1: Hyper-relational Structure.
researcher

educator

scientist
naturalist

teacher
academic

chemist

physicist

Marie Curie

Pierre Curie

subclass_of
instance_of
worker
engineer
university teacher

Antoine Henri Becquerel

Figure 2: Hierarchical Structure.

Introduction

However, the hyper-relational structure weakens the hierarchical structure of KGs due to the consideration of auxiliary information. As pointed out by Zhou et al. (2021),
the KG hierarchical structure consists of triple-based facts
with hierarchical relations such as “instance of” and
“subclass of”. As shown in Figure 2, (Marie Curie,
instance of, chemist) represents the affiliation between
the entity Marie Curie and the concept chemist, and
(chemist, subclass of, naturalist) represents the affiliation between the concept chemist and the more abstract concept naturalist.
In real-world KGs, hierarchical and hyper relations are
essential in describing knowledge facts. Despite this, no research has been conducted on the joint modeling of the
two relations, severely limiting the application of the hyperrelational KG embedding methods. In our work, we are primarily concerned with overcoming this limitation.
For the first time, this paper defines the structure of hyperrelational dual-view KG (DH-KG), as Figure 3 shows, consisting of a hyper-relational instance view for entities and
a hyper-relational ontology view for concepts abstracted hi-

Modern large-scale knowledge graphs (KGs), such as Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008) and Wikidata (Vrandecic and
Krötzsch 2014), consist of facts with entities and relations.
A triple-based fact has two entities and one relation, which
is usually expressed by triples (subject, relation, object).
Recent studies (Wen et al. 2016; Guan et al. 2021) suggest that some facts contain more than two entities, which
are represented as hyper-relational facts (Rosso, Yang,
and Cudré-Mauroux 2020). In contrast to triples, hyperrelational facts consist of one main triple (s,r,o) and several auxiliary attribute-value descriptions {(ai :vi )}. For example, the fact that Marie Curie received Nobel Prize in
Physics in 1903 together with Pierre Curie and Antoine
Henri Becquerel, can be expressed as a hyper-relational fact:
(Marie Curie, receive, Nobel Prize in Physics, year, 1903,
together with, Pierre Curie, together with, Antoine Henri
Becquerel) as shown in Figure 1.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6467

