The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multi-Level Confidence Learning for Trustworthy Multimodal Classification
Xiao Zheng1 , Chang Tang2,∗ , Zhiguo Wan3 , Chengyu Hu2 , Wei Zhang4
1

School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China
2
School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China
3
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou 311121, China
4
Shandong Computer Science Center (National Supercomputing Center in Jinan), Jinan 250000, China

Abstract

a scene is with poor light condition (Liu, Zhang, and Wu
2022)). By exploring complementary information of different modalities, multimodal learning can often improve the
final performance of certain tasks, which has been widely
studied in various fields such as medical-diagnosis (Wang
et al. 2014; Siejka-Zielińska et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2021),
classification (Gómez-Chova et al. 2015), video processing
(Zhang and Wu 2022; Zhu et al. 2022) and information retrieval (Wei et al. 2020; Jing et al. 2022). Despite significant progress, most of existing multimodal learning models heavily rely on fusion strategies, which results in challenges of deployment for safety-critical applications such
as computer-aided diagnosis. Therefore, trustworthy multimodal learning is important for practical applications.
As to multimodal learning, previous methods can be categorized into three classes: feature-level fusion, decisionlevel fusion and multi-level fusion. The former tries to jointly learn a unified representation from features of multiple
modalities by certain mutual losses, the latter fuses the decision obtained from each modality and the middle integrates
both modality-wise features and decisions. Either way, they
all aim to explore the correlated and complementary information between different modalities for boosting final performance. In past decades, a large number of multimodal
learning models have been put forward (McFee, Lanckriet, and Jebara 2011; Wang et al. 2012, 2015; Baltrušaitis,
Ahuja, and Morency 2018; Wang 2021; Huang et al. 2021).
Early proposed methods focus on aggregating the energy
or information of multimodal spaces to reach better performance than a single modal (Wang et al. 2016). However, it
is a challenge to capture the nonlinear distribution and complex structure of high-dimensional multimodal data. Due to
the powerful capability of adaptively feature learning, deep
neural network has also been widely used in the field of multimodal learning for feature learning and fusion (Choi and
Lee 2019; Wu et al. 2020; Hong et al. 2020; Wang et al.
2021). By designing rational neural network architectures,
joint representations of multiple modalities can be learned
through appropriate objective functions that related to certain tasks.
Although great success have been obtained, stability and
explainablity are not well guaranteed in most of existing
multimodal learning methods since the informativeness of
feature, modality, and decision are not jointly perceived,

With rapid development of various data acquisition technologies, more and more multimodal data come into being. It
is important to integrate different modalities which are with
high-dimensional features for boosting final multimodal data
classification task. However, existing multimodal classification methods mainly focus on exploiting the complementary
information of different modalities, while ignoring the learning confidence during information fusion. In this paper, we
propose a trustworthy multimodal classification network via multi-level confidence learning, referred to as MLCLNet.
Considering that a large number of feature dimensions could
not contribute to final classification performance but disturb
the discriminability of different samples, we propose a feature
confidence learning mechanism to suppress some redundant features, as well as enhancing the expression of discriminative feature dimensions in each modality. In order to capture the inherent sample structure information implied in each
modality, we design a graph convolutional network branch
to learn the corresponding structure preserved feature representation and generate modal-specific initial classification
labels. Since samples from different modalities should share
consistent labels, a cross-modal label fusion module is deployed to capture the label correlations of different modalities. In addition, motivated the ideally orthogonality of final
fused label matrix, we design a label confidence loss to supervise the network for learning more separable data representations. To the best of our knowledge, MLCLNet is the first
work which integrates both feature and label-level confidence
learning for multimodal classification. Extensive experiments
on four multimodal medical datasets are conducted to validate superior performance of MLCLNet when compared to
other state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Multimodal data becomes more and more ubiquitous in past
decades due to rapid development of diverse data acquisition technologies (Lahat, Adali, and Jutten 2015; Tang et al.
2018; Muhammad et al. 2021; Duro-Castano et al. 2021;
Tang et al. 2022). With different modalities, a certain object
or scene can be described more comprehensively (e.g., depth
data obtained from depth video camera can capture complementary information for traditional RGB camera when
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11381

