The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Real-Time Segmentation on the Edge
Yanyu Li* 1 , Changdi Yang* 1 , Pu Zhao* 1 , Geng Yuan1 , Wei Niu2 , Jiexiong Guan2 , Hao Tang3 ,
Minghai Qin1 , Qing Jin1 , Bin Ren2 , Xue Lin1 , Yanzhi Wang1
1
Northeastern University
College of William & Mary
3
CVL, ETH Zurich
{li.yanyu, yang.changd, zhao.pu, yuan.geng, jin.qing, xue.lin, yanz.wang}@northeastern.edu
{wniu, jguan}@email.wm.edu, bren@cs.wm.edu, hao.tang@vision.ee.ethz.ch, qinminghai@gmail.com
2

Abstract

the strength of them, combine the efficiency of lightweight
convolutions and global receptive field of transformers, while
avoiding intensive computations? In this work, we take a step
toward this goal with a self attention block to extract spatial
dependencies in the low resolution segment branch, and a
lightweight CNN stem to reduce computation overhead.
In addition to new design, it is crucial to search for a compact network for efficient deployment. Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) and network pruning have been extensively investigated to discover good architectures with lower memory
occupancy, reduced energy consumption, and faster inference speed. Though NAS and automatic pruning have been
proven to be successful on the classification task, it is nontrivial to migrate them to dense image prediction, due to the
tremendous searching computation cost to train multiple candidate architectures in Reinforcement learning (RL)-based
NAS methods (Zoph and Le 2017; Zhong et al. 2018; Zoph
et al. 2018), or the huge memory cost to train all architectures
simultaneously in differentiable NAS methods (Brock et al.
2017; Bender, Kindermans et al. 2018; Liu, Simonyan, and
Yang 2018).
Firstly, state-of-the-art segmentation models usually incorporate complex contextual fusion, that is, utilizing information from multiple spatial resolutions. As a result, unlike the
cell-level search on classification, the search space is hierarchical for the segmentation task, which is quite large and
the policy is difficult to converge, and may even converge
to poor local minima. Secondly, there are no well-defined
proxy tasks in semantic segmentation. The general practice
is to directly search on the target dataset with early stopping.
The accuracy is usually very low and comparison among the
candidates may not reflect the final performance. Thirdly,
the current segmentation paradigm (Chen et al. 2018a), especially ViTs (Xie et al. 2021), highly relies on knowledge
transformation from larger scale datasets, e.g., pretraining on
ImageNet-1000 (Deng et al. 2009) or MS COCO (Lin et al.
2014). When performing architecture search, candidates are
not pretrained on ImageNet first but directly trained on dense
prediction, which may enlarge the accuracy gap between the
early-stopped model and well-trained model. Moreover, external knowledge makes the performance assessment unfair.
In this work, we first combine the advantage of ViTs and
CNNs and design a mixed supernet building block that wields

The research in real-time segmentation mainly focuses on
desktop GPUs. However, autonomous driving and many other
applications rely on real-time segmentation on the edge, and
current arts are far from the goal. In addition, recent advances
in vision transformers also inspire us to re-design the network architecture for dense prediction task. In this work, we
propose to combine the self attention block with lightweight
convolutions to form new building blocks, and employ latency
constraints to search an efficient sub-network. We train an
MLP latency model based on generated architecture configurations and their latency measured on mobile devices, so that
we can predict the latency of subnets during search phase. To
the best of our knowledge, we are the first to achieve over 74%
mIoU on Cityscapes with semi-real-time inference (over 15
FPS) on mobile GPU from an off-the-shelf phone.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved great success
in various tasks with extraordinary performance. In this work,
we investigate semantic segmentation. As a dense prediction
task, it aims to assign a class label to each pixel, and plays
an important role in many real-world applications like autonomous driving. However, segmentation models usually
consume tremendous memory and computation resources,
leading to difficulties for deployment on the resource-limited
devices. The large feature size and complicated multi-scale
feature fusion limit the efficiency of segmentation models.
From the scope of architecture design, lightweight CNNs
(Yu et al. 2021) dominate the design space for efficient segmentation. Recent advances in vision transformer (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) inspires new research other than traditional
CNNs on segmentation task, specifically, based on self attention mechanism (Xie et al. 2021) with global receptive field.
However, neither vision transformers nor traditional CNNs
(Chen et al. 2018a; Yu et al. 2021) are computational efficient
enough for edge deployment. It is especially difficult for vision transformers to handle large resolution inputs, and we
observe that they even underperform CNNs in real-time computation budget. The open question is, can we incorporate
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1468

