The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robust Multi-Agent Coordination via
Evolutionary Generation of Auxiliary Adversarial Attackers*
Lei Yuan1,2 † , Ziqian Zhang1 † , Ke Xue1 , Hao Yin1 , Feng Chen1 ,
Cong Guan1 , Lihe Li1 , Chao Qian1 , Yang Yu1,2
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
Polixir Technologies, Nanjing 210000, China
{yuanl, xuek, yinh, guanc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {191240076, chenf, lilh}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {qianc, yuy}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

Existing CMARL methods mainly focus on solving specific challenges such as non-stationarity (Papoudakis et al.
2019), credit assignment (Wang et al. 2021a), and scalability (Christianos et al. 2021) to improve the coordination ability in complex scenarios. Either value-based methods (Sunehag et al. 2018; Rashid et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2021b) or
policy-gradient-based methods (Foerster et al. 2018; Lowe
et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2022) have demonstrated remarkable coordination ability in a wide range of tasks (e.g.,
SMAC (Samvelyan et al. 2019) and Hanabi (Yu et al. 2022)).
Despite these successes, the mainstream CMARL methods
are still difficult to be applied in real world, as they mainly
consider training and testing policy in a nondistinctive environment. Thus, the policy learned by those methods may
suffer from a performance decrease when encountering any
disagreement between training and testing (Guo et al. 2022).

Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (CMARL)
has shown to be promising for many real-world applications. Previous works mainly focus on improving coordination ability via solving MARL-specific challenges (e.g., nonstationarity, credit assignment, scalability), but ignore the
policy perturbation issue when testing in a different environment. This issue hasn’t been considered in problem formulation or efficient algorithm design. To address this issue, we
firstly model the problem as a limited policy adversary DecPOMDP (LPA-Dec-POMDP), where some coordinators from
a team might accidentally and unpredictably encounter a limited number of malicious action attacks, but the regular coordinators still strive for the intended goal. Then, we propose
Robust Multi-Agent Coordination via Evolutionary Generation of Auxiliary Adversarial Attackers (ROMANCE), which
enables the trained policy to encounter diversified and strong
auxiliary adversarial attacks during training, thus achieving high robustness under various policy perturbations. Concretely, to avoid the ego-system overfitting to a specific attacker, we maintain a set of attackers, which is optimized to
guarantee the attackers high attacking quality and behavior
diversity. The goal of quality is to minimize the ego-system
coordination effect, and a novel diversity regularizer based
on sparse action is applied to diversify the behaviors among
attackers. The ego-system is then paired with a population
of attackers selected from the maintained attacker set, and
alternately trained against the constantly evolving attackers.
Extensive experiments on multiple scenarios from SMAC indicate our ROMANCE provides comparable or better robustness and generalization ability than other baselines.

1

Training a robust policy before deployment plays a
promising role for the mentioned problem and makes
excellent progress in single-agent reinforcement learning
(SARL) (Moos et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2022). Previous works
typically employ an adversarial training paradigm to obtain a
robust policy. These methods generally model the process of
policy learning as a minimax problem from the perspective
of game theory (Yu et al. 2021) and optimize the policy under the worst-case situation (Pinto et al. 2017; Zhang et al.
2020a; Zhang, Wang, and Boedecker 2022). Nevertheless,
the multi-agent problem is much more complex (Zhang,
Yang, and Başar 2021), as multiple agents are making decisions simultaneously in the environment. Also, recent works
indicate that a MARL system is usually vulnerable to any attack (Guo et al. 2022). Some MARL works study the robustness from various aspects, including the uncertainty in local
observation (Lin et al. 2020), model function (Zhang et al.
2020a), and message sending (Xue et al. 2022c). The mentioned methods either focus on investigating the robustness
from different aspects, or apply techniques such as heuristic
rules and regularizers used in SARL to train a robust coordination policy. However, how unpredictable malicious action
attacks cause policy perturbation has not been fully explored
in CMARL.

Introduction

Recently, cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning
(CMARL) has attracted extensive attention (HernandezLeal, Kartal, and Taylor 2019; Gronauer and Diepold 2022)
and shows potential in numerous domains like autonomous
vehicle teams (Peng et al. 2021), multi-agent path finding
(Greshler et al. 2021), multi-UAV control (Yun et al. 2022),
and dynamic algorithm configuration (Xue et al. 2022b).
* Corresponding author: Yang Yu.
†

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In this work, we aim to develop a robust CMARL framework when malicious action attacks on some coordinators
11753

