The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

KICE: A Knowledge Consolidation and Expansion Framework for Relation
Extraction
Yilin Lu, Xiaoqiang Wang, Haofeng Yang, Siliang Tang *
School of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
{22121281, xq.wang, 3190105301, siliang}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

knowledge bases Wikidata (Vrandečić and Krötzsch 2014)
currently contains nearly 6,000 relations.
To reduce the manual efforts, recent works try to leverage diverse sources of knowledge to steer an efficient model
learning. Some methods provide weak labels for unlabeled corpus by incorporating external knowledge graphs
(KGs) (Lin et al. 2016) or summarizing knowledge from the
model’s high-confidence predictions (Qu et al. 2018; Zhou
et al. 2020). Others employ active learning (Margatina et al.
2021; Chen and Qian 2022) to ask the knowledge from extra
human annotation for confusing (or uncertain) data. However, on the one hand, they suffer from the coverage of available knowledge because the scale of KGs is limited and only
focusing on the self-inferred knowledge could stick the task
model in a “comfort zone”, rendering the weakness in new
knowledge discovery (Gao et al. 2020). On the other hand,
the insufficient initial labeled data may hinder the active
learning process since the under fitted model fails to estimate the uncertainty and representativeness appropriately in
the early stage (i.e.cold-start problem).
We argue that integrating the wide variety of knowledge
can help alleviate the dependency on manual annotation,
and present KICE, a knowledge consolidation and expansion framework. In this paper, KICE is instantiated for the
relation extraction task and generally applicable to other
tasks. Specifically, we engage the rule-based patterns as
transferred and explainable forms among different knowledge sources, which are also beneficial to match large-scaled
unlabeled instances and provide weak labels for those data.
Given seed instances as initial training data, our framework
continuously develops various knowledge to improve task
model learning by the following three steps:
1) Knowledge Stimulation: To better build a flexible
pattern extractor from a limited number of seed instances,
we first stimulate rich contextualized knowledge distributed
in pre-trained language models (PLMs) by prompt-tuning.
More specifically, a Rule Generator is formulated by designing various templates to build prompts from each instance,
which are fed to PLM and take the output predicted words
as different contextual patterns. Rules are obtained by taking
patterns as conditions and the corresponding instance’s label
as a result. Then the rules set is initialized by these generated
patterns from seeds. 2) Knowledge Consolidation: Based
on the rule-labeled data, we incorporate the task model into

Machine Learning is often challenged by insufficient labeled data. Previous methods employing implicit commonsense knowledge of pre-trained language models (PLMs) or
pattern-based symbolic knowledge have achieved great success in mitigating manual annotation efforts. In this paper,
we focus on the collaboration among different knowledge
sources and present KICE, a Knowledge-evolving framework
by Iterative Consolidation and Expansion with the guidance
of PLMs and rule-based patterns. Specifically, starting with
limited labeled data as seeds, KICE first builds a Rule Generator by prompt-tuning to stimulate the rich knowledge distributed in PLMs, generate seed rules, and initialize the rules
set. Afterwards, based on the rule-labeled data, the task model
is trained in a self-training pipeline where the knowledge in
rules set is consolidated with self-learned high-confidence
rules. Finally, for the low-confidence rules, KICE solicits
human-enlightened understanding and expands the knowledge coverage for better task model training. Our framework
is verified on relation extraction (RE) task, and the experiments on TACRED show that the model performance (F1 )
grows from 33.24% to 79.84% with the enrichment of knowledge, outperforming all the baselines including other knowledgeable methods.

Introduction
Relying on the large-scale human-annotated training data,
machine learning models presented in recent years have
been undergoing unprecedentedly rapid development (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014; Yang et al. 2019). However, since the scale of labeled data is limited by the timeconsuming and expensive human labor, in most areas the
prior knowledge provided by crowdsourcing datasets is quite
insufficient. This issue is more serious in relation extraction
(RE) task because the large-scaled newly emerging relations
are difficult to be handled by the model trained on a limited number of pre-defined relations in an old dataset. To be
more specific, no more than 200 relation types could be covered by current RE datasets with rich labeled data (Zhang
et al. 2017; Han et al. 2018), while there are much more relations in the real scenario. For example, one of the largest
* Siliang Tang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13336

