The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Reachability Analysis of Neural Network Control Systems
Chi Zhang1 , Wenjie Ruan1 * , Peipei Xu2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QF, UK
Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3BX, UK
{cz338; w.ruan}@exeter.ac.uk, peipei.xu@liverpool.ac.uk

Abstract
Neural network controllers (NNCs) have shown great
promise in autonomous and cyber-physical systems. Despite
the various verification approaches for neural networks, the
safety analysis of NNCs remains an open problem. Existing
verification approaches for neural network control systems
(NNCSs) either can only work on a limited type of activation
functions, or result in non-trivial over-approximation errors
with time evolving. This paper proposes a verification framework for NNCS based on Lipschitzian optimisation, called
DeepNNC. We first prove the Lipschitz continuity of closedloop NNCSs by unrolling and eliminating the loops. We then
reveal the working principles of applying Lipschitzian optimisation on NNCS verification and illustrate it by verifying
an adaptive cruise control model. Compared to state-of-theart verification approaches, DeepNNC shows superior performance in terms of efficiency and accuracy over a wide
range of NNCs. We also provide a case study to demonstrate
the capability of DeepNNC to handle a real-world, practical, and complex system. Our tool DeepNNC is available at
https://github.com/TrustAI/DeepNNC.

Figure 1: NNCS verification through reachable set estimation. We estimate the reachable sets Xt1 , Xt2 , Xt3 ..., Xtn
at t1 , t2 , t3 ..., tn . If all reachable sets do not intersect with
the grey avoid set and Xtn reaches the blue goal set, the
NNCS is verified to be safe.

Compared to verification on NNCSs, verification on neural networks (NNs) is relatively a well-explored area (Ruan,
Huang, and Kwiatkowska 2018; Ruan et al. 2019; Wu et al.
2020; Ruan, Yi, and Huang 2021; Zhang, Ruan, and Fieldsend 2022; Xu et al. 2023; Wang and Ruan 2022; Xu, Ruan,
and Huang 2022). Representative solutions can be categorised into constraint satisfaction based approaches (Botoeva et al. 2020; Katz et al. 2019, 2017) and approximationbased approaches (Singh et al. 2019; Gehr et al. 2018; Ryou
et al. 2021; Mu et al. 2022). However, these verification
approaches cannot be applied directly to NNCS. They are
not workable in the scenario where the neural network is
in close conjunction with other subsystems. A speciality of
NNCSs is the association with control time steps. Moreover, approximation-based verification inevitably results in
the accumulation of the over-approximation error with the
control time evolved. Recently, some pioneering research
has emerged to verify NNCSs. They first estimate the output range of the controller and then feed the range to a hybrid system verification tool. Although both groups of tools
can generate a tight estimate on their isolated models, direct
combination results in a loose estimate of NNCS reachable
sets after a few control steps, known as the wrapping effect (Neumaier 1993).
To resolve the wrapping effect, researchers develop various methods to analyse NNCSs as a whole. Verisig (Ivanov
et al. 2019) transforms the neural network into an equivalent

Introduction
Neural network controllers have gained increasing interest
in the autonomous industry and cyber-physical systems because of their excellent capacity for representation learning
(Ding et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022). So
far NNCs have already been applied in safety-critical systems, including autonomous driving (Bojarski et al. 2016;
Wu and Ruan 2021; Yin, Ruan, and Fieldsend 2022) and
air traffic collision avoidance systems (Julian et al. 2016),
thus verification on NNCSs plays a crucial role in ensuring
their safety and reliability before their deployment in the real
world. Essentially, we can achieve verification on NNCSs by
estimating the system’s reachable set. As Figure 1 shows,
given the neural network controller, the dynamic model of
the target plant, and the range X0 of initial states, we intend
to estimate the reachable sets of the system, that is, the output range of state variables over a finite time horizon [0, tn ].
If the reachable sets Xt1 , Xt2 , ... Xtn have no intersection
with the avoid set and Xtn reaches the goal set, we can verify that the NNCS is safe.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15287

