The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

XR AND: Differentially Private Defense against Explanation-Guided Attacks
Truc Nguyen* 1 , Phung Lai* 2 , Hai Phan2 , My T. Thai1†
1

University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611
New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ 07102
truc.nguyen@ufl.edu, tl353@njit.edu, phan@njit.edu, mythai@cise.ufl.edu
2

Abstract

end-users have no knowledge about the algorithm or internal information about the underlying ML models. Several
proposals advocate for deploying model explanations in the
cloud, such that a predicted label and an explanation are
returned for each query to provide transparency for endusers. In practice, such an explainable MLaaS system model
has been developed by many cloud providers (Azure 2021;
Bluemix 2021), with applications in both industries (Community 2018) and academic research (Shokri, Strobel, and
Zick 2021; Milli et al. 2019).
Despite the great potential of those explainers to improve the transparency and understanding of ML models in
MLaaS, they open a trade-off in terms of security. Specifically, they allow adversaries to gain insights into black-box
models, essentially uncovering certain aspects of the models that make them more vulnerable. Such an attack vector
has recently been exploited by the research community to
conduct several explanation-guided attacks (Shokri, Strobel, and Zick 2021; Milli et al. 2019; Miura, Hasegawa,
and Shibahara 2021; Zhao et al. 2021; Severi et al. 2021).
It was shown that an explainer may expose the top important features on which a black-box model is focusing, by
aggregating over the explanations of multiple samples. An
example of utilizing such information is the recent highly
effective explanation-guided backdoor attack (XBA) against
malware classifiers investigated by (Severi et al. 2021). The
authors suggest that SHAP can be used to extract the topk goodware-oriented features. The attacker then selects a
combination of those features and their values for crafting
a trigger; and injects trigger-embedded goodware samples
into the training dataset of a malware classifier, with an aim
of changing the prediction of malware samples embedded
with the same trigger at inference time.
Defense Challenges. To prevent an adversary from exploiting the explanations, we need to control the information
leaked through them, especially the top-k features. Since the
explanation on each queried sample is returned to the end
users, a viable defense is to randomize the explanation such
that it is difficult for attackers to distinguish top-k features
while maintaining valuable explainability for the decisionmaking process. A well-applied technique to achieve this is
preserving local differential privacy (LDP) (Erlingsson, Pihur, and Korolova 2014; Wang et al. 2017) on the explanations. However, existing LDP-based approaches (Erlings-

Recent development in the field of explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) has helped improve trust in Machine-Learningas-a-Service (MLaaS) systems, in which an explanation is
provided together with the model prediction in response to
each query. However, XAI also opens a door for adversaries
to gain insights into the black-box models in MLaaS, thereby
making the models more vulnerable to several attacks. For example, feature-based explanations (e.g., SHAP) could expose
the top important features that a black-box model focuses on.
Such disclosure has been exploited to craft effective backdoor
triggers against malware classifiers. To address this trade-off,
we introduce a new concept of achieving local differential
privacy (LDP) in the explanations, and from that we establish
a defense, called XR AND, against such attacks. We show that
our mechanism restricts the information that the adversary
can learn about the top important features, while maintaining
the faithfulness of the explanations.

1

Introduction

Over decades, successes in machine learning (ML) have promoted a strong wave of AI applications that deliver vast benefits to a diverse range of fields. Unfortunately, due to their
complexity, ML models suffer from opacity in terms of explainability, which reduces the trust in and the verifiability
of the decisions made by the models. To meet the necessity
of transparent decision making, model-agnostic explainers
have been developed to help create effective, more humanunderstandable AI systems, such as LIME (Ribeiro, Singh,
and Guestrin 2016) and SHAP (Lundberg and Lee 2017),
among many others (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017; Selvaraju et al. 2017; Vu and Thai 2020; Vu, Nguyen, and Thai
2022; Ying et al. 2019; Shrikumar, Greenside, and Kundaje
2017; Vu et al. 2021).
In MLaaS systems, a customer can build an ML model
by uploading their data or crowdsourcing data, and executing an ML training algorithm. Then, the model is deployed
in the cloud where users can receive the model predictions
for input queries. MLaaS assumes black-box models as the
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11873

