The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Rethinking Rotation Invariance with Point Cloud Registration
Jianhui Yu, Chaoyi Zhang, Weidong Cai
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney, Australia
{jianhui.yu, chaoyi.zhang, tom.cai}@sydney.edu.au

Local Patches Pℓ

Abstract

Registration Integration

Encoding

Recent investigations on rotation invariance for 3D point
clouds have been devoted to devising rotation-invariant feature descriptors or learning canonical spaces where objects
are semantically aligned. Examinations of learning frameworks for invariance have seldom been looked into. In this
work, we review rotation invariance in terms of point cloud
registration and propose an effective framework for rotation invariance learning via three sequential stages, namely
rotation-invariant shape encoding, aligned feature integration,
and deep feature registration. We first encode shape descriptors constructed with respect to reference frames defined over
different scales, e.g., local patches and global topology, to
generate rotation-invariant latent shape codes. Within the integration stage, we propose Aligned Integration Transformer
to produce a discriminative feature representation by integrating point-wise self- and cross-relations established within
the shape codes. Meanwhile, we adopt rigid transformations
between reference frames to align the shape codes for feature consistency across different scales. Finally, the deep integrated feature is registered to both rotation-invariant shape
codes to maximize feature similarities, such that rotation invariance of the integrated feature is preserved and shared semantic information is implicitly extracted from shape codes.
Experimental results on 3D shape classification, part segmentation, and retrieval tasks prove the feasibility of our work.
Our project page is released at: https://rotation3d.github.io/.

Source Points P! Target Points P"

Global Shape P$

RI

Shape Descriptors

U
Correspondence
Mapping

F"
F!
Correspondence
Mapping

Local & Global Descriptors
ℓ

TI

F
T
F
Aligned Integration
Transformer

%

Correspondence
Mapping

Registration
Registered 𝐔
Ours

Registration
T

Registered 𝐏 𝐬
PCR

Figure 1: Frameworks of our design (left) and robust point
cloud registration (right), where TI and RI are transformation invariance and rotation invariance, and T is the rigid
transformation. The dotted line indicates the computation of
T between reference frames.

ever, requires a large memory capacity and exhibits limited
generalization ability to unseen data (Kim, Park, and Han
2020). There are attempts to align 3D inputs to a conical
pose (Jaderberg et al. 2015; Cohen et al. 2018), or to learn
rotation robust features via equivariance (Deng et al. 2021;
Luo et al. 2022), while these methods are not rigorously
rotation-invariant and present noncompetitive performance
on 3D shape analysis. To maintain consistent model behavior under random rotations, some methods (Zhang et al.
2019; Chen et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2021) follow Drost et al.
(2010) to handcraft rotation-invariant point-pair features.
Others (Zhang et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021a; Zhao et al. 2022)
design robust features from equivariant orthonormal bases.
Most of the mentioned works either manipulate model inputs or generate canonical spaces to achieve rotation invariance (RI). In this work, we review the problem of RI from
a different aspect: robust point cloud registration (PCR). We
find that PCR and RI share the same goal: PCR aligns lowdimensional point cloud features (e.g., xyz) from the source
domain to the target domain regardless of transformations,

Introduction
Point cloud analysis has recently drawn much interest from
researchers. As a common form of 3D representation, the
growing presence of point cloud data is encouraging the development of many deep learning methods (Qi et al. 2017a;
Guo et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021), showing great success
for well-aligned point clouds on different tasks. However, it
is difficult to directly apply 3D models to real data as raw
3D objects are normally captured at different viewing angles, resulting in unaligned data samples, which inevitably
impact the deep learning models which are sensitive to rotations. Therefore, rotation invariance becomes an important
research topic in the 3D domain.
To achieve rotation invariance, a straightforward way is
to augment training data with massive rotations which, howCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3313

