The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PowRL: A Reinforcement Learning Framework for Robust Management of Power
Networks
Anandsingh Chauhan1 , Mayank Baranwal1,2 , Ansuma Basumatary3
1

Tata Consultancy Services Research, Mumbai
2
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay
3
SalesKen, Bengaluru
anandsingh.chauhan@tcs.com, baranwal.mayank@tcs.com, ansuma.bty25@gmail.com
Abstract

occasional adversarial cyberattacks in order to disrupt reliable power delivery by causing blackouts.
Modernization of the electricity grid through innovative
hardware and software solutions involving peer-to-peer networks of power electric converters for enabling coordinated
response to adjust power generation and consumption can
partially alleviate some of the challenges (Baranwal et al.
2018; Arwa and Folly 2020). However, overhauling the entire grid infrastructure, unfortunately, operates at its own
time-scale. This work addresses the challenge of leveraging
AI-driven solutions for extracting the maximum possible resiliency out of the current grid infrastructure in order to ensure smooth power delivery and provide ancillary services to
the grid operator. The challenge lies not only in dealing with
the uncertainty of power demand and generation, or the uncertain events, such as electrical faults or adversarial attacks
on the grid, but also with the huge (combinatorially large)
action space even in a moderately-sized grid. From the perspective of the grid operator, devising a real-time strategy for
the robust management of power networks is beyond human
cognition. In most such scenarios, the grid operator relies
on his/her own experience or at best, some of the potential
heuristics whose scope is limited to mitigating only a certain
types of uncertainties.
Motivating example Fig. 1 represents a typical scenario in a
power network, where one of the transmission lines (shown
in red) is overloaded beyond its thermal capacity. If left unaccounted, the overflow may result in permanent damage of
the transmission line resulting in significant delays in getting
the network back to its nominal state. Interestingly, an optimal and real-time control strategy is to identify substations
where a bus-split action (as shown in the rightmost grid) results in immediate mitigation of line overflow through appropriate changes in the underlying network topology. Finding the most-suited topology control action among the list
of all possible topologies is not straightforward, especially if
the power network is equipped with many substations with
each substation consisting of multiple control elements.
Why RL? The penetration of DERs, EVs, and complex connectivities between different substations is increasingly rendering the traditional control strategies used by the electrical engineers inadequate. On the other hand, recent advancements in machine learning (ML) may offer solutions
to such complex problems which are otherwise beyond hu-

Power grids, across the world, play an important societal
and economical role by providing uninterrupted, reliable and
transient-free power to several industries, businesses and
household consumers. With the advent of renewable power
resources and EVs resulting into uncertain generation and
highly dynamic load demands, it has become ever so important to ensure robust operation of power networks through
suitable management of transient stability issues and localize the events of blackouts. In the light of ever increasing
stress on the modern grid infrastructure and the grid operators, this paper presents a reinforcement learning (RL) framework, PowRL, to mitigate the effects of unexpected network
events, as well as reliably maintain electricity everywhere on
the network at all times. The PowRL leverages a novel heuristic for overload management, along with the RL-guided decision making on optimal topology selection to ensure that
the grid is operated safely and reliably (with no overloads).
PowRL is benchmarked on a variety of competition datasets
hosted by the L2RPN (Learning to Run a Power Network).
Even with its reduced action space, PowRL tops the leaderboard in the L2RPN NeurIPS 2020 challenge (Robustness
track) at an aggregate level, while also being the top performing agent in the L2RPN WCCI 2020 challenge. Moreover,
detailed analysis depicts state-of-the-art performances by the
PowRL agent in some of the test scenarios.

Introduction
The infrastructure that defines the modern electricity grid is
largely based on centralized power generation units, such
as the fossil-fuel-fired power plants and nuclear power
plants (Wulf 2000). Through out its evolution, the primary
focus of grid development has largely been around safety, reliability, and resiliency to uncertain events. The ever increasing penetration of centralized renewable generation units,
such as the hydroelectric dams, as well as the distributed energy resources (DERs), such as the solar or wind farms, has
resulted in significant variability in power generation. Moreover, the customers’ evolving energy usage patterns through
charging of electric vehicles (EVs), batteries, and accessibility to modern electrical appliances have furthered the uncertainty and variability in the electric grid, not to mention the
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14757

