The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Counterfactual Fairness Is Basically Demographic Parity
Lucas Rosenblatt† , R. Teal Witter†
New York University
{lucas.rosenblatt, rtealwitter}@nyu.edu

Abstract
Race

Making fair decisions is crucial to ethically implementing
machine learning algorithms in social settings. In this work,
we consider the celebrated definition of counterfactual fairness. We begin by showing that an algorithm which satisfies counterfactual fairness also satisfies demographic parity, a far simpler fairness constraint. Similarly, we show that
all algorithms satisfying demographic parity can be trivially
modified to satisfy counterfactual fairness. Together, our results indicate that counterfactual fairness is basically equivalent to demographic parity, which has important implications
for the growing body of work on counterfactual fairness. We
validate our theoretical findings empirically, analyzing three
existing algorithms for counterfactual fairness against three
simple benchmarks. We find that two simple benchmark algorithms outperform all three existing algorithms—in terms of
fairness, accuracy, and efficiency—on several data sets. Our
analysis leads us to formalize a concrete fairness goal: to preserve the order of individuals within protected groups. We
believe transparent ordering of individuals within protected
groups makes fair algorithms more trustworthy. By design,
the two simple benchmark algorithms satisfy this goal while
the existing algorithms for counterfactual fairness do not.

Law School
GPA

Gender

LSAT Score

Undergraduate
GPA

Knowledge

Figure 1: A causal model in a law school context. Directed
edges between a source and a target denote a causal relationship in the sense that changing the value of the source (probabilistically) changes the value of the target. In this context, counterfactual fairness tries to make decisions based
on knowledge (which cannot directly be measured) without
biases from race or gender.
2008; Corbett-Davies and Goel 2018). Even in the absence
of these proxy variables, seemingly reasonable remaining
predictive attributes like study time or prior health care can
still depend on protected attributes. A natural consequentialist approach in the face of concerns over group equity is
demographic parity, which ensures an identical distribution
over the outcomes for each protected group. However, demographic parity has been critiqued because it can allow for
blatantly unfair choices to individuals (Dwork et al. 2012;
Corbett-Davies and Goel 2018).
Counterfactual fairness offers a solution by advocating
for a causal perspective, which provides statistical tools to
help us minimize the direct effects of protected attributes
on decisions (Kusner et al. 2017; Nilforoshan et al. 2022),
and comports with a Rawlsian perspective of moral philosophy (Rawls 2004). It follows a surge of papers over the
past decade that borrow intuition from moral philosophy to
formally define what makes an algorithm fair (Dwork et al.
2012; Feldman et al. 2015; Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016;
Mitchell et al. 2021). Drawing from (Pearl et al. 2000)’s
work on causal models, (Kusner et al. 2017) imagine a counterfactual world where only the protected attributes of obser-

Introduction
A pressing challenge in the deployment of algorithms in social settings is the risk of “unfair” decisions with respect
to protected attributes like race, gender, religion, sexualorientation, or age. In this work, we consider the supervised
learning problem of predicting outcomes from labelled observations where the existing outcomes are already biased.
The observations consist of protected attributes and other
remaining attributes like test scores, grade point averages,
credit scores, health risks, and more context dependent variables. The goal is to “fairly” predict outcomes like student
success, credit worthiness, and health care needs.
One approach is to ignore the protected attributes and
train algorithms only on the remaining attributes i.e. “fairness through blindness” (Dwork et al. 2012). However, there
could be variables like height or zip code which are proxies for protected attributes (Pedreshi, Ruggieri, and Turini
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Authors contributed equally.

14461

