The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Truthful Mechanisms for Steiner Tree Problems
Jinshan Zhang1 , Zhengyang Liu2 * , Xiaotie Deng3 , Jianwei Yin1
1
Zhejiang University
Beijing Institute of Technology
3
Peking University
zhangjinshan@zju.edu.cn, zhengyang@bit.edu.cn, xiaotie@pku.edu.cn, zjuyjw@cs.zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

is proposed in (Byrka et al. 2013) and later a deterministic
more efficient algorithm with the same approximation ratio
is given by (Goemans et al. 2012). Very recently, the same
approximation ratio has been achieved by Traub and Zenklusen (2021), from a purely combinatorial point of view.
For any large network, such as a network for the STP,
there exists heterogeneous resources like vertices and edges,
of which may be held by different owners. These owners
intend to perform certain tasks to earn their rewards. We
take the message broadcast as an example. From the perspective of network management, it seems that the rewards
of the owners can be seen as the price of the service that
forwards the messages. Therefore, economically speaking,
each owner declares that its true price is desirable. It turns
out that in several web applications or internet services, one
needs to efficiently calculate the solution of the given optimization problem, where additional restrictions to active
agents (through appropriate payments) can be proposed to
cooperate within the algorithm. This combined output of the
calculation and the payment is often referred to as a mechanism.
A realistic applicable scenario based on the above motivation can be seen as a two-player game between the Internet
Service Provider (ISP) and Content Provider (CP) (Saltzer,
Reed, and Clark 1984; Armstrong 2006; Deng, Feng, and
Papadimitriou 2016), where CP would like to build a connection among different sites to users (e.g., establishing a
Steiner tree among terminal vertices) through the internet
service provided by different ISPs (e.g., different edges belongs to different ISPs). Each ISP charges CP in order to
maximize her own utility.
From the above consideration and wide applications of
the STP, we consider this problem in a strategic and noncooperative way. More precisely, each edge in the graph is
held by a selfish agent who reports her private cost c(e) to
the mechanism designer. The edge holder reports the cost
of its edge to maximize his utility (i.e., valuation minus the
payment, where the valuation is −c(e)). It turns out that in
many applications the mechanism designer should provide
a mechanism that incentivizes each agent to report his true
cost. Such a mechanism usually refers to a truthful mechanism. Previously, as far as we know, only a 2-approximate
truthful mechanism (Wang, Li, and Wang 2004) for the STP
with k terminal vertices was known and this ratio was im-

Consider an undirected graph G = (V, E) model for a communication network, where each edge is owned by a selfish agent, who reports the cost for offering the use of her
edge. Note that each edge agent may misreport her own cost
for the use of the edge for her own benefit. In such a noncooperative setting, we aim at designing an approximately
truthful mechanism for establishing a Steiner tree, a minimum cost tree spanning over all the terminals. We present a
truthful-in-expectation mechanism that achieves the approximation ratio ln 4 + ϵ ≈ 1.39, which matches the current best
algorithmic ratio for STP.

1

Introduction

Given a graph G = (V, E) and a set of terminal vertices
R ⊆ V , each edge e ∈ E is associated by a cost c(e). The
Steiner Tree Problem (STP) is to find a minimum cost tree
over G that spans all the terminal vertices in R. One can also
include extra intermediate vertices and edges to reduce the
cost of the induced spanning tree. These extra vertices introduced to decrease the total cost of connection are known
as Steiner points or Steiner vertices. The STP is one of the
most important and fundamental problems widely studied
in the fields of computer science and operations research,
with wide practical applications such as the design of VLSI
(Very Large Scale Integration), optical and wireless communication systems, as well as transportation and distribution
networks (Hwang and Richards 1992).
However, finding the optimal solution in the STP is
known to be one of Karp’s original 21 NP-complete problems (Karp 1972). That means we cannot hope to solve this
problem exactly. For the approximate version, it is APX96
hard and can not be approximated within 95
unless P =
NP (Bern and Plassmann 1989; Chlebı́k and Chlebı́ková
2008). During last decades, a sequence of improved apln 3
proximation ratios for the problem (from 11
6 to 1 + 2 +
ϵ ≈ 1.55) is obtained (Zelikovsky 1993; Karpinski and Zelikovsky 1997; Prömel and Steger 2000; Robins and Zelikovsky 2005). Until recently, by leveraging the LP iterative
rounding approach, a ln 4+ϵ ≈ 1.39-approximate algorithm
* Zhengyang Liu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5884

