The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Heterogeneous Graph Masked Autoencoders
Yijun Tian1,2 , Kaiwen Dong1,2 , Chunhui Zhang3 , Chuxu Zhang3 , Nitesh V. Chawla1,2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame, USA
2
Lucy Family Institute for Data and Society, University of Notre Dame, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, Brandeis University, USA
{yijun.tian, kdong2}@nd.edu, {chunhuizhang, chuxuzhang}@brandeis.edu, nchawla@nd.edu

Abstract

is impractical because acquiring labels in real applications
is always challenging and expensive (Wang et al. 2020).
Therefore, self-supervised learning (SSL), which attempts to
extract information from the data itself, becomes a promising
solution when no or few explicit labels are provided.
In the context of SSL on graphs, contrastive SSL methods
are the dominant approaches (Zhao et al. 2023, 2021).
The success of contrastive methods is largely built upon
manually selected high-quality data augmentations and
complex optimization algorithms (Hou et al. 2022). However,
most of the augmentations on graphs are based on heuristics,
with performance varying significantly across different
graphs and tasks (You et al. 2021; Ding et al. 2022; You
et al. 2020). On the other hand, complicated optimization
algorithms such as momentum and exponential moving
average for parameter update are always required due to
the computational constraint and the need for stable training
(Qiu et al. 2020; Thakoor et al. 2022). In addition, negative
sampling, as a necessity for the majority of contrastive
objectives, often involves laborious designs and arduous
constructions from graphs. Therefore, there is no assurance
that contrastive methods will achieve satisfactory results.
Generative SSL naturally avoids the aforementioned
issues of contrastive methods, by focusing on directly
reconstructing the input graph data without considering
complicated augmentations and negative sampling (Liu et al.
2020; Wu et al. 2021). Recently, masked autoencoders
demonstrate strong learning capability in computer vision
(He et al. 2022) and natural language processing (Devlin et al.
2019) by removing a large proportion of the input data and
using the removed content to guide the training. Inspired by
this, GraphMAE (Hou et al. 2022) proposes to reconstruct
node features with masking on graphs. Although GraphMAE
shows excellent performance in certain graph learning tasks,
it ignores the following challenges faced for real-world
graphs and limits its applicability to real applications.

Generative self-supervised learning (SSL), especially masked
autoencoders, has become one of the most exciting learning
paradigms and has shown great potential in handling graph
data. However, real-world graphs are always heterogeneous,
which poses three critical challenges that existing methods
ignore: 1) how to capture complex graph structure? 2)
how to incorporate various node attributes? and 3) how to
encode different node positions? In light of this, we study
the problem of generative SSL on heterogeneous graphs
and propose HGMAE, a novel heterogeneous graph masked
autoencoder model to address these challenges. HGMAE
captures comprehensive graph information via two innovative
masking techniques and three unique training strategies. In
particular, we first develop metapath masking and adaptive
attribute masking with dynamic mask rate to enable effective
and stable learning on heterogeneous graphs. We then design
several training strategies including metapath-based edge
reconstruction to adopt complex structural information, target
attribute restoration to incorporate various node attributes,
and positional feature prediction to encode node positional
information. Extensive experiments demonstrate that HGMAE
outperforms both contrastive and generative state-of-the-art
baselines on several tasks across multiple datasets. Codes are
available at https://github.com/meettyj/HGMAE.

Introduction
Heterogeneous graphs are ubiquitous in the real world with
their ability to model heterogeneous relationships among
different types of nodes, such as academic graphs (Wang
et al. 2019), social graphs (Cao et al. 2021), biomedical
graphs (Bai et al. 2021), and food graphs (Tian et al. 2022b).
Accordingly, many heterogeneous graph neural networks
(HGNNs) are proposed (Hu et al. 2020; Tian et al. 2021;
Zhang et al. 2019) to capture the complex structure and
rich semantics in heterogeneous graphs. Generally, HGNNs
achieve great success in handling graph heterogeneity and
have been applied in various real-world applications such as
recommendation systems (Tian et al. 2022a) and healthcare
systems (Wang et al. 2021b). However, most HGNNs adhere
to the supervised or semi-supervised learning paradigms
(Wang et al. 2021a), in which the learning process is guided
by labeled data. Nevertheless, the strict requirement for labels

• C1: Real-world graphs are usually heterogeneous, with
multiple types of nodes and edges, which naturally
implies their complex structure. To learn effective node
embeddings that fully consider the semantics involved in
this complex structure, simply reconstructing the masked
features is far from sufficient. Thus the challenge 1 is:
how to capture the complex graph structure that contains
informative semantics, as indicated by C1 in Figure 1.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9997

