The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Wiener Graph Deconvolutional Network Improves Graph Self-Supervised
Learning
Jiashun Cheng2 , Man Li2 , Jia Li1,2 * , Fugee Tsung1,2
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{jchengak, mlicn}@connect.ust.hk, {jialee, season}@ust.hk

Abstract
Graph self-supervised learning (SSL) has been vastly employed to learn representations from unlabeled graphs. Existing methods can be roughly divided into predictive learning and contrastive learning, where the latter one attracts
more research attention with better empirical performance.
We argue that, however, predictive models weaponed with
powerful decoder could achieve comparable or even better representation power than contrastive models. In this
work, we propose a Wiener Graph Deconvolutional Network
(WGDN), an augmentation-adaptive decoder empowered by
graph wiener filter to perform information reconstruction.
Theoretical analysis proves the superior reconstruction ability
of graph wiener filter. Extensive experimental results on various datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

Figure 1: Comparison of different variants of GALA against
latent Gaussian augmentation with magnitude β.

leverage trivial decoders, such as multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) (Kipf and Welling 2016; Pan et al. 2018; You et al.
2020b), which under-exploit graph topology information,
and thus may lead to the degradation in learning capability.
Vanilla graph neural networks (GNNs), such as GCN (Kipf
and Welling 2017), are inappropriate for decoding due to
their Laplacian-smooth essence. To overcome such inherent
limitation of GCN, GALA (Park et al. 2019) adopts spectral counterpart of GCN to facilitate the learning, but may
take the risk of unstable learning due to its poor resilience to
data augmentation (See Figure 1). GAT (Veličković et al.
2018) is employed as decoder in recent works including
GATE (Salehi and Davulcu 2020) and GraphMAE (Hou
et al. 2022). Although attention mechanism enhances model
flexibility, recent work (Balcilar et al. 2021) shows GAT acts
like a low-pass filter and cannot well reconstruct the graph
spectrum. As an inverse to GCN (Kipf and Welling 2017),
graph deconvolutional network (GDN) could be expected
to further boost the performance of reconstruction (Li
et al. 2021), which may substantially benefit the context of
representation learning. We present a summary of different decoders of predictive graph SSL in Table 1. Given the
aforementioned observations, a natural question comes up,
that is, can we improve predictive SSL by a framework with
powerful decoder?
Typically, a powerful decoder should at least remain effective against augmentations. Motivated by recent advancement of wiener in deep image reconstruction (Dong, Roth,
and Schiele 2020), we introduce the classical deconvolutional technique, wiener filter, into GDN, which is the theo-

Introduction
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL), which extracts informative
knowledge through well-designed pretext tasks from unlabeled data, has been extended to graph data recently due to
its great success in computer vision (CV) (He et al. 2020)
and natural language processing (NLP) (Devlin et al. 2019).
With regard to the objectives of pretext tasks, graph SSL
can be divided into two major categories: predictive SSL
and contrastive SSL (Liu et al. 2022). Predictive models
learn informative properties generated from graph freely via
prediction tasks, while contrastive models are trained on
the mutual information between different views augmented
from the original graph. As the dominant technique, contrastive SSL has achieved state-of-the-art performance empirically (Xu et al. 2021; Thakoor et al. 2022; Lee, Lee, and
Park 2022) for graph representation learning. In contrast, the
development of predictive SSL has lagged behind over the
past few years.
Graph reconstruction is a natural self-supervision, and
thus most methods in predictive SSL employ graph autoencoder (GAE) as their backbones (Wang et al. 2017; Hu et al.
2020b; Li et al. 2020b). The work of GraphMAE (Hou et al.
2022) re-validates the potentials of reconstruction paradigm.
Despite recent advancements, the importance of graph
decoder has been largely ignored. Most existing works
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7131

