The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Rule Induction in Knowledge Graphs Using Linear Programming
Sanjeeb Dash, João Gonçalves
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, New York, USA
{sanjeebd, jpgoncal}@us.ibm.com

Abstract

didate logic rules are obtained via relational path enumeration. Yang, Yang, and Cohen (2017) use neural logic programming to simultaneously obtain rules and rule weights.
In (Qu et al. 2021), rules and rule weights are computed
in sequence, but there is a feedback loop from the latter
learning problem to the former. Recursive neural networks
(RNN) are widely used to learn rules, though rule-mining
approaches can be very effective (Meilicke et al. 2019).
Embedding-based methods for KGC consist of representing nodes by vectors, and relations by vector transformations
that are consistent with the KG facts. They exhibit better
scaling with KG size, and yield more accurate predictions.
See the surveys by Ji et al. (2021) and Wang et al. (2017a).
However, they are less interpretable than logical rules.
Besides predictive accuracy, Michie (1988) identified
comprehensibility as an important property of a machine
learning (ML) method and proposed the strong criterion and
ultra-strong criterion. The former is satisfied if the ML system generates an explicit symbolic representation of its hypotheses, and the latter is satisfied if humans can understand
and effectively apply such symbolic representations. Interpretable ML systems form an important current research
area; see (Rudin et al. 2022) and (Kovalerchuk, Ahmad, and
Teredesai 2021). In socially sensitive applications of ML,
e.g., in the criminal justice system, interpretability is as an
essential feature to allow audits for fairness and unbiasedness (Mehrabi et al. 2022). Experimental results in (Schmid
et al. 2017; Muggleton et al. 2018) show that for logic programs inspection time (the time taken by humans to study
and understand the program before applying it) is negatively
correlated with human predictive performance. Many rulebased methods satisfy Michie’s strong criterion but generate
a lot of rules leading to long inspection times and low comprehensibility and interpretability. The tradeoff between accuracy and rule simplicity (or compactness) is well-studied
in the setting of classification; it is shown in (Dash, Günlük,
and Wei 2018; Wang et al. 2017b) that one can obtain interpretable rule sets without significantly sacrificing accuracy.
Inspired by these classification methods, we focus on
learning compact sets of entity independent FOL rules for
KGC (as KGC has no negatively labeled examples, one
cannot apply classification techniques directly). We combine rule enumeration with linear programming (LP) and
avoid solving difficult nonconvex optimizaton models inher-

We present a simple linear programming (LP) based method
to learn compact and interpretable sets of rules encoding the
facts in a knowledge graph (KG) and use these rules to solve
the KG completion problem. Our LP model chooses a set of
rules of bounded complexity from a list of candidate firstorder logic rules and assigns weights to them. The complexity bound is enforced via explicit constraints. We combine
simple rule generation heuristics with our rule selection LP
to obtain predictions with accuracy comparable to state-ofthe-art codes, even while generating much more compact rule
sets. Furthermore, when we take as input rules generated by
other codes, we often improve interpretability by reducing the
number of chosen rules, while maintaining accuracy.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KG) represent a collection of known
facts via labeled directed edges. A fact is a triplet of the
form (a, r, b), where a and b are nodes representing entities, and r is a binary relation labeling a directed edge from
a to b indicating that r(a, b) is true. Practical knowledge
graphs are often incomplete (they do not contain all true
representable facts). Knowledge graph completion (KGC)
involves using known facts in a KG to infer additional (missing) facts. Other common tasks for extracting implied information from KGs are triple classification, entity recognition,
and relation prediction. See the survey by Ji et al. (2021).
One approach for KGC is to learn first-order logic (FOL)
rules that approximately encode known facts (in practice,
KGs have inconsistencies). Consider a KG where nodes represent individuals and the relations are one of {son of, father of, grandson of}. Suppose we learn a “rule” (X, son of,
Y) and (Y, son of, Z) → (X, grandson of, Z) of length two,
where X, Y, Z are variables. If there are entities P, Q, R in the
KG such that (P, son of, R) and (R, son of, Q) are facts in the
KG then we infer that P is a grandson of Q. KGC deals with
finding answers to queries of the form (P, grandson of, ?).
We learn multiple FOL rules of the type above for this task
along with rule weights, where weights indicate importance.
Learning logic rules is a well-studied area. In a paper (Lao
and Cohen 2010) on path ranking and another (Richardson and Domingos 2006) on Markov logic networks, canCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4233

