The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Very Fast, Approximate Counterfactual Explanations for Decision Forests
Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán, Suryabhan Singh Hada
Dept. Computer Science & Engineering, University of California, Merced
{mcarreira-perpinan, shada}@ucmerced.edu

Abstract

Schapire 1997) and Gradient Boosting (Friedman 2001),
but also oblique trees, which achieve state-of-the-art accuracy using fewer and shallower trees (Zharmagambetov and
Carreira-Perpiñán 2020; Gabidolla and Carreira-Perpiñán
2022; Carreira-Perpiñán, Gabidolla, and Zharmagambetov
2023). The optimization problem is difficult because forests
define a piecewise constant predictive function, so gradients
are not applicable. The number of constant-value regions
is exponential on the size of the forest (number of leaves
and number of trees), so exhaustive search approaches (even
making use of clever pruning and engineering heuristics)
will not be able to scale to real-world forests, for which the
number of leaves per tree and the number of trees each run
into hundreds or thousands.
We propose a simple but effective approach: to limit the
search to the set of regions containing actual (training) data
points. This makes the search extremely fast, producing a
good, feasible CE estimate in less than a second (for axisaligned forests) or a few seconds (for oblique forests) even
for the largest problems we experimented with. A secondary
advantage is that it tends to produce realistic CEs, since the
live regions can be seen as a nonparametric density estimate
built in the forest. In section 3 we study the geometry of the
forest predictive function and the number of nonempty and
live regions. In sections 4–5 we give our algorithm (LIRE)
and evaluate it in section 6.

We consider finding a counterfactual explanation for a classification or regression forest, such as a random forest. This
requires solving an optimization problem to find the closest
input instance to a given instance for which the forest outputs
a desired value. Finding an exact solution has a cost that is
exponential on the number of leaves in the forest. We propose a simple but very effective approach: we constrain the
optimization to only those input space regions defined by the
forest that are populated by actual data points. The problem
reduces to a form of nearest-neighbor search using a certain
distance on a certain dataset. This has two advantages: first,
the solution can be found very quickly, scaling to large forests
and high-dimensional data, and enabling interactive use. Second, the solution found is more likely to be realistic in that it
is guided towards high-density areas of input space.

1

Introduction

A counterfactual explanation (CE) seeks the minimum
change to an input instance that will result in a desired outcome under a given predictive model. For example, “reducing your weight by 10 kg will reduce your risk of stroke
by 80%” (regression) or “you will be eligible for the loan
if you increase your annual salary by $10k” (classification).
CEs extend the use of a machine learning model beyond just
prediction to querying about potential scenarios. This is especially relevant in applications where interpretability or explainability is important, such as in financial, legal, human
resources, government or health models. It can also make it
possible to audit a model to find errors or bias, and to have
an objective measure of the importance of the input features.
CEs are also formally equivalent to adversarial attacks, but
the latter have a different motivation: they seek to trick a
model into making the wrong prediction by making imperceptible changes to the input.
CEs can be naturally formulated as an optimization problem over the input instance of the form “minimize the distance to a source instance subject to the model predicting a desired outcome”. Here, we consider as model an
ensemble of decision trees (a decision forest). We consider both axis-aligned trees, which are widely used in
Random Forest (Breiman 2001), AdaBoost (Freund and

2

Related Work

Much of the work about counterfactual explanations, particularly in the guise of adversarial attacks, has focused on
deep neural nets (Szegedy et al. 2014; Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2015). The optimization here is relatively easy
because gradients of the model are available (at least approximately, with ReLU activations). That said, with a heavily nonlinear function such as a neural net, the optimization
problem may have multiple local minima, some of them not
even feasible (i.e., failing to produce the desired prediction).
This makes finding a good solution difficult. Some work is
agnostic to the model (Karimi et al. 2020; Guidotti et al.
2019; White and d’Avila Garcez 2020), requiring only function evaluations (and possibly constructing a mimic of the
model), but this restricts its performance severely in terms
of computational efficiency and quality or feasibility of the
result.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6935

