The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Sparse Coding in a Dual Memory System for Lifelong Learning
Fahad Sarfraz* , Elahe Arani* , Bahram Zonooz
1

2

Advanced Research Lab, NavInfo Europe, The Netherlands
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands
fahad.sarfraz@navinfo.eu, elahe.arani@tue.nl, bahram.zonooz@gmail.com

Abstract

et al. 2018; Aljundi et al. 2019b) which aim to reduce forgetting by continual rehearsal of previously seen tasks, have
proven to be an effective approach in challenging CL tasks
(Farquhar and Gal 2018). They attempt to approximate the
joint distribution of all the observed tasks by saving samples
from previous tasks in a memory buffer and intertwine the
training of the new task with samples from memory. However, due to the limited buffer size, it is difficult to approximate the joint distribution with the samples alone. There
is an inherent imbalance between the samples of previous
tasks and the current task. This results in the network update
being biased towards the current task, leading to forgetting
and recency bias in predictions. Therefore, more information from the previous state of the model is needed to better
approximate the joint distribution and constrain the update
of the model to preserve the learned knowledge. However, it
is still an open question what the optimal information is for
replay and how to extract and preserve it.
The human brain provides an existence proof for successful CL in complex dynamic environments without intransigence or forgetting. Therefore, it can provide insight into
the design principles and mechanisms that can enable CL
in DNNs. The human brain maintains a delicate balance
between stability and plasticity through a complex set of
neurophysiological mechanisms (Parisi et al. 2019; Zenke,
Poole, and Ganguli 2017) and the effective use of multiple memory systems (Hassabis et al. 2017). In particular, evidence suggests that the brain employs Sparse Coding, whereby the neural code is characterized by strong
activations of a relatively small set of neurons. The efficient utilization of sparsity for information representation
enables learning new associations faster with controlled interference with previous associations while maintaining sufficient representation capacity. In addition, complementary
learning systems (CLS) theory posits that effective learning requires two complementary learning systems. The hippocampus rapidly encodes episodic information into nonoverlapping representations, which are then gradually consolidated into the structural knowledge representation in the
neocortex through the replay of neural activities.
Inspired by these mechanisms in the brain, we hypothesize that employing a mechanism to encourage sparse coding in DNNs and mimic the interplay of multiple memory
systems can be effective in maintaining a balance between

Efficient continual learning in humans is enabled by a rich set
of neurophysiological mechanisms and interactions between
multiple memory systems. The brain efficiently encodes information in non-overlapping sparse codes, which facilitates
the learning of new associations faster with controlled interference with previous associations. To mimic sparse coding in DNNs, we enforce activation sparsity along with a
dropout mechanism which encourages the model to activate
similar units for semantically similar inputs and have less
overlap with activation patterns of semantically dissimilar inputs. This provides us with an efficient mechanism for balancing the reusability and interference of features, depending on the similarity of classes across tasks. Furthermore, we
employ sparse coding in a multiple-memory replay mechanism. Our method maintains an additional long-term semantic memory that aggregates and consolidates information encoded in the synaptic weights of the working model.
Our extensive evaluation and characteristics analysis show
that equipped with these biologically inspired mechanisms,
the model can further mitigate forgetting. Code available at
https://github.com/NeurAI-Lab/SCoMMER.

Introduction
The ability to continually acquire, consolidate, and retain
knowledge is a hallmark of intelligence. Particularly, as we
look to deploy deep neural networks (DNNs) in the real
world, it is essential that learning agents continuously interact and adapt to the ever-changing environment. However,
standard DNNs are not designed for lifelong learning and
exhibit catastrophic forgetting of previously learned knowledge when required to learn tasks sequentially from a stream
of data (McCloskey and Cohen 1989).
The core challenge in continual learning (CL) in DNNs
is maintaining an optimal balance between plasticity and
the stability of the model. Ideally, the model should be stable enough to retain previous knowledge while also plastic
enough to acquire and consolidate new knowledge. Catastrophic forgetting in DNNs can be attributed to the lack of
stability, and multiple approaches have been proposed to address it. Among them, Rehearsal-based methods, (Riemer
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9714

