The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Adapting Object Size Variance and Class Imbalance for
Semi-supervised Object Detection
Yuxiang Nie1 * , Chaowei Fang2 * , Lechao Cheng3 , Liang Lin1 , Guanbin Li1,4†
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
3
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
4
Research Institute, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
nieyx3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, chaoweifang@outlook.com, chenglc@zhejianglab.com, linliang@ieee.org,
liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract
Semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) attracts extensive
research interest due to its great significance in reducing the
data annotation effort. Collecting high-quality and categorybalanced pseudo labels for unlabeled images is critical to
addressing the SSOD problem. However, most of the existing pseudo-labeling-based methods depend on a large and
fixed threshold to select high-quality pseudo labels from the
predictions of a teacher model. Considering different object
classes usually have different detection difficulty levels due
to scale variance and data distribution imbalance, conventional pseudo-labeling-based methods are arduous to explore
the value of unlabeled data sufficiently. To address these issues, we propose an adaptive pseudo labeling strategy, which
can assign thresholds to classes with respect to their “hardness”. This is beneficial for ensuring the high quality of easier
classes and increasing the quantity of harder classes simultaneously. Besides, label refinement modules are set up based
on box jittering for guaranteeing the localization quality of
pseudo labels. To further improve the algorithm’s robustness
against scale variance and make the most of pseudo labels,
we devise a joint feature-level and prediction-level consistency learning pipeline for transferring the information of the
teacher model to the student model. Extensive experiments on
COCO and VOC datasets indicate that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance. Especially, it brings mean average precision gains of 2.08 and 1.28 on MS-COCO dataset
with 5% and 10% labeled images, respectively.

Figure 1: The pseudo label quality of models which leverage pseudo labeling strategy based on a fixed threshold
(0.9) or our devised class-wise adaptive thresholds to explore unlabeled images on MS-COCO dataset with 10% labeled images. Here, an object is regarded as a small object
if its area is smaller than 32 × 32. The sample number setting for many-shot, medium-shot, and few-shot classes are
more than 4,000, 100–4,000, and less than 100, respectively.
Classes dominated by small objects or having few samples
severely affect pseudo label quality. Our proposed labeling
method can greatly alleviate this issue.
ing. (Sohn et al. 2020) utilize a pre-trained model to produce fixed pseudo labels. The other kind of methods (Jeong
et al. 2019, 2021; Tang et al. 2021a) employ the object detection model to generate supervision signals on unlabeled
images for itself. (Jeong et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2021a)
are implemented based on the consistency constraints between predictions inferred from differently augmented images. (Jeong et al. 2021) relies on the image mixup operation to construct the consistency constraint. However, such
a kind of method may be easily tracked into local minima
and interfered by noisy predictions. Another kind of methods, such as (Xu et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022a), depend
on the mean teacher model (Tarvainen and Valpola 2017) to
generate pseudo labels for unlabeled images. As shown in
Fig. 1, we can observe that imbalanced data distribution and
size variance are two key factors for limiting the overall detection performance, due to the high difficulty in detecting
few-shot or small objects. Previous SSOD methods based
on a large fixed threshold can only guarantee the high quality of pseudo-labels for easy classes, but disregard objects
of relatively hard classes. Li et al. (2022b) assign dynamic

Introduction
Large-scale training data has promoted significant progress
in object detection based on convolutional neural networks
(CNN). However, collecting annotations for a large number
of images is costly and time-consuming. Therefore, increasing attention is drawn to semi-supervised object detection
(SSOD) which can take advantage of a large number of unlabeled images during the training stage.
Existing SSOD methods mainly rely on pseudo labeling algorithms to involve unlabeled images during train* The first two authors contribute equally.
†

The corresponding author is Guanbin Li.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1966

