The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Stable Learning via Sparse Variable Independence
Han Yu1 * , Peng Cui1† , Yue He1 , Zheyan Shen1 , Yong Lin2 , Renzhe Xu1 , Xingxuan Zhang1
1
Tsinghua University
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
yuh21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn, heyue18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
shenzy13@qq.com, ylindf@connect.ust.hk, xrz199721@gmail.com, xingxuanzhang@hotmail.com
2

Abstract

and Cook 2020; Wang et al. 2021). When some information
about the test distribution is known apriori (Peng et al. 2019;
Yang and Soatto 2020), domain adaptation methods are proposed based on feature space transformation or distribution
matching (Ben-David et al. 2010; Weiss, Khoshgoftaar, and
Wang 2016; Tzeng et al. 2017; Ganin and Lempitsky 2015;
Saito et al. 2018). If there exists explicit heterogeneity in the
training data, e.g. it is composed of multiple subpopulations
corresponding to different source domains (Blanchard et al.
2021; Gideon, McInnis, and Provost 2021), domain generalization methods are proposed to learn a domain-agnostic
model or invariant representation (Muandet, Balduzzi, and
Schölkopf 2013; Li et al. 2017; Ganin et al. 2016; Li et al.
2018; Sun and Saenko 2016; He, Shen, and Cui 2021; Zhang
et al. 2022a,b). In many real applications, however, neither
the knowledge about test data nor explicit domain information in training data is available.

The problem of covariate-shift generalization has attracted
intensive research attention. Previous stable learning algorithms employ sample reweighting schemes to decorrelate
the covariates when there is no explicit domain information
about training data. However, with finite samples, it is difficult to achieve the desirable weights that ensure perfect
independence to get rid of the unstable variables. Besides,
decorrelating within stable variables may bring about high
variance of learned models because of the over-reduced effective sample size. A tremendous sample size is required
for these algorithms to work. In this paper, with theoretical justification, we propose SVI (Sparse Variable Independence) for the covariate-shift generalization problem. We
introduce sparsity constraint to compensate for the imperfectness of sample reweighting under the finite-sample setting in previous methods. Furthermore, we organically combine independence-based sample reweighting and sparsitybased variable selection in an iterative way to avoid decorrelating within stable variables, increasing the effective sample size to alleviate variance inflation. Experiments on both
synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the improvement of covariate-shift generalization performance brought
by SVI.

1

Recently, stable learning algorithms (Shen et al. 2018,
2020a,b; Kuang et al. 2018, 2020; Zhang et al. 2021; Liu
et al. 2021a,b) are proposed to address a more realistic and
challenging setting, where the training data consists of latent
heterogeneity (without explicit domain information), and the
goal is to achieve a model with good generalization ability under agnostic covariate shift. They make a structural
assumption of covariates by splitting them into S (i.e. stable variables) and V (i.e. unstable variables), and suppose
P (Y |S) remains unchanged while P (Y |V ) may change under covariate shift. They aim to learn a group of sample
weights to remove the correlations among covariates in observational data, and then optimize in the weighted distribution to capture stable variables. It is theoretically proved
that, under the scenario of infinite samples, these models
only utilize the stable variables for prediction (i.e. the coefficients on unstable variables will be perfectly zero) if the
learned sample weights can strictly ensure the mutual independence among all covariates (Xu et al. 2022). However,
with finite samples, it is almost impossible to learn weights
that satisfy complete independence. As a result, the predictor
cannot always get rid of the unstable variables (i.e. the unstable variables may have significantly non-zero coefficients).
In addition, (Shen et al. 2020a) pointed out that it is unnecessary to remove the inner correlations of stable variables.
The correlations inside stable variables could be very strong,
thus decorrelating them could sharply decrease the effective

Introduction

Most of the current machine learning techniques rely on the
IID assumption, that the test and training data are independent and identically distributed, which is too strong to stand
in wild environments (Koh et al. 2021). Test distribution often differs from training distribution especially if there is
data selection bias when collecting the training data (Heckman 1979; Young et al. 2009). Covariate shift is a common
type of distribution shift (Ioffe and Szegedy 2015; Tripuraneni, Adlam, and Pennington 2021), which assumes that
the marginal distribution of covariates (i.e. P (X)) may shift
between training and test data while the generation mechanism of the outcome variable (i.e. P (Y |X)) remains unchanged (Shen et al. 2021). To address this problem, there
are some strands of works (Santurkar et al. 2018; Wilson
* Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and

Technology (BNRist).
†
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10998

