The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Interventional SHAP Values and Interaction Values
for Piecewise Linear Regression Trees
Artjom Zern1 , Klaus Broelemann1 , Gjergji Kasneci2
1

SCHUFA Holding AG, Germany
University of Tuebingen, Germany
artjom.zern@schufa.de, klaus.broelemann@schufa.de, gjergji.kasneci@uni-tuebingen.de
2

nificantly. Both have their benefits and drawbacks depending on the concrete application (Chen et al. 2020; Kumar
et al. 2020; Miroshnikov, Kotsiopoulos, and Kannan 2021).
Observational SHAP depends only on the predictions on the
data manifold but it may assign contributions to features not
used by the model due to feature dependencies. So it puts
more emphasis on the data. The interventional SHAP, on the
other hand, focuses on the model itself, but may depend on
the predictions of the model outside the data distribution on
which the model is trained. Janzing, Minorics, and Blöbaum
(2020) discuss both variants from the causal perspective and
argue that interventional SHAP is the preferable variant for
feature attribution.
A major drawback of SHAP values in their original form
is that their computational costs grow exponentially with
the number of features. As a consequence model-agnostic
exact SHAP values are intractable for most modern applications where the number of features can easily count hundreds or even thousands. For this reason multiple subsequent
works employ model-specific computations and approximations for the sake of practical use.
A notable approach in this direction is the path-dependent
TreeSHAP algorithm (Lundberg et al. 2020; Yang 2021),
which is widely used due to its computational efficiency.
It aims to approximate observational SHAP values of tree
models by using precomputed node counts, but it implicitly assumes feature independence. As a result, the computed
values depend not only on the prediction but also on the actual tree structure, which is an undesired property in terms
of explaining model predictions. Lundberg et al. (2020)
also present a variant for (exact) interventional SHAP. Both
TreeSHAP variants have polynomial time complexity, while
Van den Broeck et al. (2021) showed that there is in general
no polynomial time algorithm for computing (exact) observational SHAP values of tree models. Under the assumption
of feature independence, Arenas et al. (2021b,a) state that
SHAP can be computed in polynomial time for a variety of
models including decision trees.
Recently, piecewise linear regression trees and their ensembles have gained considerable attention (Guidotti et al.
2018). For instance, LightGBM added support for gradient
boosting trees with linear models at the leaves.1 Despite the

Abstract
In recent years, game-theoretic Shapley values have gained
increasing attention with respect to local model explanation
by feature attributions. While the approach using Shapley values is model-independent, their (exact) computation is usually intractable, so efficient model-specific algorithms have
been devised including approaches for decision trees or their
ensembles in general. Our work goes further in this direction by extending the interventional TreeSHAP algorithm to
piecewise linear regression trees, which gained more attention in the past few years. To this end, we introduce a decomposition of the contribution function based on decision
paths, which allows a more comprehensible formulation of
SHAP algorithms for tree-based models. Our algorithm can
also be readily applied to computing SHAP interaction values
for these models. In particular, as the main contribution of this
paper, we provide a more efficient approach of interventional
SHAP for tree-based models by precomputing statistics of the
background data based on the tree structure.

1

Introduction

In recent years, predictive models have found their way
into numerous applications. With the widespread dissemination and use, the wish to gain insights into the predictions made has also increased. One notable method for doing
so are SHAP values (Lundberg and Lee 2017), which compute the contribution of each input feature on the prediction.
These feature attributions can be used to analyze and explain
model predictions. Additionally, SHAP interaction values
were proposed to capture local interaction effects between
features allowing a better interpretation of the model (Lundberg et al. 2020).
While SHAP values build on game-theoretic concepts
for computing feature attributions, there exist variants as
to what exactly is explained. Notably observational SHAP
takes the underlying data distribution with its dependencies
into account by using (observational) conditional expectations. Whereas interventional SHAP breaks up feature dependencies via interventions and therefore puts more emphasis on the model.
In case of independent features, observational and interventional SHAP coincide. Otherwise, they may differ sigCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

11164

https://github.com/microsoft/LightGBM/releases/tag/v3.2.0

