3D-Aware Indoor Scene Synthesis
with Depth Priors
– Supplementary Material –
Zifan Shi1 , Yujun Shen2 , Jiapeng Zhu1 , Dit-Yan Yeung1 , and Qifeng Chen1
1

A

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 ByteDance Inc.
{vivianszf9, shenyujun0302, jengzhu0}@gmail.com
{dyyeung, cqf}@cse.ust.hk

Overview

This supplementary material is organized as follows. Sec. B describes the implementation details of our DepthGAN, including the network structures and the
training configurations. Sec. C introduces the datasets we used for experiments.
Sec. D provides the implementation of our baseline approaches. Sec. E introduces
the rotation consistency loss used for training. Sec. F discusses how we use the
synthesized RGBD images for 3D visualization. Sec. G evaluates our switchable
discriminator on the task of depth estimation. Sec. H discusses the out-ofdistribution generation of our method. Sec. I provides more qualitative results to
demonstrate the continuous 3D control achieved by our DepthGAN.

B

Implementation Details

B.1

Network Architectures

Dual-path Generator. We use the generator of StyleGAN2 [5] as the backbone
of the depth generator and the appearance renderer, which produce the 1-channel
depth and the 3-channel image, respectively. The path length regularization is
removed from both of them.
Switchable Discriminator. The switchable discriminator follows the structure
of the discriminator in StyleGAN2 [5]. Given an image, the native discriminator
employs an input layer, Γ0 , to project it to the feature space. We supplement
Γ0 with an additional layer, Γ1 , for the toggle between the RGB image and the
depth image. Γ1 takes in a depth image and outputs the same number of channels
as Γ0 . In this way, if the input is an RGB image, only Γ0 will be activated. If
the input is an RGBD image, the outputs of Γ0 and Γ1 are aggregated using
element-wise sum. On the other hand, the architecture of depth prediction branch
is shown in Fig. S1. It uses the features at resolutions 162 , 322 , and 642 as
the inputs. Starting from the lowest resolution (i.e., 162 ) each feature is first
transformed using a small network with skip connection, then upsampled to
double the resolution, and finally concatenated onto the feature from the next

