PRIF: Primary Ray-Based Implicit
Function
Brandon Y. Feng1(B) , Yinda Zhang2 , Danhang Tang2 , Ruofei Du2 ,
and Amitabh Varshney1
1

University of Maryland, College Park, USA
yfeng97@umd.edu
2
Google Research, Mountain View, USA

Abstract. We introduce a new implicit shape representation called Primary Ray-based Implicit Function (PRIF). In contrast to most existing
approaches based on the signed distance function (SDF) which handles
spatial locations, our representation operates on oriented rays. Specifically, PRIF is formulated to directly produce the surface hit point
of a given input ray, without the expensive sphere-tracing operations,
hence enabling eﬃcient shape extraction and diﬀerentiable rendering.
We demonstrate that neural networks trained to encode PRIF achieve
successes in various tasks including single shape representation, categorywise shape generation, shape completion from sparse or noisy observations, inverse rendering for camera pose estimation, and neural rendering
with color.

1

Introduction

Learning an accurate and eﬃcient geometric representation of a 3D object is an
important problem for computer graphics, computer vision, and robotics. Recent
advances in machine learning have inspired a growing trend of implicit neural
shape representations, where a neural network learns to predict the signed distance function (SDF) for an arbitrary location in the 3D space. Moreover, in addition to the 3D location (x, y, z), the neural SDF network may take in a latent vector that describes the object identity, thus enabling the generative modeling of
multiple objects. Such an implicit neural representation (INR) not only produces
ﬁne-grained geometry, but also enables a plethora of applications [28], e.g., shape
completion, pose estimation, via a diﬀerentiable rendering based optimization.
However, rendering and extracting the shape from a trained neural SDF
network are computationally expensive and often limited to watertight shapes.
The direct approach to rendering from SDF requires sphere tracing, which needs
access to the SDF values at multiple locations along each pixel ray [21]. The
indirect approach computes and stores the SDF values at predeﬁned 3D grid
points, from which the shape can be rendered with sphere-tracing or extracted as
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5 9.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13663, pp. 138–155, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5_9

