Supplementary: Weakly Supervised Grounding for
VQA in Vision-Language Transformers
Aisha Urooj Khan1 , Hilde Kuehne2,3 , Chuang Gan3 , Niels Da Vitoria
Lobo1 , and Mubarak Shah1
1

2

University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA
Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Hesse, Germany
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge, MA, USA

In this supplementary document, we further discuss about the proposed work
as follows:
– Additional implementation details (section 1)
– Additional architecture details (section 2)
– Training objectives’ details (section 3)
– Grounding Performance Evaluation (section 4)
– Performance analysis w.r.t. varying detection threshold (section 5)
– Grounding accuracy w.r.t. each head (section 6)
– Results w.r.t. question type (section 7)
– Entities represented by visual capsules (section 8)
– Training parameters in our method (section 9)
– VQA accuracy comparison (section 10)
– Additional details about evaluation on VQA-HAT (section 11)
– Qualitative Results (section 12)

1

Additional Implementation details

Here, we discuss the additional design choices used in our model. The capsules
use routing to agree or disagree about the presence of certain entities in the input
image. This decision is independent of the question. For instance, if an image
has a bus and an elephant in it, the question cannot affect what is in the image.
To this end, the capsule routing is performed only once in our method. However,
depending on the question being asked, we may require selecting different entities
from the image. We achieve this by doing text-based capsule selection at each
layer. The capsule selection layer ϕ (equation 3 in the main paper) has shared
weights for all encoder layers. We use 8 16GB AMD GPUs for pretraining;
finetuning for GQA is performed on a single 16GB GPU. To pretrain with 48
capsules, the batch size of 640 is used.

2

Additional Architectural details

Language Encoder: The language encoder Le is composed of L transformer
encoder layers. Its input is a tokenized sentence Sl of length l. The language

