3D Equivariant Graph Implicit Functions: Appendices

A

Equivariance: Discussions and Proofs

A.1

From layer equivariance to model equivariance

We review the definition of the equivariance of the implicit function model in Section 3.
In Eq. (3), we show that equivariance is satisfied if the implicit function is locally
invariant to any Tg applied jointly to the observation X and the query p, for any X
and p. Invariance is a special case of equivariance, where the transformation Tg∗ on the
output domain is the identity function, i.e., the output is invariant regardless of the input
transformation Tg .
Here we clarify the use of layer equivariance in creating the equivariant implicit
function model. As in Eq. (4), the graph implicit function model Fgraph is composed of
the graph latent feature extractor Φgraph and the implicit decoder Ψ , where Φgraph can
be further decomposed to the point encoder ϕ and the graph local latent aggregator ψ.
We integrate the equivariant layers in ϕ and ψ that process the input point set X and
the queries p. As shown by the literature, the composition of two equivariant functions
is also an equivariant function [46]. Thus, the graph local feature extractor Φgraph that
stacks sequential equivariant graph layers in ϕ and ψ is equivariant. Note that all the
operations other than the graph convolutions involved in ϕ and ψ, such as the k-NN graph
extration and the farthest-point-sampling for the multi-scale feature, are equivariant to
the similarity transformations as well. At the end of all the equivariant graph layers in ϕ
and ψ, we apply the invariance function Ω to obtain the locally invariant latent feature.
The implicit decoder Ψ , which processes the invariant local latent feature and predicts the
occupancy probability, is simply a standard ReLU-MLP as the non-equivariant implicit
models. We do not include the query coordinate input p in the implicit decoder Ψ in
order to satisfy translation equivariance, while the local latent feature already contains
the position information. Since the local latent feature is locally invariant, the output
is locally invariant as well, which satisfies Eq. (3). Thus far, we have shown how the
equivariant graph layers help to build the equivariant implicit function model.
A.2

Extension to translation and scale equivariance

While existing vector-based equivariance methods in 3D vision [17,40] apply only to the
SO(3) group5 , we extend our method to be equivariant to the similarity transformation
group that further includes translation and scale transformations as subgroups.
Translation. The local graph structure is robust to rotation by design. The method can
further achieve numerically guaranteed translation equivariance simply by removing the
absolute coordinates input p from the graph layers in Eq. (5), keeping only the relative
positions as the spatial cue.
5

More generally, it is the O(3) group. Reflection is handled as well.

