Learning Structured Output Representation
using Deep Conditional Generative Models

Kihyuk Sohn∗†
Xinchen Yan†
Honglak Lee†
∗
NEC Laboratories America, Inc.
†
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
ksohn@nec-labs.com, {xcyan,honglak}@umich.edu

Abstract
Supervised deep learning has been successfully applied to many recognition problems. Although it can approximate a complex many-to-one function well when a
large amount of training data is provided, it is still challenging to model complex structured output representations that effectively perform probabilistic inference and make diverse predictions. In this work, we develop a deep conditional
generative model for structured output prediction using Gaussian latent variables.
The model is trained efficiently in the framework of stochastic gradient variational Bayes, and allows for fast prediction using stochastic feed-forward inference. In addition, we provide novel strategies to build robust structured prediction
algorithms, such as input noise-injection and multi-scale prediction objective at
training. In experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm in comparison to the deterministic deep neural network counterparts in
generating diverse but realistic structured output predictions using stochastic inference. Furthermore, the proposed training methods are complimentary, which
leads to strong pixel-level object segmentation and semantic labeling performance
on Caltech-UCSD Birds 200 and the subset of Labeled Faces in the Wild dataset.

1

Introduction

In structured output prediction, it is important to learn a model that can perform probabilistic inference and make diverse predictions. This is because we are not simply modeling a many-to-one
function as in classification tasks, but we may need to model a mapping from single input to many
possible outputs. Recently, the convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been greatly successful
for large-scale image classification tasks [17, 30, 27] and have also demonstrated promising results
for structured prediction tasks (e.g., [4, 23, 22]). However, the CNNs are not suitable in modeling a
distribution with multiple modes [32].
To address this problem, we propose novel deep conditional generative models (CGMs) for output
representation learning and structured prediction. In other words, we model the distribution of highdimensional output space as a generative model conditioned on the input observation. Building
upon recent development in variational inference and learning of directed graphical models [16,
24, 15], we propose a conditional variational auto-encoder (CVAE). The CVAE is a conditional
directed graphical model whose input observations modulate the prior on Gaussian latent variables
that generate the outputs. It is trained to maximize the conditional log-likelihood, and we formulate
the variational learning objective of the CVAE in the framework of stochastic gradient variational
Bayes (SGVB) [16]. In addition, we introduce several strategies, such as input noise-injection and
multi-scale prediction training methods, to build a more robust prediction model.
In experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm in comparison to the
deterministic neural network counterparts in generating diverse but realistic output predictions using
stochastic inference. We demonstrate the importance of stochastic neurons in modeling the structured output when the input data is partially provided. Furthermore, we show that the proposed
training schemes are complimentary, leading to strong pixel-level object segmentation and labeling
performance on Caltech-UCSD Birds 200 and the subset of Labeled Faces in the Wild dataset.
1

