Supplementary:BRNet: Exploring
Comprehensive Features for Monocular Depth
Estimation
Wencheng Han1 , Junbo Yin2 , Xiaogang Jin3 , Xiangdong Dai4 , and
Jianbing Shen1⋆ ,
1

SKL-IOTSC, Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
2
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology
3
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China
4
Guangdong OPPO Mobile Telecommunications Corp., Ltd

1

Results of Different Supervision Types

We compare the results of three training supervision types, M (Monocular videos),
S (Stereo image pairs) and MS (Monocular video and Stereo image pairs). As
shown in Table 2 and Fig. 1, BRNet with MS training achieves the best result
among the three types. The model trained on stereo image pairs shows better results in Abs Rel but worse results in other metrics than monocular video
training.

2

Improved Ground Truth

The evaluation method introduced by Eigen [1] for KITTI uses the projected
LIDAR points. However, it does not handle occlusions or moving objects, which
are very common because the cars are usually travelling. To alleviate these problems, [10] introduced a set of high-quality depth maps for the KITTI dataset,
which is made by five consecutive frames, and the moving objects are handled
by stereo pairs. The improved ground truth contains 652 frames from the Eigen
split, which is 93% of the total test frames (697). Following [3], we evaluate
our methods on these frames with improved ground truth and compare them to
several representative networks.
We employ the same error metrics from the standard evaluation and clip
the predicted depth to 80m to match the Eigen evaluation. As shown in Table 1, our methods trained by all the three supervision types achieve significant
improvements from our baseline work, outperforming all existing methods.

3

Effective of Post-Processing

Post-processing in depth-estimation introduced by [2] is a technique to improve
test time results. Specifically, with post-process, the model will run each test
⋆

Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen, email: shenjianbingcg@email.com.

