AssistQ: Affordance-centric Question-driven
Task Completion for Egocentric Assistant
(Supplementary Material)
Benita Wong⋆ , Joya Chen∗ , You Wu∗ , Stan Weixian Lei,
Dongxing Mao, Difei Gao, and Mike Zheng Shou†
Show Lab, National University of Singapore
benitawong@u.nus.edu {joyachen97,mike.zheng.shou}@gmail.com

1

Dataset Quality Control

To ensure the quality of videos and scripts, we worked with participants closely
(e.g. dissemination of comprehensive submission guidelines, checking of device
before filming, hands-on recording guidance, review of transcripts). Researchers
also conduct a quality check on the recorded videos before acceptance. In fact,
2-3% of videos have been rejected due to undesired quality (e.g. unclear video
instructions). To ensure the quality of QA pairs and annotation, AssistQ also
adopted all 4 quality control measures referenced in TGIF-QA [3]: gold standard
annotation to help annotators to understand requirements, rejection and reviews
(each video has been audited by at least 1 more person). The high quality of
our data can be further confirmed by the high human performances at 95.8%
recall@1.

2

Dataset Collection Source

We noticed that many virtual world simulators could help to produce a clean
dataset, but we hold on collecting data in the real world. The main reason is
that ultimately we want to deploy such AI assistant models in real environments
such as smart glasses. To this end, at least we need to have testing data in real
environment. Regarding training data, we agree it is a promising research direction to leverage a virtual environment. However, due to the significant domain
gap between the existing virtual environments (e.g., AI2Thor [4], AI Habitat [7])
and the real env, real-world training data at the scale provided by us is needed to
adapt model trained in virtual to real. In this paper’s scope, we focus on models
trained only on the real environment; we consider it as future work to pre-train
in the virtual environment first and then fine-tuning it on real-world data.
⋆

Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Author.

