1

Supplementary material for “HIVE: Evaluating the
Human Interpretability of Visual Explanations”
In this document, we provide additional details on some sections of the main
paper. Code is available at https://princetonvisualai.github.io/HIVE.
Section A: We provide more information on the evaluation tasks.
Section B: We provide more information on the four evaluated methods and
the modifications we made to their original explanation form.
Section C:: We provide more information about our human studies.
Section D: We report additional results and analyses.
• Section D.1: We supplement Section 5.2 of the main paper and discuss the
agreement study results with vs. without examples from the predicted class.
• Section D.2: We supplement Section 5.3 of the main paper and provide
more details on our analysis with automatic evaluation metrics.
• Section D.3: We supplement Section 5.4 of the main paper and discuss the
participants’ similarity ratings and decisions. We also provide a plot of the
participant vs. ProtoPNet prototype similarity ratings.
• Section D.4: We supplement Section 5.5 of the main paper and provide the
full results of our subjective evaluation.
• Section D.5: We supplement Section 5.6 of the main paper and provide the
full results of our interpretability-accuracy tradeoff study.
Section E: We show the simple decision tree model for fruit classification we
used to introduce ProtoTree.
Section F: We show snapshots of our full user interface.

A

Details on the evaluation tasks

Agreement task. For each image, we show one model prediction-explanation
pair and ask the participants how confident they are in the model’s prediction.
We show 10 images in total (5 correct, 5 incorrect predictions in random order).
Participants rate their confidence in the given prediction on a 4-point scale (1:
confident prediction is incorrect, 2: somewhat confident prediction is incorrect,
3: somewhat confident prediction is correct, 4: confident prediction is correct).
Distinction task. For each image, we show four model prediction-explanation
pairs for it (in random order) and ask the participants to identify the correct
prediction based on the explanations. For GradCAM [10] and BagNet [1], participants are tasked with 10 sample images (5 correct and 5 incorrect predictions),
each of which is shown with four heatmaps. On correctly predicted samples, the
four heatmaps correspond to the top-4 predicted classes. On incorrectly predicted ones, we show heatmaps for the top-3 predicted classes and the heatmap
of the ground-truth class. For ProtoPNet [2], we show four correctly predicted
samples in total. Each sample is presented with four explanations corresponding to the top-4 predicted classes. We reduce the total number of samples and
focus on correctly predicted samples due to the complexity of the ProtoPNet

