Exploring the Devil in Graph Spectral
Domain for 3D Point Cloud Attacks
Qianjiang Hu, Daizong Liu, and Wei Hu(B)
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, No. 128,
Zhongguancun North Street, Beijing, China
{hqjpku,forhuwei}@pku.edu.cn, dzliu@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract. With the maturity of depth sensors, point clouds have
received increasing attention in various applications such as autonomous
driving, robotics, surveillance, etc., while deep point cloud learning models have shown to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Existing attack
methods generally add/delete points or perform point-wise perturbation
over point clouds to generate adversarial examples in the data space,
which may neglect the geometric characteristics of point clouds. Instead,
we propose point cloud attacks from a new perspective—Graph Spectral Domain Attack (GSDA), aiming to perturb transform coeﬃcients in
the graph spectral domain that corresponds to varying certain geometric structure. In particular, we naturally represent a point cloud over a
graph, and adaptively transform the coordinates of points into the graph
spectral domain via graph Fourier transform (GFT) for compact representation. We then analyze the inﬂuence of diﬀerent spectral bands on
the geometric structure of the point cloud, based on which we propose to
perturb the GFT coeﬃcients in a learnable manner guided by an energy
constraint loss function. Finally, the adversarial point cloud is generated
by transforming the perturbed spectral representation back to the data
domain via the inverse GFT (IGFT). Experimental results demonstrate
the eﬀectiveness of the proposed GSDA in terms of both imperceptibility
and attack success rates under a variety of defense strategies. The code
is available at https://github.com/WoodwindHu/GSDA.
Keywords: Point cloud · Adversarial attack · Graph spectral domain

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples [12,43], which are indistinguishable from legitimate ones by adding trivial perturbations, but lead to incorrect model prediction. Many eﬀorts have
been made into the attacks on the 2D image ﬁeld [8,22,30,46], which often add
Q. Hu and D. Liu—Contributed equally to this work.
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Contract No. 61972009.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13663, pp. 229–248, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5_14

