Supplementary Materials:
Zero-Shot Attribute Attacks on Fine-Grained
Recognition Models
Nasim Shafiee and Ehsan Elhamifar
Northeastern University, Boston, USA
{shafiee.n,e.elhamifar}@northeastern.edu

1

More Details on CAUP Performance

In the main paper, we investigated the effect of CAUP `2 -norm attack on seen
and unseen accuracies and compared it against UAP [2] and GAP [1]. Cd-UAP [3]
is another important baseline which generates class-wise UAPs and can not handle zero-shot scenarios(unseen classes). Hence, it is not applicable as a baseline
for a fair comparison.
Figure 1 shows the fooling percentage as a function of `2 -norm perturbation for
different attacks (this figure is a detailed version of Figure 2 at the main paper).
From the granularity perspective, we divided the attacks to two categories. The
first category includes UAP, GAP and random attacks, which generate imagelevel perturbations. The second category consists of fine-grained attacks with
four different settings of the CAUP attack: i) Uniform is a CAUP attack with
uniform {wac }a∈A instead of trainable class-attribute function, ii) CAUP-CE
represents the CAUP attack with the Cross-Entropy loss function iii) CAUPconf2 is a CAUP attack with the Ranking loss function and δ = 2 iv) CAUP is
the default version of attack with the Ranking loss function and δ = 8.
On all datasets CAUP attack (type iv, which is our proposed attack in the paper)
outperforms all attacks of the first category of methods (UAP, GAP, Random).
These results show that the first category of attacks fail to fool the zero-shot
fine-grained model properly, as they do not leverage fine attribute models. So,
they are not a good suitable as (zero-shot) fine-grained perturbations.
On all datasets, CAUP-CE underperforms other CAUP versions. This confirms
the fact that Ranking loss is a stronger tool to attack zero-shot fine-grained
models. While we trained both CAUP and CAUP-conf2 on Ranking loss, CAUP
shows a better performance than CAUP-conf2 on CUB and SUN and similar
performance on AWA2. We can conclude that a higher confidence value makes
the `2 -norm CAUP attack to perform better. We additionally provide the performances on the harmonic mean H for both seen and unseen scenarios as a
function of the magnitude (`2 -norm and `∞ -norm) of the perturbation:
H =2×

f ools × f oolu
f ools + f oolu

(1)

