Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Monocular
3D Object Detection via Self-Training
Zhenyu Li1 , Zehui Chen2 , Ang Li3 , Liangji Fang3 , Qinhong Jiang3 ,
Xianming Liu1 , and Junjun Jiang1B
1

Harbin Institute of Technology
University of Science and Technology
3
SenseTime Research
{zhenyuli17, csxm, jiangjunjun}@hit.edu.cn lovesnow@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{liang1, fangliangji, jiangqinhong}@senseauto.com
2

1

Dataset Comparisons

To provide more intuitive comparisons among different datasets (e.g., KITTI [3],
nuScense [1] and Lyft [4]), we present images with projected ground-truth labels
in Fig. 1. One can easily observe cameras utilized in these datasets have different
parameters, which are reflected in the image resolutions, FOV, etc. This work
focuses on designing a general Mono3D UDA framework and solving the severe
depth-shift caused by misaligned camera intrinsic parameters, which is the most
crucial problem in Mono3D UDA. However, there are still numerous unsolved
issues such as different image color styles, various distributions of object dimensions, different distributions of object depth, etc. Our proposed STMono3D can
be a well-developed baseline for future research.

2

Visualizations of Pseudo Labels

Here, we present more visualizations of pseudo labels generated by the teacher
model during the training stage. The images show the depth-shift issue caused
by the misalignment of camera parameters can be well-solved. The reasonable
pseudo labels provide regular supervision on the target domain and achieve
Mono3D UDA in a teacher-student paradigm. In addition, we can find there
is still a slight error of prediction locations or dimensions that can be improved
by further development of Mono3D methods and enhancement of the UDA algorithms. There is still tremedous room for improvement of the Mono3D UDA.

3

Detailed Training Settings

In this section, we introduce more detailed training settings. As for the model,
we follow the basic config provided in MMDetection3D [2].The only modification
lies in the scaling of predicted object depth based on the pixel size (GAMS
introduced in our paper). We then summary all the runtime settings in Tab. 1,
including the number of interations, training schedule, threshold changing, etc.

