A Kendall Shape Space Approach to 3D
Shape Estimation from 2D Landmarks
Martha Paskin1(B) , Daniel Baum1 , Mason N. Dean2 ,
and Christoph von Tycowicz1,3
1

Zuse Institute Berlin, Berlin, Germany
{paskin,baum,vontycowicz}@zib.de
2
City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
mndean@cityu.edu.hk
3
Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany
Abstract. 3D shapes provide substantially more information than 2D
images. However, the acquisition of 3D shapes is sometimes very diﬃcult or even impossible in comparison with acquiring 2D images, making
it necessary to derive the 3D shape from 2D images. Although this is,
in general, a mathematically ill-posed problem, it might be solved by
constraining the problem formulation using prior information. Here, we
present a new approach based on Kendall’s shape space to reconstruct
3D shapes from single monocular 2D images. The work is motivated
by an application to study the feeding behavior of the basking shark,
an endangered species whose massive size and mobility render 3D shape
data nearly impossible to obtain, hampering understanding of their feeding behaviors and ecology. 2D images of these animals in feeding position,
however, are readily available. We compare our approach with state-ofthe-art shape-based approaches, both on human stick models and on
shark head skeletons. Using a small set of training shapes, we show that
the Kendall shape space approach is substantially more robust than previous methods and results in plausible shapes. This is essential for the
motivating application in which specimens are rare and therefore only
few training shapes are available.
Keywords: 3D shape estimation · 2D-to-3D · Shape space approach ·
Kendall’s shape space · Sparse data

1

Introduction

The reconstruction of a 3D shape from 2D images is an important problem of
computer vision that has been the subject of research for decades [6,34]. It is a
widespread challenge with sample applications including motion recognition and
tracking, autonomous driving, as well as robot-assisted surgery and navigation.
Generally, estimating the 3D shape of an object from single monocular 2D images
is an ill-posed problem in the sense of Hadamard. To tackle this problem, several
approaches have been proposed, the choice of which greatly depends on the type
and amount of data, and the application.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 363–379, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_21

