Supplementary Material for the paper:
“The One Where They Reconstructed
3D Humans and Environments in TV Shows”
Georgios Pavlakos⇤ , Ethan Weber⇤ , Matthew Tancik, Angjoo Kanazawa
University of California, Berkeley

In this document we provide more details and analysis that were not included
in the main paper due to space constraints. More specifically,
1. we discuss the results of the supplementary video (Section 1),
2. we include details about the captured/released data (Section 2),
3. we give statistics on camera/human distributions for our scenes (Section 3),
4. we discuss gaze estimation and evaluation (Section 4),
5. we include more qualitative results (Section 5),
6. we provide more details about the SfM optimization (Section 6),
7. we provide more details about NeRF-W training (Section 7),
8. we discuss the Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) evaluation (Section 8),
9. we present more experiments on the quality of estimated cameras (Section 9),
10. we discuss the importance of repetition in the data (Section 10),
11. we present experiments on temporal human reconstruction (Section 11),
12. we discuss our experimental evaluation (Section 12), and finally,
13. we include more details about the optimization procedures (Section 13).
We also encourage the readers to watch our supplementary video.

1

Results video

The included supplementary video provides extensive qualitative results from our
3D reconstruction of humans and scenes in TV show environments. We include
results for a) our camera and structure recovery (Sections 3.1 and 3.2 of the main
manuscript), b) our calibrated multi-shot human reconstruction (Section 3.3 of
the main manuscript), and c) our contextual monocular human reconstruction
(Section 3.4 of the main manuscript).
Moreover, although we follow the SMPLify paradigm [1] for these contextual
results, as we discuss in the main manuscript (Section 3.4), we believe that our
context can also inform other human reconstruction methods. To demonstrate
this, we also provide results when using HuMoR [18] with our context, which
leads to contextual temporal reconstructions. For this, we use the context we
have estimated to inform the HuMoR optimization. This helps bypass some of the
HuMoR assumptions (e.g., static camera, fixed focal length), and demonstrates
realistic contextual reconstructions. We hope that this will motivate other human
reconstruction approaches to be applied on this type of data, and benefit from
our context.

