Generating Natural images with direct patch
Distributions Matching
Supplementary material
Ariel Elnekave and Yair Weiss
Hebrew University Jerusalem
{Ariel.Elnekave, Yair.Weiss}@mail.huji.ac.il

This document contains supplementary material on our method for Generating natural images by Patch Distribution Matching (GPDM).

1

Python implementation

Our python implementation of GPDM is available at
https://github.com/ariel415el/GPDM.
All GPDM results generated in this document and in the main paper are generated via the python scripts in the ’scripts’ sub-folder. Please Consult the
README.md file for additional instructions.
All our experiments with GPNN were done with our implementation available
at https://github.com/ariel415el/Efficient-GPNN.

2

Method parameters description

In this section we describe our method’s configurations in more details As detailed in the paper. GPDM is an iterative multi-scale process for generating
images and has multiple configurations controlling the output given the inputs.
pyramid factor and coarse dimension: These parameters control the number and sizes of the different scales in which the GPDM works. The input image
is repeatedly scaled down by pyramid factor until scaling it will result in one of
its dimensions to be less than coarse dimension. All the intermediate images
are used as the multi scale pyramid on which the algorithm works.
scale factors: This parameter defines the aspect ratio of the output. It is
relevant mostly for the texture synthesis and retargeting tasks as in all other
tasks the output image should have the same size as the input.
init mode and noise sigma: These parameters effect the first initial guess
of the algorithm. init mode can instruct the algorithm to start the optimization
from a blank image, from the target image or from another image. noise sigma
defines the amount of Gaussian pixel noise added to the initial guess in order to
increase variability.
learning rate and num optimization steps: These parameters effect the
optimization of the synthesis image at each scale. specifically it defines the number of SGD steps and the step size used for optimizing SWD between the images.

