IntereStyle: Encoding an Interest Region for
Robust StyleGAN Inversion
Seung-Jun Moon1 and Gyeong-Moon Park1,2
1

A

KLleon Tech. seungjun.moon@klleon.io
2
Kyung Hee University
gmpark@khu.ac.kr

Training Details

In this section, we introduce the details of our training scheme for human and
animal facial models.
Human At the preprocessing steps, we use Graphonomy [6] for selecting the
interest region. Among 20 labels in Graphonomy, the label ‘hair’, ‘face’, and
‘sunglasses’ is contained in the interest region. We include the label ‘sunglasses’
for the following two reasons: First, a considerable number of images in the
training dataset, which is used in training StyleGAN, contains faces with glasses
on. Thus, StyleGAN is capable of generating various distributions of glasses.
Second, in most cases, glasses are overlapped with the interest region, i.e., facial
region. Consequently, excluding the region for glasses occurs undesirable artifacts on the interest region for inverting real-world images with glasses. For the
dilation, we empirically set the size of Gaussian Kernel to be (50,50) to contain
the boundary information. We show examples of preprocessed images in Figure
1. We set Limage as below:
Limage = 1 · L2 + 0.8 · LPIPS + 0.1 · LID
Animal We use DEtection Transformer [4] for selecting the interest region.
We use every part which consists of the animal as the interest region. In the
animal domain, we use LM oCo instead of LID , which is based on the MoCo v2
[8] network. Since the image resolution of the animal dataset is half of the human
dataset, we set the size of Gaussian Kernel to be (25,25) for the dilation, which
is a half size compared to FFHQ. We set Limage as below:
Limage = 1 · L2 + 0.8 · LPIPS + 0.5 · LM oCo

We use Ranger [19] optimizer with learning rate 10 4 , and train the model
for 500,000 steps with batch size 4. We save the model per every 10,000 steps,
and lastly, select the model with the lowest validation Limage . We train on the
single V100 GPU in an NVIDIA DGX1 machine, which takes around two weeks

