Neural Scene Decoration
from a Single Photograph
–Supplementary Material–
Hong-Wing Pang1 , Yingshu Chen1 , Phuoc-Hieu Le2 , Binh-Son Hua2 ,
Duc Thanh Nguyen2,3 , and Sai-Kit Yeung1
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
VinAI Research, Vietnam
3
Deakin University

Abstract. In this supplementary material, we first present more qualitative results with additional analysis on the diversity, background impact,
an additional comparison to text-guided image synthesis (Section 1). We
then provide an additional ablation study on our discriminator design
(Section 2) along with complementary details of our user study (Section 3).
Finally, we describe in detail our proposed architecture (Section 4) and
its implementation (Section 5).

1

Qualitative Results

1.1

Diversity of generated images

Our method achieves diversity in the following ways. First, the input layout
controls the output diversity. One can change the input layout to change how the
scene is decorated. Second, given the same background and layout, diversity in
the appearance of scene objects can still be obtained. Technically, this is achieved
by changing the initial latent code of the generator and finetune the generator.
A current limitation is that our model ignores the noise vector, limiting
diversity. This problem is also reported in pix2pix [2]. Revising our network
architecture for greater diversity would be a future work, e.g., use the noise
injection by OASIS [10].
Same background with different layouts. We show qualitative results of our
method using different layouts on the same background image, demonstrating the
diversity of generated contents. Several results of this experiment are presented
in Figure 1. As can be seen, our model can provide plausible renderings given
different layouts.
Same background with same layouts. Here we show results of our method using
the same background and layout. The diversity is now controlled by the initial
latent code of the generator. The results are presented in Figure 2. As can be
seen, our model can provide plausible diversity in the object appearance.

