Supplementary Materials for “Class Is Invariant
to Context and Vice Versa: On Learning
Invariance for Out-Of-Distribution
Generalization”
Jiaxin Qi1⋆ , Kaihua Tang1 , Qianru Sun2 , Xian-Sheng Hua3 , and Hanwang
Zhang1
1

Nanyang Technological University
Singapore Management University
3
Damo Academy, Alibaba Group
jiaxin003@e.ntu.edu.sg, kaihua.tang@ntu.edu.sg, qianrusun@smu.edu.sg,
xshua@outlook.com, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg
2

This supplementary material will provide further details for the main paper,
including A. Theoretical justifications, B. More experimental details, C. More
quantitative results, D. More qualitative results. Specifically, A.1 is for the preliminary knowledge about group theory and causal graph, which we will use to
justify the disentanglement of class and context and to define the classification;
A.2 is for proving the disentanglement between xc and xt ; A.3 is for justifying
that Inverse Probability Weighting can realize robust classification; A.4 is for
justifying that IRMCon can achieve ϕt (x) = xt ; B.1 is for more dataset details; B.2 is for more implementation details; B.3 provides more analysis for the
Fig. 6. and Fig. 7. in the main paper and how does our IRMCon-IPW superior to
traditional context estimation methods; C.1. is for illustrating the reproduced
results on context biased datasets; C.2 is for illustrating the bad performance of
vanilla ERM (without strong augmentations); C.3 is for illustrating the domain
gap results with pretrained backbone (for complement); D is for illustrating the
successful cases of our IRMCon and IRMCon-IPW; We summarize our algorithm
at the end of Section A.

A

Theoretical Justifications

A.1

Preliminaries

Notations. In group theory, we use capital letters to denote sets and lowercase
letters to denote elements. → is the mapping between sets, 7→ the mapping
between elements. × is the Cartesian Product. In the causal graph, capital letters
denote variables and corresponding lowercase letters denote their values.
Group. A group is a nonempty set G equipped with a binary operation (g1 , g2 ) 7→
g1 g2 (we omit the symbol of the operation), where g1 , g2 ∈ G, satisfying the following four axioms: Closure: ∀g1 , g2 ∈ G, g1 g2 ∈ G; Identity: There exists an
⋆

Corresponding author: jiaxin003@e.ntu.edu.sg

