Supplementary Materials for
Waymo Open Dataset:
Panoramic Video Panoptic Segmentation
Jieru Mei1? , Alex Zihao Zhu2 , Xinchen Yan2 , Hang Yan2 , Siyuan Qiao3
Yukun Zhu3 , Liang-Chieh Chen3 , and Henrik Kretzschmar2
1

Johns Hopkins University

2

Waymo LLC

3

Google Research

In the supplementary materials, we provide additional dataset statistics
(Sec. 1), the semantic categories definition (Sec. 2), and video visualizations for
our dataset annotations and baseline predictions (see other attachments). We
also provide additional information about the panorama generation (Sec. 3), and
discuss the proposed weighted STQ (wSTQ) in Sec. 4. Finally, we discuss the
current limitations (failure modes) of our baselines and the challenges presented
in our dataset in Sec. 5.

1

Additional Dataset Statistics

In this section, we provide more detailed statistics of our WOD-PVPS dataset,
including instance association quality (Sec. 1.1) and the distribution of object
instances (Sec. 1.2).
1.1

Instance Association Quality

As mentioned in the main paper, we exploit the existing 3D and 2D bounding
box annotations in WOD [6] to associate instance IDs across cameras and frames.
In this subsection, we analyze the effect of 3D and 2D bounding box associations
(i.e., step 2 and step 3 of Fig. 4 in main paper).
On the training set, we have 580k object instances in total with 207 instances
per sequence. Our 3D and 2D association assigns 376k and 161k object instances
with unique IDs within each sequence, respectively. The remaining 43k object
instances (7.4% of the population) are treated as crowd and we exclude them in
our experiments (e.g., loss and metric computation).
On the validation set, we have 120k object instances in total with 6k instances
per sequence on average. Our 3D and 2D association assigns 79k and 31k object
instances with unique IDs, respectively. Similarly, the remaining 10k instances
(8.3% of the population) are treated as crowd and we exclude them in our
experiments.
To provide additional references for the instance Association Quality (AQ),
we treat the final assignment of instance labels as ground-truth (which we show
in the video demo) and compute the AQ metric on the 3D-only and 2D-only
?

Work done as an intern at Waymo.

