Bottom Up Top Down Detection Transformers
for Language Grounding in Images and Point
Clouds
Ayush Jain†1 , Nikolaos Gkanatsios†1 , Ishita Mediratta§2 , and Katerina
Fragkiadaki1
1

Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Meta AI

1

Supplementary file

1.1

Overview

In Section 1.2, we provide implementation details for BUTD-DETR on both the
3D and the 2D domain. In Section 1.3, we provide a detailed analysis of our
results on SR3D, NR3D [2] and ScanRefer benchmarks [4]. In Section 1.4 we
ablate the choice of the detection backbone and experiment with unfreezing it
during the referential grounding training stage. In Section 1.5, we show the effect
of corrupting the detector’s proposals at training time. In Section 1.6, we discuss
training with detection prompts that contain negative labels. We evaluate our
model as a language-modulated object detector in Section 1.7. In Section 1.8, we
show more qualitative results on both 3D point clouds and 2D images, including
failure cases.
1.2

Implementation details

We report here architecture choices as well as training hyperparameters. We
implement BUTD-DETR in PyTorch. For the 3D version, the point cloud is
encoded with PointNet++ [18] using the same hyperparameters as in [14], pretrained on ScanNet [5]. We use the last layer’s features, resulting in 1024 visual
tokens. The detected boxes are encoded using their spatial and categorical features. Specifically, we encode each box’s coordinates with an MLP, then we
concatenate this vector with projected RoBERTa [13] embeddings and feed to
another MLP to obtain the box embeddings. For the cross-modality encoder,
we use NE = 3 layers. All attention layers are implemented using standard keyvalue attention [20,15]. In the decoder, the queries are formed from the 256 most
confident visual tokens. To compute this confidence score, each visual token is
fed to an MLP to give a scalar value. We supervise these values using Focal Loss
[12]. Specifically, since each visual token corresponds to a point with known coordinates, we associate visual tokens to ground-truth object centers and keep the
†
§

Equal contribution, order decided by np.random.rand
Work done during an internship at CMU

