Appendix for UniMiss
Yutong Xie1[0000−0002−6644−1250] , Jianpeng Zhang2 , Yong Xia2 , and Qi Wu1⋆
1

2

1

The University of Adelaide, Australia
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical
University, China
yutong.xie678@gmail.com;qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

Overview

In this document, we provide more discussions and experimental details to supplement the main submission. We first continue to discuss the necessity of switchable patch embedding (SPE) module (Section 2). We then give more details
for the downstream tasks, including the implementation details and architectures (Section 3). Finally, we provide an intuitive explanation of the proposed
volume-slice consistency mechanism (Section 4).

2

Necessity of SPE (Cont.)

To further explain the necessity of the SPE module, we compared the pyramid
U-like medical Transformer (MiT) to two variants without a SPE module. For
the variant 1, we directly flatten the 2D/3D images to a sequence based on the
pixels/voxels level and then use a linear layer for the embedding. Such a crude
flattening operation suffers the very high computation complexity and memory
requirements, especially for 3D images. Thus, it is hard to perform the variant 1
for quantitative comparisons. For the variant 2, we perform a naive embedding
strategy to reduce the complexity. We first down-sample (for encoder)/up-sample
(for decoder) the 2D/3D images by using a parameter free interpolation, then
flatten them into a sequence based on the pixels/voxels level, and finally use a
linear layer for both 2D and 3D embedding. The results in Table 1 show that MiT
with the SPE module is significantly superior to the naive embedding strategy
(i.e. variant 2) whenever with or without using the pre-training. It suggests
that our SPE is better than the parameter-free interpolation and linear layer.
The reason may be that the strided convolution with a large kernel is able to
model the local continuity of 2D/3D images, which cannot be implemented by
the linear layer.

3

Downstream Tasks

3.1

Implementation Details

In Table 2, we provide the implementation details of six downstream datasets,
including the task type, modality, number of training and test cases, loss func⋆

Corresponding author.

