1

A

Appendix

A.1

Additional Ablation Results

Table A.1 is the ViT-B counterpart of Table 2 on backbone adaptation. The
observations are similar to that of ViT-L: comparing with the baseline using no
propagation (“none”), various propagation strategies show good gains.
Table A.2 presents Table 5 with additional details about FLOPs, parameters,
and inference time, plotted in Figure 3.
Table A.3 is the ablation on pre-training strategies for LVIS. Similar to Table 4, MAE pre-training has large gains over supervised pre-training.
Figure A.1 is the LVIS counterpart of Figure 3. The trends are similar to those
in COCO, while the gain of IN-21K supervised pre-training is larger because it
significantly improves rare category detection in LVIS.
Figure A.2 is the RetinaNet [14] counterpart of Figure 3, showing the trade-off
between accuracy and model size. Here, we evaluate ViTDet with a one-stage
RetinaNet [14] detector head and compare it to using Swin and MViTv2 as
hierarchical backbones, all without hyper-parameter tuning. Compared to using
Mask R-CNN and Cascade R-CNN (Table 5 and Figure 3), we observe similar
trends with RetinaNet. In particular, our plain-backbone detector presents better
scaling behavior (e.g. ViT-H gains +3.4 APbox over MViTv2-H). These results
suggest that the proposed training recipe transfers well to different detectors and
that our proposed plain backbone adaptations are general and can likely work
with even more detection architectures.
A.2

Implementation Details

1
1 1 1
Architectures. We build a simple feature pyramid of scales { 32
, 16
, 8 , 4 } (see
1
Sec. 3). The 32 scale is built by stride-2 2×2 max pooling (average pooling or
1
convolution works similarly). The 16
scale simply uses the ViT’s final feature
1
1
map. Scale 8 (or 4 ) is built by one (or two) 2×2 deconvolution layer(s) with
stride=2. In the 41 scale case, the first deconvolution is followed by LayerNorm
(LN) [1] and GeLU [12]. Then for each pyramid level, we apply a 1×1 convolution
with LN to reduce dimension to 256 and then a 3×3 convolution also with LN,
similar to the per-level processing of FPN [13].
We study three detection frameworks: Mask R-CNN [11], Cascade Mask RCNN [3] and RetinaNet [14]. For Mask R-CNN and Cascade Mask R-CNN,
we incorporate some common best practices developed since they [11,3] were
presented years ago. We use 2 hidden convolution layers for the RPN and 4
hidden convolution layers for the RoI heads as per [16]. These hidden convolution
layers are followed by LN. For all three detection frameworks, We use the same
detection implementation for both plain and hierarchical backbones.
We use a patch size of 16 for all ViT backbones. As ViT-H in [6] by default
has a patch size of 14, after pre-training we interpolate the patch embedding
filters from 14×14×3 to 16×16×3.

