Supplementary Material
GIPSO: Geometrically Informed Propagation for
Online Adaptation in 3D LiDAR Segmentation
Cristiano Saltori1 , Evgeny Krivosheev1 , Stéphane Lathuilière2 , Nicu Sebe1 ,
Fabio Galasso3 , Giuseppe Fiameni4 , Elisa Ricci1,5 , and Fabio Poiesi5
1

2

1

University of Trento, Trento, Italy
LTCI, Télécom-Paris, Intitute Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France
3
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy
4
NVIDIA AI Technology Center
5
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
cristiano.saltori@unitn.it

Introduction

We provide supplementary material in support of the main paper. The content is
organized as follows:
– Sec. 2 reports the architecture details of the main modules used in GIPSO;
– Sec. 3 provides additional ablations of GIPSO, analysing the performance
with a different propagation size and time-window length;
– Sec. 4 goes beyond GIPSO and shows that our proposed strategies can be
used to improve baselines in SF-OUDA;
– Sec. 5 reports the class mapping used in our experiments for compatibility
between synthetic and real domains;
– In Sec. 6, additional qualitative results are reported on Synth4D → SemanticKITTI, SynLiDAR → SemanticKITTI, and Synth4D → nuScenes.

2

Architecture details

We implemented GIPSO in PyTorch by using minkowski/sparse convolutions
in MinkowskiEngine [4]. For the backbone and segmentation network we used
the existing implementation of MinkUNet18 [4] by setting the dimension of the
input space to D = 3, i.e. the dimensionality of an input point cloud. For the
self-supervised temporal consistency loss (Sec. 4, Eq. 6) we implemented the
encoder h() with two consecutive MinkowskiConvolution layers interleaved by
a ReLU activation function and a batch-normalization layer. The input size of
the first layer is set to 96 - the output feature size of the backbone network while the output size is set to 128. The last encoding layer is set to have the
same input and output size of 128. We implemented the predictor f () with the
same structure of h() with the difference that input and output sizes are set to
128. In both h() and f () we used a kernel of size 1, biases activated and D = 3.

