Revisiting a kNN-based Image Classiﬁcation
System with High-capacity Storage
(Supplementary materials)
Kengo Nakata, Youyang Ng, Daisuke Miyashita, Asuka Maki,
Yu-Chieh Lin, and Jun Deguchi
Kioxia Corporation, Kawasaki, Japan
{kengo1.nakata, youyang.ng, daisuke1.miyashita, asuka.maki,
yuchieh.lin, jun.deguchi}@kioxia.com

A

Applications of our system

Our system registers feature maps extracted from images and their corresponding
labels to the database, as described in Section 3.2 of the main paper. A feature
map can be linked with not only a single label but multiple labels as well.
For example, when extracting a feature map from a cat image, our system can
register not only the cat label but also the labels tabby (the subcategory) and
mammal or animal (the broad category or superclass) with the feature map.
In the main paper, we introduced the procedure of linear search for all feature
maps in the storage when calculating the distance with the feature maps of
the query image. Our system can use multiple registered labels to reﬁne the
search according to the classiﬁcation setting. For instance, in the case of an
animal classiﬁcation problem, our system can selectively list the ﬁles of image
feature maps linked to the animal label before the distance calculation. Then, by
loading only the listed image feature maps to the computing device, the distance
calculation can be processed even with limited memory resources.
By analyzing the number of references for each sample in the database, we
can identify frequently or rarely referred samples, and interpret what knowledge
is currently required or unnecessary. The information on the number of references
can be used for prioritization when verifying the validity of stored knowledge. For
example, when checking labels of samples within a limited amount of time, users
can review the labels of frequently referred samples ﬁrst, instead of checking
all the samples in the storage. Moreover, if users need to reduce the storage
size, rarely referred samples can be deleted from the storage like pruning model
parameters.
In addition, the inference time of our system is as short as a few milliseconds,
as shown in Fig. 5 of the main paper. Therefore, we believe that our system can be
implemented in real-time applications, e.g., infrastructure monitoring systems,
where objects to be detected change temporally and need to be identiﬁed in real
time without training. Our system can log the samples referred for inference,
along with the original images and ﬁle names. When some anomaly or error
occurs, operators can eﬀectively investigate the cause later by checking the logs.

