Intrinsic Neural Fields: Learning
Functions on Manifolds
Lukas Koestler1 , Daniel Grittner1 , Michael Moeller2 , Daniel Cremers1 ,
and Zorah Lähner2(B)
1

Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany
2
Universität Siegen, Siegen, Germany
zorah.laehner@uni-siegen.de

Abstract. Neural ﬁelds have gained signiﬁcant attention in the computer vision community due to their excellent performance in novel view
synthesis, geometry reconstruction, and generative modeling. Some of
their advantages are a sound theoretic foundation and an easy implementation in current deep learning frameworks. While neural ﬁelds have been
applied to signals on manifolds, e.g., for texture reconstruction, their
representation has been limited to extrinsically embedding the shape
into Euclidean space. The extrinsic embedding ignores known intrinsic
manifold properties and is inﬂexible wrt. Transfer of the learned function. To overcome these limitations, this work introduces intrinsic neural
ﬁelds, a novel and versatile representation for neural ﬁelds on manifolds.
Intrinsic neural ﬁelds combine the advantages of neural ﬁelds with the
spectral properties of the Laplace-Beltrami operator. We show theoretically that intrinsic neural ﬁelds inherit many desirable properties of the
extrinsic neural ﬁeld framework but exhibit additional intrinsic qualities,
like isometry invariance. In experiments, we show intrinsic neural ﬁelds
can reconstruct high-ﬁdelity textures from images with state-of-the-art
quality and are robust to the discretization of the underlying manifold.
We demonstrate the versatility of intrinsic neural ﬁelds by tackling various applications: texture transfer between deformed shapes & diﬀerent
shapes, texture reconstruction from real-world images with view dependence, and discretization-agnostic learning on meshes and point clouds.

1

Introduction

Neural ﬁelds have grown incredibly popular for novel view synthesis since the
breakthrough work by Mildenhall et al. [29]. They showed that neural radiance ﬁelds together with diﬀerentiable volume rendering can be used to reconstruct scenes and often yield photorealistic renderings from novel viewpoints. This
inspired work in related ﬁelds, e.g., human shape modeling [34], shape and texture
L. Koestler and D. Grittner—Contributed equally.

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1 36.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 622–639, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_36

