Mind the Gap in Distilling StyleGANs
Guodong Xu1 , Yuenan Hou2 , Ziwei Liu3 , and Chen Change Loy3
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
xg018@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, houyuenan@pjlab.org.cn,
{ziwei.liu, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

1

Implementation Details

Training Hyperparameters. For the mapping network mimicking of the first
stage, we use Adam as the optimizer with a initial learning rate of 0.05. We train
for 50k steps and the batch size is set as 4096. For the normal GAN training
of the second stage, we use Adam optimizer with a initial learning rate of 0.002
and 450k iterations. For the α that controls the offset along latent direction, we
sample it from a Gaussian distribution N (0, 5). We set λGAN , λrgb , λlpips and
λLD to be 1, 3, 3 and 30, respectively. The features that are used to compute
LD loss come from the outputs of 64/128/256 resolution blocks.
Evaluation Metrics. Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) is a commonly used
metric to evaluate the realism of generated images. The generated images and
real images are fed into a inception network and then a Fréchet distance is
computed between their corresponding feature maps. We use the implementation
of FID in CAGAN [2]. Specifically, we use 50K real images and 50K generated
images to compute statistics, respectively. Perceptual Path Length (PPL) is
proposed in StyleGAN [1] to measure the smoothness of latent space. We adopt
the PPL implementation in CAGAN [2] for a fair comparison. PSNR and LPIPS
are used by CAGAN to evaluate the image projection ability. A given real image
is first mapped back to the latent space through optimizer such as L-BFGS. The
projected image is obtained by feeding this resulting latent code to the generator.
Then, the PSNR and LPIPS distance are computed between the projected image
and the original image again. A smaller value indicates that the generator can
model the distribution in real world better. We compute these two metrics using
our own implementation.

2

Distillation without GAN Loss

In Section. 3.3 of the main paper, we highlight that the mapping network decides
whether a student can learn similar output to that of the teacher. To further
examine this hypothesis, we train the student in a fully supervised manner.
Specifically, we remove the GAN loss and treat the z and Gt (z) as input/label
pairs to train the student network. The result is shown in Fig. 1. It shows that the

