Multi-Exit Semantic Segmentation Networks
Alexandros Kouris1 , Stylianos I. Venieris∗,1 , Stefanos Laskaridis∗,1 , Nicholas Lane1,2
1

Samsung AI Center, Cambridge 2 University of Cambridge ∗ Indicates equal contribution.
{a.kouris,s.venieris,stefanos.l,nic.lane}@samsung.com

Supplemental Material
1

Overview

In the supplementary material of our paper, we provide details about the experimental
setup of our work, as well as additional qualitative and quantitative data further showcasing the quality of results from MESS networks and how different training/inference
schemes perform in practice. Finally, we discuss limitations of the current methodology
and potentially promising future work directions.

2

Experimental Configuration

2.1

Datasets

MS COCO: MS COCO [13] forms one of the largest datasets for dense scene understanding tasks. Thereby, it acts as common ground for pre-training semantic segmentation models across domains. Following common practice for semantic segmentation,
we consider only the 20 semantic classes of PASCAL VOC [4] (plus a background
class), and discard any training images that consist solely of background pixels. This
results in 92.5k training and 5k validation images. We set crop size (bR ) to 520×520.
PASCAL VOC: PASCAL VOC [4] comprises the most broadly used benchmark for
semantic segmentation. It includes 20 foreground object classes (plus a background
class). The original dataset consists of 1464 training and 1449 validation images. Following common practise we adopt the augmented training set provided by [6], resulting
in 10.5k training images. For PASCAL VOC, bR is also set to 520×520.
2.2 Baselines
To compare our work’s performance with the state-of-the-art, we evaluate against the
following approaches:
Single-Exit Segmentation Backbones:
– DRN: Dilated Residual Networks [19] approach for re-using classification pretrained CNNs as backbones for semantic segmentation, by avoiding loss of spatial
information. We use an FCN head at the end.
– DLBV3: DeepLabV3 [19,2], one of the leading approaches in semantic segmentation, employing Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling (ASPP).
– segMBNetV2: The lightweight MobileNetV2 segmentor presented in [16] with an
FCN head.

