Supplementary Material: Long Movie Clip
Classification with State-Space Video Models
Md Mohaiminul Islam, Gedas Bertasius
UNC Chapel Hill

Our supplementary material consists of:
1. Implementation Details.
2. Detailed Quantitative Results.
3. Additional Qualitative Results.

1

Implementation Details

1.1

ViS4mer Architecture

Our ViS4mer model consists of (i) a Transformer Encoder, and (ii) a Multi-scale
Temporal S4 decoder. For our Transformer Encoder design, we follow ViT-L [2].
In particular, we use a transformer architecture consisting of 24 blocks with
hidden dimension 1024. Each block contains a multi-headed self-attention layer
with 16 heads and a Multi-Layer Perceptron.
For the Multi-scale Temporal S4 Decoder, we use a 3 block architecture.
Each block contains an S4 layer, where the first S4 layer operates on a hidden
dimension of 1024, and each subsequent block reduces the hidden dimension by
a factor of 2 using a Multi-Layer Perceptron. Moreover, each block contains a
Pooling layer with kernel size and stride of dimension 1 × 2 × 2 which reduces
the height and width dimension by a factor of 2. We do not change the temporal
dimension throughout the network. Table 1 shows different layers and the inputoutput dimensions of each layer of the proposed ViS4mer model.
1.2

Training and Inference

We resize each video frame to a spatial resolution of 224 × 224 and divide the
frames using a patch size of 16 × 16. We train our model for 100 epochs with an
initial learning rate of 10−3 , which is divided by a factor of 5 when validation
loss begins to plateau. We use Adam optimizer [4] with a weight decay of 0.01.
We initialize the Transformer Encoder with ImageNet [1] pretraining weights
and freeze the encoder network. For the LVU dataset [8], we use a frame rate
of 1 fps and clip length of 60 seconds. During inference, we sample multiple
clips and aggregate the predictions, following the exact sampling strategy of [8].
For the Breakfast [5] and the COIN [6] datasets, we use a frame rate of 15 fps
and the standard splits [3, 7]. Following [3], we uniformly sample 64 segments
to construct an input video, where each segment consists of 8 frames. During
inference, we sample 64 equidistant segments from the whole video to construct
a video and make predictions only using one video clip.

