Convolutional Embedding Makes Hierarchical Vision
Transformer Stronger
–Supplemental Material–
Cong Wang1,2 , Hongmin Xu1 , Xiong Zhang4 , Li Wang2 , Zhitong Zheng1 , and
Haifeng Liu1,3
1

Data & AI Engineering System, OPPO, Beijing, China
{wangcong3575, xhmjimmy}@gmail.com, {liam,blade}@oppo.com
2
Beijing Key Lab of Urban Intelligent Traffic Control Technology, North China University of
Technology, Beijing, China
li.wang@ncut.edu.cn
3
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
4
Neolix Autonomous Vehicle, Beijing, China
zhangxiong@neolix.cn

1

Detailed Architectures of Fused-MBConv and MBConv

The structure of Fused-MBConv[6] and MBConv[5] are shown in Fig 1. The MBConv
block introduces depth-wise convolution with fewer parameters and FLOPs than regular
convolutions. The Fused-MBConv blocks replaced the 3 × 3 depth-wise convolution
and the 1 × 1 convolution with a regular 3 × 3 convolution to better utilize modern
accelerators. EfficientNetV2 [7] adopts a neural architecture search method to find the
right combination of these two building blocks, MBConv and Fused-MBConv.

2

Detailed Structure of LEWin

The standard Multi-head Self-attention (MSA) module in a Transformer block’s computation complexity is quadratic to the number of tokens. On the other hand, the linear projection for self-attention computation may lead the Transformer module lack of some
certain desirable properties, for example, the local structure is significant for 2D image
feature modeling because of spatially neighboring pixels are usually highly correlated.
To calculate Multi-head Self-Attention (MSA) efficiently and introduce convolutional
inductive bias at the same time, we present Locally Enhanced Window Self-Attention
(LEWin). As shown in Fig 2, LEWin is achieved by performing self-attention in local
windows with a convolutional projection.

3

Detailed Architectures of CETNet Variants

To compare with other baselines under similar model size and computation complexity,
we consider three different variants of CETNet. The detailed architecture configurations
are shown in Table 1. All model variants have four stages, and in all these variants, the
head number of the four stages is set as 4, 8, 16, 32, respectively, and the expansion
ratio of MLP is set to 4.

