Seeing Far in the Dark with Patterned Flash
Supplementary Material
Zhanghao Sun1∗ , Jian Wang2∗ , Yicheng Wu2 , and Shree Nayar2
1

1

Stanford University, 350 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
2
Snap Inc., 229 W 43rd St, New York, NY 10036, USA

Network Details

We show the network architecture details in Fig. 1. Blue/white blocks represent
features, with the black numbers indicating the number of channels. Arrows with
different colors represent different network operations. The network input has
8 channels, 4 for captured patterned flash (PF) image (RAW), 4 for calibrated
PF pattern (RAW). The network output has 5 channels, 3 for reconstructed
RGB image, 2 for estimated disparities in horizontal and vertical directions. The
model has ∼ 7M tunable parameters in total. We select the dilations in Atrous
Spatial Pyramid Pooling (ASPP) module to be roughly the integer divisions and
multipliers of the period in our dot array illumination pattern (∼ 6 pixels).

2

Object Detection with Patterned Flash

We apply another object detection task, low-light car detection, on reconstructed
flash images. We use the synthetic Apollo night-time dataset [1] for this task.
We first retrain flash image reconstruction models on the Apollo dataset, then
we fix the image reconstruction network and train an object detector network
with reconstructed images. We use CenterNet as the object detector [2] and
only focus on car objects. Qualitative comparisons are shown in Fig. 2. Due to
severe information loss in the UF reconstructed images, important objects can
be missed by the object detector (e.g., car, lane markings at a long distance),
which may lead to accidents in real-world scenarios.

3

Single-shot Flash/No-flash Imaging

When there is sufficient ambient illumination, PF can be used for single-shot
flash/no-flash imaging since flash and ambient illumination signals are spatially
separated in a PF image. Comparing with conventional double-shot flash/noflash imaging [5], [3], this supports higher frame-rate and robustness in dynamic
scenes. Various flash/no-flash techniques have been proposed, with very different
ambient and flash illumination spectrum [6], [4]. In this scenario, we extend our
algorithm to jointly reconstruct an ambient image, a flash image, and the scene
disparity, as shown in Fig. 3.
*

These authors contributed equally.

