Object Manipulation via Visual Target Localization

A

19

Qualitative Results – Sec 5.1

Our qualitative results video showcasing a few of the successful episodes of our
trained agent can be found in the supplementary package. We also provide two
failure examples and discuss the limitations of our trained agent.

B

Training Details for the Policy Network – Sec 4.3

We train our models for 20M frames (unless otherwise specified). All the models
share the same visual encoder, three convolutional layers to embed the RGBD
observation. The maximum episode length is 200 frames, and the episode fails
if the agent does not finish the task before the end of the episode. Using AI2Thor [24] multi-node training, we render 500 frames per second on 4 machines,
each with 4 Tesla T4 GPUs. We use Adam optimizer with a learning rate of
3e-4 and take gradient steps every 128 frames. We consider two objects being
in proximity if the centers of objects are less than 20cm apart. We train our
conditional segmentation model o✏ine. We use AllenAct [47] framework.

C

Training Details for Conditional Segmentation Model
– Sec 4.2

We train our conditional segmentation models for 100 epochs. We use Adam
optimizer with a learning rate of 1e 4. We initialize the ResNet backbones
with ImageNet pre-trained weights for faster training. Input images and query
images are of size 224x224. We use random crop and flipping the image for data
augmentation during training. We do not use color jittering as we found it to
negatively impact the performance of our model on the validation set.

C.1

Dataset Details.

We also generate a dataset of images from the training scenes to train our segmentation model. Our dataset consists of more than 23K images, including 116K
object masks from 120 scenes (where 80 are used for training, 20 for validation,
and 20 for test sets). We ensure that the validation and test scenes used to train
m-VOLE are not used to train the segmentation model. As explained in Section 3, the model requires query images as input. We collect these query images
by taking a crop containing the object of interest from the images of this dataset.
We only use the query images collected from the training scenes of AI2-Thor,
so the instances depicted in the query images do not overlap with the instances
of target objects during inference.

