Supplementary of Balancing between Forgetting
and Acquisition in Incremental Subpopulation
Learning
Mingfu Liang1 , Jiahuan Zhou2,(

)

, Wei Wei1 , and Ying Wu1

1

Northwestern University
{mingfuliang2020,weiwei2022}@u.northwestern.edu, yingwu@northwestern.edu
2
Peking University
jiahuanzhou@pku.edu.cn

Abstract. In this supplementary, we provide more details, analyses and
discussions about our proposed method and also other comparison methods for the incremental subpopulation learning (ISL). As mentioned in
our main paper’s Fig. 2, we first provide more concrete examples to illustrate the difference between our proposed ISL and the Incremental
Domain Learning (IDL) in Section A. Then in Section B, we discuss
the potential limitations of our proposed method and also provide corresponding empirical exploration. In Section C, we provide more empirical
analyses under different network structures and also the smallest dataset
from the BREEDS datasets [34] to explore how our method behaves under different scenarios. We also provide the statistical analysis between
our proposed proxy of forgetting estimation and the actual forgetting
in Section C.3. In Section D, we provide more discussions about our
two-stage method. In Section E, we include more discussions about the
existing methods. In Section F, we provide the complete dataset description and statistics for constructing our ISL benchmark. In Section G,
we report all the experimental details for benchmarking all compared
methods in ISL. Finally, in Section H, we include more discussions of the
related works about the related incremental learning settings like continual domain adaptation (CDA) [40] and Incremental Implicitly-Refined
Classification (IIRC) [1], and also the generalized boosting theory [32,31].
The variance of Tab. 1 and 2 in our main paper are reported in Tab. 4
and 5, and the corresponding discussions are in Section E.3.

A

More concrete examples about the difference between
ISL and IDL.

In this section, we provide the detailed illustration of our proposed ISL and the
IDL (includes New Instance and Continual Domain Adaptation settings) based
on the datasets used in each setting.
Continual Domain Adaptation (CDA). As shown in Fig. 1 (A), in CDA,
the new data distribution introduced in the new visual domains (e.g., paintings
and cartoons styles) are only the manipulation of the existing subpopulations’

