NeFSAC: Neurally Filtered Minimal Samples
Luca Cavalli1 , Marc Pollefeys1,2 , and Daniel Barath2
1

1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
2
Microsoft Mixed Reality and AI Zurich Lab

Implementation details

All MLPs in our network use leaky ReLU activation with slope 0.01, except for
the final prediction branch which uses the sigmoid activation function. Labels li
for pose and epipolar errors ei are assigned the value zero if ei > emax , the value
of one if ei < emin and are linearly interpolated for error values in [emin , emax ].
We set emax = 5pix and emin = 2pix for epipolar error using the Sampson
distance and emax = 30◦ and emin = 5◦ for pose errors using the maximum
between translation and rotation errors. When the minimal solver finds multiple
solutions, we score the sample according to the best one, and when it fails to
find any solution we consider it equivalent to the maximum possible error. The
Sampson error assigned to a minimal sample is the maximum Sampson error of
all of its correspondences with respect to the ground truth epipolar geometry.
All correspondences both for training and for the experimental validation are
obtained by matching SIFT [5] with ratio-test filtering of 0.8.
The error of the expert branch for autonomous driving takes inspiration from
several existing works on planar constrained motion [3,4,7]. We assume that the
correct motion is a rotation purely around the vertical axis and a translation
without any vertical component, and penalize the maximum rotation or translation component that deviates from such assumption. Finally errors are mapped
to classification labels with the same thresholds as with the previously defined
pose errors. We further define a tentative error for an expert branch to partially
capture the weaker regularities in a scenario of PhotoTourism [8] image collections. We consider a motion plausible when the relative rotation is either almost
horizontal or almost vertical, and penalize the deviation from such model.
Since our technique proposed in Section 3.2 of the main paper does not suffice
to produce a balanced dataset, we further address its residual imbalance with
class weighting. For each branch, we keep a running count of positive and negative samples, and weigh each sample according to the inverse of the frequency
of its class [9].

2

Experiments with MAGSAC++

In this section, we provide additional experiments of integrating NeFSAC on a
substantially different RANSAC variant than USAC [6]. We combined NeFSAC
with MAGSAC++ [2,1] and ran essential matrix estimation on scene British

