Supplementary Material:
Incremental Task Learning with Incremental
Rank Updates
Rakib Hyder1 , Ken Shao1 , Boyu Hou1 , Panos Markopoulos2 ,
Ashley Prater-Bennette3 , and M. Salman Asif1
1
2

University of California Riverside
Rochester Institute of Technology
3
Air Force Research Laboratory

In this document we provide additional discussion on some questions raised
by reviewers that we hope will be informative for the readers. We are also grateful
to all the reviewers for all of their questions and comments.

A

Relationship between frozen and new factors

Question: What is the relationship between the newly learned rank-1 weights and
the fixed weights learned in the previous task. Are they orthogonal to each other
or can the new weights be represented by a linear combination of the old fixed
weights?
The newly learned rank-1 factors are not orthogonal to previous factors, but
they are linearly independent. To demonstrate this relation, we plot the top
singular values for weight matrices in two layers corresponding to 20 tasks in SCIFAR100 in Fig. 1. The rank of the weight matrices starts at 11 and increases
by one for every task. We observed similar trend in other tasks and layers. This
suggests that the learned factors are linearly independent of frozen factors.

B

Effect of task similarity

Question: The findings suggest that the proposed method benefits from parameter sharing and positive knowledge transfer between tasks, allowing even a lowcapacity model to learn comparably well. If the model was trained on a set of
controlled task-difficulty benchmarks, the performance/memory metrics would
be even more useful. The most important question in this study is how similar
the tasks must be for the proposed method to be effective.
Our experiments suggest that a positive knowledge transfer allows low-capacity
models to perform well. We performed an experiment by selecting superclasses
of CIFAR100 as separate tasks. If all classes in a task become similar (harder
classification), the cross-task similarity reduces. We observe ∼60% accuracy for
rank-1 ITL and Parallel rank-2. If we select tasks by sampling classes in each
task at random, then cross-task similarity increases. We observe ∼65% accuracy
for rank-1 ITL.

