Learning Depth from Focus in the Wild
Changyeon Won

and Hae-Gon Jeon(B)

Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, South Korea
cywon1997@gm.gist.ac.kr, haegonj@gist.ac.kr

Abstract. For better photography, most recent commercial cameras
including smartphones have either adopted large-aperture lens to collect more light or used a burst mode to take multiple images within
short times. These interesting features lead us to examine depth from
focus/defocus. In this work, we present a convolutional neural networkbased depth estimation from single focal stacks. Our method diﬀers
from relevant state-of-the-art works with three unique features. First,
our method allows depth maps to be inferred in an end-to-end manner
even with image alignment. Second, we propose a sharp region detection
module to reduce blur ambiguities in subtle focus changes and weakly
texture-less regions. Third, we design an eﬀective downsampling module to ease ﬂows of focal information in feature extractions. In addition,
for the generalization of the proposed network, we develop a simulator
to realistically reproduce the features of commercial cameras, such as
changes in ﬁeld of view, focal length and principal points. By eﬀectively
incorporating these three unique features, our network achieves the top
rank in the DDFF 12-Scene benchmark on most metrics. We also demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed method on various quantitative
evaluations and real-world images taken from various oﬀ-the-shelf cameras compared with state-of-the-art methods. Our source code is publicly
available at https://github.com/wcy199705/DfFintheWild.
Keywords: Depth from focus · Image alignment · Sharp region
detection and simulated focal stack dataset

1

Introduction

As commercial demand for high-quality photographic applications increases,
images have been increasingly utilized in scene depth computation. Most commercial cameras, including smartphone and DSLR cameras have two interesting
conﬁgurations: large-aperture lens and a dual-pixel (DP) sensor. Both are reasonable choices to collect more light and to quickly sweep the focus through
multiple depths. Because of this, images appear to have a shallow depth of ﬁeld
(DoF) and are formed as focal stacks with corresponding meta-data such as focal
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7 1.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13661, pp. 1–18, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7_1

