Data-centric classification and clustering (DC3)

1

A data-centric approach for improving
ambiguous labels with combined semi-supervised
classification and clustering
Supplementary Material
A

Further insights into hyperparameters

During method development, we looked at a larger variety of hyperparameters
for Mean-Teacher [53] and the Plankton dataset [43]. We found in general that
the model was quite robust to changes of individual parameters. The most impact
we noticed from design decision where and where not a gradient is propagated.
For example, if we would propagate the error along the pseudo labels for the
ambiguity loss calculation the system degenerates almost always. Aside from
these design decisions, the weight for λCE −1 had the most impact. While we use
the same value for the labeled and the unlabeled data, we see slight evidence that
a lower value could be beneficial on the labeled data. Moreover, slightly lower
or higher weights for the other hyperparameters showed promising results under
certain circumstances. As stated in the paper, we aimed at providing general
parameters across different datasets and methods and thus did not fine-tune the
parameters to a specific combination.

B

Pseudocode

In our pseudo code block 1, we give the main parts of our proposed method as
pseudocode. The code is similar to python and Tensorflow code. In the following, we will describe the used parameters and methods. tf is an abbrevation
for tensorflow and refers to that function. prob_ambiguous is the output pa (x)
for a complete batch. logits_x_over, logits_u_over and logits_u2_over are
the overclustering outputs po (x) for a complete batch for the labeled data, the
unlabeled data and the possible additional second unlabeled input respectively.
The labels for the labeled data are given in l. logits_u is the output pn (x) for
a complete batch of unlabeled data. The parameters prior_ambiguity, wou,wa
and ws correspond to the hyperparameters pA , λCE −1 , λa and λs in the paper
respectively. The parameter wol is the weight λCE −1 on the labeled data. The parameter loss_tensor is SSL loss as tensor ( LSSL ). The function threshold()
thresholds the elements of the given vector (first argument) based on the given
threshold (second argument). The functions inverse_ce(), ce() and be() calculate the loss value for inverse cross-entropy (CE−1 ), cross-entropy and binary
cross-entropy respectively. The function get_different_logits() selects from
the given batch logits (first argument) one logit for each image in the batch.
A logit is randomly selected of all logits in the batch which to do not share

