Slim Scissors: Segmenting Thin Object from
Synthetic Background (Supplementary Material)
Kunyang Han1,2⋆ , Jun Hao Liew3 , Jiashi Feng3 , Huawei Tian4 ,
Yao Zhao1,2 , and Yunchao Wei1,2
1

2

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology
3
ByteDance
4
People’s Public Security University of China

1

Network Architecture

As described in the main paper, our Slim Scissors is composed of two parallel
networks, i.e., a Generic Object Segmentation (GOS) Network (Section 1.1) for
acquiring a coarse mask delineating the object’s main body and a Thin Parts
Refinement (TPR) Network (Section 1.2) for capturing the elongated thin structures based on the user-given scribbles. On top of Slim Scissors, we append a
Similarity Detection Module (SDM) (Section 1.4) that enables automated scribbles mining to further reduce user’s annotation burden, which we call Fast Slim
Scissors. We present the details of each network/module below. The overall architecture can be found in Fig. 2 and 1.
1.1

Generic Object Segmentation (GOS) Network

Our GOS network employs the state-of-the-art interactive segmentation network
IOG [6] due to its excellent performance in segmenting general objects. In particular, it consists of a CoarseNet for coarse prediction given the inside-outside
guidance, followed by a FineNet that recovers the missing boundary details. In
this work, we replace the ResNet-101 backbone in IOG with a lighter ResNet18 [2] to reduce computational cost. For more details, we refer the interested
readers to [6].
1.2

Thin Part Refinement (TPR) Network

First Stage. Similarly, our TPR network also adopts a coarse-to-fine design.
Specifically, the first stage employs an encoder-decoder structure, where the encoder takes ResNet-18 [2] as its backbone, with its global average pooling and
FC layers removed. Following [1], we limit the output stride to 16 by setting
the stride and dilation rate of the last residual block (Layer 4) to 1 and 2,
respectively. To incorporate global context, we append an Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling (ASPP) module [1] at the end of the encoder. The decoder, on the
⋆

Work done during an internship at ByteDance.

