SSBNet: Improving Visual Recognition
Efficiency by Adaptive Sampling
Supplementary
Ho Man Kwan

and Shenghui Song

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
hmkwan@connect.ust.hk eeshsong@ust.hk

In this supplementary, we provide some further results including 1.) performance with different saliency networks, 2.) comparison with another type of
adaptive networks, 3.) detailed numerical results for the ablation study in the
paper, and 4.) additional figures that visualize the sampling of the SSBNet.

1

Additional Results with Different Saliency Networks

Besides the 1 × 1 convolutional layer utilized for the saliency map estimation
in the main paper, we also conducted additional experiments by increasing the
kernel sizes of the convolutional layers from 1 × 1 to 3 × 3 and 5 × 5. The
experiments were performed with ResNet-D-50/101/152 [2, 3]. However, we did
not notice any performance difference. This may be due to the fact that the
saliency networks take the deep features as their inputs, which have large effective
kernel sizes [6]. As a result, increasing the kernel sizes in the saliency networks
did not lead to any performance improvement.

2

Comparison with Other Adaptive Networks

In the main paper, we referred to adaptive sampling as the methods that perform
geometric samplings or transformations on the images or feature maps, where
the samplings or transformations depend on the inputs. Examples of adaptive
sampling methods include spatial transformer [4] and saliency sampler [7]. There
are also approaches that adaptively skip the inference on individual units, such
as pixels or blocks, to reduce the latency. For example, the stochastic samplinginterpolation network [10] samples pixels for inference, where the SBNet [8]
selects blocks.
In table 1, we provided preliminary comparison results between SSBNet and
the stochastic sampling-interpolation network [10] (referred to as SSIN for abbreviation), a recently proposed adaptive inference network. Following the same
setting as the main paper, we trained SSBNet and SSIN based on ResNet-D50 [3] on ImageNet [9]. For SSIN, instead of the standard 120 epochs of training,
we trained the models with 200 epochs, following the original paper which used
a longer training for the adaptive networks. We reported results of SSIN with
loss weight λ of {0.001, 0.005, 0.010, 0.015}.

