Injecting 3D Perception of Controllable
NeRF-GAN into StyleGAN for Editable
Portrait Image Synthesis
-Supplementary materialJeong-gi Kwak†
†

6

Yuanming Li†
David Han‡

Korea University

Dongsik Yoon†
Hanseok Ko†
‡

Donghyeon Kim†

Drexel Univiersity

Appendix: SURF-GAN

In this section, we supplement contents that are not covered in the main paper,
i.e., additional details, experiments and discussion about the proposed SURFGAN.
6.1

Additional implementation details

Training details. The maximum resolution of SURF-GAN, as well as πGAN [3], which allows stable learning is 642 in our setting, it is because 3D-aware
GANs (especially pure NeRF-based GAN) require computationally expensive resources for training. Following π-GAN, we adopt the progressive growing strategy
that the size of the generated image increases progressively. Unlike 2D GANs,
the generator does not actually “grow”. Instead, the number of sampled rays
increases. Because NeRF-based model can be seen as an implicit continuous
function, thus it is theoretically possible to generate arbitrary resolution images. Therefore, only the discriminator adds new layers at each stage to handle
higher resolutions. We start training at 322 and it is doubled at the next stage. In
training phase, the control parameter z is sampled from the standard normal distribution. The camera pose (pitch and yaw) are sampled from the approximated
distribution (normal distribution) of dataset. We assume a perspective pinhole
camera where the field of view (FOV) is 12◦ . The number of sampled points
in each ray is 24 (12 from coarse sampling and 12 from hierarchical sampling).
We exploit non-saturating GAN loss with R1 penalty [16] following π-GAN. In
addition, there is orthogonal regularization of basis (Lreg ) as explained in Sec.
3.1. Finally, pose loss is adopted optionally on different purposes we discuss it
in Sec. 6.4. We adopt ADAM [14] optimizer with β1 = 0 and β2 = 0.99, and the
learning rate is set initially to 0.0001 and it is halved in the next stage.
SURF-GAN architecture. The architecture of SURF-GAN generator is illustrated in Fig. 1. The discriminator is same with that of π-GAN [3] except the
last layer. Besides the adversarial term that distinguishes real or fake, there is an

