Learning Object-Centric Representations of
Multi-Object Scenes from Multiple Views

Li Nanbo
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
nanbo.li@ed.ac.uk

Cian Eastwood
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
c.eastwood@ed.ac.uk

Robert B Fisher
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
rbf@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Learning object-centric representations of multi-object scenes is a promising approach towards machine intelligence, facilitating high-level reasoning and control
from visual sensory data. However, current approaches for unsupervised objectcentric scene representation are incapable of aggregating information from multiple
observations of a scene. As a result, these “single-view” methods form their representations of a 3D scene based only on a single 2D observation (view). Naturally,
this leads to several inaccuracies, with these methods falling victim to single-view
spatial ambiguities. To address this, we propose The Multi-View and Multi-Object
Network (MulMON)1 —a method for learning accurate, object-centric representations of multi-object scenes by leveraging multiple views. In order to sidestep
the main technical difficulty of the multi-object-multi-view scenario—maintaining
object correspondences across views—MulMON iteratively updates the latent object representations for a scene over multiple views. To ensure that these iterative
updates do indeed aggregate spatial information to form a complete 3D scene
understanding, MulMON is asked to predict the appearance of the scene from
novel viewpoints during training. Through experiments we show that MulMON
better-resolves spatial ambiguities than single-view methods—learning more accurate and disentangled object representations—and also achieves new functionality
in predicting object segmentations for novel viewpoints.

1

Introduction

Traditional VAEs[15] use “single-object” or “flat” vector representations that fail to capture the
compositional structure of natural scenes, i.e. the existence of interchangeable objects with common
properties. As a result, “multi-object” or object-centric representations have emerged as a promising
approach to scene understanding, improving sample-efficiency and generalization for many downstream applications like relational reasoning and control [5, 20, 3]. However, recent progress in
unsupervised object-centric scene representation has been limited to “single-view” methods which
form their representations of 3D scenes based only on a single 2D observation (view). As a result,
these methods form inaccurate representations that fall victim to single-view spatial ambiguities (e.g.
occluded or partially occluded objects) and fail to capture 3D spatial structures.
1

Code available at https://github.com/NanboLi/MulMON

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

