Video Anomaly Detection by Solving Decoupled
Spatio-Temporal Jigsaw Puzzles
(Supplementary Material)
Guodong Wang1,2 , Yunhong Wang2 , Jie Qin3 , Dongming Zhang4 ,
Xiuguo Bao4 , and Di Huang1,2⋆
1

SKLSDE, Beihang University, Beijing, China
SCSE, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
CCST, NUAA, Nanjing, China
4
CNCERT/CC, Beijing, China
{wanggd,yhwang,dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn, qinjiebuaa@gmail.com, zhdm@cert.org.cn,
baoxiuguo@139.com
2

The supplementary material provides:
– detailed configuration of the network architecture.
– comparison in terms of macro-averaged AUROC metric [3].
– running time analysis.
– visual results on UCSD Ped2 [11], CUHK Avenue [9] and ShanghaiTech
Campus (STC) [10].
– multi-label regression loss vs. multi-label classification loss for training.
– action recognition experiment on UCF-101 [14] using linear probing evaluation.

1

Network Architecture

The detailed configuration of the network is presented in Table 1. The network
consists of a shared convolutional part and two independent heads. The shared
convolutional neural network (CNN) consists of 3D convolutions (conv) to extract spatio-temporal representations and 2D conv to aggregate spatial representations, while the two individual heads are fully connected (fc) layers. The shared
part consists of three 3D blocks and one 2D block. Each 3D block comprises two
3D convolutional layers with the filters of 3 × 3 × 3 and a 3D max-pooling layer.
Each convolutional layer is followed by an instance normalization (IN) layer [15],
a ReLU activation layer. We perform 3D max-pooling along the spatial dimension in the first two blocks while the last 3D max-pooling layer performs global
temporal pooling. The 2D block consists of a 2D convolutional layer, followed
by an IN layer, a ReLU activation layer, a 2D dropout layer, and a 2D maxpooling layer. Both heads share the same configuration with two fc layers. We
employ IN layers in the network since spatial and temporal jigsaw puzzles are
instance-specific and independent of each other. Generally, we adopt the similar
architecture (expect for the normalization layer) with the “deep+wide” 3D CNN
in [2] for fair comparison.
⋆

Corresponding author (ORCID: 0000-0002-2412-9330).

