Supplementary Materials: Hierarchical Latent
Structure for Multi-Modal Vehicle Trajectory
Forecasting
Dooseop Choi1 and KyoungWook Min1
Artificial Intelligence Research Laboratory, ETRI
{d1024.choi,kwmin92}@etri.re.kr

A

Visualization of Vehicle-Lane Interaction (VLI)

As we mentioned in the paper, for the calculation of the lane-level context vector
am
i , we use not only the reference lane but also the surrounding lanes with their
relative importance. This idea is based on the fact that human drivers often pay
attention to surrounding lanes when driving along the reference lane. To show
how our model pays attention to the surrounding lanes for the target vehicle, we
use four scenarios in nuScenes and show the results in Figure 1. In the figure, blue
lines denote the reference lanes while the others denote the surrounding lanes.
The surrounding lanes of high importance are shown in red and the surrounding
lanes of low importance are shown in green. We can see in the figure that our
forecasting model pays more attention to the surrounding lanes that are close to
the reference lane.

B

Mode Blur in SOTA Model

We show in Figure 2 the prediction examples of the state-of-the-art model [6]. We
note here that the figure is identical to the figure illustrated in the supplementary
material of [6]. The model is built upon [3], which is based on the VAE framework
and learns a diverse joint distribution over multi-agent future trajectories in a
traffic scene. In the figure, green and light blue bounding boxes respectively
denote the AV and surrounding vehicles. The solid lines with light blue dots
denote the predicted trajectories for the surrounding vehicles. We can see in
the figure that some trajectories are located between adjacent lanes, which can
cause uncomfortable rides for the AV with plenty of sudden brakes and steering
changes [4].

C

Further Explanation to Average Quality

We mentioned in the paper that ADE1 and F DE1 metrics shown in the tables
presented in the paper represent the average quality of the trajectories generated

