Laplacian Mesh Transformer:
Dual Attention and Topology Aware Network
for 3D Mesh Classification and Segmentation
– Supplemental Material –
Xiao-Juan Li1,2

, Jie Yang ( )1,2

, and Fang-Lue Zhang3

1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Victoria University of Wellington
{lixiaojuan,yangjie01}@ict.ac.cn fanglue.zhang@vuw.ac.nz

OVERVIEW
This supplementary material accompanies the main paper, which presents
data preparation, more implementation details, more quantitative evaluations
on shape part segmentation and classification on other public datasets, more
visualization results of shape part segmentation, and attention maps of dual
attention.
All sections are organized as follows:
– Section 1 provides more details on data preparation and implementation.
– Section 2 provides more evaluations on shape classification on other datasets
(e.g. SHREC11 [13], Cube Engraving [9]).
– Section 3 provides more evaluations on shape part segmentation on Human
Body dataset [15].
– Section 4 provides more evaluations on the shape segmentation for the
performance of the noisy input and with different number of vertex. And
also for a fair comparison, we evaluate our method, PD-MeshNet [17], and
MeshCNN [9] on different metrics on edges, faces, and vertices.
– Section 5 and Section 6 provide more visualization on shape part segmentation and importance maps of our proposed dual attention mechanism.

1

Implementation Details

In this section, we provide the statistics and more details of the datasets used
in our experiments. Table 1 describes more details of the training and test
for the application tasks, i.e. Classification (Cls.) or Segmentation (Seg.). We
follow the available official training set and test set to split our data. For the
SHREC11 dataset, there are 16 training shapes in each category, so we follow
the default setting to perform the evaluation on the experiments, denoted as
SHREC11-Split16. As for Split10, we randomly select 10 examples from the
training set of each category. The reported performance is the average score

