Supplementary Materials for
FurryGAN: High Quality Foreground-aware
Image Synthesis
Anonymous ECCV submission
Paper ID 408

We provide the following supplementary materials:
A Uncurated visual comparison of Labels4Free and ours
B Choice of pseudo ground truth masks
C Quantitative results with alternative pseudo ground truth masks
D Examples of style mixing
E Additional details and visualization of the mask
F Results on unaligned datasets (LSUN-Church, LSUN-Horse, and CUB)
G User study on mask quality (between Lables4Free and ours)

A

Uncurated comparison

Fig. S7-S8 (located at the end for clear spacing) present uncurated visual comparisons between Labels4Free and ours on FFHQ and AFHQv2-Cat. The columns
represent foreground images, alpha masks, and composite images with generated
backgrounds. While Labels4Free often misses clothes and whiskers, our method
produces more accurate and detailed masks, especially on hair, fur, and whiskers.
Consistency between the generated masks and the actual foreground region in
the composite image also demonstrates the superiority of our method.

B

Choice of pseudo ground truth masks

In this section, we provide the grounds for choosing TRACER (TE7) [19] to
prepare pseudo ground truth masks over BiSeNet [38] (in Labels4Free [1]) and
Mask R-CNN1 (in PSeg [5]). As FFHQ does not have ground truth masks, we
manually annotate ten images for the evaluation. The images are broadly chosen
to cover various ages, genders, ethnic groups, and accessories. Fig. S1 shows the
chosen images, annotated ground truths, and the pseudo ground truths from the
methods. The quantitative comparison also reveals that TRACER achieves the
best performance. Note that CelebAMask-HQ does not suffice to serve as the
benchmark because BiSeNet is trained on it.
Fig. S2 further contrast the performance of the methods. On FFHQ, TRACER
captures even hair while BiSeNet struggles. On AFHQv2-Cat, TRACER precisely captures even long fur on the ears and the top of the heads.
1

https://github.com/facebookresearch/maskrcnn-benchmark

