Combating Label Distribution Shift for
Active Domain Adaptation
—Supplementary Material—
Sehyun Hwang1
Sohyun Lee2
Sungyeon Kim1
1,2⋆
Jungseul Ok
Suha Kwak1,2⋆
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Korea
2
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH, Korea

This material provides additional analysis and results that have been omitted due to the page limit. Section A presents in-depth analysis of LAMDA,
including detailed component analysis (Sec. A.1), computational complexity
(Sec. A.2), LAMDA with various UDA methods (Sec. A.3), t-SNE visualization (Sec. A.4), and the component analysis of our sampling strategy (Sec. A.5).
Section B demonstrates more results, including comparison with SSDA methods
(Sec. B.1), comparison with cosine classifier (Sec. B.2), and more results of DomainNet (Sec. B.3). Finally, the configuration of our DANN [2] (Sec. C.1) and
implementation details of ADA methods (Sec. C.2) are provided in Section C.

A

Further analysis of LAMDA

A.1

Component analysis for each adaptation scenarios

Table a1-a2 quantifies the impact of each component of LAMDA, in every domain adaptation scenario of the two datasets. Every component in LAMDA
generally improves the performance of each domain adaptation scenario. Comparing the second and the third rows of Table a2, one can see the remarkable
performance gain by our label distribution matching strategy since it alleviates
the significant label distribution shift of OfficeHome-RSUT. Additionally, Our
random sampling baseline incorporating DANN achieves 86.7% on VisDA-2017
and 51.3% on DomainNet.
A.2

Computational complexity of LAMDA

In Table a3, we compare the computational complexity and computation time
per round of LAMDA and previous ADA methods. The computation time is
measured on Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6240 CPU. While the computational complexity of LAMDA exhibits quadratic growth regarding the target dataset’s size,
it is significantly faster than CLUE [9] and S3 VAADA [10], even on the large
scale Clipart dataset of DomainNet consists of 30K images. This is because
the calculation for our sampling consists of simple matrix multiplication, which
can be computed efficiently in parallel. LAMDA achieves the best performance
among the previous arts with a reasonable sampling time.
⋆

Co-corresponding authors

