Break and Make: Interactive Structural
Understanding Using LEGO Bricks
Supplementary Material
Aaron Walsman,1 Muru Zhang1 , Klemen Kotar2 , Karthik Desingh1 ,
Ali Farhadi1 , and Dieter Fox1,3
1

A

University of Washington awalsman@cs.washington.edu
2
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
3
NVIDIA

Qualatative Examples

Figure 1 shows ten randomly chosen target assemblies and assemblies predicted
by the Stubnet-B model on each dataset. Very few examples are completed precisely correct. In the random 2-brick, 4-brick and the OMR 2-brick examples, the
agent is able to build an assembly using the correct bricks but fails to connect
them correctly. The model largely fails to build anything resembling the target
for the random 8-brick and OMR 4-brick and 8-brick scenes. This clearly demonstrates the difficulty of this problem even in simple settings, and shows how the
problem becomes more difficult as the number of bricks per scene increases, and
the total number of bricks used in the dataset increases. See the supplemental
video for an example of a successful episode on a 2 brick model generated with
the Stubnet-B model.

B

Dataset

B.1

Simulator Details and Performance

The LTRON simulator uses native Python along with the Splendor-Render
rendering package that provides a python interface for OpenGL rendering. The
speed of the simulator is dependent on the size and complexity of the scene, but
for the scenes used in the experiments here, the simulator runs at over 100fps
on an Nvidia 2080ti graphics card, and can be parallelized. The simulator also
supports headless EGL rendering for use on clusters that do not have graphical
sessions. LTRON is not as heavily optimized as some other 3D environments
such as Habitat 2.0 [3], but the simulator speed was fast enough not to be a
bottleneck during experiments.
B.2

Statistics

We source brick shapes from the LDRAW[1] database, which contains over ten
thousand official bricks. However, many bricks in the official parts list are not

