Supplementary for “General Object Pose
Transformation Network from Unpaired Data”
Yukun Su1,2 , Guosheng Lin2∗ , Ruizhou Sun1 , and Qingyao Wu1,3∗
1

School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China
suyukun666@gmail.com

Abstract. This supplementary material contains more details of the
network architecture, additional qualitative results of transferred examples and additional experimental results in our paper “General Object
Pose Transformation Network from Unpaired Data”.

1

Details of Network Architecture

The overall architecture of our proposed network is shown in Tab 1, which depicts
some of the detailed layers and modules. The foreground generator Gf g and the
background generator Gbg both aim to perform reconstruction, thus, they have
a similar architecture with encoder and decoder. Since we inject more TPS and
dense warping information in Gf g , therefore, they do not share weights during
training. Specifically, the background generator Gbg can be arbitrary Unet-like [6]
network for background inpainting. We deploy a discriminator in the form as [8]
to discriminate the generated fake images and real samples. We train our network
on all datasets using the same proposed loss functions with the same hyperparameters in an end-to-end manner. In our paper, we set the hyper-parameters
empirically. During the training, we do not use any data augmentation strategies,
and thus it is easy to reproduce. And we replace the least-squares loss with a
hinge function to stabilize the discriminator.

2

More Qualitative Results

We perform more qualitative results on four datasets: Mammals, Birds, Human
and Cars dataset in Fig 1 and Fig 2 respectively. We can yield more realistic images compared to other methods, and we take the early step to explore
the general object pose transformation, which can be beneficial to applications
covering wide range of objects.
⋆

Corresponding authors.

