Tomography of Turbulence Strength
Based on Scintillation Imaging
Supplementary Material
Nir Shaul

and Yoav Y. Schechner

Viterbi Faculty of Electrical and Computers Eng.,
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
nir.shaul@gmail.com , yoav@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract. This is a supplementary document to the main manuscript.
This document provides a detailed theoretical explanation and an illustration of the seeing effect, as a comparison to the scintillation effect.
We also attach a video sample of the acquired data from the field experiment conducted in 02/02/2022. Additionally, we provide more simulated
results.

1

Outline

This supplementary document contains four sections. Sec. 2 gives another intuition for the phenomenon of seeing and its path integral characteristics. In
Sec. 3, we explain the scenario in the attached video, sampled during the outdoor experiment. Sec. 4 provides additional results of the simulated scintillation
formation signal.

2

Modeling the Seeing Effect

According to Sec. 2 of the main manuscript, one of the turbulence visual effects
is termed seeing. In this effect, random refraction perturbs the angle of arrival
(AOA) of a ray from an object to the camera. Thus, the LOS of each pixel
wiggles, creating spatiotemporal geometric distortions in image sequences. For
an object at distance L and a camera having a lens aperture diameter D, the
AOA of a line of sight (LOS) has variance given by Eqs. (3,4) of the main
manuscript. The contribution is maximal by a turbulent air parcel right near
the camera lens.
Here we provide an intuitive illustration of how a turbulent medium creates
seeing, in a pinhole camera observing a single isotropic point source. Consider a
very simplified case, where an air parcel has a shape of a prism, and its refractive
index is slightly higher than that of calm steady air. Then, the air parcel acts as
a refracting medium (Fig.1 herein). This effect yields a first order perturbation
of the AOA.
If the air parcel is adjacent to the isotropic point source (z = 0), then it has
a negligible effect on the AOA at the camera. As a result, no matter what is the

