Supplementary Material for “Prior-Guided
Adversarial Initialization for Fast
Adversarial Training”
Xiaojun Jia1,2,† , Yong Zhang3,⋆ Xingxing Wei4 , Baoyuan Wu5 , Ke Ma6 ,
Jue Wang3 , Xiaochun Cao7,⋆
1

2

SKLOIS, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Tencent, AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China.
5
School of Data Science, Secure Computing Lab of Big Data, Shenzhen Research
Institute of Big Data, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
6
School of Computer Science and Technology, UCAS, Beijing, China
7
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus, Sun Yat-sen
University, Shenzhen 518107, China
jiaxiaojun@iie.ac.cn; zhangyong201303@gmail.com; xxwei@buaa.edu.cn;
wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn; make@ucas.ac.cn; arphid@gmail.com;
caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn

This supplementary material contains the following contents:
– The difference between the training processes of FAT and SAT methods on
the more datasets. (see Sec. 1).
– Detailed algorithms of FGSM-BP, FGSM-EP and FGSM-MEP in Sec. 3.3
of the manuscript (see Sec. 2).
– Proof of Proposition 1 in Sec. 3.4 of the manuscript.(see Sec. 3).
– Detailed hyper-parameter settings. (see Sec. 4).
– Experiments with a larger model as the backbone (see Sec. 5).
– More comparative experiments with using a cyclic learning rate strategy (see
Sec. 6).

1

Difference between the Training Processes of FAT and
SAT Methods

In Fig.2 of the manuscript (Sec.3.1), we compared the intermediate results of
the training processes of FAT and SAT on the CIFAR-10 dataset. Here, we also
reinvestigate catastrophic overftting on more datasets, i.e., CIFAR-100 [6] and
Tiny ImageNet [2]. We adopt ResNet18 [3] as the backbone on CIFAR-100 and
PreActResNet18 [4] on Tiny ImageNet. The training setting is presented in the
Sec.4.1 of the manuscript.
We observe a similar overfitting phenomenon on CIFAR-100 and Tiny ImageNet. There is also a distinct difference between the attack success rates (ASRs)
⋆

Correspondence to: Yong Zhang (zhangyong201303@gmail.com) and Xiaochun Cao
(caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn).† Work done in an internship at Tencent AI Lab.

