Faster VoxelPose: Real-time 3D Human Pose
Estimation by Orthographic Projection
Supplementary Material
Hang Ye1∗ , Wentao Zhu2,3∗ , Chunyu Wang4+ ,
Rujie Wu2,3 , and Yizhou Wang2,3,5
1

Yuanpei College, Peking University
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University
3
School of Computer Science, Peking University
4
Microsoft Research Asia
5
Inst. for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
{yehang, wtzhu, wu rujie, yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn, chnuwa@microsoft.com
2

Abstract. This document provides supplementary information which
is not elaborated in our manuscript due to space limits. Section 1 gives
details about the implementation of our method. Section 2 describes the
datasets and evaluation metrics we use in our experiments. Section 3
presents additional experiment results. We also present a video demo
that includes additional results.

1

Implementation details

1.1

Human Detection Networks

Following [7], we discretize the overall motion space into L × W × H voxels. In
our experiments, we set L = W = 80 and H = 20.
Inspired by [7], we adopt a similar Encoder-Decoder architecture in the Human Detection Networks. The key difference is that we replace all expensive 3D
convolutions with 2D and 1D convolutions. The basic components of our fullyconvolutional networks include vanilla convolutional block and residual convolution block. The former is comprised of one convolutional layer, one batch-norm
layer and ReLU while the latter consists of two consecutive basic convolutional
blocks with residual connection. At the initial stage, the feature volume is fed
into a 7×7 convolutional layer. In the subsequent Encoder structure, the feature representation is downsampled through three 3× 3 residual convolutional
blocks with maxpooling. The Decoder adopts a symmetric design, but with deconvolution operations. Finally, the network generates the results through a 1×1
convolutional layer. Following [9], the outputs of 2D networks are fed into three
*
+

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

