SLAYER: Spike Layer Error Reassignment in Time

Garrick Orchard†
Temasek Laboratories @ NUS
National University of Singapore
Singapore, 117411
tslgmo@nus.edu.sg

Sumit Bam Shrestha∗
Temasek Laboratories @ NUS
National University of Singapore
Singapore, 117411
tslsbs@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Configuring deep Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) is an exciting research avenue
for low power spike event based computation. However, the spike generation
function is non-differentiable and therefore not directly compatible with the standard error backpropagation algorithm. In this paper, we introduce a new general
backpropagation mechanism for learning synaptic weights and axonal delays which
overcomes the problem of non-differentiability of the spike function and uses a
temporal credit assignment policy for backpropagating error to preceding layers.
We describe and release a GPU accelerated software implementation of our method
which allows training both fully connected and convolutional neural network (CNN)
architectures. Using our software, we compare our method against existing SNN
based learning approaches and standard ANN to SNN conversion techniques and
show that our method achieves state of the art performance for an SNN on the
MNIST, NMNIST, DVS Gesture, and TIDIGITS datasets.

1

Introduction

Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), especially Deep Neural Networks, have become the go-to tool for
many machine learning tasks. ANNs achieve state of the art performance in applications ranging from
image classification and object recognition, to object tracking, signal processing, natural language
processing, self driving cars, health care diagnostics, and many more. In the currently popular second
generation of ANNs, backpropagation of the error signal to the neurons in preceding layer is the key
to their learning prowess.
However, ANNs generally require powerful GPUs and computing clusters to crunch their inputs
into useful outputs. Therefore, in scenarios where power consumption is constrained, on-site use of
ANNs may not be a viable option. On the other hand, biologically inspired spiking neurons have
long shown great theoretical potential as efficient computational units [1–3] and recent advances in
Spiking Neural Network (SNN) hardware [4–6] have renewed research interest in this area.
SNNs are similar to ANNs in terms of network topology, but differ in the choice of neuron model.
Spiking neurons have memory and use a non-differentiable spiking neuron model (spike function)
while ANNs typically have no memory and model each neuron using a continuously differentiable
activation function. Since the spike function is non-differentiable, the backpropagation mechanism
used to train ANNs cannot be directly applied.
Nevertheless, a handful of supervised learning algorithms for SNNs have been proposed previously.
The majority of them are designed for a single neuron [7–9], but a few have proposed methods to work
around the non-differentiable spike function and backpropagate error through multiple layers [10–14].
∗
†

bam_sumit@hotmail.com
www.garrickorchard.com , garrickorchard@gmail.com

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

