Self-calibrating Photometric Stereo
by Neural Inverse Rendering
Junxuan Li(B) and Hongdong Li
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
{junxuan.li,hongdong.li}@anu.edu.au
Abstract. This paper tackles the task of uncalibrated photometric
stereo for 3D object reconstruction, where both the object shape, object
reﬂectance, and lighting directions are unknown. This is an extremely
diﬃcult task, and the challenge is further compounded with the existence of the well-known generalized bas-relief (GBR) ambiguity in photometric stereo. Previous methods to resolve this ambiguity either rely
on an overly simpliﬁed reﬂectance model, or assume special light distribution. We propose a new method that jointly optimizes object shape,
light directions, and light intensities, all under general surfaces and lights
assumptions. The specularities are used explicitly to solve uncalibrated
photometric stereo via a neural inverse rendering process. We gradually ﬁt specularities from shiny to rough using novel progressive specular bases. Our method leverages a physically based rendering equation by minimizing the reconstruction error on a per-object-basis. Our
method demonstrates state-of-the-art accuracy in light estimation and
shape recovery on real-world datasets.
Keywords: Uncalibrated photometric stereo · Generalized bas-relief
ambiguity · Neural network · Inverse rendering

1

Introduction

Photometric Stereo (PS) aims to reconstruct the 3D shape of an object given a
set of images taken under diﬀerent lights. Calibrated photometric stereo methods assume the light directions are known in all images [7,15,17,31,36,45–47].
However, it is quite a tedious and laborious eﬀort to calibrate the light sources in
all input images in practice, often requiring instrumented imaging environment
and expert knowledge. How to solve uncalibrated photometric stereo is therefore
a crucial milestone to bring PS to practical use.
Recovering the surface shape with unknown light sources and general
reﬂectance is diﬃcult. Previous methods tackle this problem by assuming the
Lambertian surfaces. However, Lambertian surfaces in uncalibrated photometric
stereo have an inherent 3 × 3 parameters ambiguity in normals and light directions [3]. When the surface integrability constraint is introduced, this ambiguity
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1 10.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 166–183, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_10

