PoseScript: 3D Human Poses
from Natural Language
– Supplementary Material –
Ginger Delmas1,2 , Philippe Weinzaepfel2 , Thomas Lucas2 ,
Francesc Moreno-Noguer1 , and Grégory Rogez2
1

Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC, Barcelona, Spain
2
NAVER LABS Europe

In Section 1, we present a description of the attached video; it is a live demo of
our proposed text-conditioned generative model, trained on the human-written
captions of PoseScript. We then provide additional information about the data
collection process in Section 2. We give additional details on how to compute
the different kinds of posecodes in Section 3, and specify a list of those that are
used in our work. In Section 4, we elaborate on additional information about our
automatic captioning pipeline and we compare different versions of the captions
we produced. Additional statistics about our PoseScript dataset are presented
in Section 5, and implementation details are given in Section 6.

1

Live demonstration of text-conditioned pose generation

The attached video shows a live demo of our text-conditioned generative model,
pretrained on automatic captions and finetuned on human-written captions. The
top part is a text area where the user can write a pose description, and generated
poses that correspond to this query are displayed below. The demo starts with
an empty text, and random sampled poses, i.e., with latent variables randomly
sampled from the standard normal distribution N0 (see Figure 1). The latency
in showing the results is mainly due to the internet connection. It takes a few
milliseconds to generate the generated poses, and a few more to visualize them.
The video shows several generated poses per caption. Most of the constraints
specified in the text description are satisfied by the sampled poses; the set of
poses is also generally very diverse, which shows that our model is able to handle
the ambiguities left in the caption. We also observe that more precise descriptions
lead to less variability in the output samples.
Physical plausibility. We do not explicitly enforce plausibility constraints on
the model outputs. As in VPoser [3] (same architecture), these must be learned
by the model from the data. Empirically we did not notice any ‘monster’, except
for some cases of inter-penetration, which also happen in AMASS. However,
an improved prior could be trained with more data, e.g. with all poses from
AMASS, with unconditional pose generation when no caption is available and
text-to-pose generation when they are.

