Supplemental Material for ECO-TR: Efficient
Correspondences Finding Via Coarse-to-Fine
Refinement
Dongli Tan1,3⋆ , Jiang-Jiang Liu2,3⋆ , Xingyu Chen3 , Chao Chen3 , Ruixin
Zhang3 , Yunhang Shen3 , Shouhong Ding3 , and Rongrong Ji1,4 B
1

Media Analytics and Computing Lab, School of Informatics, Xiamen University
2
TMCC, CS, Nankai University
3
Youtu Lab, Tencent Technology (Shanghai) Co.,Ltd
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
{dltan921,j04.liu}@gmail.com, rrji@xmu.edu.cn

In this supplementary material, we give additional details about our experiment settings and results. We first introduce more details during the training and
testing stages in Sec. 1 and Sec. 2, respectively. Then, we describe more experimental results for speed comparison in Sec. 3. Finally, we show more qualitative
results in Sec. 4.

1

More training details

Architecture. We implemented our model in PyTorch [2]. The local feature
CNN uses a modified version of ResNet-50 as a backbone without pretraining.
The sizes of the coarse-, middle-, and fine-level feature maps are 1/32, 1/16,
and 1/4 of the original image size, respectively. The channel number of each
layer’s feature is converted to 256 by 1 × 1 convolutions. For the transformer,
we use three layers for both encoder and decoder. Same with COTR, we disallow
self-attention among the query points in the decode stage. For coarse-to-fine
refinement modules, we set the crop window size wM = 17, wF = 13. For the
AQC module, we set t = 1, Knum = 128. The distance threshold T h is set to 0.8
times of the corresponding side of patches during training and 0.6 times during
inference.

Training data. Our model is trained on the outdoor dataset MegaDepth. Training pairs are generated in an on-the-fly manner based on the ground truth intrinsics, poses and depth maps. For a fair comparison with COTR, We use the
same 115 scenes for training. There are two kinds of pairs, zoomed pairs and
non-zoomed pairs. For zoomed pairs, an extra random zoom level between 1×
and 3× is selected among ten levels in the log scale and applied to images. We
mix these two kinds of pairs up during training.
⋆

Authors contributed equally.

