Learning Phase Mask for Privacy-Preserving Passive Depth Estimation

A

19

Prototype Sensor

The prototyping pipeline accepts a learned phase mask height map and culminates with fine-tuning of UtilityNet and AttackNet with the calibrated
PSFs. The phase mask comprises of heights of individual pixels, which are discretized into steps of 200nm. The mask is then fabricated using a Photonic
Professional GT2, Nanoscribe GmbH (two-photon lithography 3D printer). We
print using Nanoscribe’s IP-Dip photoresist (n = 1.5) on a 700µm thick fused
silica substrate. The printing is done using a 63⇥ Objective working in Dip-in
Liquid Lithography mode (DiLL) mode. After printing, the substrate is laser
cut to fit inside optics assembly of our lens. We also laser cut a black cardboard
ring to act as our aperture and finally insert both the mask and aperture at the
aperture plane of our lens.
Our prototype consists of a modular imaging lens and a sensor as shown in
figure 1(B). To replicate the optics model of our simulation, we install the fabricated phase mask at the aperture plane of this lens. Edmund Optics fixed focal
length modular lenses provide easy access to the aperture plane which makes it
an ideal choice for our prototype. We use a 16mm Cx Series Fixed Focal Length
Lens. To avoid fabricating a low resolution sensor, we use a high resolution sensor and downsample it. We use Lumenera’s Lt545r camera which has a Sony
IMX250 color imaging sensor. The imaging sensor has a native resolution of
2464 ⇥ 2056 pixels, a pixel size of 3.45µm and a 2/3” optical format. The sensor
and lens combination achieves a field-of-view (FOV) of 30⇥25 degrees. Since our
sensor simulation (sensor H in figure 2) hypothesizes a sensor with 16 ⇥ 16 pixels
we intentionally down-sample our captured images from 2464 ⇥ 2056 pixels to
16 ⇥ 14 pixels and pad the vertical direction with reflective padding to end up
with images of 16 ⇥ 16 pixels. If an actual low resolution sensor for the same
imaging area, either the pixel pitch or the pixel size could be increased. Another
scheme could be to implement pixel binning in the analog domain. The choice of
a particular scheme would lead to di↵erent noise levels during capture but since
they can be influenced by other factors as well, we simply assume a Gaussian
noise level of = 0.01 for our simulations.
The learned phase mask has 2048 ⇥ 2048 simulated pixels with a pixel size of
4.25µm. The full size of the phase mask is 8.7mm, so we laser-cut an aperture of
that size. We focus our sensor at 0.1m and calibrate our system by capturing a
series of images of a point light source at 21 discrete depth values ranging from
1 10m, which gives us the actual PSFs of our imaging system. These depths
are the same ones for which we generate the simulated PSFs for learning the
height map. At each depth, the exposure and gain on the camera for individual
channels are adjusted to capture the most variation in PSFs. The captured PSFs
are shown in figure 8. In order to account for non-idealities and misalignment in
our system we fine-tune all downstream models with the actual (real) PSFs on
the NYUv2 and VGGFace2 datasets. Further we collect a small dataset of 800
images and use 500 and 300 images for fine-tuning and testing of UtilityNet
respectively. We divide the images carefully into di↵erent scenes such that images

