Any-resolution Training for
High-resolution Image Synthesis:
Supplementary Materials
Lucy Chai1 , Michaël Gharbi2 , Eli Shechtman2
Phillip Isola1 , and Richard Zhang2
1

MIT

2

Adobe Research

In the supplementary, we first demonstrate an extension of our approach
towards panorama generation (Section 1). In Section 2, we provide additional
qualitative and quantitative comparisons to baselines (super-resolution methods,
discrete-resolution and oracle generators), explore additional model variations,
and investigate the detectability of our method using an off-the-shelf forensics
method. We provide implementation details in Section 3.

1

Panorama generation extension

Our default training setup assumes that we use low-resolution images to learn
global context and patches from high-resolution images to learn details. An alternative setup to learn from patches directly, without ever knowing the entire global
context. One such scenario is panorama generation, where a large-scale dataset
would be much more difficult to obtain than single images. We investigate this
setup on the Mountains domain, in which the generator is tasked with synthesizing a panorama from landscape images, without training directly on panoramas.
Accordingly, we modify the [0, 1] × [0, 1] coordinate grid to [−π, π] × [0, 1], and
enforce continuity on the endpoints by using a sine and cosine encoding prior
to Fourier feature embedding. At training time, we sample a “slice” of the coordinate grid for generation corresponding to a random viewing angle, but at
inference time the entire panorama can be synthesized by specifying the full
grid of coordinates. In this case, we find that it is important to use a cross-frame
discriminator, in which the discriminator straddles the boundary between two
generated slices to enable seamless boundaries in the panorama. Qualitative results are shown in Fig 2. At inference time, we can spatially interpolate the w
latent code with arbitrary spacing, which generates seamless infinite landscapes.

