Supplementary Materials: Learning from
Multiple Annotator Noisy Labels via
Sample-wise Label Fusion
Zhengqi Gao1 , Fan-Keng Sun1 , Mingran Yang1 ,
Sucheng Ren2 , Zikai Xiong1 , Marc Engeler3 , Antonio Burazer3 , Linda
Wildling3 , Luca Daniel1 , and Duane S. Boning1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA 02139, USA
2
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
3
Takeda Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd., Zurich, Switzerland

A Ablation Studies on MNIST
Hammer-Spammer Synthesis. Here we conduct experiments on MNIST under the hammer-spammer synthesis method used in MBEM and TraceReg.
Specifically, we consider the class-wise hammer-spammer synthesis. A hammer
refers to always correct and a spammer refers to always wrong. In their original
implementations, an annotator is a hammer with probability p and a spammer
with probability 1 − p for any class k ∈ {0, 1, · · · , K − 1} (where K = 10 in
MNIST dataset). During our implementation, we find that this synthesis has
too much variance. Namely, one annotator provides wrong labels for all samples
while other annotators provide correct labels for some classes and achieve moderate accuracies. Thus, we slightly revise the hammer-spammer implementation.
For one annotator, we randomly select Ncorrect classes and specify that this annotator is a hammer on those classes, and a spammer on the remaining ones. In this
example, we make up five annotators following our class-wise hammer-spammer
synthesis. Other settings (e.g., learning rate, hyper-parameter) are identical to
the experiment in the main text.
Table 1. Test accuracies of different methods (%) are evaluated under Ncorrect = 3.
The test accuracy of training with golden labels (i.e., upper bound) is 99.20%.
Max AnTs’ Mean AnTs’ Min AnTs’ TraceReg
40.68%

39.56%

38.55%

84.54%

Mjv

MBEM WDN

Ours

86.27% 88.31% 88.26% 88.26%

Test accuracies of different methods are reported in Table 1. The first, second, and third columns report the max, mean, and min test accuracy that the
model trained solely with one annotator’s labels could achieve. All values in
the table are reported after averaging five independent experiments. We observe
that in this case, MBEM, WDN, and our method achieve similar accuracies and

