DetMatch: Two Teachers are Better Than One
for Joint 2D and 3D Semi-Supervised Object
Detection (Supplementary Materials)
Jinhyung Park1∗ , Chenfeng Xu2† , Yiyang Zhou2 , Masayoshi Tomizuka2 ,
and Wei Zhan2
1

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA 15213, USA
jinhyun1@andrew.cmu.edu
2
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley CA 94720, USA
{xuchenfeng, yiyang.zhou, tomizuka, wzhan}@berkeley.edu

In this supplementary, we provide additional training details, quantitative results, and qualitative visualizations. These sections are organized as follows:
– Section 1 provides additional details about our implementation and training
setup.
– Section 2 contains the ablation study for the thresholds of the single-modality
2D and 3D SSL pipelines.
– Section 3 contains the ablation study for performing 2D NMS on projected
3D boxes before 2D-3D matching.
– Section 4 presents additional quantitative results with DetMatch using SECOND instead of PV-RCNN, demonstrating the adaptability of our method.
– Section 5 lists training and inference costs of our method.
– Section 6 contains additional visualizations of DetMatch on KITTI and
Waymo.

1

Additional Implementation and Training Details

For all settings, including single-modality pipelines and DetMatch, we pre-train
on the labeled data, then initialize both the teacher and student model with
these weights to begin SSL training. Similar to prior work [11,8], we ramp-up
EMA momentum from 0.99 to 0.999. We follow Unbiased Teacher [3] in only
supervising classification for the 2D detector in both single-modality SSL and
DetMatch. Further, we adopt their setting of maintaining a constant learning
rate through training and taking the teacher as the final model - we find that
this yields more stable and reproducible performance. Moreover, we replace the
classification loss in the 2D detector with Focal Loss [2], which has been found [3]
to yield more class-balanced pseudo-labels in SSL. The 3D detectors PV-RCNN
[6] and SECOND [9] use Focal Loss by default, so they are left unchanged. For fair
∗
†

Work conducted during visit to University of California, Berkeley.
Corresponding author

