Fast Fourier Convolution

1

Lu Chi1 , Borui Jiang2 , Yadong Mu1∗
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, 2 Center for Data Science
Peking University
{chilu,jbr,myd}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Vanilla convolutions in modern deep networks are known to operate locally and at
fixed scale (e.g., the widely-adopted 3 × 3 kernels in image-oriented tasks). This
causes low efficacy in connecting two distant locations in the network. In this work,
we propose a novel convolutional operator dubbed as fast Fourier convolution
(FFC), which has the main hallmarks of non-local receptive fields and cross-scale
fusion within the convolutional unit. According to spectral convolution theorem in
Fourier theory, point-wise update in the spectral domain globally affects all input
features involved in Fourier transform, which sheds light on neural architectural
design with non-local receptive field. Our proposed FFC is inspired to capsulate
three different kinds of computations in a single operation unit: a local branch that
conducts ordinary small-kernel convolution, a semi-global branch that processes
spectrally stacked image patches, and a global branch that manipulates image-level
spectrum. All branches complementarily address different scales. A multi-branch
aggregation step is included in FFC for cross-scale fusion. FFC is a generic
operator that can directly replace vanilla convolutions in a large body of existing
networks, without any adjustments and with comparable complexity metrics (e.g.,
FLOPs). We experimentally evaluate FFC in three major vision benchmarks
(ImageNet for image recognition, Kinetics for video action recognition, MSCOCO
for human keypoint detection). It consistently elevates accuracies in all above tasks
by significant margins.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have been the prominent driving force for recent dramatic progress in several
research domains. The goal of this paper is the exposition of a novel convolutional unit codenamed
fast Fourier convolution (FFC). Motivating our design of FFC, we consider two desiderata. First,
one of the core concepts in deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) is receptive field that is
deeply rooted in the visual cortex architecture. In convolutional networks, receptive field refers to
the image part that is accessible by one filter. A majority of modern networks have adopted the
architecture of deeply stacking many convolutions with small receptive field (3 × 3 in ResNet [11]
for images or 3 × 3 × 3 in C3D [27] for videos). This still ensures that all image parts are visible
to high layers, since stacking convolutional layers can increase the receptive field either linearly
or exponentially (e.g., using atrous convolutions [2]). However, for context-sensitive tasks such as
human pose estimation, large receptive field in convolutions is highly desired. Recent endeavor on
enlarging receptive field includes deformable convolution [9] and non-local neural networks [31].
Secondly, CNNs typically admit a chain-like topology. Neural layers provide different levels of
feature abstraction. The idea of cross-scale fusion has celebrated its success in various scenarios.
For example, one can tailor and send high-level semantics to shallower layers for guiding more
accurate spatial detection, as shown in the seminal work of FPN [18]. Recent studies have considered
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

