FBNet: Feedback Network for Point
Cloud Completion
Xuejun Yan1,3 , Hongyu Yan1,2 , Jingjing Wang1 , Hang Du1 , Zhihong Wu2 ,
Di Xie1 , Shiliang Pu1(B) , and Li Lu2(B)
1
Hikvision Research Institute, Hangzhou, China
{yanxuejun,wangjingjing9,duhang,xiedi,pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com
2
Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
hongyuyan@stu.scu.edu.cn,luli@scu.edu.cn
3
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China

Abstract. The rapid development of point cloud learning has driven
point cloud completion into a new era. However, the information ﬂows of
most existing completion methods are solely feedforward, and high-level
information is rarely reused to improve low-level feature learning. To this
end, we propose a novel Feedback Network (FBNet) for point cloud completion, in which present features are eﬃciently reﬁned by rerouting subsequent ﬁne-grained ones. Firstly, partial inputs are fed to a Hierarchical Graph-based Network (HGNet) to generate coarse shapes. Then, we
cascade several Feedback-Aware Completion (FBAC) Blocks and unfold
them across time recurrently. Feedback connections between two adjacent time steps exploit ﬁne-grained features to improve present shape
generations. The main challenge of building feedback connections is the
dimension mismatching between present and subsequent features. To
address this, the elaborately designed point Cross Transformer exploits
eﬃcient information from feedback features via cross attention strategy
and then reﬁnes present features with the enhanced feedback features.
Quantitative and qualitative experiments on several datasets demonstrate the superiority of proposed FBNet compared to state-of-the-art
methods on point completion task. The source code and model are available at https://github.com/hikvision-research/3DVision/.
Keywords: Point cloud completion · Feedback network · Cross
transformer

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of 3D sensors, point cloud has been widely used in
3D computer vision applications such as autonomous driving, augmented reality,
X. Yan and H. Yan—Equal contribution.

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1 39.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 676–693, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_39

