Appendix for k-means Mask Transformer
Qihang Yu1 , Huiyu Wang1 , Siyuan Qiao2 , Maxwell Collins2 , Yukun Zhu2 ,
Hartwig Adam2 , Alan Yuille1 , and Liang-Chieh Chen2
1

Johns Hopkins University
2
Google Research

In the appendix, we provide ablation studies, along with both COCO [11]
and Cityscapes [6] test set results. We also include more visualizations and some
failure cases.

A

More Experimental Results

A.1

Ablation Studies

We conduct ablation studies on COCO val set. To ensure the conclusion is
general to different backbones, we experiment with both ResNet-50 [9] and MaXS [18] (i.e., ResNet-50 with axial-attention blocks [19] in the 3rd and 4th stages).
Models are trained with 100k iterations for experiment efficiency.
Different ways for pixel-cluster interaction. The proposed k-means
cross-attention adopts a different operation (i.e., cluster-wise argmax) from the
original cross-attention (i.e., spatial-wise softmax) [17]. The modification, even
though simple, significantly improves the performance at a negligible cost of
extra parameters and FLOPs (incurred by the extra prediction heads for deep
supervision). In Tab. 1, we provide a comparison with different cross-attention
modules serving for the pixel-cluster interaction. In this ablation study, we keep
everything the same (e.g., the network architecture and training recipes) except
the ‘cross-attention modules’. As shown in the table, k-means cross-attention
significantly surpasses the original cross-attention by 5.2% PQ with ResNet-50 as
backbone. Even when employing a stronger backbone MaX-S, we still observe a
significant gain of 4.1% PQ. In both cases, the proposed k-means cross-attention
maintains a similar level of parameters and FLOPs.
We have also experimented with another improved cross-attention: dual-path
cross-attention, proposed in [18]. The dual-path cross-attention simultaneously
updates pixel features and cluster centers, and only shows a marginal improvement (e.g., 0.5% with ResNet-50) over the original cross-attention at the cost of
more parameters and FLOPs. Additionally, we attempted to combine both dualpath cross-attention and the proposed k-means cross-attention (called dual-path
k-means cross-attention in the table), but did not observe any further significant
improvement. Therefore, we did not use it in our final model.
Additionally, we try to add the deep supervision to the cross-attention variant
as well, which degrades 1.2% PQ for ResNet-50 backbone and improves 0.1% PQ
for MaX-S backbone, indicating that deep supervision, though needed to train
the kMaX decoder, is not the reason of the performance improvement.

