Supplemental Materials:
Fine-grained Egocentric Hand-object
Segmentation: Dataset, Model, and Applications
Lingzhi Zhang*1 , Shenghao Zhou*1 , Simon Stent2 , and Jianbo Shi1
1
2

University of Pennsylvania
Toyota Research Institute

In this supplementary materials, we first describe the following details of
this work: 1). details of video frame collection; 2). training details of segmentation network; 3). how we chose the quantity of data augmentation; 4). the
performance of using 100-DOH followed by PointRend. Please note that we also
provide results of per-frame hand-object segmentations and ”see-through hand”
application in egocentric videos. Please check our ”.mp4” file in the supplementary materials for details.

1

Dataset

Our labeled dataset consists of video frames sparsely sampled from multiple
sources, including 7,458 frames from Ego4D [2], 2,212 frames from EPIC-KITCHEN
[1], 806 frames from THU-READ [6], and 350 frames of our own collected egocentric videos with people playing Escape Room. In Ego4D videos [2], we use the
videos from the hand-object interaction challenges, which consist around 1,000
videos. Among these videos, we first sparsely sample one frame per three seconds, and then use 100-DOH detector [5] to filter out the frames that actually
contain hand-object interaction. In order to make our labeled data as meaningful as possible, we ask humans to manually select 7,458 frames with diverse
and interesting hand-object interactions among these extracted frames. Similarly, we uniformly sample one frame per three seconds in EPIC-KITCHEN [1]
videos across 37 participants, then filter out frames that contain hand-object,
and finally manually select the interesting frames to label. The THU-READ
[6] dataset consists of short video clips of 40 classes of hand-object interaction,
which we uniformly sample a few images in each category. Finally, for our own
collected GoPro videos, we also sparsely sample one frame per three seconds,
and manually filter out frames to label.

2

Training Details of Segmentation Networks

In this section, we discuss the details of our segmentation network training. We
use ResNet-18 backbone [3] and HRNet head [8] as our base model for all of our
experiments. For each experiment, we train the network for 80,000 iterations with
SGD optimizer with batch size of 8, learning rate of 0.01, momentum of 0.9, and

