Supplementary Material
Intelli-Paint: Towards Developing More
Human-Intelligible Painting Agents
Jaskirat Singh1,2 , Cameron Smith2 , Jose Echevarria2 , and Liang Zheng1
1

A

Australian National University
2
Adobe Research

Analysis: Progressive Layering

The progressive layering module forms one of the key components of the intellipaint pipeline, wherein much like a human artist, it allows for a multi-layered
evolution of the painted canvas. In this section, we provide a discussion on different aspects of the progressive layering module in order to aid a more in-depth
understanding of the proposed approach. First, we analyse the use of progressive
layering for achieving artistic painting evolution for different domains in Appendix A.1. We then discuss a formulation for extending the proposed layering
mechanism for L ą 2 layers and show its application to achieve a more detailed
layering on images with multiple foreground objects (refer Appendix A.2).
A.1

Artistic Painting Evolution

By allowing the final painting agent to draw a given scene in multiple successive
layers, the progressive layering strategy facilitates for a more human-relatable
evolution of the painted canvas [6]. We next illustrate the use of progressive layering on different domains and analyse some intermediate canvas representations
achieved during the painting process.
Facial domain. Results are shown in Fig. 1a. We observe that instead of directly trying to minimize the pixel-wise distance between the painted canvas and
the target image (as is done in previous works), our method takes a much more
human-like approach to portrait generation. For instance, consider the second
example (row-2) for the painting sequence in the right column. Instead of directly
painting based on low-level features (e.g. white brushstrokes for the mouth region), our method first draws a rough outline for the facial shape. It then refines
this outline whilst indicating (but not drawing) the potential locations of important focalpoints (eyes, nose, lips) through appropriate facial shading. Only
after the intermediate sketch has been set up, does it then proceed to add the
fine-grain details on the exact facial features (eyes, nose, mouth, etc).
General images. Illustrations of progressive layering applied to general object
images are shown in Fig. 1b. Mimicking the layering approach often observed
among human artists [6], the intelli-paint agent first begins by drawing a natural
background scene, before adding in the foreground objects in the second layer.

