APPENDIX
Automatic dense annotation of
large-vocabulary sign language videos
Liliane Momeni1⋆ , Hannah Bull2⋆ , Prajwal K R1⋆ ,
Samuel Albanie3 , Gül Varol4 , and Andrew Zisserman1
1

Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford, UK
2
LISN, Univ Paris-Saclay, CNRS, France
3
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, UK
4
LIGM, École des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
{liliane,prajwal,albanie,gul,az}@robots.ox.ac.uk;
hannah.bull@lisn.upsaclay.fr
https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/research/bsldensify/

We first provide a discussion on the dependency and complementarity between different annotation approaches (Sec. A). We subsequently describe implementation details in Sec. B, present additional experimental results in Sec. C
and show some qualitative examples and failure cases in Sec. D.

A

Different automatic annotation approaches

We provide a summary of the different approaches mentioned in this paper for
annotating signs automatically in sign language interpreted TV shows, which
consist of continuous signing and weakly-aligned English subtitles. We highlight
specifically the limitations of different approaches and their dependencies.
– M refers to automatic sign annotations obtained in previous work [2] from
mouthings, as signers often mouth a word and sign it simultaneously. Specifically, the sign annotations are obtained by querying subtitle words in a signing window with a mouthing-based keyword spotting model and saving the
most confident model predictions. Mouthing is a strong signal, but it cannot be used to annotate all data (since signers do not mouth continuously).
Furthermore, these automatic annotations are skewed towards words with
‘easy’ mouthings.
– D refers to automatic sign annotations obtained in previous work [6] by
leveraging online sign language dictionary clips. In more detail, a joint embedding space is learned between the isolated dictionary video clips and the
continuous signing video sequences. At inference time, the cosine similarity
between the continuous signing sequence and dictionary clips corresponding
to subtitle words is calculated. The sign annotations correspond to the dictionary clips with highest similarity. Although these automatic annotations
are not limited to signs accompanied by mouthings, they are limited to the
⋆

Equal contribution

