Supplementary Material of Detecting and
Recovering Sequential DeepFake Manipulation
Rui Shao

, Tianxing Wu

, and Ziwei Liu⋆

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{rui.shao, twu012, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg
https://rshaojimmy.github.io/Projects/SeqDeepFake

1

Implementation Details

Implementation is in PyTorch. To be comparable in the number of parameters,
we adopt a transformer model with 2 encoder and 2 decoder layers with 4 attention heads. For the training schedule, we employ a 20-epochs warm-up strategy.
The initial learning rate is set as 1e − 3 for transformer part and 1e − 4 for
CNN part, with a decay factor of 10 at 70 and 120 epochs, totally 170 epochs.
We use the SGD momentum optimizer with weight decay set as 1e − 4. We use
a mini-batch size of 32 per GPU and 4 GPUs in total. We set λ = 4. Model
selection for evaluation is conducted by considering the trained model that has
produced the best accuracy on the validation set.

2

Baseline Methods

The most straightforward solution for detecting Seq-Deepfake manipulation is
to regard it as a multi-label classification problem [8]. It treats all manipulations
in the sequences as independent classes and classifies the manipulated images
into multiple manipulation classes. Specifically, we design a simple multi-label
classification network (denoted as Multi-Cls) as one of the baselines. We use
ResNet-34 [4] and ResNet-50 [4] pre-trained on ImageNet [2] dataset as backbones for the multi-label classification network, which is concatenated with N
single linear-layer branches as N classification heads (N = 5 as maximum manipulation steps are 5 in Seq-Deepfake dataset). Moreover, we study a more
complex transformer structure modified for our problem. DETR [1] is a popular transformer devised for end-to-end object detection. This model detects input
images’ bounding boxes and corresponding object classes conditioned on object
queries. We revise this model by replacing the object queries with annotations of
manipulation sequences and only preserve the output of object classes. Furthermore, to examine the performance of existing deepfake detection methods for our
research problem, we adapt three state-of-the-art deepfake detection methods,
a Dilated Residual Network variant (DRN) [9], a two-stream network modeling the correlation between high-frequency features and regular RGB features
⋆

Corresponding author

