Supplementary for
NSNet: Non-saliency Suppression Sampler for
Efficient Video Recognition

In this supplementary, we provide more implementation details and experimental results of our proposed NSNet. Accordingly, we organize the supplementary materials as follows.
– In Section A, we present more implementation details for training and inference of our method.
– In Section B, we provide more ablation studies to further analyze the capability of our proposed NSNet.
– In Section C, we present predicted saliency score distributions to qualitatively analyze the capability of proposed NSNet.

A

Implementation Details

A.1

Training

Pre-processing. Following previous works, the frames fed to recognizer are
rescaled with a shorter side of 256 and center cropped to 224×224 for all datasets.
The resolution of frames fed into Feature Embedding module is 224 × 224 for
ActivityNet, FCVID and UCF101, and 112 × 112 for Mini-Kinetics. Note that
we only use the RGB frames of these datasets for experiments. Following [6],
before adaptive sampling by samplers, T frames are uniformly pre-sampled from
frame sequence. For those videos whose lengths are shorter than T , we repeat
multiple times and splice them to T frames.

Model training details and hyper-parameters. For transformer encoder,
the hidden dimensions of query, key and value is set to the ratio between the
number of input feature channels and the number of heads. The hidden dimension of FFN is set to be equal to the input feature channel number. Dropout [4] is
used to reduce over-fitting. In Video Glimpse module, dropout layers are placed
before classification fully-connected layer with ratio of 0.9 and after temporal
attention layer with 0.2, respectively. In transformer encoder, the dropout rate
after the positional encoding layer is set to 0.2. Temporal random shift is adopted
as data augmentation strategy. The model is trained using SGD optimizer with
momentum of 0.9 and batch size of 64 for 120 epochs. The learning rate is set
to starting at 10−2 , decaying by the factor of 0.1 at the 50th and 75th epoch.

