R-DFCIL: Relation-Guided Representation
Learning for Data-Free Class Incremental
Learning (Supplementary Material)
Qiankun Gao1 , Chen Zhao2 , Bernard Ghanem2 , and Jian Zhang1⋆
1

Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China
gqk@stu.pku.edu.cn, zhangjian.sz@pku.edu.cn
2
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi
Arabia
{chen.zhao,bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

In the supplementary materials, we further validate the proposed approach
by providing the following:
– Section A: Relational Knowledge Distillation in Detail.
– Section B: Details of Adaptive Scale Factors in RRL Loss.
– Section C: Additional Experimental Details.
– Section D: Additional Experimental Results.
– Section E: Feature Analysis and Bottlenecks in Prior Approaches.

A

Relational Knowledge Distillation in Detail

We described the relation knowledge distillation (RKD) in Sec. 3.2 of the main
paper. Here we give some more details of RKD, by illustrating the process in
Fig. 1. We calculate the RKD loss for a triplet of new samples (xa ,xb ,xc ) in
several steps. First, we extract their representations on the old model (fi ) and
the current model (f ), respectively. Then, we transform the representations by
two linear layers ϕ and ψ, and we get two groups of transformed representations
t∗ and s∗ , all of which are points (R2d vectors) in the feature space. Next, from
the point tb we construct edges eab = ta − tb and ecb = tc − tb in the feature
space, and obtain the angle ∠ta tb tc between the two edges. Similarly, we can
get the angle ∠sa sb sc by constructing edges hab = sa − sb and hcb = sc − sb .
Finally, we compute the RKD loss about the sample xb by Eq. (5) in the main
paper. The RKD loss about the other two samples xa and xc are computed in
the same way, which are omitted in the figure.

B

Details of Adaptive Scale Factors in RRL Loss

In Sec. 3.2 of the main paper, we elaborated our relation-guide representation
learning (RRL), in which hard knowledge distillation (HKD) prevents forgetting of previous knowledge, local cross-entropy loss (LCE) improves the model’s
⋆

Corresponding author: Jian Zhang.

