Real-Time Neural Character Rendering with Pose-Guided
Multiplane Images (Supplementary Material)
Hao Ouyang1 , Bo Zhang2 , Pan Zhang2 , Hao Yang2 , Jiaolong Yang2 , Dong
Chen2 , Qifeng Chen1 , and Fang Wen2
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Microsoft Research Asia

1

Implementation Details

1.1

Network structure

Our network structure adopts the encoder-decoder structure following U-Net [5],
which has been proved very effective for conditional image generation. The encoder consists of a series of residual blocks, gradually reducing the feature spatial
size and doubling the number of channels. From the latent feature, the decoder
recovers the feature spatial size with skip connection from the features of the
encoder. The number of features of the first block is 64 and we adopt 5 blocks
for the encoder or decoder respectively. The final layer of the decoder is a 1 × 1
convolutional layer that outputs the multiplane images (MPIs). We adopt a texture sharing strategy following Nex [7] to achieve a more compact MPI, where
every 4 plane shares the same RGB textures. Specifically, the network outputs
240 channels, where the first 192 channels represent the alpha channels and the
remaining 48 channels are the RGB textures.
Also, we introduce a small U-Net structure where we make the following
modifications: 1) Reduce the number of feature channels to 1/3 of the baseline.
2) Remove one residual block for encoder and decoder respectively. As verified
in the quantitative study, this smaller network only introduces minor quality
degradation but enables real-time rendering.
1.2

Data preprocess

After we capture the multi-camera video sequences, we perform the following
data processing for training
Synchronization Our pose-guided MPI synthesis requires temporally synchronized driving frame and multi-views. We use audio to synchronize the videos
from multiple cameras. We utilize a commercial software, Adobe Premiere, to
synchronize the videos according to their audio tracks, which offers synchronization accuracy within a few tens milliseconds to five milliseconds. Because there
inevitably exists misalignment, we ask the character to move a little bit slower
than usual to reduce the misalignment between frames. Instead of processing the
whole video sequence, we divide the videos into overlapping clips and synchronize
the video clips, which we find leads to more accurate alignment.

