CLASTER: Clustering with Reinforcement
Learning for Zero-Shot Action Recognition
Supplementary
Shreyank N Gowda1 , Laura Sevilla-Lara1 , Frank Keller1 , and Marcus
Rohrbach2
1

University of Edinburgh
2
Meta AI

Summary
Section 1 shows how using clustering has a regularization effect on the seen
classes with all samples as well as seen classes with a subset of samples.
Section 2 shows that our approach outperforms prior work with a high statistical significance in most scenarios.
Section 3 shows that our approach is consistently outperforming prior work
when evaluated on the same split.
Section 4 and Figure 3 shows the performance w.r.t. the number of clusters,
which is stable across a wide range of values for this hyper parameter.
Section 5 shows the comparison of aggregation strategies and interaction between visual and semantic features.
Section 6 and Table 4 report the performance of seen and unseen classes separately for the case of GZSL.

1

Regularization Effect of Clustering

In the main paper, we showed the regularization effect that clustering had when
using 6, 10 and 51 clusters in comparison to no clusters. Here, we look at the
same effect with 20 and 35 clusters as well. We see consistent improvements
of over 15% in accuracy for the unseen classes using the proposed CLASTER
representation compared to no clustering.
In addition, we show that using only 35% of the data of seen classes for
training also benefits from clustering on the unseen classes. This can be seen in
Figure 2 While in the case of seen classes, using no clustering has the highest
validation accuracy, at test time for the unseen classes, clustering leads to the
best results. There are a few interesting points to note here. First, no clustering results in clear overfitting. The training accuracy reaches over 80% while
the validation accuracy reaches a peak of 46% before dropping. However, using clustering results in the training and validation curves to be really close to
each other. Another interesting point is that when there is a limited number of
samples, having more clusters results in better performance at test time. This

