Uncertainty Quantification in Depth
Estimation via Constrained Ordinal
Regression
Dongting Hu1 , Liuhua Peng1 , Tingjin Chu1 , Xiaoxing Zhang2 , Yinian Mao2 ,
Howard Bondell1 , and Mingming Gong1(B)
1

The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia
dongting@student.unimelb.edu.au,
{liuhua.peng,tingjin.chu,howard.bondell,mingming.gong}@unimelb.edu.au
2
Meituan, Beijing, China
{zhangxiaoxing,maoyinian}@meituan.com
Abstract. Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE) is a task to predict a
dense depth map from a single image. Despite the recent progress brought
by deep learning, existing methods are still prone to errors due to the
ill-posed nature of MDE. Hence depth estimation systems must be selfaware of possible mistakes to avoid disastrous consequences. This paper
provides an uncertainty quantiﬁcation method for supervised MDE models. From a frequentist view, we capture the uncertainty by predictive
variance that consists of two terms: error variance and estimation variance. The former represents the noise of a depth value, and the latter
measures the randomness in the depth regression model due to training
on ﬁnite data. To estimate error variance, we perform constrained ordinal regression (ConOR) on discretized depth to estimate the conditional
distribution of depth given image, and then compute the corresponding
conditional mean and variance as the predicted depth and error variance
estimator, respectively. Our work also leverages bootstrapping methods
to infer estimation variance from re-sampled data. We perform experiments on both simulated and real data to validate the eﬀectiveness of the
proposed method. The results show that our approach produces accurate
uncertainty estimates while maintaining high depth prediction accuracy.
The code is available at https://github.com/timmy11hu/ConOR
Keywords: Monocular depth estimation · Frequentist uncertainty
quantiﬁcation · Constrained ordinal regression · Bootstrapping

1

Introduction

Estimating depth from 2D images has received much attention due to its
vital role in various vision applications, such as autonomous driving [15] and
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1 14.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 237–256, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_14

