Galileo: Perceiving Physical Object Properties by
Integrating a Physics Engine with Deep Learning

Jiajun Wu∗
EECS, MIT
jiajunwu@mit.edu
Joseph J. Lim
EECS, MIT
lim@csail.mit.edu

Ilker Yildirim∗
BCS MIT, The Rockefeller University
ilkery@mit.edu
William T. Freeman
EECS, MIT
billf@mit.edu

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
BCS, MIT
jbt@mit.edu

Abstract
Humans demonstrate remarkable abilities to predict physical events in dynamic
scenes, and to infer the physical properties of objects from static images. We
propose a generative model for solving these problems of physical scene understanding from real-world videos and images. At the core of our generative model
is a 3D physics engine, operating on an object-based representation of physical
properties, including mass, position, 3D shape, and friction. We can infer these
latent properties using relatively brief runs of MCMC, which drive simulations in
the physics engine to fit key features of visual observations. We further explore
directly mapping visual inputs to physical properties, inverting a part of the generative process using deep learning. We name our model Galileo, and evaluate it on a
video dataset with simple yet physically rich scenarios. Results show that Galileo
is able to infer the physical properties of objects and predict the outcome of a variety of physical events, with an accuracy comparable to human subjects. Our study
points towards an account of human vision with generative physical knowledge at
its core, and various recognition models as helpers leading to efficient inference.

1

Introduction

Our visual system is designed to perceive a physical world that is full of dynamic content. Consider
yourself watching a Rube Goldberg machine unfold: as the kinetic energy moves through the machine, you may see objects sliding down ramps, colliding with each other, rolling, entering other
objects, falling — many kinds of physical interactions between objects of different masses, materials and other physical properties. How does our visual system recover so much content from the
dynamic physical world? What is the role of experience in interpreting a novel dynamical scene?
Recent behavioral and computational studies of human physical scene understanding push forward
an account that people’s judgments are best explained as probabilistic simulations of a realistic, but
mental, physics engine [2, 8]. Specifically, these studies suggest that the brain carries detailed but
noisy knowledge of the physical attributes of objects and the laws of physical interactions between
objects (i.e., Newtonian mechanics). To understand a physical scene, and more crucially, to predict
the future dynamical evolution of a scene, the brain relies on simulations from this mental physics
engine. Even though the probabilistic simulation account is very appealing, there are missing practical and conceptual leaps. First, as a practical matter, the probabilistic simulation approach is shown
to work only with synthetically generated stimuli: either in 2D worlds, or in 3D worlds but each
∗

Indicates equal contribution. The authors are listed in the alphabetical order.

1

