Discovering Deformable Keypoint Pyramids

A

19

Supplementary Material

We first go over neural network architecture details in Section A.1. We then
present additional quantitative results on the Bot-and-Objects (B&O) dataset
in Section A.2. Next we show quantitative results on both datasets on an additional baseline. Next we present an additional result where we inspect the
image reconstruction qualities from discovered Keypoint Pyramids. Next we describe the network architectures for the action category recognition on H3.6M
experiments in Section A.5 where we show that improved keypoints discovery
by our approach improves downstream task performance. Next, we demonstrate
the robustness of our method to multi-object scenes. Lastly, we show more visualizations and examples on both datasets in Section A.7.
A.1

Architecture Implementation Details

In Section 3.5 of the main paper, we overviewed the architectural choices. Here
we provied a more detailed description of the implementation details.
The FPN networks have four bottom-up layers and three top-down layers.
Each bottom-up layer is consists of six Conv-BatchNorm layers. The filter size is
1 ⇥ 1 followed by 3 ⇥ 3, alternatively. For each top-down layer, it consists of one
convolutional layer with a skip connection from the output of its corresponding
bottom-up layer. The same FPN design is used as the feature extraction network
(xref ) and l (x) and to provide input to our keypoint network. The keypoint
encoder at level l takes in FPN features fl (x) and l 1 (x), followed by two ConvBatchNorm-ReLu layers. The keypoint-only reconstruction decoders and feature
refinement decoders are the reverse of their corresponding encoders with bilinearupsampling layers to undo striding. We have also provided our implementation
code for further implementation details.
A.2

Detailed Quantitative Results on B&O Dataset

In the main paper’s Section 4.3, we reported keypoint regression results on
H3.6M which comes with comprehensive annotations of 17 keypoints corresponding to main joints of the human body. For B&O, such comprehensive annotation
is not possible because each scene contains three deformable objects and they
have infinite degrees of freedom. Here, we flesh out the quantitative evaluation
of discovered keypoint representations on B&O in two ways: first, by annotating
5 coarse key points as a direct analogue to the H3.6M results, and next, by reporting the errors for reconstructing the full image from the keypoints alone, for
which we showed qualitative visualization results in Figer 7 in the main paper.
Coarse keypoint regression: On our B&O dataset, we randomly select 1000
images from the held-out evaluation set and annotate five keypoints: one on each
of the three deformable objects, one on the QR code attached to the end e↵ector

