Rethinking Robust Representation Learning
Under Fine-grained Noisy Faces
Bingqi Ma1∗ , Guanglu Song1∗ , Boxiao Liu1,2 , and Yu Liu1†
1

Sensetime Research
SKLP, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
{mabingqi,songguanglu}@sensetime.com, liuboxia@ict.ac.cn,
liuyuisanai@gmail.com
2

1

Terms and notations

We provide a holistic description of terms and notations in Table 1.
Table 1. Detailed description of terms and notations in our paper.
Terms/Notations Meaning
Identity
Faces sharing identity means these images come from the same person.
Class
Faces annotated with the same label construct a class. There may be annotation errors in the class.
Cluster
If there are no less than two faces for an identity, these images build a meaningful cluster.
µj,mj , σj,mj
The mean and standard deviation of the cosine similarity between the sub-center Wj,mj and features.
λ1
λ1 aims to reduce the inter-class conflict.
λ2
λ2 controls the decision boundary of producing operation, which aims to reduce the intra-class conflict.
λ3
λ3 controls the decision boundary of dropping operation, which aims to reduce the intra-class conflict.
λ4
λ4 controls the decision boundary of merging operation, which aims to reduce the inter-class conflict.
Mj
Initial number of sub-centers for class j.

2

Synthetic Noisy Datasets

In our paper, we reformulate the noise type in each class with a more finegrained manner as N-identities|KC -clusters. Different types of the noisy face
can be generated by adjusting the values of N , K, and C. We will give a detailed
description on the process of constructing synthetic noisy dataset.
– Intra-class Conflict. Intra-class conflicts arises from faces with multiple
identities sharing the same label. We design a ingenious method to construct
fine-grained intra-class noisy data. Specifically, we firstly sample a subset of
IDs from MS1MV3 as clean data according to the noise ratio. For the rest
data, we randomly group them into a maximum of 5 IDs, and then merge
them into a random ID in the clean subset. Furthermore, we introduce up to
10 shallow faces into each ID to increase the grainedness of noisy data. Based
on above strategy, we can obtain intra-class conflict dataset with N ≥ K ≥ 1,
and C = 0 in each class.
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author.

