STEEX: Steering Counterfactual Explanations
with Semantics
— Supplementary material —
Paul Jacob1 , Éloi Zablocki1 , Hédi Ben-Younes1 , Mickaël Chen1 , Patrick
Pérez1 , and Matthieu Cord1,2
1

2

A

valeo.ai
Sorbonne University

Additional Qualitative Samples

In this section, we show additional samples of counterfactual explanations generated by STEEX, for the five classifiers mentioned in the main paper (trained
on CelebA, CelebAMask-HQ and BDD100k).
STEEX on CelebAMask-HQ. In Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, we show samples for the
Smile- and Young- classifiers on the CelebAMask-HQ dataset, with images of the
size 256 × 256. The modifications found by STEEX to the images are plausible,
understandable and easily traceable by a human due to their sparsity: they
are mostly around the mouth for the Smile-classifier and on the skin and hair
texture for the Young-classifier. Note that these explanations are not regiontargeted, meaning that STEEX automatically selects the semantics to modify
for the explanations.
STEEX on CelebA. In Fig. 3, we show samples for the Smile- and Young- classifiers on the CelebA dataset, with images of the size 128 × 128. STEEX applies
both meaningful and sparse modifications to the query images and we can make
similar observations as for CelebAMask-HQ.
Region-targeted counterfactuals on CelebAMask-HQ. In Fig. 4, we report examples of region-targeted counterfactual explanations on CelebAMask-HQ, for a
binary classifier on the attribute Young. While the counterfactual explanations
targeting the skin regions part mostly add wrinkles to the faces, explanations on
the hairy parts (hair and eyebrows) slightly turn them to gray. As skin-targeted
counterfactuals are more convincing than hair-targeted counterfactuals, it may
indicate that the decision model mostly relies on the skin texture and wrinkles
to perform its ‘Young’ classification.
STEEX on BDD100k. In Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, we show samples for the Moveforward classifier on the BDD100k dataset, with images of size 512 × 256. To
explain ‘Stop’ decisions, by providing counterfactual images where the decision

