PoseGPT: Quantization-based 3D Human Motion
Generation and Forecasting
Supplementary Material
Thomas Lucas*, Fabien Baradel*, Philippe Weinzaepfel, and Grégory Rogez
NAVER LABS Europe
https://europe.naverlabs.com/research/computer-vision/posegpt

In this supplementary material, we first discuss the attached video which shows
samples generated from PoseGPT (Section 1). We then present additional details about
PoseGPT (Section 2).

1

Discussion on the attached video

Samples generated without observed motion. First we show some samples generated from scratch for four different human actions, namely ‘walk’, ‘turn’, ‘jump’ and
‘dance’. The initial human poses are different for all samples and the human motions are
diverse; this indicates that PoseGPT is able to generate realistic, diverse and discriminative human motions. We also observe that even though the human action ‘dance’ is
not well represented in the BABEL dataset, PoseGPT is still able to generate diverse
samples.
Samples conditioned on an initial human pose. We then show samples obtained while
conditioning our model on a initial pose for the human actions ‘run’ and ‘turn’. There
is high diversity in the future human motions generated by PoseGPT, yet all samples
are realistic futures given the initial human pose, which demonstrates the flexibility of
the model.
Samples conditioned on an observed human motion. Finally we generate samples
while conditioning the model on 10 frames, and visualize future motions for the classes
‘turn’, ‘throw’ and ‘stretch’. We observe that increasing the duration of the observations
allows us to decrease the uncertainty on the predicted futures, even though they remain
diverse and do not mode-drop to a single modality.

2

Additional details

Auto-regressive prediction head. In Section 3.1 of the main paper, we propose to
model correlations between the K codebook indices produced by product quantization by using a prediction head that is auto-regressive over the K codebooks. At train
time, this prediction head takes as input (i) the logits produced by the standard head
*

Equal contribution.

