Supplementary Materials for
“ParticleSfM: Exploiting Dense Point Trajectories
for Localizing Moving Cameras in the Wild”
Wang Zhao1,3 , Shaohui Liu2,3 , Hengkai Guo3 ,
Wenping Wang4 , and Yong-Jin Liu1
1

A

Tsinghua University 2 ETH Zurich 3 ByteDance Inc. 4 Texas A&M University

More Implementation Details

Point Trajectory. We use the pretrained raft-things model for RAFT [16] in all
our experiments. It is trained on FlyingChairs and FlyingThings3D [10]. For
optical flow forward-backward consistency check, we use the threshold of 1px for
MPI Sintel dataset [2], and 3px for ScanNet dataset [4].
Motion Segmentation. For training trajectory motion segmentation network, we
first prepare the trajectory data of FlyingThings3D dataset [10]. The dataset
consists of over 2000 training scenes, and each scene contains 10 video frames,
together with groundtruth optical flow, camera parameters and depth maps. We
run our dense point trajectory generation algorithm to track trajectories from
groundtruth optical flows, and then calculate trajectory groundtruth motion
labels by comparing optical flow with rigid flow from depths and camera poses.
We infer the relative depth information by pretrained MiDaS [13] model. For all
experiments, we use the pretrained midas-v21 model. During training, we directly
take all the point trajectories from 10 video frames and output the per-trajectory
motion label. Weighted binary cross-entropy loss is then applied.
Global Bundle Adjustment (BA). The implementation of our pipeline is mainly
based on the Theia SfM system [15]. With the dense correspondences sampled
from the point trajectories, we first compute two-view geometry [5] between
valid image pairs and decompose the relative poses. In particular, the view pairs
with very few or extremely noisy correspondences are detected with geometric
verification [14] and ignored in the subsequent stages. Then, L1-IRLS rotation
averaging [3] is applied to estimate the global orientations from the relative
rotations among those valid pairs. After filtering outlier pairs with large errors
on the relative rotations, we solve for the relative translations with the global
rotations and apply LUD translation averaging [12] to get global translations.
With these initial global poses, we incrementally triangulate 2D observations as
in [14] and perform bundle adjustment on all the poses and 3D points to get the
final output camera poses. Note that since we triangulate over the correspondences
directly sampled from the dense point trajectories, each constraint in the bundle
adjustment exactly corresponds to a part of the original point trajectory with

