Prototypical Networks for Few-shot Learning

Jake Snell
University of Toronto∗
Vector Institute

Kevin Swersky
Twitter

Richard Zemel
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research

Abstract
We propose Prototypical Networks for the problem of few-shot classification, where
a classifier must generalize to new classes not seen in the training set, given only
a small number of examples of each new class. Prototypical Networks learn a
metric space in which classification can be performed by computing distances
to prototype representations of each class. Compared to recent approaches for
few-shot learning, they reflect a simpler inductive bias that is beneficial in this
limited-data regime, and achieve excellent results. We provide an analysis showing
that some simple design decisions can yield substantial improvements over recent
approaches involving complicated architectural choices and meta-learning. We
further extend Prototypical Networks to zero-shot learning and achieve state-ofthe-art results on the CU-Birds dataset.

1

Introduction

Few-shot classification [22, 18, 15] is a task in which a classifier must be adapted to accommodate
new classes not seen in training, given only a few examples of each of these classes. A naive approach,
such as re-training the model on the new data, would severely overfit. While the problem is quite
difficult, it has been demonstrated that humans have the ability to perform even one-shot classification,
where only a single example of each new class is given, with a high degree of accuracy [18].
Two recent approaches have made significant progress in few-shot learning. Vinyals et al. [32]
proposed Matching Networks, which uses an attention mechanism over a learned embedding of the
labeled set of examples (the support set) to predict classes for the unlabeled points (the query set).
Matching Networks can be interpreted as a weighted nearest-neighbor classifier applied within an
embedding space. Notably, this model utilizes sampled mini-batches called episodes during training,
where each episode is designed to mimic the few-shot task by subsampling classes as well as data
points. The use of episodes makes the training problem more faithful to the test environment and
thereby improves generalization. Ravi and Larochelle [24] take the episodic training idea further
and propose a meta-learning approach to few-shot learning. Their approach involves training an
LSTM [11] to produce the updates to a classifier, given an episode, such that it will generalize well to
a test-set. Here, rather than training a single model over multiple episodes, the LSTM meta-learner
learns to train a custom model for each episode.
We attack the problem of few-shot learning by addressing the key issue of overfitting. Since data is
severely limited, we work under the assumption that a classifier should have a very simple inductive
bias. Our approach, Prototypical Networks, is based on the idea that there exists an embedding in
which points cluster around a single prototype representation for each class. In order to do this,
we learn a non-linear mapping of the input into an embedding space using a neural network and
take a class’s prototype to be the mean of its support set in the embedding space. Classification
is then performed for an embedded query point by simply finding the nearest class prototype. We
∗

Initial work done while at Twitter.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

