Towards Comprehensive Representation
Enhancement in Semantics-Guided
Self-supervised Monocular Depth
Estimation
Jingyuan Ma, Xiangyu Lei, Nan Liu, Xian Zhao, and Shiliang Pu(B)
Hikvision Research Institute, Hangzhou, China
{majingyuan,leixiangyu,liunan6,zhaoxian,pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com

Abstract. Semantics-guided self-supervised monocular depth estimation has been widely researched, owing to the strong cross-task correlation of depth and semantics. However, since depth estimation and semantic segmentation are fundamentally two types of tasks: one is regression
while the other is classiﬁcation, the distribution of depth feature and
semantic feature are naturally diﬀerent. Previous works that leverage
semantic information in depth estimation mostly neglect such representational discrimination, which leads to insuﬃcient representation enhancement of depth feature. In this work, we propose an attention-based module to enhance task-speciﬁc feature by addressing their feature uniqueness within instances. Additionally, we propose a metric learning based
approach to accomplish comprehensive enhancement on depth feature
by creating a separation between instances in feature space. Extensive
experiments and analysis demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our proposed
method. In the end, our method achieves the state-of-the-art performance on KITTI dataset.
Keywords: Monocular depth estimation · Self-supervised learning ·
Feature metric learning · Representation enhancement

1

Introduction

Depth estimation is one of the fundamentals in many computer vision applications such as robotics, augmented reality and autonomous driving. A depth
map reﬂects the distance between image plane and corresponding objects in
real world. Such depth map can be acquired from various sensor setups. Owing
to the low cost of single camera setup, monocular depth estimation has been
J. Ma and X. Lei—First two authors contribute equally to this work.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7 18.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13661, pp. 304–321, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7_18

