Large scale Real-world Multi-Person Tracking
Bing Shuai , Alessandro Bergamo , Uta Buechler
Andrew Berneshawi , Alyssa Boden, Joseph Tighe
AWS AI Labs
https://github.com/amazon-research/tracking-dataset

1

Video Sourcing

1.1

Query keywords

A pre-defined set of search keywords are used to query videos in stock video
services (Fillerstock [1], Pexels [2], Pixabay [3]). The complete list of keywords
is as follows: 1), People walking in the street; 2), People walking in the mall; 3),
People walking in the city; 4), People walking near market; 5), People walking
inside mall; 6), People walking inside shops; 7), People crossing the street; 8),
People walking in open space. We select this set specifically to query videos
that include moving people rather than static people for the interest of tracking
applications.
1.2

Videos Manual Selection

This section adds details regarding the video manual selection process introduced
in Sec. 3 in the main paper. More in detail, our team of experts selected the videos
to be part of the dataset by taking into account the following criterias:
– Application Aligned. We look for videos that appear to come from fixed
connected home or city level cameras. We discard videos captured from television programs that contain advertisement interruptions, or videos with
subtitles or that have been otherwise edited by software.
– Moving crowds. We try to strike a balance between (1) avoiding trivial
videos with one or two people only, and (2) having over-crowded videos
with hundreds of people, which we believe would have posed challenges at
annotation time and lowered the ground truth accuracy. In particular, we
discard videos with less than 5 people, and videos where more than half of
the scene contained crowds, with less than 10% of each person visible. We
also favor the selection of videos containing moving people rather than static
ones (sitting or standing), given the fact that the latter represents a trivial
scenario for tracking.
– Occlusion. We also favor the selection of videos containing high degrees of
occlusions, where people become occluded for one or more seconds, and then
reappear in the scene. This is done in order to promote the development of
algorithms that can handle such situations. We include both partial and full
occlusions, as well as person-to-person and person-to-object occlusions.

