Supplementary Materials for “Quasi-Balanced
Self-Training on Noise-Aware Synthesis of
Object Point Clouds for Closing Domain Gap”
Yongwei Chen1,2∗ , Zihao Wang1∗ , Longkun Zou1 , Ke Chen1,3† , and Kui Jia1,3†
1

South China University of Technology
2
DexForce Co. Ltd.
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{eecyw,eezihaowang,eelongkunzou}@mail.scut.edu.cn,
{chenk,kuijia}@scut.edu.cn

A

Details for Simulating Virtual Active Stereo Based
Depth Sensor

In this section, we give a detailed description for the virtual active stereo based
depth sensor simulation presented in Sec. 3 of our main text. The whole pipeline
can be divided into building a physical simulator of stereo cameras for a photorealistic rendering (see Sec. A.1) and a pixel-to-point generation (see Sec. A.2).
A.1

Rendering with Projection of Speckle Patterns

For simulating a typical active stereo based depth sensor, we first set a stereo
camera and a projector, which can actively project pre-defined speckle patterns
in a simulation platform, e.g. the Blender [3] adopted in this paper. Specifically,
the cycle engine in Blender [3] is employed as our rendering engine, which is a
physically-based path tracer and supports artistic control and flexible shading
nodes. Given object models M = {Mi , yi }N
i=1 as input, the output of stereo
image rendering can be {Iileft , Iiright , yi }N
.
i=1
Pre-processing for Photorealistic Rendering – During the procedure of
data pre-processing, those mesh-based models M are first scaled to a unit-ball
with an arbitrary rotation along the z-axis, which are fed into the render engine together with the settings of scene illumination and object reflection for a
photorealistic rendering. To this end, we place one area light source on top of
the object model to be rendered, which can thus provide a uniform scene illumination. Moreover, characteristics of object material also affect the reflection
of light received on object surface and are sensitive in optical imaging. In view
of this, the bidirectional scattering distribution function (BSDF) material [2] is
adopted in our generation to model the scattered pattern of light by a surface,
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding authors

