Supplementary Material on
Improving Test-Time Adaptation via
Shift-agnostic Weight Regularization and Nearest
Source Prototypes
Sungha Choi⋆

Seunghan Yang

Seokeon Choi

Sungrack Yun

Qualcomm AI Research†
{sunghac,seunghan,seokchoi,sungrack}@qti.qualcomm.com

This supplementary material begins with a discussion of our two proposed
approaches and then provides additional quantitative results examining hyperparameter impacts, the performance of the NSP classifier, the transform function
of the SWR, and the SWR variants. We also evaluate our approach on a large-scale
dataset, ImageNet-C [9], and expand the proposed SWR to support pixel-level
classification (i.e., semantic segmentation) on Cityscapes-C [4,9]. Finally, we provide further implementation details for the projector and additional information
about the experiments on the domain generalization benchmarks.

A

Discussion

A.1

Shift-agnostic Weight Regularization

The intuition of SWR is to control the update of model parameters depending
on each parameter’s sensitivity to the distribution shift. If θ ∗ in Eq. (1) is fixed
as source model parameters without being updated with the model parameters
from the previous step, it is difficult to adapt the model to the target data
sufficiently. Constraining the model parameters not to move away significantly
from the source model parameters is not the purpose of SWR (Instead, NSP
aligns source and target features based on the source prototypes). Updating θ ∗
shows better performance than freezing θ ∗ , and these results are included in the
supplementary Section B.7.
We assumed color and blur as a distribution shift to find shift-agnostic and
shift-biased weights. Using too various augmentations increases the number of
shift-biased weights. This means that more parameters are largely updated,
which may result in performance degradation (Table 8). We conjecture that the
augmentations such as color and blur, which can be commonly included in various
domain gaps, are suitable for finding shift-agnostic weights.
We generated the penalty vector w in parameter-wise, output channel-wise,
and layer1 -wise manners, and we chose the best method experimentally. While
⋆

Corresponding author.
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
1
torch.nn.Module units defined in Pytorch.
†

