Supplementary material: Exploiting the local
parabolic landscapes of adversarial losses to
accelerate black-box adversarial attack
Hoang Tran1 , Dan Lu1 , and Guannan Zhang1⋆
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge TN 37830, USA
{tranha,lud1,zhangg}@ornl.gov

In this supplementary section, we include the following materials:
1. Additional experimental results, where we compare BABIES with two baseline methods, PPBA [2] and PRGF [1] (Section 1),
2. Ablation study showing the robustness of our method to the random seed
(Section 2) and step size ε (Section 3),
3. Scatter plots showing the accuracy of the loss values approximated by parabolas for additional image classifiers (Section 4).

1

Comparison with PPBA and PRGF

We compare our method with two recent approaches, i.e., Projection & Probabilitydriven Black-box Attack (PPBA) and Prior-guided Random Gradient-free (PRGF),
using the same setting (e.g., maximum perturbation and maximum queries) and
dataset as in our main paper. The code for PPBA and PRGF were acquired from
github.com/theFool32/PPBA and github.com/thu-ml/Prior-Guided-RGF, respectively. We use the hyperparameters suggested by the authors of the methods.
In particular, for PRGF, ResNet-v2-152 is used as the surrogate model to provide the transfer gradient. We evaluate two variants of PRGF, i.e., with biased
sampling (PRGF-BS) and with gradient averaging (PRGF-GA), incorporated
with data-dependent prior. Since the Github repositories of PPBA and PRGF
only provide codes and hyperparameters for ImageNet untargeted attacks, we
only evaluate them in those cases. The performance of PPBA and PRGF can
be compared directly with other baselines in our main evaluation for the untargeted tests (Tables 3 and 5 in the paper). We reproduce those here for reader’s
convenience.
The results are shown Table 1. We observe that on successful attacks, PPBA
and PRGF require fewer queries than BABIES. On standard models, the average
and median queries of PRGF are the best, with PPBA and Square-attack slightly
trailing behind, while PPBA performs better than PRGF in robust models.
However, the advantage of both baselines in the number of queries metric is
somehow offset by their low success rates. Here, our BABIES algorithm leads
by a remarkable margin: 10% on two standard models, and 20%-30% on robust
⋆

Corresponding author

