The Caltech Fish Counting Dataset:
Supplementary Material
Justin Kay1,5 , Peter Kulits1 , Suzanne Stathatos1 , Siqi Deng2 , Erik Young3 ,
Sara Beery1 , Grant Van Horn4 , and Pietro Perona1,2
1

1

California Institute of Technology 2 AWS AI Labs
4
Cornell University 5 Ai.Fish

3

Trout Unlimited

Imaging Sonar

In this section we provide additional background information regarding the imaging sonar format and causes of the challenges enumerated in Fig. 2 of the main
paper.
The Caltech Fish Counting Dataset (CFC) consists of video clips sourced
from adaptive resolution imaging sonar (ARIS) hardware manufactured by Sound
Metrics Corporation. Imaging sonars use an array of sound beams to produce underwater images (see Fig. 1B), and have been used to monitor migrating salmon
populations in rivers since 2002 [1,14]. Because sound travels much further than
light in water [22], sonar can be used to make observations at longer ranges compared to photographic systems and is more robust to turbid conditions [18, 22].
It can also be used at night, when salmon often travel to minimize predation
risk [4]. The latest generations of imaging sonar have the additional benefit of
encoding information about real-world distances, i.e. each pixel in the resulting image represents a defined distance in meters. This can be used to directly
measure the length of the observed fish, an important attribute for fisheries management programs in differentiating between species, age groups, and assessing
overall population makeup [9].
The ARIS hardware is typically positioned perpendicular to the river flow,
thus the fish are observed as moving left-to-right or right-to-left once the sonar
data is transformed into video. There are a number of factors which impact the
visual characteristics and contribute to a large variance in the images produced
at different deployments.
Environmental factors include the presence of sediment, floating or static
debris, textured river bottom, and plant material. These affect visibility and
cause occlusion of target fish. These factors change day-to-day due to weather
conditions, as well as on longer time scales due to seasonal variations and anthropogenic impact [24]. The shape and size of the river, which change throughout
the season as water levels rise and fall, have an impact on image quality as well.
Smaller river channels can result in increased echo, and variations in the shape
of the river bottom can make it difficult for a single camera to effectively observe
a broad area, e.g. to cover a steep bank while maintaining visibility further out
into the middle of the river.

