TEMOS: Generating diverse human motions from
textual descriptions
Supplementary Material
Mathis Petrovich1,2 , Michael J. Black2 , and Gül Varol1
2

1
LIGM, École des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
{mathis.petrovich,gul.varol}@enpc.fr, black@tue.mpg.de
https://mathis.petrovich.fr/temos/

This appendix provides additional experiments (Section A), description of the
motion representations (Section B), details on evaluation metrics (Section C),
implementation details (Section D), and dataset statistics (Section E).
Video. Additionally, we provide a supplemental video, available on our website [10], which we encourage the reader to watch since motion is critical in our
results, and this is hard to convey in a static document. In the video, we illustrate: (i) comparison with previous work, (ii) training with skeleton versus SMPL
data, (iii) diversity of our model, (iv) generation of variable size sequences, (v)
interpolation between two texts in our latent space, and (vi) failure cases.
Code. We also share our code base on the project page [10], which reproduces
our training and evaluation metrics. Explanations on how to configure the data
and launch the training can be found in the file README.md.

A

Additional experiments

We conduct several experiments to explore the sensitivity of our model to certain hyperparameters. Our final set of hyperparameters was chosen using the
validation set (starting from a set of hyperparameters similar to ACTOR [11]).
Note that these hyperparameters did not always appear optimal on the test set.
The following ablations provide a sense of robustness to different parameters. In
particular, we show the effects of the batch size (Section A.1), {λKL , λE } loss
weighting parameters (Section A.2) and the architecture parameters of Transformers (Section A.3). All other parameters, such as the learning rate (10−4 ),
the optimizer (AdamW) and the number of epochs (1000) are fixed. For all these
experiments we use the skeleton-based MMM representation.
We also experiment with various pretrained language models (Section A.4).
Note that the evaluation is based on a single random sample. All results can
be improved by taking the best sample closest to the ground truth out of multiple
generations (as next explained in Section A.5). We also experiment with taking
the sample farthest from the ground truth.
Finally, in Section A.6, we report quantitative results for our model trained
with SMPL rotations.

