Real-RawVSR: Real-World Raw Video
Super-Resolution with a Benchmark Dataset
–Supplementary Material–
Huanjing Yue , Zhiming Zhang , and Jingyu Yang⋆
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{huanjing.yue,zmzhang,yjy}@tju.edu.cn

This supplementary file provides the details that were not presented in the
main paper due to page limitations. First, we give more details about our constructed Real-RawVSR dataset. Second, we give the network details for the
temporal fusion module. Third, we provide the ablation study results for 2×
SR. Fourth, to verify the effectiveness of our proposed network tailored for raw
sequence input, we retrain our network on the synthetic RawVSR dataset, i.e.,
RawVD [2], and give comparison results with state-of-the-art methods. Hereafter, to verify the generalization of the model trained on our dataset, we provide
test results on new frames captured by other devices. Finally, we provide the SR
results for large scenes.

1

Real-RawVSR Dataset

We totally captured 450 LR-HR video pairs for 3 magnification ratios. The HR
scenes are captured with focal length setting to 72mm and the LR scenes for
the three magnification ratios are captured with focal length setting to 36mm,
24mm, and 18mm respectively. Table 1 lists the detailed information in terms
of resolutions and scene numbers for our Real-RawVSR dataset. Fig. 1 presents
some examples of our captured scenes, including sports, animals, playgrounds,
cityscape, indoors, streets, etc.
We would like to point out that there may be small misalignments between
the moving area in LR and HR frames when the captured object is moving fast.
Even though we utilize an infrared remote control to signal both cameras to
capture at the same time, it is difficult to keep synchronization for capturing
rapid movements. Fortunately, it only happens in a few scenes.

2

Network Structure

Temporal Fusion. After the interaction module, we get the combined aligned
frames F̂cb and F̂cs , whose temporal length is 4N + 2. Since our temporal fusion
module is the same for the two branches, in the following, we take the Bayer
⋆

This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 62072331. Corresponding author: Jingyu Yang.

