Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases
and their Compositionality

Tomas Mikolov
Google Inc.
Mountain View
mikolov@google.com

Ilya Sutskever
Google Inc.
Mountain View
ilyasu@google.com

Kai Chen
Google Inc.
Mountain View
kai@google.com

Jeffrey Dean
Google Inc.
Mountain View
jeff@google.com

Greg Corrado
Google Inc.
Mountain View
gcorrado@google.com

Abstract
The recently introduced continuous Skip-gram model is an efficient method for
learning high-quality distributed vector representations that capture a large number of precise syntactic and semantic word relationships. In this paper we present
several extensions that improve both the quality of the vectors and the training
speed. By subsampling of the frequent words we obtain significant speedup and
also learn more regular word representations. We also describe a simple alternative to the hierarchical softmax called negative sampling.
An inherent limitation of word representations is their indifference to word order
and their inability to represent idiomatic phrases. For example, the meanings of
“Canada” and “Air” cannot be easily combined to obtain “Air Canada”. Motivated
by this example, we present a simple method for finding phrases in text, and show
that learning good vector representations for millions of phrases is possible.

1 Introduction
Distributed representations of words in a vector space help learning algorithms to achieve better
performance in natural language processing tasks by grouping similar words. One of the earliest use
of word representations dates back to 1986 due to Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams [13]. This idea
has since been applied to statistical language modeling with considerable success [1]. The follow
up work includes applications to automatic speech recognition and machine translation [14, 7], and
a wide range of NLP tasks [2, 20, 15, 3, 18, 19, 9].
Recently, Mikolov et al. [8] introduced the Skip-gram model, an efficient method for learning highquality vector representations of words from large amounts of unstructured text data. Unlike most
of the previously used neural network architectures for learning word vectors, training of the Skipgram model (see Figure 1) does not involve dense matrix multiplications. This makes the training
extremely efficient: an optimized single-machine implementation can train on more than 100 billion
words in one day.
The word representations computed using neural networks are very interesting because the learned
vectors explicitly encode many linguistic regularities and patterns. Somewhat surprisingly, many of
these patterns can be represented as linear translations. For example, the result of a vector calculation vec(“Madrid”) - vec(“Spain”) + vec(“France”) is closer to vec(“Paris”) than to any other word
vector [9, 8].
1

