Learning Where To Look –
Generative NAS is Surprisingly Efficient:
Supplementary Material
Jovita Lukasik1,2∗ , Steffen Jung2∗ , and Margret Keuper2,3
1

2

University of Mannheim
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
3
University of Siegen

Section A provides an overview about the graph representations for each
search space, we consider in the main paper. In section B we show additional
ablation studies. In section C, we provide more details about the experimental
settings. In subsection C.5 we provide additional details for our search method
on the DARTS search space. In section D we describe details about the generator
network, and in section E we list all hyperparameter settings of our experiments.
Lastly, we include a visual intuition of the latent space optimization technique
in section F.

A

Search Space Representations

In this section we give more details about the search spaces we consider in the
main paper.
A.1

NAS-Bench-101

NAS-Bench-101 is the first tabular benchmark designed for benchmarking NAS
methods. This search space is a cell-based search space and contains 423, 624
unique neural networks. Each architecture is trained 3 times on CIFAR-10 [17]
for image classification. The cell topology is limited to the number of nodes
|V | ≤ 7 (including input and output nodes) and edges |E| ≤ 9. The nodes
represent the architecture layers and intermediate nodes can take any operation
from the operation set O = {1 × 1 conv., 3 × 3 conv., 3 × 3 max pooling}. For
visualization purposes, we present in Figure 5 exemplary a DAG from the NASBench-101 search space, with its corresponding node attribute matrix and its
adjacency matrix. Note, a concatenation of the flatted node attribute matrix and
the flatted upper triangular adjacency matrix is the representation our generator
model is trained to learn; this holds for all search spaces.
A.2

NAS-Bench-201

NAS-Bench-201 [12] is another cell-structured search space, which consists of
15, 625 architectures. Each architecture is trained for 200 training epochs on
∗

Authors contributed equally.

