1

APPENDIX
TM2T: Stochastic and Tokenized Modeling for the Reciprocal
Generation of 3D Human Motions and Texts
Abstract. This supplementary provides more details on data pre-process,
implementations details, evaluation metrics, baseline implementations,
AMT user study, motion token contexts, text-based modification, inference time analysis and network architecture.

A

Data Preprocess

Pose Representation. For pose representation, we extract root
angular velocity, root linear velocities, root height, local joint positions, velocities, 6D rotations [16] and foot contacts from raw motions as in [5]. This results in 263 and 251 dimensional pose vectors
for HumanML3D (22-joint skeleton) and KIT-ML (21-joint skeleton) dataset respectively. After all, Z-score normalization is applied
to both datasets.
During training motion quantization model, to mitigate foot sliding phenomenon, the decoder D is asked to additionally predict foot
contact information which is not provided to the encoder E. We also
scale the magnitude of root angular velocity, root linear velocities,
root height and foot contacts by a value of 5 to amplify their importance. To improve the robustness of our approach, during learning
motion2text and text2motion models, we randomly cutting off 0 to
4 frames at the head or tail of pose sequences, which increases the
data variance while not scarifying the quality.
B

Implementation Details

Our framework is implemented by PyTorch. Our codebook B contains 1024 1024-dimentional embedding vectors. Encoder and decoder in motion quantization are two 1D convolutional/upsampling
layers with resblocks. Weighting factor β is set to 1. Transformers
for motion2text and text2motion have 4 and 3 attention layers respectively, both with 8 attention heads with 512 hidden size. The
GRU based text2motion model have encoder with hidden size of 512
while the decoder is modeled as 1-layer GRU with hidden size of
1024. This GRU model is trained with teacher force ratio of 0.4. Bidirectional GRUs with hidden size 1024 are used for motion & text

