Adaptive Transformers for Robust Few-shot
Cross-domain Face Anti-spoofing
Hsin-Ping Huang1 , Deqing Sun2 , Yaojie Liu2 , Wen-Sheng Chu2 , Taihong Xiao1 ,
Jinwei Yuan2 , Hartwig Adam2 , and Ming-Hsuan Yang1,2,3
1

University of California, Merced

2

Google Research

3

Yonsei University

We first discuss implementation and experiment details. Next, we present
more ablation studies of our approach. Third, we provide additional visualization
to validate the proposed design. Finally, we include additional discussions.

1

Implementation Details

Frame sampling strategy for Protocol 1. Following SSDG [6], we train the
model using only one frame selected in each video, and evaluate the model using
two frames in each video. Both the training and test set videos in the original
dataset are considered as data in one domain, and there are no training and test
splits for cross-domain evaluation. We hold out ten frames in each domain as the
few-shot samples. We calculate the average probability for each video and the
HTER, AUC and TPR@FPR=1% scores are obtained based on videos instead of
frames. We use TPR@FPR=1% as the metric instead of TPR@FPR=0.1% since
the test sets contain only hundreds of images.
Frame sampling strategy for Protocol 2. We train the model using ten
frames equidistantly sampled from each video, and evaluate the model using ten
frames in each video for WMCA and CeFA. We use all frames from the SURF
dataset. We split the data into training and test sets for this protocol. As there
are multiple spoof types in WMCA dataset, we use all videos for training, and use
only print attacks, replay attacks and live videos for test. For CeFA and SURF
datasets, we use all data as training set, and use the original validation set for test.
We hold out ten frames in each domain as the few-shot samples. As SURF does
not contain videos, we calculate the HTER, AUC and TPR@FPR=1% scores
based on the probabilities of frames instead of videos. Based on the sampling
strategy, the numbers of frames used in training/test are 16K/9K (WMCA),
60K/12K (CeFA) and 96K/9K (SURF).
Explanation about the benchmark. We follow the typical cross-domain
evaluation setting that is widely used in face anti-spoofing literature [2, 6, 7, 12–
14, 19–23, 25]. We note that the zero-shot benchmark proposed in [15] has been
previously retrieved and is no longer available. The benchmark proposed in [18]
is less used in the FAS literature. The authors study a different topic of detecting
novel live/spoof sub-categories, and their zero/few-shot settings use ten live and
spoof samples from two different sub-categories for adaptation. The problem
setup is different from our supervised few-shot domain adaptation task.

