Sobolev Training for Implicit Neural
Representations with Approximated Image
Derivatives: Supplementary Material
Wentao Yuan1,2
1

Qingtian Zhu1 Xiangyue Liu1
Haotian Zhang1⋆ Chi Zhang1
Megvii Research

2

Yikang Ding1

Peking University

1

Additional Details & Results

1.1

Image Regression

For image regression task, we set the angular velocity of the sinusoidal function
to 30 and initialize the weights of MLPs following [10]. We provide other results
of Set 5 dataset [3] in Fig. 1. We also report the memory consumption as well
training time required in Tab. 1. The proposed training paradigm requires more
memory and time at the training phase for additional computation and storage of derivatives but it is worth noting that the time, as well as the memory
consumption at the inference phase, is the same with or without the derivative
supervision.
1.2

Inverse Rendering

For inverse rendering task, we set the angular velocity of the sinusoidal function
to 1 and initialize the weights of MLPs according to the method described in [6].
LLFF dataset [8,9] consists of 8 scenes captured with a handheld cellphone,
captured with 20 to 62 images. We follow [9] to hold out 81 of images for the
evaluation set. All of the training images are 756 × 1008, but the dataset also
provides the raw cellphone images of 3024 × 4032, which will be used to evaluate
high resolution rendering results in Sec. 4.
We provide other results of LLFF dataset [8,9] in Fig. 2. Tab. 2 reports the
training-time memory consumption and time. Similar to image regression, the
additional cost is only at training-time.

2

Audio Regression

As mentioned in the discussions of the main paper, the training paradigm we
proposed can further generalize to more tasks, as long as the tasks satisfy the
formulation in Sec. 3.1 of the main paper. Here we follow [10] to conduct the
task of audio signal representation.
⋆

This work is done by the first four authors as interns at Megvii Research.
Corresponding author (zhanghaotian@megvii.com).

