RC-MVSNet: Unsupervised Multi-View Stereo
with Neural Rendering
-SupplementaryDi Chang1 , Aljaž Božič1 , Tong Zhang2 , Qingsong Yan3 , Yingcong Chen3 ,
Sabine Süsstrunk2 , Matthias Nießner1
1

Technical University of Munich
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
di.chang@tum.de
2

In this supplementary material, we present our results on the Tanks&Temples
Advanced subset in Sec. 1 and describe depth map fusion in detail in Sec. 2. We
provide details about cost volume regularization of the Cas-MVSNet backbone
and implicit volume construction of our rendering consistency network in Sec. 3.
We also show additional depth map prediction and point cloud reconstruction
results in Sec. 4. Furthermore, we provide an ablation study on number of sampled rendering rays in Sec. 5. Finally, we discuss training strategy of pseudo label
based multi-stage self-training and end-to-end unsupervised training in Sec. 6.

1

Performance on Tanks&Temples Advanced Benchmark

We train the proposed RC-MVSNet on the DTU training set, and test on the
Tanks&Temples Advanced dataset without finetuning. We compare our method
to state-of-the-art supervised [3, 6, 8, 11], pseudo-label-based multi-stage selfsupervised method U-MVSNet [7]. Table 1 shows the evaluation results on the
advanced subset. Our RC-MVSNet is the first end-to-end unsupervised method
on advanced subset of Tanks&Temples. We achieve comparable performance to
the multi-stage self-supervised method [7] and supervised methods [3, 6]. We also
outperform supervised method CIDER [8] by +7.7 (33%) and R-MVSNet [11]
by

2

Depth Map Fusion

After obtaining depth maps through RC-MVSNet, we need to convert them
into 3D point clouds through depth map fusion for further evaluation. Following
MVSNet [10] and R-MVSNet [11], we use geometric consistency and photometric
consistency to remove occlusions and unreliable regions. Geometric consistency
projects depth maps of source images into the reference image and masks out
depth-inconsistency regions. To unify point cloud representation, we compute
the average depth value of the consistent region. As for photometric consistency,
we directly use the confidence maps generated by RC-MVSNet and only keep

