LoRD: Local 4D Implicit Representation for
High-Fidelity Dynamic Human Modeling
Supplementary Material
Boyan Jiang1

Xinlin Ren1 Mingsong Dou2 Xiangyang Xue1†
Yanwei Fu1† Yinda Zhang2†
1

Fudan University

2

Google

In this supplementary material, we provide implementation details, additional experimental results, visualization of the surface deformation within a
local part, additional qualitative results, and discussions about limitations and
future work of our approach.

1

Implementation Details

1.1

Network Architecture

Motion model We adapt the architecture of the IMNet [1] for our motion
model. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), the input is the concatenation of: the motion
code cm ∈ R128 , 3D query point x ∈ R3 and normalized time value T ∈ R1 . The
network is based on multi-layer perceptrons with the skip connection to copy
the input to concatenate with the output feature of the first 4 layers, each layer
has the nonlinear activation of LeakyReLU (α = 0.2) [8] except the last layer.
We follow LIG [4] to reduce the feature dimension of each hidden layer by 4
fold to obtain an efficient motion model. The output of our motion model is a
deformation vector x∗ ∈ R3 that transforms the given point to its position in
the space of the canonical frame, i.e. T = 0.
Canonical shape model The canonical shape model uses the auto-decoder
network proposed in DeepSDF [13], which is shown in Fig. 1 (b). The input is
the concatenation of the canonical shape code cs ∈ R128 and 3D query point
x ∈ R3 , and the network predicts a signed distance value s ∈ R1 for the given
point. We reduce the number of hidden layers from 8 to 6 and the feature channels
from 512 to 256 for the efficiency. And following IGR [2], the softplus activation
(β = 100) and geometric initialization are also used.
Texture model The texture model is used to produce the colored results in
Fig. 1 and 5 of the main paper. We modify the decoder architecture proposed in
Texture Fields [11] for our 4D texture inference, and the architecture is shown
in Fig. 1 (c). The texture model is fed with the texture code ct ∈ R128 and the
concatenation of a 3D point x ∈ R3 and a normalized time value T ∈ R1 , and
predicts the RGB values c ∈ R3 for the given point. There are five residual blocks
Boyan Jiang, Xinlin Ren and Xiangyang Xue are with School of Computer Science,
Fudan University. Yanwei Fu is with School of Data Science, Fudan University.
†
Corresponding authors. E-mail: Yanwei Fu (yanweifu@fudan.edu.cn).

