Supplementary Material
Paint2Pix: Interactive Painting based Progressive
Image Synthesis and Editing
Jaskirat Singh1,2 , Liang Zheng1 , Cameron Smith2 , and Jose Echevarria2
1

A

Australian National University
2
Adobe Research

Paint2pix for Artistic Content Generation

While the main goal of paint2pix is to perform photorealistic image synthesis from primitive human paintings and brushstrokes, it can also be used for
artistic content generation. In this section, we explore how paint2pix along with
encoder-bootstrapping [1] would allow a novice artist to generate different forms
of professional artistic content (e.g., colored sketches, oil painting, disney cartoons, watercolor paintings, etc.) using just few rudimentary brushstroke inputs.
Approach. In particular, we first use the non-adversarial domain adaptation
strategy from Gal et al . [2], in order to finetune the original StyleGAN [6] generator network (e.g., trained on FFHQ [5] for faces) to produce images from
different artistic domains. Different variations in output artistic domain are
achieved through simple text commands for source-to-target domain transition
(e.g., photo Ñ watercolor painting) without requiring image datasets for the target domain. We then use the encoder-bootstrapping strategy from [1], wherein
paint2pix encoding is used in conjunction with the domain-adapted generator
network in order to infer user-intention in the target domain. The generalizability of paint2pix model to different brushstroke variations (or abstractions) is
important in this regard, as it allows paint2pix to reliably encode image semantics from canvas inputs belonging to different artistic domains (e.g., watercolor
paintings) into the latent space of the domain-adapted StyleGAN generator.
Results. Results are shown in Fig. 1. We observe that similar to photorealistic
image synthesis, paint2pix allows a novice user to easily express his/her ideas in
visual form while progressively synthesizing different styles of high-quality artistic content. Furthermore, we observe that the user-intention predictions from
rudimentary user inputs are adapted in order to fit the given artistic context.
For instance, coarse scribbles describing the hair of a person are expressed differently for toon (more shiny) and watercolor (more fluid) painting generation.
This property is highly convenient, as it implies that a novice user can now create
different forms of professional-level art without requiring expertise in the target
domain (e.g., oil paintings, colored sketches, etc.), through the use of just few
generic (not domain dependent) and coarse user scribbles.

