LESS: Label-Efficient Semantic Segmentation for
LiDAR Point Clouds
Minghua Liu1? , Yin Zhou2?? , Charles R. Qi2 , Boqing Gong3 , Hao Su1 , and
Dragomir Anguelov1
1

UC San Diego, 2 Waymo, 3 Google

In this supplementary material, we first present the implementation and
training details of our proposed method and baseline methods (Sec. S.1). We
then show the visual examples of our pre-segmentation results (Sec. S.2), the
full results on the nuScenes dataset (Sec. S.3), and the multi-scan distillation results on the SemanticKITTI dataset (Sec. S.4). Finally, we analyze the generated
label distribution (Sec. S.5) and the robustness to label noise (Sec. S.6).
S.1

Implementation & training details

Pre-segmentation & labeling While some prior works require perfect presegmentation results, our proposed labeling and training pipeline (using weak
and propagated labels) allows imperfect component proposals (e.g., a component
with multiple categories or an object instance divided into multiple components),
which greatly mitigates the impact of pre-segmentation quality on final performance. Our pre-segmentation heuristic only includes two key steps: ground
removal and connected component construction. Compared to other complex
heuristics, it has fewer hyperparameters. Also, thanks to the good property of
outdoor point clouds (i.e., objects are well-separated), we find that, in our experiments, the hyper-parameters are intuitive and easy to select without much
effort.
For example, during the ground removal, we find that the cell size and the
RANSAC threshold are robust across datasets, and we set them to be 5m × 5m
and 0.2m for both datasets. When building connected components, the parameter d should accommodate the LiDAR sensor (the sparser the points, the larger
the d). We set d to 0.01 and 0.02 for SemanticKITTI [1] and nuScenes [2] datasets,
respectively. In our experiments, choosing hyper-parameters with visual inspection is convenient and sufficient to achieve satisfactory results.
For the SemanticKITTI [1] dataset, we fuse every 5 adjacent scans for the
0.1% setting and every 100 adjacent scans for the 0.01% setting. Fusing more adjacent scans will improve labeling efficiency, but may sacrifice pre-segmentation
quality as points may become blurry, especially for dynamic objects. After constructing connected components, oversized components are subdivided along the
xy axes to ensure each component is within a fixed size (i.e., 2m × 2m for nonground components). We also ignore small components with no more than 100
?
??

Work done during internship at Waymo LLC.
Corresponding to yinzhou@waymo.com.

