The Challenges of
Continuous Self-Supervised Learning
(Supplementary Material)
Senthil Purushwalkam1⋆ , Pedro Morgado1,2⋆ , and Abhinav Gupta1
1

2

Carnegie Mellon University
University of Wisconsin-Madison

www.senthilpurushwalkam.com/publication/continuousssl/

A

Ethics and Societal Impact

Research on self-supervised learning has been making progress towards building
systems that can continually learn from data in our world without human
supervision. In this work, we propose a problem setup that evaluates the challenges
faced when such methods are truly deployed in-the-wild. As these systems start
being deployed without supervision, there are numerous possibilities for biases to
emerge based on the statistics of data consumed. These biases could potentially
have a negative impact on our society. Therefore, it is important to exercise
caution when deploying such systems and relying on them for downstream
applications. Before deploying such systems it is also important to thoroughly
study and implement approaches to mitigate such emergent biases.
In our work, apart from working with existing datasets, we gather a collection of 100M images by downloading images from Flickr that have the Creative
Commons license. While this license permits usage in our application, we do not
plan to redistribute the images since they have not been thoroughly scanned
for privacy concerns. The models trained in this work also have not been examined for potential societal biases or other spurious correlations that might have
emerged from the data. While we plan to release the models trained here for
research purposes, we would strongly advise against using them for any real-world
applications.

B

Implementation details

B.1

SimSiam

The experiments conducted in this paper make extensive use of SimSiam, a
contrastive learning algorithm for self-supervised visual representation learning.
We closely follow the official SimSiam implementation available at https://
github.com/facebookresearch/simsiam.
⋆

Equal contribution.

