Disentangling factors of variation in deep
representations using adversarial training

Michael Mathieu, Junbo Zhao, Pablo Sprechmann, Aditya Ramesh, Yann LeCun
719 Broadway, 12th Floor, New York, NY 10003
{mathieu, junbo.zhao, pablo, ar2922, yann}@cs.nyu.edu

Abstract
We introduce a conditional generative model for learning to disentangle the hidden
factors of variation within a set of labeled observations, and separate them into
complementary codes. One code summarizes the specified factors of variation
associated with the labels. The other summarizes the remaining unspecified variability. During training, the only available source of supervision comes from our
ability to distinguish among different observations belonging to the same class.
Examples of such observations include images of a set of labeled objects captured
at different viewpoints, or recordings of set of speakers dictating multiple phrases.
In both instances, the intra-class diversity is the source of the unspecified factors of
variation: each object is observed at multiple viewpoints, and each speaker dictates
multiple phrases. Learning to disentangle the specified factors from the unspecified
ones becomes easier when strong supervision is possible. Suppose that during
training, we have access to pairs of images, where each pair shows two different
objects captured from the same viewpoint. This source of alignment allows us to
solve our task using existing methods. However, labels for the unspecified factors
are usually unavailable in realistic scenarios where data acquisition is not strictly
controlled. We address the problem of disentaglement in this more general setting
by combining deep convolutional autoencoders with a form of adversarial training.
Both factors of variation are implicitly captured in the organization of the learned
embedding space, and can be used for solving single-image analogies. Experimental results on synthetic and real datasets show that the proposed method is capable
of generalizing to unseen classes and intra-class variabilities.

1

Introduction

A fundamental challenge in understanding sensory data is learning to disentangle the underlying
factors of variation that give rise to the observations [1]. For instance, the factors of variation involved
in generating a speech recording include the speaker’s attributes, such as gender, age, or accent, as
well as the intonation and words being spoken. Similarly, the factors of variation underlying the image
of an object include the object’s physical representation and the viewing conditions. The difficulty
of disentangling these hidden factors is that, in most real-world situations, each can influence the
observation in a different and unpredictable way. It is seldom the case that one has access to rich
forms of labeled data in which the nature of these influences is given explicitly.
Often times, the purpose for which a dataset is collected is to further progress in solving a certain
supervised learning task. This type of learning is driven completely by the labels. The goal is for
the learned representation to be invariant to factors of variation that are uninformative to the task
at hand. While recent approaches for supervised learning have enjoyed tremendous success, their
performance comes at the cost of discarding sources of variation that may be important for solving
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

