PCW-Net: Pyramid Combination and Warping
Cost Volume for Stereo Matching –
Supplementary Material
Zhelun Shen1 , Yuchao Dai2† , Xibin Song1† , Zhibo Rao2 , Dingfu Zhou1
and Liangjun Zhang1
1

Robotics and Autonomous Driving Lab, Baidu Research, China
2
Northwestern Polytechnical University
{shenzhelun, song.sducg, dingfuzhou}@gmail.com; daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn;
raoxi36@foxmail.com; zhangliangjun@baidu.com;

Abstract. In this supplementary material, we provide more implementation details and experimental results of our PCW-Net. Firstly, more
ablation study is provided to sufficiently prove the effectiveness of the
proposed method. Then, we introduce the inherent principle of the proposed switch training strategy. Finally, we discuss the limitations of our
method and show more visual results.

1

More Ablation Studies

To further verify the proposed PCW-Net, more ablation studies with different
model settings are conducted here. For efficient evaluation, only the KITTI 2015
dataset (without pre-training from Scene Flow) has been used for training and
evaluation. Generally, four types of experiments have been executed here.
Selection of the Dres in Warping Volume. The displacement Dres is an essential hyper-parameter in the construction of warping volume, which determines
the residue searching range in the refinement network. We test three different
values here, including 48, 24 and 8. As shown in Tab. 1, we find that setting
searching range as 24 achieves the better performance and a larger or smaller
setting will give a negative influence on the network.
Loss function. We employ smooth-l1 as our loss function. Generally, the smoothl1 loss is robust to outliers than l2 and easier to converge to a local minimum
than l1 . Here, we test the impact of employing other loss functions. As shown
in the Loss F unction section of Tab. 1, the smooth-l1 loss achieves lower D1 all
error rate, which proves the superiority of the used smooth-l1 loss.
Feature extraction backbone. We construct a Resnet-like network for feature extraction. Although stereo matching methods usually don’t use universal
backbones for feature extraction, we test the impact of employing some standard
backbones, i.e., resnet-34 to verify the effectiveness of the proposed method. As
shown in the Backbone section of Tab. 1, compared with the commonly used
†

Corresponding authors

