18

A

Vandenhende et al.

Implementation details

This section discusses additional implementation details of our experiments in
Sec. 4 and Sec. 5.
Data. We use the following publicly available datasets for fine-grained image
recognition: CUB [58], iNaturalist-2021 [55], and StanfordDogs [28]. The image
classifier implementation follows the typical implementation in PyTorch and
uses standard image augmentations (i.e., random resized cropping and random
horizontal flipping). We provide additional details for each dataset below:
– CUB: The CUB dataset consists of images of 200 bird species annotated
with keypoint locations of 15 bird parts, e.g., crown, beak, etc. Some of the
keypoint annotations distinguish between the left-right instances of parts:
‘left wing’ / ‘right wing’, ‘left leg’ / ‘right leg’, and ‘left eye’ / ‘right eye’.
We treat these as a single part during the evaluation of the Near-KP and
Same-KP metrics, i.e., ‘left wing’ and ‘right wing’ as ‘wing’.
– iNaturalist-2021: The iNaturalist-2021 dataset consists of various supercategories (e.g., plants, insects, birds, etc.), covering 10,000 species in total.
The dataset contains a larger number of classes and more complex scenes
compared to other fine-grained image recognition datasets. Therefore, the
iNaturalist-2021 dataset can be considered as a more challenging testbed for
our approach. However, this dataset lacks keypoint annotations. We used
the bird supercategory for our quantitative evaluation in Sec. 4, and requested human annotators to provide part keypoint information for 2,060
validation images. The keypoint definitions from the CUB dataset are used.
We did not perform a quantitative evaluation of other supercategories, as
these are considerably more challenging to annotate. Specifically, we identified the following challenges: (i) some supercategories do not have identifiable
parts (e.g., fungi), and (ii) some supercategories are too diverse, and do not
support common keypoint definitions across all sub-categories (e.g., plants,
mammals, insects, etc.). We do provide qualitative results on several of these
supercategories in Sec. C.
– StanfordDogs: The StanfordDogs dataset contains images of 120 dog breeds
taken from the ImageNet [19] dataset. The keypoint annotations are provided
by [10]. Again, we treat left-right instances of parts as the same part, i.e.,
left ear and right ear as just ear.
Classifier. The training follows the typical VGG-16 and ResNet-50 implementation in PyTorch [37] with 100 epochs. All models use pre-trained ImageNet [19]
weights. The training uses stochastic gradient descent with momentum 0.9 and
weight decay of 0.0001. We use batches of size 32 for the CUB and Stanford
Dogs datasets, and batches of size 256 for the iNaturalist-2021 dataset. The initial learning rate is selected via grid search and decreased by 10 at the 70-th and
90-th percentile of training.

