EgoBody: Human Body Shape and Motion of Interacting People from HMD

1

EgoBody: Human Body Shape and Motion of
Interacting People from Head-Mounted Devices
**Supplementary Material**

A

Details of Dataset Building

A.1

Calibration

To spatially calibrate the Kinects-Kinects and Kinects-HoloLens2, we employ
a checkerboard to obtain an initial calibration; we then refine the result by
running ICP [11] on the scene point clouds reconstructed from the depth sensor
of the devices. Additionally, the Kinects-HoloLens2 calibration is refined by the
keypoint-based optimization scheme as described in the main paper Sec. 3.3.
To register camera data into the 3D scene, we first manually annotate a set of
correspondence points between the scene mesh and scene point clouds given by
the Kinect depth frames to obtain an initial rigid transformation, which is again
refined via ICP.
A.2

SMPL-X Body Model

We use SMPL-X [73], which represents the body as a function Mb ( , , ✓, ).
It maps global translation
2 R3 , body shape
2 R10 , pose ✓ and facial
10
expression 2 R to a triangle body mesh with 10,475 body vertices. Mb =
(Vb , Fb ) with body vertices Vb 2 R10475⇥3 and faces Fb . The pose parameters
include body, facial and hand poses. J( ) denotes the 3D body joints in the
neutral pose, which can then be posed according to a given ✓.
A.3

Data Processing

Body point cloud extraction. We use Mask-RCNN [31] to get coarse human
instance segmentation masks in Kinect RGB frames and refine the masks with
DeepLabv3 [31]. The obtained human instance segmentation masks are mapped
to Kinect depth frames to segment the human body point clouds from point
clouds extracted from depth.
Subject index reordering. Note that OpenPose [13], DeepLabv3 and MaskRCNN all work per-frame, without temporal tracking. For each sequence, we
therefore reorder subject indices from OpenPose detections and human masks
by their relative position to each other in 2D, such that each subject has a
consistent index across all frames and all Kinect views.
Data cleaning. 2D joint detection and human instance segmentation can fail in
the presence of body-body or body-scene occlusions (Fig. S1 left/middle). Thus
we manually clean the failed detections and exclude them from the reconstruction

