Supplementary Materials for
Point Scene Understanding via Disentangled
Instance Mesh Reconstruction
Jiaxiang Tang1 , Xiaokang Chen1 , Jingbo Wang2 , and Gang Zeng1
1

Key Laboratory of Perception (MoE), School of AI, Peking University
2
Chinese University of Hong Kong
{tjx, pkucxk}@pku.edu.cn, wj020@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, zeng@pku.edu.cn

A

Data Processing

In this section, we detail the data processing in our experiments.

A.1

Semantic Segmentation Labels

To enable training with both ScanNet point-level annotations and Scan2CAD
instance-level annotations, we first make a compatible label system that contains
25 semantic classes, including 2 stuff classes and 23 object classes. This label
system basically extends the ScanNet 20-class label system by subdividing some
classes, to make sure we can convert safely to the CAD 8-class label system. The
full label mapping is shown in Figure 1 (d). For the semantic segmentation task,
we use all the 25 classes as the supervision.

A.2

Instance Segmentation Labels

Due to the complicated containment relationships between these two label systems as shown in Figure 1 (d), the ScanNet instance segmentation labels are
still inconsistent with Scan2CAD models. For example, the cabinet class in
Scan2CAD may refer to cabinet, counter, refrigerator in ScanNet instance segmentation annotations. Directly using the ScanNet annotations may lead to
inaccurate instance supervision for our task, such as the instance centers and
point-wise offsets. Figure 1 (a) and (b) shows an example of such a condition.
Therefore, we need to merge the instances that belong to the same CAD class.
Since these instances mainly belong to the cabinet class, we use the instance
bounding boxes from the Scan2CAD dataset to rectify the ScanNet instance
segmentation annotations, as illustrated in Figure 1 (c). These new instance labels are used to supervise the instance segmentation task in our pipeline. Please
note that we do not manually annotate this dataset, but only rearrange the
existing annotations to make the training consistent.

