To Trust Or Not To Trust A Classifier
Heinrich Jiang∗
Google Research
heinrichj@google.com

Been Kim
Google Brain
beenkim@google.com

Melody Y. Guan†
Stanford University
mguan@stanford.edu

Maya Gupta
Google Research
mayagupta@google.com

Abstract
Knowing when a classifier’s prediction can be trusted is useful in many applications
and critical for safely using AI. While the bulk of the effort in machine learning
research has been towards improving classifier performance, understanding when
a classifier’s predictions should and should not be trusted has received far less
attention. The standard approach is to use the classifier’s discriminant or confidence
score; however, we show there exists an alternative that is more effective in many
situations. We propose a new score, called the trust score, which measures the
agreement between the classifier and a modified nearest-neighbor classifier on
the testing example. We show empirically that high (low) trust scores produce
surprisingly high precision at identifying correctly (incorrectly) classified examples,
consistently outperforming the classifier’s confidence score as well as many other
baselines. Further, under some mild distributional assumptions, we show that if the
trust score for an example is high (low), the classifier will likely agree (disagree)
with the Bayes-optimal classifier. Our guarantees consist of non-asymptotic rates
of statistical consistency under various nonparametric settings and build on recent
developments in topological data analysis.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) is a powerful and widely-used tool for making potentially important decisions,
from product recommendations to medical diagnosis. However, despite ML’s impressive performance,
it makes mistakes, with some more costly than others. As such, ML trust and safety is an important
theme [1, 2, 3]. While improving overall accuracy is an important goal that the bulk of the effort in
ML community has been focused on, it may not be enough: we need to also better understand the
strengths and limitations of ML techniques.
This work focuses on one such challenge: knowing whether a classifier’s prediction for a test example
can be trusted or not. Such trust scores have practical applications. They can be directly shown to
users to help them gauge whether they should trust the AI system. This is crucial when a model’s
prediction influences important decisions such as a medical diagnosis, but can also be helpful even
in low-stakes scenarios such as movie recommendations. Trust scores can be used to override the
classifier and send the decision to a human operator, or to prioritize decisions that human operators
should be making. Trust scores are also useful for monitoring classifiers to detect distribution shifts
that may mean the classifier is no longer as useful as it was when deployed.
∗
†

All authors contributed equally.
Work done while intern at Google Research.
An open-source implementation of Trust Scores can be found here: https://github.com/google/TrustScore

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

