Supplementary for ‘DeepMend: Learning
Occupancy Functions to Represent Shape for
Repair’
Nikolas Lamb , Sean Banerjee , and Natasha Kholgade Banerjee
Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699, USA
{lambne,sbanerje,nbanerje}@clarkson.edu

1

Point Sampling Method

To obtain sample points X for training and inference, referenced in Section 3
of the main paper, for each shape S ∈ {C, F, R}, we sample n5 points from a
uniform distribution within a cube with side lengths of 1.1 units that surrounds
S, and 4n
5 points near the surface of S. To obtain the surface points, we densely
sample the surface of the mesh corresponding to S and perturb the sampled
points by adding a random translation from a normal distribution with σ = 0.02
units. During training we merge sampled points for C, F , and R to obtain X . For
training we use n = 5, 461 for F and R, and n = 5, 462 for C. When obtaining
a set of sample points for a given tuple of training shapes, after merging the
sampled points we ensure that of the n points, at least m points are sampled
from the interior of each shape and at least m points are sampled from the
exterior of each shape, where we use m = n6 . During inference, we use the same
sampling approach except we only sample points from F , and use n = 8, 000.
When obtaining the sample points we ensure that half of the points belong to
the interior of F and half of the points belong to the exterior of F .

2

Network Implementation Details for DeepMend

As discussed in Section 3 of the main paper, we represent the occupancy function
for the complete shape and the break shape with neural networks fΘ and gΦ
respectively. Network fΘ has 8 dense layers where layers 1 to 4 and 6 to 8
contain 512 units each and layer 5 contains 509 - p units with a skip connection
to the input. Network gΦ has 5 dense layers with 512 units each. We use the
leaky rectified linear unit (ReLU) for all intermediate dense layers, and use the
sigmoid as the activation function for the final layers of fΘ and gΦ to output the
probability that point x is inside the shape. During training we apply dropout
with a probability of 0.2 and weight normalization [2] to each layer of fΘ and
gΦ . For training we use the Adam optimizer [1] with a learning rate of 5e − 4 for
the network parameters Θ and Φ and with a learning rate of 1e−3 for the latent
codes. We train for 2,000 epochs. For inference we use the Adam optimizer with
a learning rate of 5e − 3 for the latent codes, and perform optimization for 1600

