Supplementary Material: Multi-domain Learning
for Updating Face Anti-spoofing Models
Xiao Guo, Yaojie Liu, Anil Jain, and Xiaoming Liu
Michigan State University
{guoxia11,liuyaoj1,liuxm,jain}@cse.msu.edu

In this supplementary material, we provide some detailed explanations on
our method and implementation details in the experiment section.

1

More Method Details

1.1

Face Reconstruction Analysis

The motivation of using face reconstruction in our method is that, although
it cannot reconstruct the perfect live faces given its spoof counterpart, but it
can largely shed the light on spatial pixel location where spoofness occurs. As
introduced in Sec. 3.2, we use such a reconstruction method to generate the
preliminary mask Ipre as the pseudo label that supervises the proposed SRE.
We offer the detailed visualization in Fig. 1.
In general, we have categorized spoof types into three main genera: (a) covered materials; (b) makeup stroke; (c) visual artifacts (i.e., color distortion and
moire effect) in the replay and print attacks. In particular, for covered materials, reconstruction methods largely erase these spoof materials, such as funny
glasses, and human mask. As shown from Fig. 1, Ipre can roughly locate the
pixel-wise spatial location that has been covered by the spoof material, and the
estimated spoof region gives the more accurate prediction on pixels that are
covered by these spoof materials. For makeup stroke, the reconstruction method
changes the color and texture of the facial makeup area, making them similar to
the natural skin. Ipre offers the scattered, discrete binary mask and estimated
spoof region provides the smoother region indicating the spoofness. For replay
and print attacks, the reconstruction method modifies facial structure (i.e., nose
and eyes) of the human face, or largely change the image’s appearance, by providing the image with a sense of depth. Similar as makeup stroke genera, Ipre
gives very discontinuous predictions on spoofness whereas the estimated spoof
region is smoother and semantic.
1.2

Model Response

When a target domain image Itarget is fed to the pre-trained model, the pretrained model will be activated, as if the pre-trained model takes as input source
domain images Isource which has resemblance with Itarget . In other words, the
pre-trained model recognizes it as source domain images Isource which has common characteristic and pattern with Itarget . Therefore, source data can manifest

