Point Cloud Compression with Range
Image-based Entropy Model for Autonomous
Driving
Sukai Wang1,4

and Ming Liu123

1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Nansha,
Guangzhou, 511400, Guangdong, China
3
HKUST Shenzhen-Hong Kong Collaborative Innovation Research Institute, Futian,
Shenzhen
4
Clear Water Bay Institute of Autonomous Driving, Hong Kong SAR, China
{swangcy, eelium}@ust.hk
2

Abstract. In this supplementary material, we first introduce the network details and the training details, and then further evaluate and discuss the runtime of our compression and decompression framework. We
also visualize the comparison results of our method and the baseline
methods with the error bar in three different datasets (KITTI, Oxford,
and Campus16) and exhibit the detection performance in the KITTI
detection dataset.

1

Compression Framework

Our proposed framework is the first to apply the entropy model in point cloud
compression based on the range image. And we find that the neural network is
suitable for the coarse range image prediction and refinement. Compared with
the RGB image compression technologies, our proposed framework doesn’t alter
the original data and achieves better performance using the geometry features.
From the experiments of the SOTA OctSqueeze[2], we can find that directly
applying the image deep neural network into the range image cannot get good
enough results, even worse than the G-PCC and the other traditional baselines.
Also, currently, the SOTA tree-based learnable networks, like OctSqueeze[2] and
VoxelContext[4] are not open-source for reproduction. We are promised to release
our code for better usage and comparison.

2

Network Details

The RICNetstage1 and RICNetstage2 contain a Minkowski Unet14 architecture
as the 3D feature extractor, two scan-attentive feature conv (SAC) blocks as the
2D feature fusion module, and one 1D conv layer as the occupancy head or refinement head for two sub-models respectively. The detailed overall architecture
of the RICNet is shown in Fig. 1.

