3D Siamese Transformer Network
for Single Object Tracking on Point
Clouds
Le Hui, Lingpeng Wang, Linghua Tang, Kaihao Lan, Jin Xie(B) ,
and Jian Yang(B)
Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information
of Ministry of Education Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding
for Social Security PCA Lab, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{le.hui,cslpwang,tanglinghua,lkh,csjxie,csjyang}@njust.edu.cn
Abstract. Siamese network based trackers formulate 3D single object
tracking as cross-correlation learning between point features of a template and a search area. Due to the large appearance variation between
the template and search area during tracking, how to learn the robust
cross correlation between them for identifying the potential target in the
search area is still a challenging problem. In this paper, we explicitly
use Transformer to form a 3D Siamese Transformer network for learning robust cross correlation between the template and the search area of
point clouds. Speciﬁcally, we develop a Siamese point Transformer network to learn shape context information of the target. Its encoder uses
self-attention to capture non-local information of point clouds to characterize the shape information of the object, and the decoder utilizes
cross-attention to upsample discriminative point features. After that, we
develop an iterative coarse-to-ﬁne correlation network to learn the robust
cross correlation between the template and the search area. It formulates
the cross-feature augmentation to associate the template with the potential target in the search area via cross attention. To further enhance the
potential target, it employs the ego-feature augmentation that applies
self-attention to the local k-NN graph of the feature space to aggregate target features. Experiments on the KITTI, nuScenes, and Waymo
datasets show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on
the 3D single object tracking task. Source code is available at https://
github.com/fpthink/STNet.
Keywords: 3D single object tracking · Siamese network ·
Transformer · Point clouds

1

Introduction

Object tracking is a classic task in computer vision, and contributes to various
applications, such as autonomous driving [34,39,41], visual surveillance [59,72],
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1 17.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 293–310, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_17

