Supplementary Material – Learning Degradation
Representations for Image Deblurring
Dasong Li1 , Yi Zhang1 , Ka Chun Cheung2 , Xiaogang Wang1,4 ,
Hongwei Qin3⋆⋆ , and Hongsheng Li1,4,5⋆⋆
1
MMLab, CUHK 2 NVIDIA AI Technology Center 3 SenseTime Research
4
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence Limited 5 Xidian University
{dasongli@link, hsli@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk, qinhongwei@sensetime.com

1

Architecture of Encoder

In our framework, one encoder E and two generators Gr , Gd for reblurring and
deblurring are optimized to achieve deblurring with learned degradation representations. We list the architecture and detailed operations of the encoder E in
Table 1. We use leaky ReLU [2] as the activation layer. We perform the reflection
padding for 1-stride convolution layers. We also add the spectral normalization
[3] for all Convolution layers.

2

Ablation of Reblurring

We select our method of reblurring as the baseline and remove the 2D degradation map and adversarial training to evaluate their effectiveness. Qualitative
analysis is performed on the blurry images generated from different settings.
First, we replace the 2D degradation map with a 1D latent code (denoted as “Gr
w/ 1D”). The results in Fig. 1 show that the 1D latent code cannot properly
model the spatially varying blurry patterns. The sharp regions are also affected
by the blurry regions in Fig. 1. Second, we remove the adversarial training and
only use the L1 distance as the loss function (denoted as “Gr w/ L1 only”). It is
observed in Fig. 1 that the generator Gr trained with only L1 loss function to the
ground-truth pixel values cannot well reconstruct the complicated blurry images,
which affects the expressiveness of the learned degradation representations.

3

Full-frame Deblurring Results

We compare our method with HINet on GoPro [4] and RealBlur [5] test datasets
for full-frame deblurring. The deblurring images for GoPro dataset and RealBlur
dataset are shown in Figures 2 and 3, respectively.

2

Corresponding authors

