Learning Series-Parallel Lookup Tables for
Efficient Image Super-Resolution
Supplementary Material
Cheng Ma1,2,∗ , Jingyi Zhang1,2,∗ , Jie Zhou1,2 , and Jiwen Lu1,2,†
1

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
macheng17@tsinghua.org.cn; zhangjy20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

A

Details of Mapping Modules

In the training phase, we replace the LUTs with mapping modules, which are
comprised of a convolutional layer with a kernel size of kh × kw , activation layers
of GELU [1] and 1 × 1 convolutional layers. The architecture is displayed in
Fig. 1. All convolutional layers output feature maps with 64 channels except the
last one. The output channel number Cout of the last convolutional layer is set
to Cout = Cf for the mapping modules that extract intermediate features and
Cout = CSR = s2 for the mapping modules that produce the final SR results. s is
the upscaling factor. The consecutive 1×1 convolutions followed by GELU layers
strengthen the nonlinearity and representative ability of the mapping modules.
In the last query block of each parallel branch, the mapping module contains an
additional pixel-shuffle layer [3]. It maps the outputs vectors with s2 channels to
s × s output patches to get the final SR images. In the inference phase, we only
care about the inputs and outputs of these mapping modules. Therefore, the
detailed architecture of the mapping modules does NOT affect the computation
complexity of LUTs.

B

Details of SPLUT-S and SPLUT-L

We design three SPLUT models with different model sizes, namely SPLUT-S,
SPLUT-M, and SPLUT-L. The three models have similar architectures. The
difference between the three models lies in the channel number of intermediate
features Cf and the details of query blocks. We have introduced the details of
SPLUT-M in Section 3 of our main paper. SPLUT-S and SPLUT-L have the
same overall framework as SPLUT-M but have different query blocks. Note that
the three models have the same receptive field size. Here we describe the details
of their query blocks, which are shown in Fig. 3.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

