3D Human Pose Estimation Using Möbius
Graph Convolutional Networks
Niloofar Azizi1(B) , Horst Possegger1 , Emanuele Rodolà2 , and Horst Bischof1
1

Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria
{azizi,possegger,bischof}@icg.tugraz.at
2
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy
rodola@di.uniroma1.it
Abstract. 3D human pose estimation is fundamental to understanding human
behavior. Recently, promising results have been achieved by graph convolutional networks (GCNs), which achieve state-of-the-art performance and provide
rather light-weight architectures. However, a major limitation of GCNs is their
inability to encode all the transformations between joints explicitly. To address
this issue, we propose a novel spectral GCN using the Möbius transformation
(MöbiusGCN). In particular, this allows us to directly and explicitly encode the
transformation between joints, resulting in a significantly more compact representation. Compared to even the lightest architectures so far, our novel approach requires 90–98% fewer parameters, i.e. our lightest MöbiusGCN uses only
0.042M trainable parameters. Besides the drastic parameter reduction, explicitly encoding the transformation of joints also enables us to achieve state-of-theart results. We evaluate our approach on the two challenging pose estimation
benchmarks, Human3.6M and MPI-INF-3DHP, demonstrating both state-of-theart results and the generalization capabilities of MöbiusGCN.

1 Introduction
Estimating 3D human pose helps to analyze human motion and behavior, thus enabling
high-level computer vision tasks such as action recognition [30], sports analysis [49,
64], augmented and virtual reality [15]. Although human pose estimation approaches
already achieve impressive results in 2D, this is not sufficient for many analysis tasks,
because several 3D poses can project to exactly the same 2D pose. Thus, knowledge of
the third dimension can significantly improve the results on the high-level tasks.
Estimating 3D human joint positions, however, is challenging. On the one hand,
there are only very few labeled datasets because 3D annotations are expensive. On
the other hand, there are self-occlusions, complex joint inter-dependencies, small and
barely visible joints, changes in appearance like clothing and lighting, and the many
degrees of freedom of the human body.
To solve 3D human pose estimation, some methods utilize multi-views [50, 70],
synthetic datasets [46], or motion [25, 55]. For improved generalization, however, we
follow the most common line of work and estimate 3D poses given only the 2D estimate
of a single RGB image as input, similar to [27, 33, 45]. First, we compute 2D pose joints
given RGB images using an off-the-shelf architecture. Second, we approximate the 3D
pose of the human body using the estimated 2D joints.
c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022

S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13661, pp. 160–178, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7_10

