Supplementary Material
A

Sherlock Data Collection and Evaluation

The dataset was collected during the month of February of 2021. The data
collected is in English and HITs were open to workers originating from US,
Canada, Great Britain and Australia. We target for a worker payment rate of
$15/hour for all our HITs. For data collection and qualifications, average pay for
the workers came to $16-$20 with median workers being compensated $12/hour.
We hash Worker IDs to preserve anonymity. A sample of data collection HIT
is shown in Fig. 4 (with instructions shown in Fig. 3).

A.1

Qualification of Workers

As a means for ensuring high quality annotations, 266 workers were manually
selected through a qualification and training rounds. The workers were presented with three images and asked to provide three observation pairs per
image. Each of the worker responses were manually evaluated. A total 297
workers submitting 8 reasonable observation pairs out of of 9 were qualified
for training.
The process of creating bounding boxes and linking these boxes to the observation pairs was complex enough to necessitate a training stage. For
the training round, qualified workers were given a standard data collection hit
(Fig. 4) at a higher pay to account for the time expected for them to learn the
process. An additional training round was encouraged for a small pool of workers to ensure all workers were on the page with regards to the instructions and
the mechanism of the hit. 266 workers worked on and completed the training
(remaining 31 did not return for the training round). In this paper, we use
the term qualified workers to refer to the workers who have completed both the
qualification and training round.

A.2

Data Collection

As described in §3, we collected a total of 363K observation pairs which
consist of a clue and inference. Further examples of annotations are shown in
Fig. 7.
Image sourcing. For VCR images, we use the subset also annotated by VisualCOMET [44]; we limit our selection to images that contain at least 3 unique entities (persons or objects). For Visual Genome, during early annotation rounds,
crowdworkers shared that particular classes of images were common and less
interesting (e.g., grazing zebras, sheep in pastures). In response, we performed
a semantic de-duplication step by hierarchical clustering into 80K clusters of
extracted CLIP ViT-B/32 features [51] and sample a single image from each
resulting cluster. We annotate 103K images in total, and divide them into
a training/validation/test set of 90K/6.6K/6.6K, aligned with the community
standard splits for these corpora.
1

