Estimating Spatially-Varying Lighting in Urban
Scenes with Disentangled Representation
(Supplemental Material)
Jiajun Tang1 , Yongjie Zhu2 , Haoyu Wang1 , Jun Hoong Chan1 ,
Si Li2 , and Boxin Shi1,3
1

2

NERCVT, School of Computer Science, Peking University
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory

In this supplementary material, we provide more details about our data
collection, implementation details and network architectures. We also show
additional results on our enhanced synthetic dataset, captured real data and
collected in-the-wild data.

7

Appendix

7.1

Data Collection Details

For synthetic data generation, we collect 30 PBR materials from ambientCG [1]
in 4 categories: bricks, concrete, pavement, and grass field; we then mark the 3D
city model with the category labels and randomly replace the materials following
the category labels in Blender [2]4 . After material enhancement, we follow the
camera sampling and rendering process proposed in SOLID-Net [13]. Specifically,
the view point (x, y, z) of the local lighting is 10 cm away from the surface at
the designated pixel position (u, v) along its normal.
When capturing the real data of the outdoor spatially-varying lighting, we
use a level to ensure we capture the correct sun elevation angle relative to the
skyline and we use a compass to ensure we capture the correct sun azimuth angle
in the panoramas relative to the observation direction of the limited-FoV images.
Due to the long capture time and the moving clouds, we discard the data if the
lighting environment changes largely in its capture process, which makes our
data capture very time-consuming, especially in (partly-)cloudy weathers.
7.2

Implementation Details

In our implementation, we use 128 parameters in total to model spatially-varying
lighting. Among them, zsky ∈ R16 , zsun ∈ R45 , Msun is determined by 2 parameters, zlocal ∈ R64 , and we treat the spatially-varying sun visibility zvis as another
parameter. The image resolutions are 320 × 240 for limited-FoV images I and
128 × 64 for panoramic maps (128 × 32 for panoramic maps of the sky-dome).
4

We use the PBR materials in Blender following the document at https://docs.
ambientcg.com/books/using-the-assets/page/pbr-materials-in-blender

