BRACE: The Breakdancing Competition
Dataset for Dance Motion Synthesis
Supplementary material
Davide Moltisanti1⋆† , Jinyi Wu2† , Bo Dai3⋆ , and Chen Change Loy4
1

2

1

University of Edinburgh, davide.moltisanti@ed.ac.uk
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, jinyi002@e.ntu.edu.sg
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory, daibo@pjlab.org.cn
4
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

Supplementary Material Video

We prepared a video to showcase our dataset. For a better viewing we outline
the video below. We overlay our keypoints onto the original videos, however we
only release keypoints since video copyright belongs to Red Bull, to which we
are not affiliated. The video is available at https://youtu.be/-5N6uBDfMoM.
Active dancer detection We show the input/output of our active dancer detection
algorithm, i.e. all the poses obtained with the pose estimation models and the
automatically detected performing dancer. Notice the abundant number of boxes
and keypoints and the accurate detection of the active dancer.
Merging and interpolating sequences We show a sequence of raw automatic poses
and the corresponding sequence obtained merging and interpolating automatic
and manual keypoints. Notice here the noisy estimations in the raw sequence.
Noisy poses were automatically rejected, and a few of them were manually labelled. The final sequence merges good automatic poses and manually annotated
keypoints, interpolating the rejected frames we did not annotate due to our discount method. This example shows how our approach is able to produce good
sequences with a low annotation cost. We recommend slowing down the video
during this section. We added a text colour legend to illustrate which keypoints
were rejected or missing, manually annotated or were good automatic keypoints.
Dataset samples We show a few toprock, footwork and powermove segments. We
display the interpolated keypoint sequences and play the corresponding audio.
Notice the main characteristics that make keypoint extraction challenging: multiple moving cameras, fast lighting changes, occlusions, tangled poses and fast
movements. Complex postures and dynamic moves also make BRACE a unique
data source for dance motion synthesis.
⋆

Work done while at Nanyang Technological University. † Equal contribution.

