Camera Auto-calibration from the Steiner
Conic of the Fundamental Matrix
Yu Liu1,2

and Hui Zhang2(B)

1

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
SAR, China
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research and Application for Data
Science, BNU-HKBU United International College, Zhuhai, China
{yuliu,amyzhang}@uic.edu.cn

Abstract. This paper addresses the problem of camera auto-calibration
from the fundamental matrix under general motion. The fundamental
matrix can be decomposed into a symmetric part (a Steiner conic) and
a skew-symmetric part (a ﬁxed point), which we ﬁnd useful for fully calibrating camera parameters. We ﬁrst obtain a ﬁxed line from the image
of the symmetric, skew-symmetric parts of the fundamental matrix and
the image of the absolute conic. Then the properties of this ﬁxed line
are presented and proved, from which new constraints on general eigenvectors between the Steiner conic and the image of the absolute conic
are derived. We thus propose a method to fully calibrate the camera.
First, the three camera intrinsic parameters, i.e., the two focal lengths
and the skew, can be solved from our new constraints on the imaged
absolute conic obtained from at least three images. On this basis, we can
initialize and then iteratively restore the optimal pair of projection centers of the Steiner conic, thereby obtaining the corresponding vanishing
lines and images of circular points. Finally, all ﬁve camera parameters
are fully calibrated using images of circular points obtained from at least
three images. Experimental results on synthetic and real data demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in terms of
accuracy.
Keywords: Auto-calibration · Steiner conic · Fundamental matrix ·
General motion

1

Introduction

Camera calibration is a very critical step in image measurement or machine
vision applications such as 3D reconstruction [5,23,36], vision metrology [22]
and robot navigation [4]. The accuracy and stability of the calibration algorithm directly aﬀect its usability. In the past few decades, researchers have proposed many methods to solve the problem of camera calibration, which can be
roughly divided into two categories: calibration with objects [10,35,37] and without objects [7,12,30,34,36]. Calibration methods with objects always require
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 431–446, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_25

