2DPASS: 2D Priors Assisted Semantic
Segmentation for LiDAR Point Clouds
Supplementary Material

A

Overview

In this supplementary material, we first provide more implementation details
in Section B. Besides, we provide more experiments and analysis in Section C.
Finally, we provide concrete results, including results on validation sets and
public online benchmarks.

B

Training and Inference Details

This section provides training and inference details of the proposed 2DPASS.
For the 3D input, we utilize the widely used data augmentation strategy for
semantic segmentation, including global scaling with a random scaling factor
sampled from [0.95, 1.05], and global rotation around the Z axis with a random
angle. For the 2D input, we employ horizontal flipping and color jitter. Each
2D image is cropped to the size 480 × 320 (width × height) for faster training.
The 2DPASS is trained in an end-to-end manner from scratch with the SGD
optimizer. For the SemanticKITTI dataset, our model was trained with batch
size 8 and learning rate 0.24 for 64 epochs, where the cosine annealing learning
rate strategy is adopted for the learning rate decay. Moreover, we adopt instancelevel augmentation [17] for a better performance on ‘motorcyclist’ category. As
for the NuScenes dataset, we trained the model with batch size 16 for 80 epochs
since the number of points per scene in NuScenes is generally smaller. During
the inference, following [1,2], we apply the test-time augmentation, i.e., rotating
the input scene with eight angles around the Z axis and averaging the prediction
scores. All experiments are conducted using a single Nvidia Tesla V100 GPU.

C

Additional Experiments

C.1

Comparing with Multi-Sensor Architecture

To further demonstrate the advantages of our 2DPASS upon multi-sensor methods, we set several multi-sensor baselines as well and compare against them in
this section.
– PointPainting: We follow the setup of previous work [7], which exploits
the segmentation logits of images and projects them to the LiDAR space by

