Supplementary Material for
“Granularity-aware Adaptation for Image
Retrieval over Multiple Tasks”
Jon Almazán1 Byungsoo Ko2 Geonmo Gu2
Diane Larlus1 Yannis Kalantidis1
1

NAVER LABS Europe 2 NAVER Corp.

Appendix
We report further analysis that supports our choice to learn adaptors instead
of fine-tuning the backbone (Section A), zero-shot performance of Grappa on
datasets that are not in the Multiple Retrieval Tasks benchmark (Section B),
and results on learning Grappa’s fusion layer using class labels (Section C). We
also present PyTorch-style pseudo-code for our architecture (Section D).

A

Learning adaptors vs fine-tuning the backbone

We validate the different configurations of adaptors presented in the main paper
and compare them in a supervised setting with a typical baseline that involves
fine-tuning all layers of a given pretrained model M. In particular, we compare
this baseline with fine-tuning just a single, randomly initialized adaptor (M +
A1 ), and with adding 8 random adaptors and fine-tuning them together with a
fusion layer (M∗ ).
For both settings, the underlying model M is kept fixed, and we use DINO [1]
pretrained on ImageNet in all models. We use the train splits of the 6 datasets
in MRT (Aircraft, Cars, CUB, Flowers, Food-101, and Products) and train 6
individual models per method, using class labels and a norm-softmax loss.
We report the performance on their respective test splits in the diagonal of
Table I. We observe that only adding a single adaptor outperforms the other
models in almost all datasets. This is probably due to the fact that these are
relatively small datasets and a single adaptor provides enough capacity to specialize, yet too little to overfit. When comparing M + A1 to M∗ , we already
saw a similar behavior in Table 2 in the main paper (rows 2 and 3), suggesting
that randomly initialized adaptors perform worse when they are simultaneously
trained with a fusion layer, and that one way to address this is pretraining them
for different objectives.

B

Zero-shot performance

Supervised training separately on each dataset. We consider specialized
models that have been trained in a supervised manner on each dataset separately,

