Robust Visual Tracking by Segmentation
Appendix
Matthieu Paul, Martin Danelljan, Christoph Mayer, and Luc Van Gool
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
{paulma, damartin, chmayer, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

In this Appendix, we provide further details on various aspects of our tracking pipeline. First, we provide additional architectural and inference details in
Sections A and B. Second, we provide additional ablation studies, in particular
on the loss weighting parameter η on different benchmarks to show the importance of the auxiliary instance localization loss in Section C. Then, we provide
success plots for different Visual Object Tracking (VOT) benchmarks as well
as a detailed analysis of our results on LaSOT [6] by comparing our approach
against the other state-of-the-art methods for all the dataset attributes in Section D. Finally, we provide some additional visual comparison to other trackers
in Section E.

A

Additional Architecture details

Classification Scores Encoder Hθ First, we describe in Figure A1 the architecture of the Classification Scores Encoder Hθ . It takes as input the H × W dimensional scores predicted by the Instance Localization (Classification) branch
and outputs a 16 channels deep representation of those scores. The score encoder
consists of a convolutional layer followed by a max-pool layer with stride one and
two residual blocks. The output of the residual blocks has 64 channels. Thus, the
final convolutional layer reduces the number of channels of the output to 16 to
match the encoded scores with the mask encoding. All the convolutional layers
use (3 × 3) kernels with a stride of one to preserve the spatial size of the input
classification scores.
Segmentation Decoder Dθ The segmentation decoder has the same structure has in LWL [2]. Together with the backbone, it shows a U-Net structure and
mainly consists of four decoder blocks. It takes as input the extracted ResNet-50
backbone features and the combined encoding xf from both the instance localization branch (Hθ (sc )) and the segmentation branch (xm ), with xf = xm + Hθ (sc ).
Since the encoded instance localization scores have a lower spatial resolution
than the mask encoding xm , we upscale the encoded instance localization scores
using a bilinear interpolation before adding it with the mask encoding xm . We
refer the reader to [2] for more details about the decoder structure.
Segmentation Branch We use the same architectures for the feature extractor
Fθ , the label encoder Eθ , the weight predictor Wθ , the few-shot learner Aθ and
the segmentation model Tτ as proposed in LWL [2]. Hence, we refer the reader
to [2] for more details.

