TextAdaIN: Paying Attention to Shortcut Learning in
Text Recognizers
Supplementary Material
Oren Nuriel, Sharon Fogel, and Ron Litman
AWS AI Labs
{onuriel, shafog, litmanr}@amazon.com

A

SCATTER - Baseline Architecture

As mentioned in the paper, throughout this work our baseline architecture is a state-ofthe-art recognizer named SCATTER [16]. The SCATTER architecture consists of four
main components:
1. Transformation: A rectification module that aligns the input text image using a Thin
Plate Spline (TPS) transformation [17, 23].
2. Feature extraction: A convolutional neural network (CNN) that extracts features
from the rectified image. Similar to [4, 3, 16, 2, 1], a 29-layer ResNet is employed
as the backbone. Subsequently, the features are mapped to a sequence of frames,
denoted by V = [v1 , v2 , ..., vT ], each corresponding to different receptive fields in
the image.
3. Visual feature refinement: An intermediate supervision in the form of a CTC decoder [7] is employed to provide direct supervision for each frame in the visual
features V .
4. Selective-Contextual Refinement Block: Contextual features are extracted using a
two-layer bi-directional LSTM encoder. These features are concatenated to the visual features, V . The features are then fed into a selective decoder and into a subsequent block if it exists. These blocks can be stacked together to improve results.
In this work, for convenience, we set the number of blocks to two.

B

Image Corruptions

In Sections 3.1 and 5.4, we compare the performance of the baseline model and the
TextAdaIN version on corrupted versions of the IAM test set. Fig. 1 contains original
images from the test set on the first column and the results of applying each of the
corruptions on the following columns. They are split into three categories based on their
impact: (a) local masking, (b) pixel-wise distortions and (c) geometric. The corruptions
are applied utilizing the imgaug [11] package as explicitly written below.
from imgaug import augmenters as iaa
corruptions = {
3
’original’: iaa.Noop(),
4
’dropout’: iaa.CoarseDropout((0.0, 0.05),
1
2

