Implicit Neural Representations for Image Compression

7

19

Supplementary Material

In Section 7.1 we provide a description of the meta-learning algorithm and in Section 7.2 we explain in detail how we overfit starting from meta-learned initializations. We motivate our architecture choice in Section 7.3 and show the influence
of L1 regularization in Section 7.4. Additional ablation studies on the influence
of quantization bitwidth and the generalization potential of meta-learned initializations are shown in Section 7.6 and Section 7.7 respectively. A further runtime
comparison between our method, JPEG and SOTA RDAEs is presented in Section 7.8. In Section 7.9 we present a complete overview of the hyperparameters
used in the di↵erent stages of the compression pipeline. Finally, we provide additional qualitative examples comparing our method to JPEG and JPEG2000
in Section 7.10 and Draco in Section 7.11.
7.1

Meta-Learning Algorithm

Meta-learned Initializations for Implicit Neural Representations Algorithm 1 is
an adapted version of the algorithm presented in [48]. We modify the notation
to match ours and change the objective to image regression instead of signed
distance function regression. Generally, the algorithm consists of two loops, the
outer loop (lines 7-15) and the inner loop (lines 11-13). The outer loop index i is
denoted as a superscript, whereas the inner loop index j is denoted as a subscript.
The outer loop is executed for a predefined number of iterations n. First of all,
we sample an image xi from the data distribution. We then define a coordinate
vector p with a coordinate grid of the same resolution as the image xi . We
initialize the inner loop parameters i0 to the current outer loop parameters ✓.
For i = 1 this is just random initialization, afterwards these are the meta-learned
parameters. We start the inner loop on line 9. For k iterations we compute the
MSE loss between the image xi and the output of the INR parameterized by
the inner loop parameters ij . On line 13 we perform a gradient update of the
inner loop parameters. ↵ contains the learning rates for the inner loop gradient
update. A simple choice is using the same static learning rate for all parameters
in ij . The power of meta-learning is that we can also meta-learn the learning
rate of the inner loop, thus ↵ is an optimization variable just like ✓. We can take
this even a step further by meta-learning a learning rate for every individual
inner loop parameter and every step j. This variant is referred to by the authors
[48] as a per parameter per step learning rate type 5 . We are e↵ectively learning
k times as many learning rates as model parameters. We use the Hadamard
product on line 13 to denote that the product between the learning rates in ↵
and the gradient is performed componentwise. The subscript j of ↵ denotes that
we have di↵erent learning rates in each step j.
After k iterations of the inner loop, we recompute the loss for the inner loop
parameters of the last step. On line 15 we perform a gradient update of the
meta-learned model parameters and the learning rates ↵. This is a gradient of
5

https://github.com/vsitzmann/metasdf

