Supplementary Material: Contrastive Learning
for Diverse Disentangled Foreground Generation
Yuheng Li1,2 , Yijun Li2 , Jingwan Lu2 , Eli Shechtman2 , Yong Jae Lee1 , and
Krishna Kumar Singh2
1

University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 Adobe Research

In this supplementary material, we first introduce our model architecture and
implementation details in Section 1, followed by the dataset details in Section 2.
In Section 3, we provide a visual example to better understand our approach in
the main paper. Next, we give details about disentanglement study conducted
in the main paper and also show this study on vanilla StyleGAN in Section 4.
Finally, we show more studies and qualitative results in Section 5.

1

Architecture and implementation details

Our model is an encoder and decoder architecture. Figure 1 shows the encoder
(left) and decoder (right) details. The input is the masked image of size 256×256.
It consists of a bunch of Bi-modulated convolution and leaky relu activation
functions. Inspired by [9] to preserve better spatial alignment information with
the input inpainting mask, once the feature reaches to 4×4 we upsample it to 16×
16 with lateral connections. In decoder, we have two bi-modulated convolution
for each resolution and one to rgb layer as output skip connection since it is
beneficial for gradient update [5, 6]. Note we do not show two input codes for bimodulated convolution block in both encoder and decoder for simplicity. Please
refer Figure 3 in the main paper for details about bi-modulation.
We train our model for 200k iterations with learning rate of 0.002 using
Adam optimizer. We set the weight of known factor loss λ1 as 1, and weight of
unknown factor loss λ2 as 0.1 (for face and bird) and 5 (for car) for the initial
100k iterations. We decrease both λ1 and λ2 by 10 times for the next 100k
iterations.

2

Dataset details

For face dataset, we use the official face parsing annotations from CelebAHQ[8] to define our face region. Specifically, the following officially defined semantic regions are merged: ’skin’, ’nose’, ’eye glass’, ’l eye’, ’r eye’, ’l eyebrow’,
’r eyebrow’, ’l ear’, ’r ear’, ’mouth’, ’u lip’, ’l lip’. The union of these region is
defined as face mask in all our experiments. We convert mask to box when we
mask out inpatining region in the main paper. For the extra training data from
FFHQ [5], we do the same process.
For bird and car which are obtained from the LSUN dataset [14], we first
only choose images whose both sides are greater than 400 resolution and at least

