Organic Priors in Non-rigid Structure
from Motion
Suryansh Kumar1(B) and Luc Van Gool1,2
1

ETH Zürich Switzerland, Zurich, Switzerland
{sukumar,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch
2
KU Leuven Belgium, Leuven, Belgium

Abstract. This paper advocates the use of organic priors in classical
non-rigid structure from motion (NRSf M). By organic priors, we mean
invaluable intermediate prior information intrinsic to the NRSf M matrix
factorization theory. It is shown that such priors reside in the factorized
matrices, and quite surprisingly, existing methods generally disregard
them. The paper’s main contribution is to put forward a simple, methodical, and practical method that can eﬀectively exploit such organic priors
to solve NRSf M. The proposed method does not make assumptions other
than the popular one on the low-rank shape and oﬀers a reliable solution to NRSf M under orthographic projection. Our work reveals that
the accessibility of organic priors is independent of the camera motion
and shape deformation type. Besides that, the paper provides insights
into the NRSf M factorization—both in terms of shape and motion—and
is the ﬁrst approach to show the beneﬁt of single rotation averaging for
NRSf M. Furthermore, we outline how to eﬀectively recover motion and
non-rigid 3D shape using the proposed organic prior based approach and
demonstrate results that outperform prior-free NRSf M performance by
a signiﬁcant margin. Finally, we present the beneﬁts of our method via
extensive experiments and evaluations on several benchmark datasets.
Keywords: Organic priors · Non-rigid structure from motion · Rank
minimization · Rotation averaging · Matrix factorization

1

Introduction

Non-rigid structure from motion (NRSf M) factorization is a classical problem in
geometric computer vision [9,27]. The problem’s primary objective is to recover
3D shape of a deforming object from a given set of image key-points tracked
across multiple images. As a result, it is sometimes referred as solving an inverse
graphics problem [46]. An eﬀective solution to NRSf M is of signiﬁcant importance to many computer vision and geometry processing applications [10,39].
It is now widely accepted that the NRSf M problem is challenging to work
out if the shape deforms arbitrarily across images, as it becomes equivalent to
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_5.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 71–88, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_5

