Appendix of Skeleton-Parted Graph Scattering
Networks for 3D Human Motion Prediction
Maosen Li1 , Siheng Chen1,2 , Zijing Zhang3 , Lingxi Xie4 ,
Qi Tian4 , and Ya Zhang1,2
1

Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Shanghai AI laboratory
3
Zhejiang University
4
Huawei Cloud & AI.
{maosen li, sihengc, ya zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn, zijing zhang@163.com,
198808xc@gmail.com, tian.qi1@huawei.com

I. Some details of Model
About SPGSN architectures. The entire SPGSN is constructed by cascaded
MPGSBs, where we note that all the MPGSBs use distinct parameters without
weight-sharing. The non-shared MPGSBs flexibly extract multi-level features to
enrich the representation, just like ResNet uses distinct residual blocks to learn
the hierarchical features.
Since the MPGSBs are formed in cascade, the input of the second MPGSB
is the output of the first MPGSB, H′ , integrating the features from spatial
and spectrum domains. We use IDCT to transform the output features to the
predicted sequences.
About experimental scenarios. The coordinates of all the body-joints denote
the relative positions of distinct body-joints to a central joint (e.g. chest). In this
benchmark, all the studies target to predict the pure poses, regardless of the body
positions in a global space.

II. Protocol Modification of STSGCN
Published in ICCV 2021, STSGCN [9] is one of the practical algorithms of human
motion prediction, which leverages both spatial and temporal graph convolution
on the different network stages. According to the official codes5 , however, the
experimental protocols have two main differences from most previous works [8,
4, 2, 3, 7, 5, 6], leading to their reported results having very different means:
• First, to evaluate the prediction performance at each timestamp, STSGCN
learns a specific and unique model; that is, STSGCN uses different pre-trained
models to generate poses at different timestamps such as 80ms and 160ms. However, most previous models use only one model to forecast the whole pose sequences directly and just calculate the errors at different timestamps based on
5

https://github.com/FraLuca/STSGCN

