Supplementary Material of
Scraping Textures from Natural Images for
Synthesis and Editing
Xueting Li1 , Xiaolong Wang2 ,
Ming-Hsuan Yang1 , Alexei A. Efros3 , and Sifei Liu4
1

1

UC Merced

2

UC San Diego

3

UC Berkeley

4

NVIDIA

Overview

In this supplementary, we provide more details about the implementation and
experiental results of the proposed method. We start by describing implementation details including network architecture, objective details, data augmentation mechanism and hyperparameters in Section 2. We then validate our design
choices by carrying out ablation studies on different components of our method
in Section 3. In Section 4, we present a detailed comparison and differentiation
with other state-of-the-arts texture synthesis methods. More qualitative results
on arbitrary-sized texture synthesis and texture editing are demonstrated in
Section 6. Finally, we discuss limitations of our work in Section 7.

2

Implementation Details

2.1

Network Architecture

We show the detailed framework of our method in Fig. 1.
Encoder Our encoder shown in Fig. 1(a) is inspired by the encoder in [7], which
includes six residual blocks. It takes an image I ∈ R3×H×W as input and first
H
W
encodes it into a feature map F ∈ R3× 8 × 8 . The grouping module shown in
Fig. 1(c) takes F as input and outputs the grouping mask M ∈ RK×H×W and
the texture code tk ∈ R256 , k = 1, . . . , K for each group.
Decoder The decoder shown in Fig. 1(b) takes each texture code tk as input
and predicts the frequency of the sine wave S k for each group k. Then we concatenate the sine wave with a random Gaussian noise image of equal size and
feed the concatenation into a stack of SPADE residual blocks [11] for either
reconstruction or texture synthesis, as discussed in Section 3.3 and 3.4 in the
submission, respectively. We note that the sine wave is a rigorous periodic function, thus we concatenate it with a noise image before feeding into the SPADE
blocks such that the network can better fit for irregular textures (e.g., grass,
water, etc.)

