Supplementary Material: Decouple-and-Sample:
Protecting sensitive information in task agnostic
data release
Abhishek Singh, Ethan Garza, Ayush Chopra,
Praneeth Vepakomma, Vivek Sharma, and Ramesh Raskar
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
abhi24@mit.edu

1

Reproducibility

All of our experiments are implemented using PyTorch [6] and conducted using
NVIDIA 1080 Ti GPUs. We use Adam optimizer [3] for training all of the neural
networks. Throughout all the experiments, we use a ResNet-50 [1] architecture
for prediction related tasks and transpose convolution-based architectures for
generative tasks. Unless noted otherwise, we use ϵ = 1.0 for all the experiments.
The value of ϵ is divided as 0.3 for the mean and 0.7 for the variance parameter of
DP-sampling mechanism. For all of our evaluations we choose k = 8 and m = 32.
Our training pipeline requires training base model for all techniques for a given
set of hyper-parameters. This base model is used to obtain sanitized datasets.
We use sanitized datasets to train a separate utility model and adversary model.
Each utility and adversary model is trained independently for every trade-off parameter corresponding to every baseline. This results in a privacy-utility trade-off
curve for each technique. We use α1 = 1, α2 = 1, α3 = 100, α4 = 1, β = 5 for all
sanitizer experiments except the ones where these parameters were changed to
obtain a trade-off. We keep α3 = 100 since the distance correlation is typically
a small quantity and requires scaling in order to influence the overall loss term.

1.1

Extended Results

We analyze the visual results for different techniques for a given sample (Fig 1)
and different samples for our technique (Fig 2). We note that some of the techniques such as TIPRDC [4], while applicable for the sanitization task, do not
release their output in the image domain therefore qualitative results can not
be compared with them. Results demonstrate that sanitizer provides improved
sample quality in comparison to other techniques. The key reason for improved
sample quality is that sanitizer randomizes the sensitive attribute instead of removing it. We note that the sample quality can be further improved by extending
our work for hierarchical VAEs that are known for high quality image synthesis.
For multiple sensitive attributes, we evaluated ours and strongest baseline
TIPRDC on CelebA. We use (gender, smiling) as sensitive and (mouth-open,

