ECCV Caption: Correcting False Negatives by
Collecting Machine-and-Human-verified
Image-Caption Associations for MS-COCO
— Supplementary Materials —
Sanghyuk Chun, Wonjae Kim, Song Park, Minsuk Chang♢ , Seong Joon Oh♣
NAVER AI Lab
♢ Now at Google Research ♣ Now at University of Tübingen

We include additional materials in this document. We first describe the details of our machine annotators (Appendix A), including the explanation of each
model (Appendix A.1) and diversity between each model (Appendix A.2). We
provide the details of Human Intelligence Tasks (HITs) for ECCV Caption construction (Appendix B), such as detailed questionnaire (Appendix B.1), MTurk
worker statistics (Appendix B.2) and the results (Appendix B.3). Appendix C
describes the post-processing details, including the full list of invalid items (Appendix C.1) and the examples of ECCV Caption (Appendix C.2). We include
more evaluation results in Appendix D, such as user study details for comparing mAP@R and Recall@k (Appendix D.1), training details of re-implemented
methods (Appendix D.2), the full results with various evaluation metrics (Appendix D.3). Finally, we provide the full bias analysis in Appendix E and the
discussions of noisy crowdsource annotations in Appendix F.

A

ECCV Caption Machine Annotators Details

A.1

Machine annotators

To cover both diversity and practical relevance, we have choose five state-of-theart cross-modal retrieval models with diverse properties.
• VSRN [24] builds up connections between image regions, and perform reasoning with Graph Convolutional Networks to generates features with semantic
relationships. VSRN uses the Faster R-CNN detector [33] as the visual encoder following [1]. VSRN employs the triplet loss [36] with hardest negative
mining (HNM) [13].
• PVSE [38] learns a one-to-many function to solve ambiguous matching by
one-to-one function. PVSE is a multi-headed model, focusing on diverse
matching between two diverse concepts. PVSE also employs the triplet loss
with HNM as VSRN.
• PCME [7] is a stochastic model for learning many-to-many correspondences
in multi-modal matching tasks. PCME is trained by a probabilistic matching
objective function based on the pair-wise matching loss.

