Supplementary Material: Cross-Modal 3D Shape
Generation and Manipulation
Zezhou Cheng1 , Menglei Chai2 , Jian Ren2 , Hsin-Ying Lee2 , Kyle Olszewski2 ,
Zeng Huang2 , Subhransu Maji1 , and Sergey Tulyakov2
1

University of Massachusetts, Amherst
2
Snap Inc.

The following describes the content in each section in the supplementary material.
– § 1 describes additional implementation details.
– § 2 presents ablation study of the proposed model.
– § 3 illustrates more details of our baselines including encoder-decoder networks [4] and EditNeRF [8].
– § 4 details our experimental settings (e.g., datasets, evaluations).
– § 5 provides detailed analysis on the limitations of the proposed model.
– § 6 provides more color editing results with diverse color scribbles.

1

Implementation Details

The implementation details of 3D shape and color networks are included in the
main text. Here we provide additional implementation details.
– Joint latent space. The shape and color latent codes are both of dimension
128 throughout our experiments. We observe that lower-dimensional latent
codes (e.g., 32) lead to worse shape reconstruction.
– 2D sketch and renderings. The image resolution of all 2D modalities is
set to 128 × 128. We use the generator architecture from DCGAN [12] for all
2D modalities.
– Few-shot shape generation. We use the discriminator from DCGAN [12].
The mapping function hw (z) in the MineGAN framework [14] is a two-layer
MLP with batch normalization [7] and a ReLU activation function.
– Latent optimization. In the task of shape and appearance manipulation, we
conduct the latent optimization for 5 steps starting from a known initial latent
code that corresponds to the initial 2D and 3D instances. The hyperparameter
γ and β in Eqn.11 is 0.02 and 0.5 respectively by default. For the single-view
shape generation tasks, we run multiple trials of latent optimization from
different randomly sampled latent codes. The optimized code with minimal
reconstruction loss is used as the final result. We observe that such multi-trial
optimization significantly stabilizes the performance of 3D reconstruction
(see Sec. 2 for more details).

2

Ablation study

The latent optimization is crucial to the performance of our shape reconstruction
and manipulation tasks. In this section, we provide ablation studies on the regu-

