Unsupervised Deep Multi-shape Matching
Dongliang Cao1,2(B) and Florian Bernard1
1

University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
dcao@uni-bonn.de
2
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany

Abstract. 3D shape matching is a long-standing problem in computer
vision and computer graphics. While deep neural networks were shown to
lead to state-of-the-art results in shape matching, existing learning-based
approaches are limited in the context of multi-shape matching: (i) either
they focus on matching pairs of shapes only and thus suﬀer from cycleinconsistent multi-matchings, or (ii) they require an explicit template
shape to address the matching of a collection of shapes. In this paper,
we present a novel approach for deep multi-shape matching that ensures
cycle-consistent multi-matchings while not depending on an explicit template shape. To this end, we utilise a shape-to-universe multi-matching
representation that we combine with powerful functional map regularisation, so that our multi-shape matching neural network can be trained in
a fully unsupervised manner. While the functional map regularisation is
only considered during training time, functional maps are not computed
for predicting correspondences, thereby allowing for fast inference. We
demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art results on several
challenging benchmark datasets, and, most remarkably, that our unsupervised method even outperforms recent supervised methods.
Keywords: 3D shape matching · Multi-shape matching · Functional
maps · 3D deep learning

1

Introduction

The matching of 3D shapes is a long-standing problem in computer vision and
computer graphics. Due to its wide range of applications, numerous approaches
that address diverse variants of shape matching problems have been proposed
over the past decades [44,46]. In recent years, with the success of deep learning, many learning-based methods were introduced for shape matching. One
common way to address shape matching is to formulate it as classiﬁcation problem [6,13,23,26,29,49]. The advantage of such methods is that after training
the classiﬁer, shape correspondences can eﬃciently and directly be predicted. A
major downside is that for training such a classiﬁer typically a large amount of
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5 4.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13663, pp. 55–71, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5_4

