Facial Depth and Normal Estimation using Single Dual-Pixel Camera

15

Supplementary material
This is a supplementary material for the paper, Facial Depth and Normal Estimation using Single Dual-Pixel Camera. We will further describe details: ground
truth acquisition process of our facial DP dataset (Sec. A), concrete description
of evaluation metrics (Sec. B), precise algorithm of our Adaptive Normal Module
(Sec. C), and generalization experiments using our network and dataset (Sec. D).

A

Ground-Truth Acquisition

In this section, we describe the precise ways of ground truth depth acquisition processes from our hardware setup. These processes consist of three subprocesses: (1) depth from structured light (Sec. A.1) (2) multi-view depth refinement (Sec. A.2) (3) normal-assisted depth refinement (Sec. A.4). To this end,
we explain detail of our process to acquire parameters of Eq. 1 in manuscript.
A.1

Depth from Structured Light

Under the carefully designed hardware setup, we start to acquire initial ground
truth depth maps from structured light. We would like to briefly explain detail
processes to acquire unwrapped phase images from coded patterns. As in [24,23],
we use 12 horizontal patterns and 10 vertical patterns consisting of 6-bit inverse
gray-code (Fig. 13-(a),(b)) to get unwrapped phase images, and 8 phase-shifting
patterns [19,55] (Fig. 13-(c)) for phase correction [30]. These pattern images are
used to acquire two (horizontal/vertical) unwrapped phase images per camera
view. Then, we estimate dense correspondences based on a standard phase unwrapping method [55]. After that, consistency between multi-view unwrapped
phase images’ intensity is used to get high quality of facial depth following [23].
A.2

Multi-View Depth Refinement

Structured light can give us high-quality facial geometry that can be regarded as
the ground-truth depth maps. There still exists outliers that mainly comes from
small movement of face while capturing different coded patterns. To resolve this
problem, we check the visibility of acquired points in perspective view of each
camera and remove outliers of gathered point clouds with considering neighbor
points. Finally, we check each points’ multi-view photometric/depth consistency
(each point should be visible from more than two sampled views) to determine
whether the point is inlier or not. Results in Fig. 14 shows that this refinement
process can reduce outliers effectively without loosing inliers.
A.3

Surface Normal from Photometric Stereo

In this section, we will explain our progress to get good quality of normal map
to be used for supervised signal in training step. We use a photometric stereo

