Open-Vocabulary DETR
with Conditional Matching
Yuhang Zang1 , Wei Li1 , Kaiyang Zhou1 , Chen Huang2 , Chen Change Loy1B
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Carnegie Mellon University
{zang0012, wei.l, kaiyang.zhou, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

chen-huang@apple.com

Supplementary Material
A

More Qualitative Results of OV-DETR

Open-Vocabulary COCO. We provide more qualitative results of OV-DETR
on Open-Vocabulary COCO setting (Fig. 1). We visualize the detection results
on novel classes and the activation maps of OV-DETR and Region Proposal
Network (RPN) [3] used by ViLD [1], which further validate the motivation
from the main paper: OV-DETR has higher activation values on objects of novel
classes than RPN.
Web Images. To verify the generalization ability, we also provide the qualitative
results of anime characters in Fig. 2. Although these characters are not provided
during training, OV-DETR can successfully detect the regions matched with the
conditional image queries.
Failure Cases. Fig. 3 shows some failure cases of OV-DETR. We notice that
detecting small or occluded objects with conditional image query is hard. Our
method is not robust to the unrelated out-of-distribution text queries. We will
address these shortcomings in further research.

B

Discussion of Object Proposals

In previous work ViLD [1], class-agnostic object proposals are leveraged to
transfer the knowledge from CLIP image encoder to the detector. As shown
in Fig. 4 (a), ViLD first trains a RPN network on base classes to get M precomputed proposals. These object proposals may contain objects of novel classes
and are essential for training ViLD model. For these M proposals, M predicted
region embeddings and the corresponding ground-truth embeddings are computed by a Mask R-CNN detector and a CLIP image encoder respectively. Then,
a knowledge distillation loss is applied for the predicted region embeddings and
the ground-truth embeddings.
We follow the steps of ViLD, pre-training a detector with the base classes to
predict object proposals that may cover the novel classes. The only difference is
that we use different architectures (Def-DETR vs. the RPN network in ViLD).
Despite of building upon different architectures, the generated object proposals
have similar high top-300 averaged recall (AR@300) for novel categories (48.3
for ViLD and 47.6 for ours). Fig. 4 (b) shows that compared with ViLD, we

