Cross-Domain Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation:
Supplementary Material
Shuo Lei1 , Xuchao Zhang2 , Jianfeng He1 , Fanglan Chen1 , Bowen Du3 ⋆ , and
Chang-Tien Lu1
1

Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Falls Church, VA, USA
2
NEC Laboratories America, Princeton, NJ, USA
3
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University,
Beijing, China

In this material, we provide more details about the proposed benchmark, the
illustration of the proposed Task-adaptive Fine-tuning Inference (TFI) strategy
and more experiment results in the paper. Specifically, in Section 1, we briefly
introduce the selected datasets and analyze the task difficulty of each dataset in
CD-FSS. Moreover, the DisFB measurement is presented, which is proposed to
measure the similarity between foreground and background classes in a single
image. In Section 2, we summarize the whole process of the TFI strategy. In Section 3, we provide the implementation details of transfer learning baselines. More
details about the experiment results and some qualitative results are presented.

1

Task Difficulty Analysis on CD-FSS

To provide a better overview of the established benchmark, Table 1 in the paper
summarizes the conceptual difference between PASCAL VOC [3] and the four
cross-domain datasets. And the task difficulty for each domain is measured from
two aspects: 1) domain shift (cross the datasets) and 2) class distinction in a
single image (within the dataset). Different from the image classification task,
the challenges of the segmentation task are decided by not only the domain shift
but the discrimination between classes in a single image. For example, even if
Chest X-ray data are far different from PASCAL VOC, predicting the mask in
X-ray images is easier than the satellite images, as the foreground class is distinct
from the background class.
We adopt Kullback-Leibler Divergence (KL-divergence) to measure the similarity between foreground and background classes in a single image, denoted as
DisFB. Specifically, for each image, we first get the masked image for each class
by multiplying the image and its corresponding segmentation map. Then the
masked images are fed to the backbone network. Here, we adopt the final average pooling features in Inception network [8] pretrained in ImageNet [6]. Finally,
the similarity between foreground and background classes is measured by calculating the KL-divergence between the probability distribution of foreground and
background classes. The larger the DisFB is, the less the discrimination between
classes in the dataset. Noted that DisFB is calculated in the same domain, not
the domain shift measurement.
⋆

Corresponding author.

