Supplementary Materials for
Learn-to-Decompose: Cascaded Decomposition
Network for Cross-Domain Few-Shot Facial
Expression Recognition
Xinyi Zou1 , Yan Yan1⋆ , Jing-Hao Xue2 , Si Chen3 , and Hanzi Wang1
1

Xiamen University, China
University College London, UK
3
Xiamen University of Technology, China
2

1

Detailed Architecture of the LD module

The proposed CDNet cascades several learn-to-decompose (LD) modules with
shared parameters to obtain weighted expression prototypes progressively. We
illustrate the detailed architecture of the proposed LD module in Fig. 1. Each
LD module contains a decomposition block and a weighting block to obtain an
expression prototype and its corresponding weight, respectively. The decomposition block includes a transformation layer, a batch normalization layer, and
an activation layer. The weighting block consists of a three-layer perceptron
network. The dropout layer is used for regularization.

2

Datasets

Our CDNet is trained on multiple basic expression datasets and tested on the
compound expression dataset. Such a cross-domain setting evaluates the generalization ability of our model (trained on multiple source domains) on a novel
compound FER task in the target domain.
Basic Expression Datasets We use five basic expression datasets to form the
training set, including three in-the-lab datasets (CK+, MMI, and Oulu-CASIA),
and two in-the-wild datasets (RAF-DB and SFEW). CK+ involves 327 video
sequences annotated with seven basic expression categories. MMI contains 326
video sequences (205 frontal-view sequences are used) with six basic expression
categories. Oulu-CASIA consists of 2,880 video sequences (480 normal indoor
illumination sequences are used) with six basic expression categories. Three peak
frames of each sequence in the above in-the-lab datasets are selected in our
experiments. RAF-DB includes a basic subset and a compound subset. The
basic subsets with seven basic expression annotations are employed as a part of
the training set. SFEW is also labeled with seven basic expression categories.
All the samples in these basic expression datasets are used for training.
⋆

Corresponding author.

: yanyan@xmu.edu.cn

