Learning to Rank with Nonsmooth Cost Functions

Christopher J.C. Burges
Microsoft Research
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052, USA

Robert Ragno
Microsoft Research
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052, USA

Quoc Viet Le
Statistical Machine
Learning Program
NICTA, ACT 2601, Australia

cburges@microsoft.com

rragno@microsoft.com

quoc.le@anu.edu.au

Abstract
The quality measures used in information retrieval are particularly difficult to optimize directly, since they depend on the model scores only through the sorted
order of the documents returned for a given query. Thus, the derivatives of the
cost with respect to the model parameters are either zero, or are undefined. In
this paper, we propose a class of simple, flexible algorithms, called LambdaRank,
which avoids these difficulties by working with implicit cost functions. We describe LambdaRank using neural network models, although the idea applies to
any differentiable function class. We give necessary and sufficient conditions for
the resulting implicit cost function to be convex, and we show that the general
method has a simple mechanical interpretation. We demonstrate significantly improved accuracy, over a state-of-the-art ranking algorithm, on several datasets. We
also show that LambdaRank provides a method for significantly speeding up the
training phase of that ranking algorithm. Although this paper is directed towards
ranking, the proposed method can be extended to any non-smooth and multivariate
cost functions.

1

Introduction

In many inference tasks, the cost function1 used to assess the final quality of the system is not the one
used during training. For example for classification tasks, an error rate for a binary SVM classifier
might be reported, although the cost function used to train the SVM only very loosely models the
number of errors on the training set, and similarly neural net training uses smooth costs, such as
MSE or cross entropy. Thus often in machine learning tasks, there are actually two cost functions:
the desired cost, and the one used in the optimization process. For brevity we will call the former the
‘target’ cost, and the latter the ‘optimization’ cost. The optimization cost plays two roles: it is chosen
to make the optimization task tractable (smooth, convex etc.), and it should approximate the desired
cost well. This mismatch between target and optimization costs is not limited to classification tasks,
and is particularly acute for information retrieval. For example, [10] list nine target quality measures
that are commonly used in information retrieval, all of which depend only on the sorted order of the
documents2 and their labeled relevance. The target costs are usually averaged over a large number
of queries to arrive at a single cost that can be used to assess the algorithm. These target costs
present severe challenges to machine learning: they are either flat (have zero gradient with respect
to the model scores), or are discontinuous, everywhere. It is very likely that a significant mismatch
between the target and optimizations costs will have a substantial adverse impact on the accuracy of
the algorithm.
1

Throughout this paper, we will use the terms “cost function” and “quality measure” interchangeably, with
the understanding that the cost function is some monotonic decreasing function of the corresponding quality
measure.
2
For concreteness we will use the term ‘documents’ for the items returned for a given query, although the
returned items can be more general (e.g. multimedia items).

