CPrune: Compiler-Informed Model Pruning for
Efficient Target-Aware DNN Execution
(Supplementary Materials)
Taeho Kim1 , Yongin Kwon2 , Jemin Lee2 , Taeho Kim2 , and Sangtae
Ha1
1

University of Colorado Boulder
{taeho.kim,sangtae.ha}@colorado.edu
2
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
{yongin.kwon,leejaymin,taehokim}@etri.re.kr

1

Identifying α and β for Each Pruning Iteration

CPrune evaluates the execution time and accuracy of the pruned candidate
model at each pruning iteration. Each iteration compares its performance with
the thresholds obtained by multiplying α and β to the last execution time and
accuracy, respectively. α is the ratio to represent the minimum allowable accuracy used during each iterative step of the pruning process, and β is the ratio
to define the target execution time of the next pruning iteration. We conducted
the following experiments to determine the α and β used in our experiments.
1.1

Identifying α

This experiment measures the accuracy and processed figures per second (FPS)
according to various α and determines our experiment’s α value. When the
pruned candidate model of CPrune shows an execution time lower than the
target execution time of the current iteration, it compares the accuracy of a
pruned model with the threshold (α · ap ). Then, if its accuracy is higher than
the threshold, the pruned candidate model is selected as the pruned model of
the current iteration.
We execute CPrune process for the ResNet-18 using ImageNet on Kryo
385 CPU and compare their final CPrune models when choosing different α
(α ∈ {0.9975, 0.995, 0.99}). We observe a clear trade-off between fast FPS and
high accuracy based on the choice of α, as shown in Table 1. When α = 0.9975,
we can see that the FPS is improved, and the top-5 accuracy is slightly improved,
as shown in Figure 1. On the other hand, when α = 0.99, we obtain a high execution speed by sacrificing some accuracy. 0.9975 only marginally improves the
FPS, and 0.99 makes its accuracy too low. Therefore, although the appropriate
α varies depending on the accuracy requirement, we chose α = 0.995 as a suitable heuristic to address the observed trade-off during the pruning process. The
results in Table 1 confirm that we obtain significant increase rate in FPS (1.38×
∼ 2.23×) by using CPrune with α = 0.995.
2

Yongin Kwon is the corresponding author.

