CAR: Class-aware Regularization for
Semantic Segmentation
Supplementary
Ye Huang1 , Di Kang2 , Liang Chen3 , Xuefei Zhe2 ,
Wenjing Jia1 , Linchao Bao2 , and Xiangjian He4⋆
1

University of Technology Sydney, Australia
2
Tencent AI Lab
3
Fujian Normal University
4
University of Nottingham Ningbo China

A

Appendix

A.1

Extra technical details

A.1.1 Deterministic Control variables are very important for all scientific
research. In computer vision, we always use the same backbones and the same
datasets when verifying the difference between two methods.
Without using “deterministic” technology, all operations in neural networks
contain some randomness. Nowadays, with the latest deterministic technology
and fixed seeds, experiments can be conducted in a fully-controlled environment.
This means that the performance difference between different settings (i.e., w/
and w/o CAR) is not affected by this randomness any more but faithfully reflects
the effectiveness of different methods.
In Tab. 1, we report the performance of our proposed CAR (ResNet-50 +
Self-attention and Swin-Tiny + UperNet) with different seeds for readers who
are interested in how our CAR performs when trained with different random
seeds. As it is shown, our CAR consistently improves the mIOU over its baseline
using different random seeds, demonstrating the effectiveness of the CAR.
A.2

Extra experiments

A.2.1 Ablation studies on batch class center In our experiments, we
calculated the class centers using all the training images in a batch to alleviate
the negative impact of noisy images. Here, we investigate the impact of using
the class center of each individual image for class-aware regularizations.
A.2.2 CAR using Moving Average. We also implemented a moving average version of CAR which tracks the class center µ with moving average similar
to BatchNorm. As shown in Tab. 3, we find this moving average version of CAR
negatively impacts both ResNet-50 + Self-Attention and Swin-Tiny + Uper.
⋆

Corresponding author

