Supplementary Material for Multi-Faceted
Distillation of Base-Novel Commonality for
Few-shot Object Detection
Shuang Wu2 , Wenjie Pei2,∗ , Dianwen Mei2 , Fanglin Chen2 , Jiandong Tian3 ,
and Guangming Lu1,2,∗
1

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Novel Security Intelligence Technologies
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang Institute of Automation
{wushuang9811, wenjiecoder}@outlook.com, {178mdw, linwers}@gmail.com,
luguangm@hit.edu.cn, tianjd@sia.cn

1

More Implementation Details

Unlike previous works [2,3,4] that fine-tune the detector on a small balanced
training set with K novel instances and K randomly sampled base instances,
we utilize more base instances used in the first stage for fine-tuning, in that
our approach requires abundant base instances stored in the memory bank to
calculate the prototypes and distributions. Specifically, the training data for
fine-tuning consists of two sets: base set with abundant instances and novel
set with K instances per class. During each iteration, a batch is composed of
two equally sized parts, one from the base set and another from the novel set.
Then we update the memory bank by enqueuing the RoI features of instances in
current batch to the corresponding class queue. The dimension of RoI features
stored in the memory bank is 2048 for DeFRCN [2] baseline and 1024 for other
three baselines (TFA [4], Retentive R-CNN [1], FSCE [3]). All other training
settings (batch size, training iterations, learning rate, etc) are the same as that
in corresponding baselines.

2

Performance for Base Classes

The proposed commonality distillation from base classes to novel classes allows
leveraging the samples of base classes to train the object detector on the novel
classes. Such commonality distillation pushes the model to fit the base samples
to other classes (novel classes) with semantic similarities instead of their own
groundtruth classes (base classes). Thus, it would not lead to the overfitting on
the base classes. Table 1 shows that while the commonality distillation improves
the performance of our model on novel classes substantially, it does not degrade
the performance on base classes.
∗

Corresponding authors.

