Supplementary Material:
DVS-Voltmeter: Stochastic Process-based Event
Simulator for Dynamic Vision Sensors
Songnan Lin1⋆ , Ye Ma2⋆ , Zhenhua Guo3 , and Bihan Wen1⋆⋆
1

1

Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Ave, Singapore
2
McGill University, Montreal, Canada
3
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China

Overview

In this supplementary material, we first provide the implementation details of
the proposed model calibration in Section 2. We present further quantitative
analysis and discussion on the fidelity of event timestamps, the running time, and
the temperature effect in Section 3. We show additional qualitative comparison
among real events, our results and other simulated ones in Section 4. Finally, we
provide more visual comparisons on two applications, i.e. semantic segmentation
and intensity-image reconstruction, on real event data in Section 5 and Section
6, respectively.

2

Implementation Details of Model Calibration

To train deep neural networks generalizing to a specific DVS camera, it is necessary to accurately calibrate the parameters in the proposed event model and
generate realistic events for this DVS camera. The parameters, including k1 ,
k2 ,..., k6 , are related to sensors and environment (Please see Eq. (10) in the
original paper for details). Ideally, we can look up the specification of the camera and conduct statistical experiments on noise effects to determine the parameters, similar to V2E [3]. However, the statistical experiments need complex
equipment, and thus, are difficult to implement. In this paper, we provide a calibration method to get the parameters from a sequence of intensity frames and
corresponding events.
Specifically, for every event recorded between two adjacent frames Fi and
Fi+1 , we can get the brightness conditions when the event occurs, including an
approximated brightness L̄ = (Fi + Fi−1 )/2 and a brightness changes ∆L =
Fi − Fi−1 . As intensity frames have limited dynamic range resulting in the loss
of details, the events relevant to the black and white regions of the frames are
removed from calibration. Furthermore, we collect the time interval τ between
this event and the last event triggered at the same pixel. Then, given a specific
⋆
⋆⋆

Equal contribution
Corresponding author: bihan.wen@ntu.edu.sg

