Supplementary Materials:
A Simple Learning Framework for Large
Vocabulary Video Object Detection
Sanghyun Woo1,† , Kwanyong Park1,† ,
Seoung Wug Oh2 , In So Kweon1 , and Joon-Young Lee2
1

2

1

KAIST
Adobe Research

Appendix

In this appendix, we provide,
A1. Our view of the proposal from video data scaling perspectives,
A2. Datasets specifics used in the experiments,
A3. Implementation details including COCO → YTVIS transfer learning setup,
A4. Oracle analyses to investigate the disentangled impact of the method on
object classification and tracking,
1.1

Bridging Images and Videos

Applying deep learning in the video domain fundamentally suffers from the
data-hungry issue, and the situation will become even more severe for more
complex and challenging tasks. One promising direction we believe is leveraging
already well-curated large-scale image data to complement the insufficient video
data. However, jointly using multiple datasets [14], image and video labels, leads
to several issues, detailed below.
In this paper, we investigate the new problem of large vocabulary tracking,
one of the essential milestones for dynamic world understanding AI agents. The
task naturally lacks training labels as the data collection and annotation procedure is extremely expensive. As a remedy, leveraging the large-scale images
is an attractive solution [3]. However, in doing so, we face three main issues:
1) lacking video supervision in images, 2) semantic label inconsistency between
images and videos, and 3) the domain gap (e.g., explicit data styles or implicit
data distributions are different) between images and videos. The current learning
paradigm bypasses the first two issues by independently training the detection
head and tracking head with images and videos (decoupled ). Instead, our learning
framework explicitly handles the former two issues by hallucinating the supervisions and enables end-to-end video model learning from all training data, leading
†

This work was done during an internship at Adobe Research.

