SUPR: A Sparse Unified Part-Based
Human Representation
Ahmed A. A. Osman1(B) , Timo Bolkart1 , Dimitrios Tzionas2 ,
and Michael J. Black1
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
{aosman,tbolkart,black}@tuebingen.mpg.de
2
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
d.tzionas@uva.nl

Abstract. Statistical 3D shape models of the head, hands, and full body
are widely used in computer vision and graphics. Despite their wide use,
we show that existing models of the head and hands fail to capture
the full range of motion for these parts. Moreover, existing work largely
ignores the feet, which are crucial for modeling human movement and
have applications in biomechanics, animation, and the footwear industry. The problem is that previous body part models are trained using 3D
scans that are isolated to the individual parts. Such data does not capture
the full range of motion for such parts, e.g. the motion of head relative to
the neck. Our observation is that full-body scans provide important information about the motion of the body parts. Consequently, we propose
a new learning scheme that jointly trains a full-body model and speciﬁc
part models using a federated dataset of full-body and body-part scans.
Speciﬁcally, we train an expressive human body model called SUPR
(Sparse Uniﬁed Part-Based Representation), where each joint strictly
inﬂuences a sparse set of model vertices. The factorized representation
enables separating SUPR into an entire suite of body part models: an
expressive head (SUPR-Head), an articulated hand (SUPR-Hand), and
a novel foot (SUPR-Foot). Note that feet have received little attention
and existing 3D body models have highly under-actuated feet. Using
novel 4D scans of feet, we train a model with an extended kinematic tree
that captures the range of motion of the toes. Additionally, feet deform
due to ground contact. To model this, we include a novel non-linear
deformation function that predicts foot deformation conditioned on the
foot pose, shape, and ground contact. We train SUPR on an unprecedented number of scans: 1.2 million body, head, hand and foot scans. We
quantitatively compare SUPR and the separate body parts to existing
expressive human body models and body-part models and ﬁnd that our
suite of models generalizes better and captures the body parts’ full range
of motion. SUPR is publicly available for research purposes.

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1 33.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 568–585, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_33

