Layered Controllable Video Generation

1

Layered Controllable Video Generation
Supplementary Material
This supplementary material is structured as follows. In Section A, we present
our architectural details of our models, and the implementation details of our
training/ testing procedures. In Section B, we show visual results of the frames
generated by our model under di↵erent conditions. In Section C, we show additional ablation results to prove the e↵ectiveness of our two staged training setup.
In Section D, we show soft masks could lead to degenerated results. Our video
results can be found at this website.

A

Implementation Details

Architecture details. Our model consists of four main modules: the Mask Network M, the Encoder E, the learnable discrete code book Z, and the Decoder D.
We summarize the details in Table 3. In total, our model has 47.8 M parameters,
and takes about 191.2 MB to store on disk.
Training Details. In all our experiments, we use the Adam Optimizer with a
fixed learning rate of 4.5 ⇥ 10 6 , which we found empirically.
– Initial training for mask-based generation: For this stage, we train all models
for 10, 000 iterations. For experiments on the BAIR dataset, we initialize the
ratio between bg : fg to be 80 : 1, and reduce it by a factor of 2 for every
1, 000 iterations until this ratio becomes 5 : 1. For experiments on the Tennis
dataset, this ratio is initialized to 10 : 1 and reduced by half after 5, 000
iterations.
– Fine-tuning for controllability: In this stage of training, we drop all losses
related to the mask regularization as their gradient becomes zero (see Section 3.2), except for Lbg . On the BAIR dataset, bg is set to 5, and on the
Tennis dataset, it’s set to 0.5.
– Finding the “ground-truth” control signal: In Equation. 19, we use the fully
di↵erentiable transformation operation T (✓t ) to approximate the mask of the
ground truth next frame using the mask of the current frame. For each frame,
we optimize the affine transformation matrix that’s been used to transform
mt into mtc , the optimization is performed by the ADAM optimizer for 1, 000
iterations with the learning rate of 0.1.
On the BAIR dataset, our model requires 80GB GPU memory and 40 hours
to train on 4⇥ RTX-6000 (24GB V-RAM per GPU) GPUs, and on the Tennis
daaset, the model takes 22GB GPU memory and 23 hours to train on a single
RTX-3090 (24GB V-RAM).

