Learning to Generate Realistic LiDAR Point
Clouds – Supplementary Material
Vlas Zyrianov, Xiyue Zhu, and Shenlong Wang
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
{vlasz2,xiyuez2,shenlong}@illinois.edu

Abstract. In the supplementary material, we first provide more qualitative and quantitative results and additional ablation analysis in Sec. 1.
In addition, we report experimental results on the challenging NuScenes
dataset in Sec. 2. Finally, we provide additional quantitative and qualitative results for posterior sampling in Sec. 3. The supplementary video
“LiDARGen-intro.mp4 ” briefly introduces our method, demonstrates the
diffusion process in detail on KITTI-360, and compares qualitative results
with other methods.
Keywords: 3D generation, self-driving, generative models

1

Additional Analysis

Qualitative Ablation Study We conduct ablation studies to justify the design
choice of our algorithm. We compare the same score function model in three
different settings: with circular convolution and without coordinate encoding,
with circular convolution and without coordinate encoding, and our final model,
which uses circular convolution and a coordinate encoding. Qualitative results
are shown in Fig. 2.
Without circular convolution, a discontinuity appears in the point cloud
representation horizontally, starting from the origin. This discontinuity is most
clearly seen in the sixth row of the second column in Fig. 2. This discontinuity is
caused by the left and right edges of the range image lacking a receptive field
between each other when using normal convolutions. To address this issue, we use
Circular Convolutions. Qualitatively, this discontinuity is fixed with this change.
With the help of coordinate encoding, our approach generates more straight
road layouts that appropriately reflect the real-world layout distribution in the
urban driving environment.
Comparison to Point-based Backbone We also compare our model against
the point-based score-matching model proposed in ShapeGF [3]. The original
ShapeGF model was trained and tested in ShapeNet. We adapt their model
on LiDAR generation by changing the point cloud size to be 50k points and
changing the noise level schedule by setting the number of noise steps to be 15
and end noise sigma to be 0.001. We train its stage 1 autoencoding and stage
2 GAN model from scratch on the KITTI training set until the validation loss

