Efficient Meta-Tuning for Content-aware Neural
Video Delivery
Xiaoqi Li1∗ , Jiaming Liu1,2∗ , Shizun Wang3∗ , Cheng Lyu3 , Ming Lu4† ,
Yurong Chen4 , Anbang Yao4 , Yandong Guo2 , and Shanghang Zhang1†
1

Peking University
OPPO Research Institute
3
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
4
Intel Labs China
clorisleef0313@gmail.com, shzhang.pku@gmail.com, yandong.guo@live.com
2

In this appendix, we present more detailed comparisons with other neural
video delivery method. In addition, we further apply EMT on long videos with
more settings.

1

Supplementary Comparisons with Neural Video
Delivery Methods

We report the supplementary comparisons with H.264/H.265, CaFM [2], SRVC
[1], and DVC [3] on more video sequences of VSD4K dataset. For the two commercial codec standards H.264 and H.265, we use ffmpeg with libx264 codec and
libx265 codec to compress the HR videos at lower bit-rate while maintain the
resolution. We obtain these compressed videos of the same size as our method
(LR video and models). We also compare our method with DVC at four different
bitrate-distortion trade-off operating points λ ∈ {256, 512, 1024, 2048} (DVC1,
DVC2, DVC3, DVC4). As shown in Fig. 1, our method outperforms these methods under same or less storage size in most cases. In Tab. 1, EMT achieves
promising results compared with other methods with less training time in most
circumstances, demonstrating the advantage of our method.

2

Extension to Long Videos

In this section, we report more results on long videos of VSD4K [2]. For long
videos, previous neural video delivery methods take too much computational
cost. Therefore, we only compare with commercial codec standards. We evaluate
our method under two settings, which are denoted as M ′ and M separately. M ′
uniformly divides the long video into 5-second chunks and sequentially delivers
the content-aware SR models. M first divides the long video into groups and
applies EMT to each group. To be specific, we extract all the I-frames from the
input video and make each group contain 30 I-frames. As shown in Tab. 2, both
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding Author

