Supplementary Materials for Temporally
consistent semantic video editing
Yiran Xu1 , Badour AlBahar2 , and Jia-Bin Huang1
1

University of Maryland, College Park
2
Virginia Tech

This supplementary material presents additional visual results and implementation details to complement the main paper.

1

Overview

We include the following contents as our supplementary material:
– This document, including the implementation details of our proposed approach, and additional results.
– Video results. We show our video results on the project page.

2

Implementation details

2.1

Datasets

RAVDESS. To evaluate human faces, we sub-sample 20 videos from the
RAVDESS dataset [4]. To use GAN inversion, we apply the face alignment [3]
with smoothing to each frame as a pre-processing. We first apply GAN inversion
and different editing techniques to those frames. For out-of-domain editing, we
use Restyle encoder [1] (PSP-based) and StyleGAN-NADA [2]. The resolution
of GAN inversion output is 1024 × 1024, and the dimension of the latent code
is 18 × 512. The pre-trained generators with different editing styles are directly
from StyleGAN-NADA. For in-domain editing, we use Pivot Tuning Inversion
(PTI) [6] on e4e [8] for inversion, and the StyleCLIP [5] mapper for editing. We
train the editing directions, “eyeglasses” and “beard” use other directions from
pre-trained mappers provided by the authors.
Internet Videos. The videos in the RAVDESS dataset have simple white
background and close-up faces. Such videos do not reflect the complexity of
faces in real videos and the potential challenges for achieving temporally coherent semantic editing. In light of this, we further show additional video results
collected from the Internet for in-domain editing. We collected these Internet
videos from YouTube and clipped them into 2-3 seconds. All the Internet videos
are 720P with an FPS of 30.
For phase 1, we set the learning rate for MLP αI to 0.005 and the number
of optimization epochs to 5. For phase 2, we set the learning rate αII to 0.0001,

