Towards Racially Unbiased Skin Tone
Estimation via Scene Disambiguation
Supplementary Material

In the following we provide additional information on the benchmark and
training datasets (Sec. 1), training details (Sec. 2), additional qualitative and
quantitative results (Sec. 3), and details about the geometric and appearance
model (Sec. 4).

1

Datasets

Benchmark. In Fig. 2 we show examples of full scene images from the evaluation
dataset, along with ground-truth diffuse albedo. Note that the evaluations are
performed in UV space (Fig. 1, left), not on the rendered albedo images.
The benchmark was rendered with the Unreal Engine 4.27 pathtracer (raytracing), using 155 head scans purchased from Triplegangers, and 50 HDRI
panorama scenes from PolyHaven (omni-directional spherical images). The only
light source of the scene is the HDRI panorama; additional global illumination,
auto-exposure compensation and ground reflection were turned off. From each
of these 50 environment maps we rendered 18 scene images, rotating the map
100◦ per rendering. Scene images with extremely low/high light intensity, which
cause the face detector to fail, were removed.
The textures provided by Triplegangers contained tiny markers on the face for
better alignment, which we manually removed. Each scene contains three head
scans that share the same illumination. After classifying each scan according to
its ITA value, we selected three heads for each scene as follows. We first uniformly
sample a skin category from three possible groups, where each group contains
two consecutive ITA skin types (I-II, III-IV, V-VI). We take this approach since
type I contains very few samples (note that the population having type I skin
is in general very low, as can be seen in the ITA graphs from [1]). We next
randomly select a head scan from the designated skin category. This ensures an
overall balance of skin tones in the benchmark.
To measure ITA we compute per-pixel ITA values over a mask that covers
mainly the cheek region, as this is the most consistent area of the UV map
in terms of skin color. Note that a similar protocol is usually employed in the
field of dermatology [1], where measures are taken also on the cheek area. A
visualization of this mask can be found in Fig 1, right.
The testing dataset contains 721 images and 2163 facial crops under different
illumination conditions, with ground-truth UV maps. We also build a smaller
validation set consisting of 234 images and 702 crops, which we use for ablation
studies.

