Appendix
VTC: Improving Video-Text Retrieval
with User Comments
Laura Hanu1 , James Thewlis1 , Yuki M. Asano2 , and Christian Rupprecht3
1

2

Unitary Ltd.
University of Amsterdam
3
University of Oxford

1

Appendix

1.1

Qualitative Examples

In Figure 1 we adapt the text branch, similar to Fig. 1 of the main paper. The
example in the second row of Figure 1 shows how our Context Adapter Module
can leverage the comments to learn that the content is indeed about parrots,
as opposed to dogs. The fourth row shows that without comments, the title
alone can be extremely ambiguous while comments can again guide the model to
retrieve relevant videos of drumming.
We provide examples where the video branch has been adapted in Figure 2.
In most cases, the retrieved titles are broadly related to the video thumbnails.
However, when provided with the comments, the retrieved titles become more
specific to the videos. For example, in the example from the second row of a
screenshot from Mario Kart, the retrieved titles are generally about games e.g.
The Castle or Sun Haven, whereas when adapting the video with the comments,
the model retrieves titles specifically about Mario Kart. Similarly, in the example
from the last row, the model seems to get confused about the content of the
video when deprived of the comments, which provide the necessary context about
feeding a fish.
Finally, in Figure 3, we show the saliency of comments with regards to a
given video and title. For this, we use the approach of masking out each comment
in turn, allowing us to visualise the effect of each individual comment on the
network output. We compare the output descriptor when including all comments
to the descriptors with a comment masked, using the inner product as a score of
similarity, and present the comments sorted from lowest to high, the expectation
being that an uninformative comment will not cause a large shift in the descriptor
(so will still have high similarity when excluded) whereas a salient comment
will cause a larger shift (and so a lower similarity when excluded). We show
results for adapting both the text branch (left) and visual branch (right), and
observe that, as expected, uninformative comments such as “That was great! ” and
“Possibly?!?!?!?! Lol ” cause little change to the descriptor, whereas comments
related to objects in the video cause a larger shift. This demonstrates that the
method is able to pick out and filter the relevant information.

