Supplementary for Compositional Human-Scene
Interaction Synthesis with Semantic Control
Kaifeng Zhao1 , Shaofei Wang1 , Yan Zhang1 , Thabo Beeler2 , and Siyu Tang1
1

ETH Zürich
{kaifeng.zhao, shaofei.wang, yan.zhang, siyu.tang}@inf.ethz.ch
2
Google
thabo.beeler@gmail.com

In the supplementary, we first provide method details, including architecture
illustrations, training losses, and compositional body generation in Sec. A. We
then elaborate on experiment details in Sec. B. In Sec. C, we present ablation
studies on different body representations and the two-stage generation framework. In Sec. D, we show more qualitative results and discuss typical failure
cases and limitations.

A

Method Details

A.1

Architecture Details

PelvisVAE. We illustrate the detailed architecture of PelvisVAE in Fig. S1.
The PelvisVAE encoder and decoder use a stack of 2 transformer layers with an
embedding dimension of 64. PelvisVAE represents a human as a pelvis frame of
location and orientation. At the decoder, PelvisVAE takes a zero vector as the
body token.
PointNet++. We train a PointNet++ [12] network to extract sparse key points
from point clouds, which reduces the number of object nodes to a suitable level
for transformers. We show the architecture of the PointNet++ object encoder
in Fig. S2. The PointNet++ module comprises two set abstraction layers to
extract 256 key points for each object. The output points features are projected
to vectors of dimension 128 for BodyVAE and dimension 64 for PelvisVAE using
a linear layer.
SMPL-X Regressor We train a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to regress
SMPL-X parameters from body meshes as shown in Fig. S3. The MLP has six linear layers, and we employ residual connections. The MLP outputs the SMPL-X
body poses using the 6D continuous representation [18], body shape parameters,
and the first six hand pose PCA components for each hand. Following [8], We
detach the gradients of the reconstructed body from the computational graph
and use the concatenation of the reconstructed body and a template T-pose
body as inputs to the MLP.

