ManiFest: manifold deformation
for few-shot image translation
- supplementary material Fabio Pizzati1,2 , Jean-Franois Lalonde3 , Raoul de Charette1
1

Inria, 2 VisLab, 3 Universit Laval
{fabio.pizzati, raoul.de-charette}@inria.fr, jflalonde@gel.ulaval.ca

In this document, we provide additional insights about the training of ManiFest
and details for the comparison with the baselines (Sec. 1). We also include more
ablation studies (Sec. 2) about the role of anchors, the impact of GERM and
more qualitative results on feature consistency. Finally, we study the deformed
manifold resulting from our training (Sec. 3), we discuss limitations (Sec. 4), and
we include more results on translation tasks (Sec. 5). For additional visualizations,
please refer to the provided supplementary video.

1

Architectures and Training

ManiFest training Here we include details on ManiFest training procedure. Being
GERM a residual correction, the network could use it to compensate an unrealistic
suboptimal s̃w (i.e., the image obtained from the style interpolation of WMI, see
Sec. 3.2 and Eq. (2) of the main paper), which would consist of a naive pitfall in
the ManiFest training. This will lead the network to encode strong corrections in
s̃r , with dramatic color changes. This depends mainly on training initialization.
To avoid this behavior, we want s̃w to resemble as much as possible T , so we
additionally apply Lstyle also to s̃w . In this way, residuals will be forced to encode
only minor corrections to the discovered interpolated style, ultimately balancing
the training procedure.
For the multi-target generator behavior, we follow StarGANV2 [1] and apply
a multi-head mechanism to our style encoder, in the same way as in the mapping
network.
We train ManiFest for 150,000 iterations, using Adam with β1 = 0.5, β2 =
0.999 with learning rate 1e − 4 for the network and 1e − 2 for w. For the patchbased discriminator, we use patches of size 64 × 64 and rotation up to 360°. We
apply horizontal flipping as data augmentation.
Baselines training We now detail the adaptation of the FUNIT [3] and COCOFUNIT [6] baselines. We decrease the number of downsampling blocks in both the
content and style encoders to 2, use a single MLP block, and reduce the number
of residual blocks to 4 following MUNIT [2]. We weight the reconstruction loss
to 10. Please note that training with default hyperparameters leads to training
divergence in our tasks. We use the official Imaginaire library for training1 .
1

https://github.com/NVlabs/imaginaire, under NVIDIA License-NC

