Supplementary Material for “AdaNeRF:
Adaptive Sampling for Real-time Rendering of
Neural Radiance Fields”
Andreas Kurz1⋆ , Thomas Neff1⋆ , Zhaoyang Lv2 , Michael Zollhöfer2 , and Markus
Steinberger1
1

1

Graz University of Technology, Austria
2
Reality Labs Research, USA

Training speed

AdaNeRF requires ≈ 4− 6 hours to train the sampling network, and ≈ 1− 3 hours
to train the shading network (less when using half precision). Similarly, DONeRF
(assuming ground truth depth is available) requires ≈ 6 hours to train its oracle,
and ≈ 1−3 hours to train its shading network. However, this assumes that a depth
estimate exists—we used a full NeRF to estimate and export depth for DONeRF
(≈ 24 − 48 hours). TermiNeRF* requires even more dense training targets for
its sampling network, which results in even slower training times compared to
DONeRF, depending on the size of the dataset. Finally, the fast CUDA/C++
implementation of Instant-NGP trains in ≈ 10 − 30 minutes. Similar concepts
(hash table encoding, tiny efficient shading networks) could also potentially be
applied to AdaNeRF in the future.

2

Large-Scale Scene Subdivision and Rendering

In the supplementary video on our project page, we show our approach is able
to scale to larger scenes, with a new dataset based on the Pavillon scene of the
DONeRF dataset, consisting of 15 slightly overlapping view cells, a complex
scene with reflections and close up shots of intricate objects. For each view cell,
we train a separate AdaNeRF. During rendering, we interleave the outputs of
two overlapping AdaNeRF, thus evaluating only one AdaNeRF per pixel, which
does not increase the computational cost. To this extent, we define a blue noise
sequence that blends the transition between cells to show that AdaNeRF is
consistent across different view cells in space. We greedily select the two closest
view cells that are oriented in the camera viewing direction for blending, ensuring
at most two networks in memory at any time.
⋆

Authors contributed equally to this work.

