How Severe is Benchmark-Sensitivity in Video Self-Supervised Learning?

21

Appendix
In Appendix A, we provide details of the video self-supervised models we
use in our evaluation study. Appendix B provides details on the experimental
setup for each of our downstream sensitivity factors. We also show correlation
plots between current benchmarks and the experimental results for each sensitivity factor in Appendix C. Feature similarities between supervised pre-training
and each self-supervised pre-training method are shown in Appendix D. In Appendix E, we describe domain di↵erence between the downstream video datasets
we use and the attributes we use to characterize this di↵erence. We show the
standard deviations of the experiments on the SEVERE benchmark Appendix F
and also compare the SEVERE benchmark to results on HMDB51 action recognition in Appendix G. Finally, we report results of some additional experiments
in Appendix H and Appendix I that we did not have room for in the main paper.

A

Details of the Evaluated Self-Supervised Models

We use a variety of di↵erent self-supervised methods in our paper, here we
describe each method:
MoCo [10] is a contrastive learning method proposed for representation learning in images. Positives are created by performing di↵erent spatial augmentations on a video. Negatives are other videos. To obtain negatives beyond the
current batch, MoCo proposes a momentum encoder which maintains a queue
of momentum-updated data samples from previous batches.
SeLaVi [4] views the audio and visual modalities as di↵erent augmentations of
a video and learns with a cross-modal clustering pretext task.
VideoMoCo [53] extends MoCo to the temporal domain. It does this with an
adversarial dropout augmentation which removes the frames the model considers
most important. With the contrastive learning loss, the model learns invariance
to this adversarial frame dropout alongside the spatial augmentations used in
MoCo.
Pretext-Contrast [70] combines the pretext task approach with contrastive
learning. As its pretext task it uses video cloze procedure [45] where the goal
is to predict which augmentations have been applied to a video clip. For the
contrastive learning objective di↵erent temporal shifts, i.e. distinct clips from
the same video, are considered.
RSPNet [56] also combines pretext and contrastive tasks, with a focus on video
speed. The pretext task is to predict the relative di↵erence in speed between two
versions of the same video, while the contrastive task creates extra positives
and negatives by augmenting videos with di↵erent speeds along with the spatial
augmentations.
AVID-CMA [49] is a multi-modal contrastive learning method which uses
audio in addition to the visual modality. It first uses cross-modal contrastive
learning where the one modality is used as the positives and the other as the

