Supplementary Material for “Active
Pointly-Supervised Instance Segmentation”
Chufeng Tang1 , Lingxi Xie2 , Gang Zhang1 , Xiaopeng Zhang2 ,
Qi Tian2( ) , and Xiaolin Hu1,3,4( )
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Institute for AI, BNRist,
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems, Tsinghua University
2
3
Huawei Inc.
Chinese Institute for Brain Research (CIBR)
4
IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Tsinghua University
{tcf18, zhang-g19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {198808xc, zxphistory}@gmail.com
tian.qi1@huawei.com, xlhu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

A.

More Details and Results of AFIS

Since there is no existing work can be directly compared to APIS, we established
the baseline setting active fully-supervised instance segmentation (AFIS). The
mask annotations (image-level or instance-level) are queried by the model during
each active learning step, which is conceptually similar to some existing active
learning algorithm designed for image classification or object detection. In this
section, we provide more description and results of AFIS.
Annotation Schemes. Fig. S1 illustrates different annotation schemes from
the perspective of human annotators, as well as the corresponding approximate
annotation time. Compared to AFIS, APIS can be studied in a more fine-grained
manner because it allocates annotation budgets to pixels, and the annotation of
points is considerably faster and cheaper.
Sampling Strategy of AFIS. In Fig. 6 of the main paper, we compared
different sampling strategies for the case of image-level selection and instancelevel selection, respectively. Firstly, the results of the Mean Entropy strategy
were unsatisfactory in both cases, even lagging behind the results of random
sampling. We diagnosed the problem and found the main reason is that the
instances selected under this metric are usually small objects. For example,
over 76% of the selected instances at the first step are small (i.e., area<322 ,
as defined in COCO). For the larger objects, there were usually a lot of lowentropy points (e.g., points on the smooth interior areas or background), which
decreased the mean entropy value. It is well-known that the the model’s performance is usually poor on small objects even with the mask supervision [6], thus
the annotated instances in our cases were not so effective. Secondly, we used
the detection loss (e.g., GIoU Loss) to measure the Detection Quality, i.e., the
lower the loss, the higher the quality. As shown, the strategy that selecting with
the lowest detection loss (Min. Det. Loss) usually produced better results than
random sampling for the image-level selection, while for the instance-level selection, the performance was usually on par with random sampling. In addition,
we also studied the opposite strategy that selecting with the highest detection

