Swapping Autoencoder for Deep Image Manipulation

Taesung Park12
Jun-Yan Zhu2
Oliver Wang2
Jingwan Lu2
2
12
Eli Shechtman
Alexei A. Efros
Richard Zhang2
1

UC Berkeley

2

Adobe Research

Abstract
Deep generative models have become increasingly effective at producing realistic
images from randomly sampled seeds, but using such models for controllable
manipulation of existing images remains challenging. We propose the Swapping
Autoencoder, a deep model designed specifically for image manipulation, rather
than random sampling. The key idea is to encode an image into two independent
components and enforce that any swapped combination maps to a realistic image.
In particular, we encourage the components to represent structure and texture, by
enforcing one component to encode co-occurrent patch statistics across different
parts of the image. As our method is trained with an encoder, finding the latent codes
for a new input image becomes trivial, rather than cumbersome. As a result, our
method enables us to manipulate real input images in various ways, including texture
swapping, local and global editing, and latent code vector arithmetic. Experiments
on multiple datasets show that our model produces better results and is substantially
more efficient compared to recent generative models.

Figure 1: Our Swapping Autoencoder learns to disentangle texture from structure for image editing tasks. One
such task is texture swapping, shown here. Please see our project webpage for a demo video of our editing method.

1

Introduction

Traditional photo-editing tools, such as Photoshop, operate solely within the confines of the input
image, i.e. they can only “recycle” the pixels that are already there. The promise of using machine
learning for image manipulation has been to incorporate the generic visual knowledge drawn
from external visual datasets into the editing process. The aim is to enable new class of editing
operations, such as inpainting large image regions [60, 81, 55], synthesizing photorealistic images
from layouts [33, 73, 59], replacing objects [88, 28], or changing the time photo is taken [41, 2].
However, learning-driven image manipulation brings in its own challenges. For image editing, there
is a fundamental conflict: what information should be gleaned from the dataset versus information
that must be retained from the input image? If the output image relies too much on the dataset,
it will retain no resemblance to the input, so can hardly be called “editing”, whereas relying too
much on the input lessens the value of the dataset. This conflict can be viewed as a disentanglement
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

