Supplemental Material: Spotting Temporally
Precise, Fine-Grained Events in Video
James Hong1 , Haotian Zhang1 , Michaël Gharbi2 ,
Matthew Fisher2 , and Kayvon Fatahalian1
1

Stanford University
Adobe Research

2

A

Implementation Details for E2E-Spot

A.1

Spatial-Temporal Feature Extractor, F

As described in § 3, our feature extractor is a standard RegNet-Y [19] with Gate
Shift Modules [21] (GSM) inserted. GSM is applied at each residual block, to 41
of the channels, rounded up to the nearest multiple of 4. RegNet-Y 200MF and
800MF produce spatially-pooled features of dimension 368 and 768 respectively.
We choose RegNet-Y [19] over the more commonly used ResNet [12] family of
2D CNNs because the former is more recent and compact (RegNet-Y 200MF has
3.2M parameters vs. 11.7M parameters for ResNet-18), while exhibiting generally
better performance on image classification benchmarks [24]. E2E-Spot, however,
can be implemented with any 2D CNN architecture.
A.2

Long-term Temporal Reasoning Module, G

G provides temporal reasoning on dense feature vectors, following the spatial
pooling layer of F . The details of G are given in the paper in § 3.2. Here, we
provide details for the additional variations of E2E-Spot used in § 5.4.
Deeper GRU increases the number of GRU layers to 3. MS-TCN and ASFormer are described in § B.1.
GRU* takes multiple 1-layer GRUs at different temporal granularities, in
addition to the 1-layer GRU, to more directly aggregate information across wider
contexts. We use two temporal scales, 4 and 16, requiring two additional GRUs.
Each scale defines a temporal down-sampling of the clip length by a factor of the
scale, S. For each scale, all output features are first fed to a fully connected layer
and ReLU. Then, the sequence of length N is divided into ⌈ N
S ⌉ non-overlapping
windows, and max-pooling is performed in each window. The ⌈ N
S ⌉ sequence is
processed by the scale-specific GRU. Finally, the outputs of each GRU, at each
time scale, are up-sampled by repetition back to the full clip length N and
concatenated for each time step t.
While these experiments do not cover the full breadth of architectures and
settings available, we note that we did not observe major performance gains over
the 1-layer GRU in applying these alternatives alongside end-to-end learning.

