Action Quality Assessment with Temporal
Parsing Transformer: Supplementary Material
Yang Bai1,2∗† , Desen Zhou2∗ , Songyang Zhang3 , Jian Wang2 , Errui Ding2 ,
Yu Guan4 , Yang Long1 , and Jingdong Wang2‡
1
Department of Computer Science, Durham University
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory, 4 University of Warwick
{yang.bai,yang.long}@durham.ac.uk,{zhoudesen,wangjingdong}@baidu.com
2

In this supplementary material, we provide more results on AQA-7 dataset.

1

Datasets

MTL-AQA dataset is the largest dataset for AQA task. In MTL-AQA, 1412
fine-grained samples are collected from 16 different events with different views.
The dataset mainly focuses on diving covering various categories. In this dataset,
different annotations are available to support research on different tasks, including action quality assessment, action recognition, and comment generation. In
addition, raw annotation of score and difficulty (DD) from the multiple judges
is available. We split the dataset into 1059 training samples and 353 test data
following the evaluation protocol suggested in paper [3].
AQA-7 dataset contains samples from seven different action categories, including gymnastic vaulting, big air skiing, big air snowboarding, synchronous diving
- 3m springboard, synchronous diving - 10m platform, and trampoline. Following
the setting in [2], we excluded the trampoline category with much longer videos
than the other categories, resulting in 803 training videos and 303 testing videos.
JIGSAWS [1] is a surgical activities dataset that contains three tasks, namely
Suturing (S), Needle Passing (NP), and Knot Tying (KT). To evaluate different
features of videos, samples in the dataset are annotated with multiple scores, and
the final score is the sum of all annotations. We applied four-fold cross-validation
following [4] to align with previous work.

2

Additional Ablation Study

2.1

Ablation on different number of queries and layers

Number of queries We show the ablation study of the number of queries in
Tab. 1a. We found that too many queries hurt performance. As a result, we
choose query number to be 5.
* Equal contribution. † Work done when Yang Bai was a research intern at VIS, Baidu.
‡ Corresponding Author.

