CenterFormer: Center-based Transformer for 3D
Object Detection
Zixiang Zhou1,2 , Xiangchen Zhao1 ,
Yu Wang1 , Panqu Wang1 , and Hassan Foroosh2
1

2

TuSimple
Computational Imaging Lab., University of Central Florida
zhouzixiang@knights.ucf.edu
{xiangchen.zhao,yu.wang,panqu.wang}@tusimple.ai
hassan.foroosh@ucf.edu

We present the supplementary material for “CenterFormer: Center-based
Transformer for 3D Object Detection” in this paper.

1

Implementation Details

VoxelNet backbone network We adopt the same VoxelNet backbone network
design in CenterPoint [7]. In specific, we first use an average pooling in each voxel
to encode the point cloud into a voxel feature map. Then, a VoxelNet [8] with
sparse convolution is used to extract features in the voxel map. Except for the
down-sample layer, all residual blocks use the submanifold sparse convolution
layer to minimize the computation cost. The VoxelNet backbone network downsamples the dimensions of the x-axis and y-axis with a factor of 8 and the z-axis
with a factor of 16. Finally, the output voxel feature map is reshaped to the
BEV for the following process.
Multi-scale CPN We design the Multi-scale CPN to achieve two goals:
First, we want to encode the BEV feature into different scale levels for the
transformer decoder. Second, the BEV feature map should be large enough to
separate small objects like the pedestrian. Since in our experiment, the size of
each BEV grid in the VoxelNet output feature is [0.8m × 0.8m], which is similar
to the average pedestrian object size, we need to up-sample the feature map to
avoid the voxelization error. We also use a down-sample layer to extract largerscale features. The overall network structure is shown in Figure 1.
Spatial-aware heatmap fusion To focus the heatmap fusion on the current
object center location, we use the current BEV feature as the reference to learn
spatial attention. We concatenate the current feature and the weighted previous
features together and use another 3 × 3 convolution layer to compress the BEV
feature into the same size as the single frame input in the heatmap head.
Training details Generally, the transformer decoder requires a matching
process, e.g. Hungarian matching, to find the closest ground truth bounding
box to the prediction in training. The computation cost of this process becomes
unacceptable when we match two 3D bounding boxes with orientation. Hence,
we use the same training strategy in the center-based object detection network,
i.e. only training the network when the proposed center is at the same position

