MILES: Visual BERT Pre-training with Injected
Language Semantics for Video-text Retrieval
Appendix
Yuying Ge1 Yixiao Ge2 Xihui Liu4 Jinpeng Wang5
Jianping Wu6 Ying Shan2 Xiaohu Qie3 Ping Luo1
1

The University of Hong Kong 2 ARC Lab, 3 Tencent PCG 4 UC Berkeley
5
National University of Singapore 6 Tsinghua University
yuyingge@hku.hk
{yixiaoge, yingsshan, tigerqie}@tencent.com
xihui.liu@berkeley.edu
jinpengwang@u.nus.edu
jianping@cernet.edu.cn
pluo@cs.hku.hk

1

Visualization

1.1

Local Visual Semantics Capture

We visualize the self-attention map from the video encoder through computing
the self-attention of the [CLS] token in the last block. As shown in Fig. 1, compared to the model without MVM, our pre-trained model pays high attention to
those significant local regions in the video. For example, in the right column of
the second row, our model is highly focused on the boat area as well as the duck
in the lake while the model without MVM only takes notice of the duck, where
the boat region is essential to describe the video content for retrieving this video
with the given query text. Pre-training the model with MVM can capture local
visual semantics and enhance the fine-grained video context understanding.

1.2

Fine-grained Video-text Alignment

We also visualize the cross-modality alignment between text and video tokens by
calculating the similarity map between features embedded from the text encoder
and video encoder. Fig. 2 shows that compared with the model without MVM,
our pre-trained model aligns words with corresponding visual regions accurately.
For example, in the right column of the first row, visual features of the area
where the woman’s hand holds the phone shows large similarity with the text
features of the word “phone” in our model, while the visual features of irrelevant
background area are highly similar to the word “phone” in the model without
MVM. Performing MVM using video-text aligned features as the reconstruction
targets effectively trains the model to capture video-text alignment with the
“dual-encoder” architecture.

