Exploiting Unlabeled Data with Vision and
Language Models for Object Detection
Supplementary Document
Shiyu Zhao1,⋆ , Zhixing Zhang1,⋆ , Samuel Schulter2 , Long Zhao3 ,
Vijay Kumar B.G2 , Anastasis Stathopoulos1 , Manmohan Chandraker2,4 ,
and Dimitris Metaxas1
1

Rutgers University, 2 NEC Labs America, 3 Google Research, 4 UC San Diego

The supplemental material first provides additional experiments on open-vocabulary
detection (OVD) on the LVIS dataset in Sec. A.1, a faster version of VL-PLM to
speed-up pseudo label (PL) extraction in Sec. A.2, and additional experiments on
semi-supervised detection (SSOD) in Sec. A.3. Then, we give additional analysis
on fusing pseudo labels in SSOD in Sec. B.1, the quality of PLs in Sec. B.2,
how to model the background category in PL generation in Sec. B.3, and the
generalization ability of the proposal generator in Sec. B.4. Finally, qualitative
results of PLs and the final OVD detector are given in Sec. C.

A

Additional Experiments

A.1

Open-vocabulary detection results on LVIS

In addition to our open-vocabulary detection (OVD) experiments on COCO [6]
in Sec. 4.1 of the main paper, we also evaluate our model on the LVIS [4] dataset.
LVIS is a large-vocabulary dataset with 1203 categories and shares images with
COCO [6]. We follow the experimental setup of ViLD [3], the state-of-the-art
method on LVIS for OVD (LVIS-OVD): All categories are divided into three
sets, namely, frequent, common, and rare, based on the numbers of their objects.
Following [3], we take frequent and common categories as the base categories
and regard rare categories as the novel categories. We leverage base categories
to train our two-stage class-agnostic proposal generator and adopt VL-PLM to
generate PLs for novel categories. Then, a standard OVD detector was trained
with both the ground truth of base categories and our PLs.
Comparison with ViLD: Table 1 compares our detector via VL-PLM with
Supervised and the state-of-the-art method ViLD. Supervised is the supervised
baseline model trained on the whole LVIS with repeat factor sampling [4,7].
We report the box mAP to better indicate the performance on detection. For
ViLD [3], we took the model provided by the authors and re-ran the evaluation
to ensure a fair comparison. For the Supervised baseline, we adopted the numbers
from [3]. As shown, our method outperforms ViLD on all splits. We gain +0.6
APr for rare categories (novel) and +2.6 APc /+3.5 APf for common/frequent
⋆

Equal contribution.

