Zero-Shot Category-Level Object Pose
Estimation: Supplementary Material
Walter Goodwin1⋆ , Sagar Vaze2⋆ , Ioannis Havoutis1 , and Ingmar Posner1
1
2

1

Oxford Robotics Institute, University of Oxford
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
firstname@robots.ox.ac.uk

Supplementary Material

In this appendix, we first discuss our choice of dataset, followed by our choice
of evaluation categories and sequences, and a description of our pose-labelling
procedure, and data pre-processing steps. We then present several further experiments and ablations to our method, showing that performance improves further
under greater numbers of target views, and the effectiveness of our full method
in refining a pose estimation. Results around the number and diversity of correspondences are given, and the approach to the rigid body transform solution
and RANSAC is described further and justified. We examine our choice of evaluation metric for the SO(3) component of pose estimation, and explore the effect
of near-symmetries on our results in this light. We give further implementation
details on several baselines.

A

CO3D dataset

A.1

Choice of dataset

A comparison of several multi-category, multi-instance datasets is given in table A.1. Several existing canonical category-level pose datasets are not appropriate for our method as they do not include depth information [46, 47], or only
have extremely sparse depth [2]. The Redwood dataset [14] contains a good
diversity of object categories and instances, with many views per object and
ground truth depth maps, but structure-from-motion (SfM) is only run on a
small subset of categories and sequences, so very few sequences have camera
extrinsics, required to evaluate the multiple target view version of our method.
The REAL275 dataset [45], being motivated in the same embodied settings as
the present work, has the appropriate depth and extrinsic information. However,
the dataset contains only 6 categories and a small number of instances (7 per
category). The present work considers a zero-shot approach to category-level
pose, and a strong quantitative and qualitative evaluation of this method requires a large diversity of object categories. CO3D [35] provides this, with 51
⋆

These authors contributed equally

