V2X-ViT: Vehicle-to-Everything Cooperative
Perception with Vision Transformer
(Supplementary Material)
Runsheng Xu1⋆ , Hao Xiang1⋆ , Zhengzhong Tu2⋆ , Xin Xia1 ,
Ming-Hsuan Yang3,4 , and Jiaqi Ma1 †
1

University of California, Los Angeles
2
University of Texas at Austin
3
Google Research
4
University of California, Merced

In this supplementary material, we first discuss the design choice and scalability issue of our method (Sec. 1). Then, we provide more model details and
analysis (Sec. 2) in regards to the proposed architecture, including the mathematical details of the spatial-temporal correction module (Sec. 2.1), details of the
proposed MSwin (Sec. 2.2), and the overall architectural specifications (Sec. 2.3).
Afterwords, additional information and visualizations of the proposed V2XSet
dataset are shown in Sec. 3. In the end, we present more quantitative experiments, qualitative detection results, attention map visualizations, and details
about the effects of the transmission size experiment in Sec. 4.

1

Discussion of design choice

Scalability of ego vehicles. Our approach can be scalable in two ways: 1) Decentralized: the ablation studies conducted in this paper (Fig. 5a) and OPV2V [15]
indicate that, when the number of collaborators is larger than 4, the performance
gain becomes marginal while the computation still increases linearly. In practice,
each agent only needs to share features with a limited number of agents. For example, Who2Com [10] studies which agent to request/transmit data, largely
reducing computation. Moreover, the computation of selected PointPillar backbone is efficient, e.g., around 4 ms for 4 agents with full parallelization and 16 ms
in sequence computing on RTX3090. 2) Centralized: Within a certain communication range, only one ego agent is selected to aggregate all the features from
neighbors to predict bounding boxes and share the results with other agents.
This solution requires only one computation node for a group of agents, thus
being scalable.
Design choices for communication. Compared to the broadcasting approach (i.e., compute the features in each cav’s own space and transform the
feature maps directly on the ego side), our approach has more advantages in
terms of detection accuracy. Most LiDAR detection methods often largely crop
the LiDAR range based on the evaluation range to reduce computation. As the
⋆

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author: jiaqima@ucla.edu

