DANBO: Disentangled Articulated
Neural Body Representations via Graph
Neural Networks
Shih-Yang Su1(B) , Timur Bagautdinov2 , and Helge Rhodin1
1

University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
shihyang@cs.ubc.ca
2
Reality Labs Research, Pittsburgh, USA

Fig. 1. DANBO enables learning volumetric body models from scratch, only requiring
a single video as input, yet enable driving by unseen poses (inset) that are out of the
training distribution, showing better robustness than existing surface-free approaches.
Real faces are blurred for anonymity.
Abstract. Deep learning greatly improved the realism of animatable
human models by learning geometry and appearance from collections
of 3D scans, template meshes, and multi-view imagery. High-resolution
models enable photo-realistic avatars but at the cost of requiring studio settings not available to end users. Our goal is to create avatars
directly from raw images without relying on expensive studio setups
and surface tracking. While a few such approaches exist, those have
limited generalization capabilities and are prone to learning spurious
(chance) correlations between irrelevant body parts, resulting in implausible deformations and missing body parts on unseen poses. We introduce a three-stage method that induces two inductive biases to better
disentangled pose-dependent deformation. First, we model correlations
of body parts explicitly with a graph neural network. Second, to further reduce the eﬀect of chance correlations, we introduce localized perbone features that use a factorized volumetric representation and a new
aggregation function. We demonstrate that our model produces realistic body shapes under challenging unseen poses and shows high-quality
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1 7.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 107–124, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_7

