Abstracting Sketches through Simple Primitives
Supplementary Material
Stephan Alaniz1,2 , Massimiliano Mancini1 , Anjan Dutta3 ,
Diego Marcos4 , and Zeynep Akata1,2,5
1

1

University of Tübingen, 2 MPI for Informatics, 3 University of Surrey,
4
Wageningen University, 5 MPI for Intelligent Systems

Network Architecture Details

For all our networks that take sketches as input, we use the Transformer [7]
architecture with GeLU activations [2], 8 self-attention heads and a layer size
of 128 for the self-attention layers and 512 for the fully-connected layers. Our
network f has 6 Transformer layers and embeds strokes by adding a single embedding token to the input sequence of points. We find that adding positional
embeddings to encode the order of points does not improve the performance, so
we only use the coordinates as input for each point.
We train a sketch classifier on Quickdraw with the same architecture as
our stroke encoder, i.e. we use the 6-layer Transformer architecture. The first
three layers embed strokes and the last three layers embed the full sketch by
taking the sequence of stoke embeddings as input. First, we pass the sequence
of points of individual strokes (or primitives in PMN) through the first three
Transformer layers without positional embedding. To integrate stroke relative
positions, the global position and scale are mapped linearly and added to the
stroke embeddings. We then pass this stroke embedding sequence to the last
three Transformer layers. A linear layer maps the final sketch embedding to the
class logits before taking the cross entropy loss on the ground truth class label.
When partial sketches are evaluated, we mask out unused strokes or sub-strokes
at the input to obtain the predicted class logits.
For FG-SBIR, we train a Siamese network [5] on the original training sketches
with the same architecture of [4,1], based on the InceptionV3 [6] architecture
with an embedding size of 128. Since the network acts on natural images and
images of sketches, we render our primitive reconstructions to images when evaluating them on the task. Similarly, partial sketches are rendered and fed to the
CNN to obtain the retrieval scores for different budget and when applying DSA
and GDSA.

2

Compatibility function

Our proposed PMN model uses a compatibility function ϕ to choose which primitive to match to a human stroke. In theory, the model can also be trained without

