Stereo Depth Estimation with Echoes
Supplementary Material
Chenghao Zhang1,2 , Kun Tian1,2 , Bolin Ni1,2 , Gaofeng Meng1,2,3⋆ , Bin Fan4 ,
Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3 , and Chunhong Pan1
1

NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAIR, HK Institute of Science and Innovation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
University of Science and Technology Beijing
2

1

Network Architecture

We now provide the detailed architecture of each subnetwork of the proposed
StereoEchoes.
Echo Net. The Echo Net is an encoder-decoder network used in [7]. The encoder
network consists of 3 convolutional layers with the kernel size of 8 × 8, 4 × 4,
3 × 3, the stride of 4 × 4, 2 × 2, 1 × 1, and the number of output channels
32, 64, 8, respectively. Finally, a 1 × 1 convolutional layer is added to obtain
a 512-dimensional echo feature vector. The decoder consists of 7 convolutional
layers with the kernel size, stride, and padding of 4, 2, and 1, respectively. The
corresponding number of output channels are 512, 256, 128, 64, 32, 16, and 1,
respectively. Each layer is followed by BN and ReLU.
Stereo Net. The Stereo Net used in [3] consists of four parts, feature extraction,
cost volume construction, cost aggregation, and disparity prediction. The detailed structure is listed in Table 1. For feature extraction, a ResNet-like siamese
network with sharing weights is adopted to extract features of stereo images. The
last feature maps of conv2, conv3, and conv4 are concatenated to construct the
group-wise cost volume. Then, a 3D aggregation network is used to aggregate
features from neighboring disparities and pixels to obtain refined cost volumes.
It consists of a pre-hourglass module and three stacked 3D hourglass networks,
which are connected to output modules to predict multi-scale disparity maps.
Cross-modal Volume Refinement. We adopt the output feature maps of
layers 4, 5, and 6 of the decoder of Echo Net as the audio feature inputs of
our CVR module. The three outputs of the Hourglass module of the Stereo
Net are used as the visual feature inputs of CVR. We adopt 3 × 3 convolutions
for downsampling or deconvolutions for upsampling to align the feature sizes of
audio features and visual features. The 3D convolutional layers in CVR have the
kernel size of 3 × 3 × 3 with stride 1 and filter output size 32.
Relative Depth Uncertainty Estimation. The RDUE module mainly contains two parts, which are audio and visual uncertainty estimation networks.
⋆

Corresponding author.

