Bilateral Normal Integration
Xu Cao1(B) , Hiroaki Santo1 , Boxin Shi2,3 , Fumio Okura1 ,
and Yasuyuki Matsushita1
1
Osaka University, Suita, Japan
{cao.xu,santo.hiroaki,okura,yasumat}@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
2
NERCVT, School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
shiboxin@pku.edu.cn
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

Abstract. This paper studies the discontinuity preservation problem in
recovering a surface from its surface normal map. To model discontinuities, we introduce the assumption that the surface to be recovered is
semi-smooth, i.e., the surface is one-sided diﬀerentiable (hence one-sided
continuous) everywhere in the horizontal and vertical directions. Under
the semi-smooth surface assumption, we propose a bilaterally weighted
functional for discontinuity preserving normal integration. The key idea
is to relatively weight the one-sided diﬀerentiability at each point’s two
sides based on the deﬁnition of one-sided depth discontinuity. As a result,
our method eﬀectively preserves discontinuities and alleviates the underor over-segmentation artifacts in the recovered surfaces compared to
existing methods. Further, we unify the normal integration problem in
the orthographic and perspective cases in a new way and show eﬀective
discontinuity preservation results in both cases (Source code is available
at https://github.com/hoshino042/bilateral normal integration.).
Keywords: Normal integration · Discontinuity preservation ·
Semi-smooth surface · One-sided diﬀerentiability · Photometric shape
recovery

1

Introduction

Photometric shape recovery aims at high-ﬁdelity three-dimensional (3D) surface
reconstruction by exploiting the shading information. Representative methods
include photometric stereo [29] and shape from polarization [17]. These methods
typically estimates shape in the form of a surface normal map (Fig. 1(a)). To
recover the 3D surface, it is needed to integrate the surface normals, which is
called the normal integration problem [24]. Therefore, the normal integration
plays a key role in photometric surface recovery.
Despite the importance, most normal integration methods are limited to
recovering smooth surfaces. Namely, the target surface is assumed diﬀerentiable
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7 32.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13661, pp. 552–567, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7_32

