Supplementary Material for
KING: Generating Safety-Critical Driving Scenarios
for Robust Imitation via Kinematics Gradients
Niklas Hanselmann1,2,3 , Katrin Renz2,3 , Kashyap Chitta2,3 , Apratim
Bhattacharyya2,3 , and Andreas Geiger2,3
1

Mercedes-Benz AG R&D, Stuttgart
2
University of Tübingen
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

Abstract. In this supplementary document, we first provide additional information regarding AIM-BEV (Sec. 1.1) and the rule-based expert (Sec. 1.2). Next,
we provide additional information on the kinematics model (Sec. 2) and a detailed
description of our cost functions (Sec. 3). Furthermore, we discuss details regarding the maps, routes and traffic initialization of the scenarios in Sec. 4. Finally,
we present details on the hyperparameter choices for all optimization methods,
further results, as well as additional qualitative examples in Sec. 5.

1

Driving Agents

In this work, we consider three driving agents: (1) Our AIM-VA [3] variant termed
AIM-BEV, (2) TransFuser [10] and (3) a privileged rule-based expert, which provides
supervision for AIM-BEV and TransFuser and is additionally used to determine solvability for the scenarios generated by KING. In the following we provide additional
details on AIM-BEV and the rule-based expert. For TransFuser, we refer readers to the
original paper. In addition, we provide further information on the driving metrics used
to benchmark their performance in the CARLA simulator.
1.1

AIM-BEV

Model: Our architecture is similar to the AIM models introduced in previous work
[3, 10]. For efficiency during simulation, we use a lightweight MobileNetV3-Small [8]
instead of the ResNet34 used in AIM as a convolutional backbone. As described in the
main paper, it takes a bird’s-eye view (BEV) semantic occupancy grid observation ot
as input. From this, a 512-dimensional feature vector is extracted (same as in AIM).
This is then further processed by three fully-connected layers (256, 128 and 64 units
with ReLU activations) to yield a 64-dimensional representation of ot . To be able to
train and evaluate the model in the CARLA simulator [5], we concatenate a binary
variable indicating if the vehicle should stop for a red light to this representation. As
we do not model traffic lights in KING scenarios, this variable is always set to zero

