Label Embedding Trees for Large Multi-Class Tasks

Samy Bengio(1)

Jason Weston(1)

David Grangier(2)

(1)

Google Research, New York, NY
{bengio, jweston}@google.com
(2)
NEC Labs America, Princeton, NJ
{dgrangier}@nec-labs.com

Abstract
Multi-class classification becomes challenging at test time when the number of
classes is very large and testing against every possible class can become computationally infeasible. This problem can be alleviated by imposing (or learning)
a structure over the set of classes. We propose an algorithm for learning a treestructure of classifiers which, by optimizing the overall tree loss, provides superior
accuracy to existing tree labeling methods. We also propose a method that learns
to embed labels in a low dimensional space that is faster than non-embedding approaches and has superior accuracy to existing embedding approaches. Finally
we combine the two ideas resulting in the label embedding tree that outperforms
alternative methods including One-vs-Rest while being orders of magnitude faster.

1

Introduction

Datasets available for prediction tasks are growing over time, resulting in increasing scale in all their
measurable dimensions: separate from the issue of the growing number of examples m and features
d, they are also growing in the number of classes k. Current multi-class applications such as web
advertising [6], textual document categorization [11] or image annotation [12] have tens or hundreds
of thousands of classes, and these datasets are still growing. This evolution is challenging traditional
approaches [1] whose test time grows at least linearly with k.
At training time, a practical constraint is that learning should be feasible, i.e. it should not take
more than a few days, and must work with the memory and disk space requirements of the available
hardware. Most algorithms’ training time, at best, linearly increases with m, d and k; algorithms
that are quadratic or worse with respect to m or d are usually discarded by practitioners working on
real large scale tasks. At testing time, depending on the application, very specific time constraints
are necessary, usually measured in milliseconds, for example when a real-time response is required
or a large number of records need to be processed. Moreover, memory usage restrictions may also
apply. Classical approaches such as One-vs-Rest are at least O(kd) in both speed (of testing a single
example) and memory. This is prohibitive for large scale problems [6, 12, 26].
In this work, we focus on algorithms that have a classification speed sublinear at testing time in k as
well as having limited dependence on d with best-case complexity O(de (log k + d)) with de  d
and de  k. In experiments we observe no loss in accuracy compared to methods that are O(kd),
further, memory consumption is reduced from O(kd) to O(kde ). Our approach rests on two main
ideas: firstly, an algorithm for learning a label tree: each node makes a prediction of the subset of
labels to be considered by its children, thus decreasing the number of labels k at a logarithmic rate
until a prediction is reached. We provide a novel algorithm that both learns the sets of labels at each
node, and the predictors at the nodes to optimize the overall tree loss, and show that this approach is
superior to existing tree-based approaches [7, 6] which typically lose accuracy compared to O(kd)
approaches. Balanced label trees have O(d log k) complexity as the predictor at each node is still
1

