Supplementary material: PolarMOT: How far
can geometric relations take us in 3D
multi-object tracking?
Aleksandr Kim, Guillem Brasó, Aljoša Ošep, and Laura Leal-Taixé
Technical University of Munich, Germany
{aleksandr.kim,guillem.braso,aljosa.osep,leal.taixe}@tum.de

1

Implementation details

1.1

Training and augmentation

Training. As training data we use annotated training keyframes from the
nuScenes [1] dataset. We represent labeled boxes as nodes in the graph. Edges
in the graph are labeled positive if they connect nodes with the same track ID
(across any number of frames) and negative otherwise. During model training, all
input clips are processed individually and each edge is considered an independent
sample that contributes to the total focal loss [4].
Data augmentation. To mimic noisy, real-world detectors, we rely on data
augmentation. We add random bounding box detections at each frame before
the graph construction to imitate false positive detections. For each frame, the
number of added boxes is a fraction of the number of real boxes (between 0.7 and
0.9 for each class) plus a fixed number (between 1 and 3) to augment completely
empty frames. Pose coordinates (position and orientation) of augmented boxes
are sampled from uniform distributions whose parameters are the minimum and
maximum values of corresponding coordinates to labeled boxes.
We also augment input graphs at each training iteration. To mimic occlusions
and miss-classifications, we randomly drop nodes (between 40%-60%) at each
frame as well as some complete frames from our graphs. To emulate imprecise
detections, we further perturb each initial edge feature, representing differences
in object poses, with noise vectors sampled from class-specific Gaussian distributions with zero mean. For each class, the standard deviation for distributions of
distance noise (meters) is between 0.05 and 0.35, for polar angle noise (radians)
between 0.1 and 0.25, and for orientation noise (radians) between 0.05 and 0.25.
For further augmentation, we fully remove approximately 20% of all edges in the
graph. These augmentations ensure that our model is robust to imperfect/noisy
inputs that we obtain from real-world 3D object detectors.
Inference. In multi-object tracking, track IDs need to be distinct at each frame,
i.e., only one object detection can be assigned to each identity (track ID). In
our problem setting, this means that every node in the graph can have at most
one positive edge connecting it to each past and future frame. We do not impose

