GAN with Multivariate Disentangling for
Controllable Hair Editing - Supplementary
Material
Xuyang Guo1,2

, Meina Kan1,2

, Tianle Chen1,2 , and Shiguang Shan1,2,3

1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CAS), Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
{xuyang.guo,tianle.chen}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {kanmeina,sgshan}@ict.ac.cn
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beiijng 100049, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518055, China

This supplementary material provides more details in six aspects: Section A gives
more details about network architectures and the training procedure. Section B
gives more details about how to automatically get color annotations. Section C
presents details about exploring binary (i.e. weak) annotation to guide the semantic dimension disentangling for texture. Section D discusses the comparison
between our method and other general GAN inversion-based editing methods.
Section E shows details about testing of continuous editing ability. Section F
shows more results about the disentangled dimension of color, texture, and
shape, more comparisons with existing methods, and more visual results.

A

Network Architectures and Training Procedure

Network Architectures for Hair Color and Texture Editing. The networks of color and texture have two parts, encoders (EC , ET ) and decoder (DX ).
The encoder EC of color is designed as a fully connection architecture with
3 hidden layers, as shown in Fig. 1. It takes hair feature X as input to get
the latent representations ZC . The encoder ET of texture is designed as a fully
connection architecture with 4 hidden layers, as shown in Fig. 2. It takes hair
feature X as input to get the latent representations ZT . A single decoder DX
is used to generate the edited hair feature X̂ from edited latent representations
ẐC , ẐT of color and texture. The network architecture of the decoder DX has 4
hidden layers, as shown in Fig. 3.
During optimization of the encoder and decoder, adversarial training with
Lreal is needed to ensure the reality of edited feature X̂. So, a discriminator δX
is introduced as described in Section 3.2 of our paper. The discriminator has a
similar architecture with ET and shares network weights as shown in Fig. 2 for
saving parameters and better extracting common features.
Network Architecture for Hair Shape Editing. The networks for the shape
editing are designed as convolution architecture considering that shape is position sensitive, consisting of the shape encoder and the shape adaptor. Since the
input segmentation mask has no position information for convolution operation,

