JPerceiver: Joint Perception Network for Depth,
Pose and Layout Estimation in Driving Scenes
(Supplementary Material)
Haimei Zhao1 , Jing Zhang1 , Sen Zhang1 , and Dacheng Tao2,1
1

The University of Sydney, 6 Cleveland St, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
2
JD Explore Academy, China
{hzha7798,szha2609}@uni.sydney.edu.au
jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract. This document provides supplementary information on (1)
more additional quantitative and qualitative evaluation results and analysis towards BEV layout estimation, depth estimation and visual odometry, (2) the ablation study of the network architecture and loss designing,
and (3) the implementation details.

S1

Additional Evaluation Results

S1.1

Layout Estimation

BEV layout estimation on Nuscenes. In nuscenes[2], we compare with more
recent methods that either take six-camera [10,14,11,8] or one-camera [9,17]
images as input, and evaluate it under two settings, i.e., predicting a BEV layout
in a range of 50m × 50m (denoted as Setting 1 in Table 1) and 100m × 100m
(denoted as Setting 2 in Table 1). It is noteworthy that we choose to predict in
an area of the same size for fairness, which covers the range of Z m in front of
the ego vehicle and horizontally covers Z2 m to the left and right. The results of
six-camera methods are retrained to predict only two classes (drivable area and
car). And the results of PYVA [17] are also trained using their provided codes
on the Nuscenes dataset. According to Table 1, while our method takes only
one-camera images as input, we have achieved comparable or superior results
to the SOTA methods [14,10] that take six-camera input under Setting 1. In
addition, our method also surpasses the other methods that take one-camera
input in both settings by a large margin.
Ablation of different losses. We conduct an ablation study of different
components of Hybrid Loss on the KITTI Object dataset. As shown in Table 2,
Hybrid loss achieves superior performance w.r.t. both mIoU and mAP, consisting
of CE, IoU and Boundary Losses.
Qualitative results. As shown in Fig. 2, we compare the estimated BEV
layouts with the state-of-the-art (SOTA) method and corresponding ground
truth in various test scenarios of different datasets, including Argoverse [3] (top),
Nuscenes [2] (middle) and KITTI [5] (bottom). Notably, the estimation results

