Supplementary Materials: Where to Focus:
Investigating Hierarchical Attention
Relationship for Fine-Grained Visual
Classification
Yang Liu1⋆ , Lei Zhou1⋆ , Pengcheng Zhang1 , Xiao Bai1 , Lin Gu2,3 ,
Xiaohan Yu4 , Jun Zhou4 , and Edwin R. Hancock5,1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Software
Development Environment, Jiangxi Research Institute, Beihang University, China
2
3
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan
The University of Tokyo, Japan
4
5
Griffith University, Australia
University of York, U.K.

Appendix A: ARISTO Collection
We collected the human gaze dataset Attention Reinforced Images on Species
TaxonOmy (ARISTO) on the Caltech-UCSD birds (CUB) dataset [32] by designing a bird classification game consisting of two steps. As illustrated in Fig. 1,
firstly, two random images from different categories were given for the participant
with 6 seconds to learn the differences between these two categories. Secondly, a
new image of one of the two categories was shown, and the participant needed to
decide which category this image belonged to in 6 seconds. We utilized the Tobii
Pro Nano eye-tracker device to record the human gaze data during the second
step. To obtain the human gaze for image classification at different granularities,
we adopted the four-level category hierarchy (13 orders, 37 families, 122 genera,
and 200 species) of the CUB dataset organized by [5]. We repeated the game
for four rounds on these four levels, respectively. In each round, the compared
images in the first step of the game were randomly chosen from categories of
different granularities. For example, for the family level classification, the compared images were randomly chosen from two different families. Ten participants
of different genders and ages contributed to the human gaze study. We divided
the entire CUB dataset into ten subsets, and each participant played the game at
four hierarchies on one subset. Fig. 1 also shows more samples of the ARISTO.

Appendix B: Fusion Operation Analysis
The addition is an effective fusion operation to enhance the region representations. We can take the region representation bl,m and its orthogonal component
borth
l,m as bases and obtain more discriminative region representation through their
⋆

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: Xiao Bai (baixiao@buaa.edu.cn).

