Emotion Recognition for Multiple Context
Awareness: Supplementary Material
Dingkang Yang1,2, , Shuai Huang1,2, , Shunli Wang1,2 , Yang Liu1 , Peng Zhai1,2 ,
Liuzhen Su1,2 , Mingcheng Li1,2 , and Lihua Zhang1,3,2,4()
1

Academy for Engineering & Technology, Fudan University
Engineering Research Center of AI and Robotics, Ministry of Education, China
3
Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligence Science & Engineering, China
4
AI & Unmanned Systems Engineering Research Center of Jilin Province, China
lihuazhang@fudan.edu.cn
2

1

Datasets

1.1

HECO and Comparison with Related Datasets

Collection. HECO consists of images from Human-Object Interaction (HOI)
datasets, film clips, and images from the Internet. The process of collecting is
strictly controlled and supervised to ensure that HECO is free from potential negative impacts and to respect ethical behaviour generally. For the HOI datasets (
V-COCO [3], HICO-DET [1]), which contain images of agents interacting with
objects and scene contexts, we collect images with high resolution and clearly
visible agent subjects. Moreover, we collect film clips from Web. After that,
the film clips are divided to the shot with shot boundary detection, removing
face-undetected shots and ambiguous shots. To avoid similarity and redundancy
between samples, we manually select images with rich context information instead of processing the frame rate. Additionally, we collect images of agents in
Google Engine by searching for healthy keywords (e.g., Warmth, Sports, and
Partying).
Annotation. We use Visual Object Tagging Tool (VOTT) interface to annotate emotions. The labelling process involves 3 psychologists and 10 graduate
students. Psychologists utilize professional courses in cognitive psychology to
train annotators rigorously. Only all annotators who pass the evaluation test are
allowed to annotate. The annotation is performed blindly and independently, i.e.,
the judgement of each annotator is not influenced by others. Figure 1 shows the
eight discrete categories in the HECO. Furthermore, we annotate each image,
including multiple agents with recognizable multimodal features, in an elaborate way that is rarely achieved in previous datasets. Figure 2 shows examples
of agents with different levels of each one of VAD [7] dimensions. Valence (V)
measures how positive or pleasant an emotion is. Arousal (A) measures the
Dinakang Yang and Shuai Huang : Equal contribution.

