Supplementary Material for Mining
Cross-Person Cues for Body-Part Interactiveness
Learning in HOI Detection
Xiaoqian Wu1

?

, Yong-Lu Li1,2 ? , Xinpeng Liu1 , Junyi Zhang1 , Yuzhe
Wu3 , and Cewu Lu1 ??
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Hong Kong university of Science and Technology
3
DongHua University
{enlighten,yonglu li,junyizhang,lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{xinpengliu0907,wuyuzhe486}@gmail.com
2

1

HOI Hard Cases

In Fig. 1a (main text, the same below), we show the histograms of hard cases in
HICO-DET [1] train set and find that hard cases are common in HOI datasets,
which impedes interactiveness learning. In Sec. 5.3, we split HICO-DET [1] test
set and compare the interactiveness detection performance of TIN++ [5] and
our method. We detail the settings as follows:
– Tiny interactive persons. In the 1-st histogram in Fig. 1a, for each interactive H-O pair, the ratio r of the area of the human bounding box to
the area of the image is calculated. In the test set, the image is considered
as “tiny-persons scenes”, if it has at least one interactive pair with the ratio
r<0.1.
– Crowded Scenes. We calculate the detected person counts in each image
and show them in the 2-nd histogram in Fig. 1a. In the test set, the image
is considered as “crowded scenes”, if it has at least three interactive pairs.
– Occlusion. In the 3-rd histogram in Fig. 1a, for each interactive H-O pair,
the average of human joint detection confidence is calculated based on the
pose estimation results [2]. In the test set, for each image, we calculate the
average of joint detection confidence of all the human bounding boxes in it
as j. An image is regarded as “more-occlusion scenes” if j<0.2 and regarded
as “less-occlusion scenes” if j>0.6.
Notably, we split the test set in image level for the convenience of model
inference, i.e., avoid an image to be seen in inference phrase. For example, in an
image tiny persons and normal size persons may co-exist, and more/less-occluded
persons may co-exist. After the split, for all the interactive persons in “tinypersons scenes” images, 84.3% of them has a ratio r<0.1. For all the interactive
?
??

The first two authors contribute equally.
Cewu Lu is corresponding author, member of Qing Yuan Research Institute and
Shanghai Qi Zhi institute.

