Large-displacement 3D Object Tracking with
Hybrid Non-local Optimization

Supplementary Material

1

The Out-of-plane Rotation

1.1

The Decomposition of Rotation

As described in the paper, a rotation matrix R can be decomposed as in-plane
rotation Rin and out-of-plane rotation Rout , so that R = Rin Rout . Rout will
change the view direction, and Rin is a rotation around the view axis. However,
note that this decomposition is not unique, because there is no standard way to
change the view direction without introducing in-plane rotation.
We thus adopt a similar approach as the gluLookAt function, which can keep
an up direction while changing the view direction. To retrieve the view direction
v from R, we should note that in the camera coordinate space, the view axis
is always the Z axis. Therefore, v should be aligned with the Z axis after the
rotation, i.e. Rv = [0, 0, 1]⊤ . Obviously, v should be the last row of R.
Given the view direction v, we can compute Rout similarly as gluLookAt,
by specifying an up vector ([0, 1, 0] in our implementation). We found that this
approach can better decompose in-plane and out-of-plane rotations than using
Euler angles.
1.2

The Distribution of Failures

As mentioned in the paper, our basic observation is that most failures of previous
3D tracking methods are caused by the out-of-plane rotations. Figure 1 shows
the statistics of tracking failures caused by different components (translation, inplane and out-of-plane rotation) for the representative methods RBOT [7] and
SRT3D [5]. As can be seen, about 70% of RBOT failures and 90% of SRT3D
failures are due to the out-of-plane rotation. We found that the translation and
in-plane rotation introduce more failures for RBOT mainly because the optimization process is not sufficiently converged in order to achieve real-time speed,
which results in larger error for the translation and in-plane rotation.
To classify the failures, the rotation error Rd = RR−1
gt is first decomposed
out
as in-plane part Rin
and
out-of-plane
part
R
,
using
the
method as described
d
d
above. The standard 5◦ -5cm criteria then is applied for the classification. If the
translation error is greater than 5cm, the translation failure is added by one. If
out
the error of Rd is greater than 5◦ , the one in Rin
with larger error is
d and Rd
counted as fail.

