Appendix of “WaveGAN: Frequency-aware GAN
for High-Fidelity Few-shot Image Generation”
Mengping Yang1,2 , Zhe Wang1,2,? , Ziqiu Chi1,2 , and Wenyi Feng1,2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, East China University of
Science and Technology, China
2
Key Laboratory of Smart Manufacturing in Energy Chemical Process, East China
University of Science and Technology, China
mengpingyang@mail.ecust.edu.cn wangzhe@ecust.edu.cn
{chiziqiu Y10200096}@mail.ecust.edu.cn

Appendix
This appendix provides the supplementary information that is not elaborated in
the main paper: Sec. A provides the implementation details of our model. Sec. B
provides quantitative results of our ablation studies. Sec. C shows the efficacy
of different High-frequency components. Finally, Sec. D presents the 2D DWT
Visualization results of the images generated by our WaveGAN.

A

Implementation Details.

Our encoder consists of five convolutional blocks and four wavelet transformation blocks. The five convolutional blocks contain one convolution layer, followed
by batch normalization and Leaky-Relu activation. Our decoder is symmetrical
with four upsampling blocks and one output convolutional layer. Each upsampling block includes upsample operation followed by one convolutional block. We
perform our wavelet transformation after each convolution block in the encoder
and employ inverse transformation after each convolution block in the decoder.
Our discriminator is the same as LoFGAN with four residual blocks and two
fully connected layers.
Adam optimizer is used and we train our model for 100,000 iterations. At
the beginning of 50,000 iterations, the learning rates for both the generator
and the discriminator are set to 1e-4, after 5000 iterations, the learning rates
D
decay linearly to 0. We set λG
cls = λcls = λF re = 1, we save the final checkpoint
to synthesis images for evaluation. The batchsize is set to 8, and we sample
hundreds of K-shot image generation tasks from Cs . Our model is implemented
in PyTorch framework and trained on 1 × NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU.

B

Quantitative Results of Ablation Studies

Here we provide the quantitative results of our ablation studies in Sec.4.4 of the
main paper, demonstrating the effectiveness of each component of the proposed
?

Corresponding author

