Supplementary Material:
Inductive and Transductive Few-Shot Video
Classification via Appearance and Temporal
Alignments
Khoi D. Nguyen1 , Quoc-Huy Tran2 , Khoi Nguyen1 , Binh-Son Hua1 , and Rang
Nguyen1⋆
1

VinAI Research, Vietnam
Retrocausal, Inc., USA

2

In this supplementary material, we first elaborate the difference between
datasets that are sensitive or insensitive to action ordering in Sec. A. In Sec. B,
we provide additional experiment results of our method on Something-Something
V2 dataset. We then evaluate the performance of our method on two action
recognition benchmarks, namely UCF-101 and HMDB-51 in Sec. C.

A

Order-Sensitive Datasets vs Order-Insensitive Datasets

Here, we discuss the difference between datasets that are sensitive or insensitive
to action ordering. For order-sensitive datasets, temporal cues (e.g., temporal
order-preserving prior [16,2,3,9]) are essential in distinguishing between video
categories. For example, in Something-Something V2, deciding whether a video
belongs to ”Pulling sth from left to right” or ”Pushing sth from right to left” must
consider the positional changes of an object presented in the video. Fig. S1 shows
how videos from the two classes in Something-Something V2 can be aligned with
each other. On the other hand, videos in order-insensitive datasets like Kinetics
loosely rely on temporal cues. Their video classes can mostly be distinguished
just with the appearance information.

B

Additional Results

Running time. During training, we use the same ResNet-50 encoder with a linear classifier on top as the baseline [20], yielding the same number of parameters.
At inference stage, we discard the linear classifier and use the trained ResNet50 to extract frame features. In our implementation, our method has the same
number of epochs (25 epochs) and roughly the same training (12 hours) and
inference time (0.2 and 0.5 secs for a 1-shot and 5-shot episode) as the baseline.
Ablation results of α and ν. We perform ablation study on the two hyperparameter α and ν. We first fix ν = 0.1 and vary the value of α in the range
[0.01, 1.0]. Results are shown in Fig. S2(a). As we can observe, increasing the
⋆

Corresponding author

