Not Just Streaks: Towards Ground Truth for
Single Image Deraining
(Supplementary Material)
Yunhao Ba1⋆ , Howard Zhang1⋆ , Ethan Yang1 , Akira Suzuki1 , Arnold
Pfahnl1 , Chethan Chinder Chandrappa1 , Celso M. de Melo2 , Suya You2 ,
Stefano Soatto1 , Alex Wong3 , and Achuta Kadambi1
1

University of California, Los Angeles
{yhba,hwdz15508,eyang657,asuzuki100,ajpfahnl,chinderc}@ucla.edu
soatto@cs.ucla.edu, achuta@ee.ucla.edu
2
DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory
{celso.m.demelo.civ,suya.you.civ}@army.mil
3
Yale University
alex.wong@yale.edu

A

Visualization of Previous Deraining Datasets

We illustrate some typical image pairs from various deraining datasets in Fig. A.
Synthetic datasets in the community are usually generated by adding synthetic
rain effects on real images taken under sunny illumination conditions, and the
semi-real SPA-Data [34] only considers rain streaks. As a result, the domain gap
between these existing datasets and real rainy scenarios are relatively larger as
compared with the proposed GT-RAIN dataset.

B

More Results from GT-RAIN

As an additional supplement to Fig. 5 in the main paper, we provide some
more quantitative and qualitative results from our test set in Fig. B. Note that
these comparison models are using the weights provided by the authors which
are trained on synthetic or semi-real datasets. We see that our proposed model
trained on GT-RAIN continues to outperform other competing models.

C

More Results on Internet Images

As a supplement to Fig. 6 in the main paper, we provide more qualitative results
on real Internet images in Fig. C. Note that all comparison models are using the
weights provided by the author, which are trained on synthetic or semi-real
datasets. All images are taken from the dataset of common real rainy images
provided by [36]. Our proposed model trained on GT-RAIN continues to remove
rain streaks of varying shapes and sizes as well as rain accumulation without
introducing the unwanted color shifts seen in HRR [20] and DGNL-Net [10].
⋆

Equal contribution.

