GitNet: Geometric Prior-Based
Transformation for Birds-Eye-View
Segmentation
Shi Gong1 , Xiaoqing Ye2 , Xiao Tan2 , Jingdong Wang2 , Errui Ding2 ,
Yu Zhou1(B) , and Xiang Bai1
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
{gongshi,yuzhou}@hust.edu.cn
2
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China

Abstract. Birds-eye-view (BEV) semantic segmentation is critical for
autonomous driving for its powerful spatial representation ability. It is
challenging to estimate the BEV semantic maps from monocular images
due to the spatial gap, since it is implicitly required to realize both
the perspective-to-BEV transformation and segmentation. We present
a novel two-stage Geometry PrIor-based Transformation framework
named GitNet, consisting of (i) the geometry-guided pre-alignment and
(ii) ray-based transformer. In the ﬁrst stage, we decouple the BEV segmentation into the perspective image segmentation and geometric priorbased mapping, with explicit supervision by projecting the BEV semantic labels onto the image plane to learn visibility-aware features and
learnable geometry to translate into BEV space. Second, the pre-aligned
coarse BEV features are further deformed by ray-based transformers to
take visibility knowledge into account. GitNet achieves the leading performance on the challenging nuScenes and Argoverse Datasets.
Keywords: Birds-eye-view · Segmentation · Geometric prior-based

1

Introduction

The birds-eye-view (BEV) semantic map is a compact representation of the surrounding environment for autonomous driving, which provides both the layout
of road elements and the occupancy of objects. Such representations are useful
for downstream tasks such as path planning, collision avoidance. In this work,
we focus on BEV map estimation from monocular images.
The BEV semantic segmentation is particularly challenging for two reasons.
First, the BEV segmentation implicitly involves two coupled tasks: mapping
from perspective view to the birds-eye-view, and pixel-wise classiﬁcation. Most
S. Gong and X. Ye—Contribute equally.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7 23.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13661, pp. 396–411, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7_23

