A2-Nets: Double Attention Networks
Yunpeng Chen∗
National University of Singapore
chenyunpeng@u.nus.edu

Yannis Kalantidis
Facebook Research
yannisk@fb.com

Shuicheng Yan
Qihoo 360 AI Institute
National University of Singapore
eleyans@nus.edu.sg

Jianshu Li
National University of Singapore
jianshu@u.nus.edu

Jiashi Feng
National University of Singapore
elefjia@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Learning to capture long-range relations is fundamental to image/video recognition.
Existing CNN models generally rely on increasing depth to model such relations
which is highly inefficient. In this work, we propose the “double attention block”, a
novel component that aggregates and propagates informative global features from
the entire spatio-temporal space of input images/videos, enabling subsequent convolution layers to access features from the entire space efficiently. The component
is designed with a double attention mechanism in two steps, where the first step
gathers features from the entire space into a compact set through second-order
attention pooling and the second step adaptively selects and distributes features
to each location via another attention. The proposed double attention block is
easy to adopt and can be plugged into existing deep neural networks conveniently.
We conduct extensive ablation studies and experiments on both image and video
recognition tasks for evaluating its performance. On the image recognition task, a
ResNet-50 equipped with our double attention blocks outperforms a much larger
ResNet-152 architecture on ImageNet-1k dataset with over 40% less the number
of parameters and less FLOPs. On the action recognition task, our proposed model
achieves the state-of-the-art results on the Kinetics and UCF-101 datasets with
significantly higher efficiency than recent works.

1

Introduction

Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been successfully applied in image and video
understanding during the past few years. Many new network topologies have been developed to
alleviate optimization difficulties [9, 10] and increase the learning capacities [26, 5], which benefit
recognition performance for both images [8, 2] and videos [23] significantly.
However, CNNs are inherently limited by their convolution operators which are dedicated to capturing
local features and relations, e.g. from a 7 × 7 region, and are inefficient in modeling long-range
interdependencies. Though stacking multiple convolution operators can enlarge the receptive field, it
also comes with a number of unfavorable issues in practice. First, stacking multiple operators makes
the model unnecessarily deep and large, resulting in higher computation and memory cost as well as
increased over-fitting risks. Second, features far away from a specific location have to pass through a
stack of layers before affecting the location for both forward propagation and backward propagation,
increasing the optimization difficulties during the training. Third, the features visible to a distant
location are actually “delayed” ones from several layers behind, causing inefficient reasoning. Though
∗

Part of the work is done during internship at Facebook Research.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

