Supplementary Material for “Learning from
Unlabeled 3D Environments for
Vision-and-Language Navigation”
Shizhe Chen1 , Pierre-Louis Guhur1 , Makarand Tapaswi2 ,
Cordelia Schmid1 , and Ivan Laptev1
1

Inria, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University
2
IIIT Hyderabad

We first present additional automatically generated examples from our HM3DAutoVLN dataset in Sec. A. Then, we present further ablation analysis of our
methods and also discuss results on the SOON dataset (equivalent analysis for
the REVERIE dataset was in the main paper) in Sec. B. Finally, some qualitative
visualizations of predicted navigation results are presented in Sec. C.

A

HM3D-AutoVLN Dataset

In Fig. 1, we provide more examples of generated navigation graphs and objecttrajectory-instruction triplets in the HM3D-AutoVLN dataset. Each trajectory
consists of a sequence of panoramas. We only visualize the oriented view image
at each step in Fig. 1 for simplicity.

B

Additional Ablations

B.1

Comparison of Different Generated Instructions

We compare our generated instructions from the proposed speaker model (Sec.
3.2 of the main paper) with two types of template-based instructions. The first
type of template instructions (Template.Obj) only describes the target object
name, e.g., “open the window”, “clean the mirror”. The second type (Template.Sent) uses sentence structures in REVERIE training split as templates [1]
and replaces the noun phrases in the template with detected objects in the scene,
e.g., “go to bedroom and clean the chandelier”. As these template instructions
are less accurate and contain less details, we generate three instructions per target object to alleviate the impact of noisy instructions. As shown in Table 1,
even with fewer number of instructions per object, the generated instructions
from our speaker model outperform the two template-based instructions.
B.2

Influence of the Number of Training Environments

Table 2 and Table 3 present the results for all evaluation metrics corresponding
to the SR/SPL results in Fig. 4 of the main paper. We can see that more training environments are beneficial for the performance on unseen environments in

