Video Mask Transfiner for High-Quality Video
Instance Segmentation
(Supplemental material)
Lei Ke1,2 , Henghui Ding1 , Martin Danelljan1 , Yu-Wing Tai3 ,
Chi-Keung Tang2 , and Fisher Yu1
1

2

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Kuaishou Technology
http://vis.xyz/pub/vmt

We first provide more details on the HQ-YTVIS dataset creation and annotation process for the train, val and test splits in Section 1. Then, we conduct more
experimental analysis on our VMT and the iterative training paradigm in Section 2. We further present more implementation and training/inference details
of Video Mask Transfiner (VMT) in Section 3. Finally, we show extensive video
results comparisons in our project page, which includes: 1) Annotation quality comparisons between YTVIS [9] and HQ-YTVIS; 2) Comparisons between
VMT and existing state-of-the-art methods on four video instance segmentation
benchmarks; 3) The results of the same methods trained on YTVIS vs. HQYTVIS; 4) Ablation results of the quadtree sequence grouping (QSG); 5) The
failure cases of our VMT.

1

HQ-YTVIS Dataset Creation

To construct the HQ-YTVIS, we randomly re-split the original YTVIS training
set (2238 videos) with coarse mask boundary annotations into train (1678 videos,
75%), val (280 videos, 12.5%) and test (280 videos, 12.5%) subsets following the
splitting ratios in YTVIS. We observe that the proportions of 40 categories are
nearly the same on the three splits and similar to original YTVIS training set.
We keep at least 3 videos per category in the created validation and test splits,
and fix this split for training, validation and test on HQ-YTVIS.
The details of automatically refining train annotations of HQ-YTVIS through
iterative training VMT are described in Section 3.2 of the paper. We here provide
more details on manually correcting the smaller validation and test sets of HQYTVIS using LabelMe [5] in Figure 1. The human annotators correct the YTVIS
mask boundary errors by carefully relabeling it with dense polygon points along
object boundary, which has over 130 points per object in average.
Also, we show more visual cases when degrading the masks of OVIS dataset
(Figure 2), which is to equip VMT with initial boundary correction ability as
discussed in Section 3.2 (paper), we simulate various shapes of inaccurate segmentation masks by by perturbing the ground truth of OVIS datasets. The GT

