UNIF: United Neural Implicit Functions
for Clothed Human Reconstruction
and Animation
Shenhan Qian1,2 , Jiale Xu2 , Ziwei Liu3 , Liqian Ma1(B) ,
and Shenghua Gao2,4,5
1

ZMO AI Inc., Guangzhou, China
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
{qianshh,xujl1,gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
3
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
4
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging,
Shanghai, China
5
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Energy Eﬃcient and Custom AI IC,
Shanghai, China
2

Abstract. We propose united implicit functions (UNIF), a part-based
method for clothed human reconstruction and animation with raw scans
and skeletons as the input. Previous part-based methods for human
reconstruction rely on ground-truth part labels from SMPL and thus
are limited to minimal-clothed humans. In contrast, our method learns
to separate parts from body motions instead of part supervision, thus
can be extended to clothed humans and other articulated objects. Our
Partition-from-Motion is achieved by a bone-centered initialization, a
bone limit loss, and a section normal loss that ensure stable part division even when the training poses are limited. We also present a minimal perimeter loss for SDF to suppress extra surfaces and part overlapping. Another core of our method is an adjacent part seaming algorithm that produces non-rigid deformations to maintain the connection
between parts which signiﬁcantly relieves the part-based artifacts. Under
this algorithm, we further propose “Competing Parts”, a method that
deﬁnes blending weights by the relative position of a point to bones
instead of the absolute position, avoiding the generalization problem of
neural implicit functions with inverse LBS (linear blend skinning). We
demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our method by clothed human body
reconstruction and animation on the CAPE and the ClothSeq datasets.
Our code is available at https://github.com/ShenhanQian/UNIF.git.
Keywords: Clothed human reconstruction · Neural implicit
functions · Shape representation · Non-rigid deformation
S. Qian—Work conducted during an internship at ZMO AI Inc.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5 8.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13663, pp. 121–137, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5_8

