Supplementary Material
Physically-Based Editing of Indoor Scene
Lighting from a Single Image
Zhengqin Li1 , Jia Shi1,3 , Sai Bi1,2 , Rui Zhu1 , Kalyan Sunkavalli2 , Miloš Hašan2 ,
Zexiang Xu2 , Ravi Ramamoorthi1 , and Manmohan Chandraker1
1

UC San Diego

2

Adobe Research

3

Carnegie Mellon University

The supplementary material is organized as follows:
– A video to demonstrate the consistency of our scene editing results (Sec. 1 )
– Network and training details (Sec. 2)
– More qualitative and quantitative light source prediction and neural rendering
results on our synthetic dataset (Sec. 3)
– Light editing results with predicted masks (Sec. 4).
– Limitations and future works (Sec. 5).

1

Video

We include a video covering various scene editing applications. In the video, we
move virtual light sources and objects to change highlights and shadows, and
gradually modify the wall color to edit global illumination. Even though we do
not explicitly add any smoothness constraint, our framework manages to achieve
consistent scene editing results. This is probably because our framework explicitly
follows the physics of the image formation process, which provides a natural
regularization for our rendering results to be consistent.

2

Network Architecture and Training Details

We train our network on the OpenRooms Dataset [4], which is the only dataset
that provides all the necessary ground truths for training our light source estimation and neural rendering frameworks, including depth D, SVBRDF (diffuse
albedo A, normal N and roughness R), direct shading EL,W and shadow SL,W
for each individual light source, shading with indirect illumination E and per-pixel
lighting L. The dataset contains 1287 indoor scenes, with 118,233 images in total.
We utilize 108,159 images rendered from 1178 scenes for training and the rest
for testing. All the synthetic results are generated from the testing set. The
comprehensive supervision provided by the OpenRooms dataset [4] allows us
to train each module of our framework separately, which greatly simplifies the
training process. The number of iterations for training each network and batch
sizes are summarized in Tab. 3.
For all network figures in the supplementary, CX1 -KX2 -SX3 -P X4 -GX5 represents a convolutional layer with X1 channels, kernel size X2 , stride size X3 ,

