Supplementary: Approximate Differentiable
Rendering with Algebraic Surfaces
Leonid Keselman and Martial Hebert
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA
{lkeselma,hebert}@cs.cmu.edu

1

Video Results

Here we describe additional details about the experiment shown in Fig. 9 of
the main paper. Concerning the differentiable renderer: the method, settings
and hyperparameters are identical to those in Fig. 7 and 8 and Section 5.3. We
simply run the method on different input.
We collected a 14 second video with a Samsung S9 cell phone at 1280 x 720
resolution at 30 Hz. The video contains motion blur, auto-exposure, and clearly
visible video compression artifacts, making it unsuitable for some reconstruction methods. We sub-sampled the video down to 6Hz and ran Mask RCNN [3]
from Detectron2 [15] with the pre-trained weights COCO-InstanceSegmentation
/mask rcnn R 50 FPN 3x.yaml to detect objects. In our case, the object was detected as part of the teddy bear class, with about 55 viable frames. We ran
COLMAP [12] to obtain camera poses for those frames, where COLMAP successfully returned 36 frames with valid camera poses. We ran our SFS pipeline
at 160 x 90 resolution to obtain the results shown. Visual examples from this
pipeline are shown in Fig. 1. All the methods used their default settings; there
was no parameter tuning involved.
1.1

Video Result Analysis

The trajectory shown here only covers about half of the object from a roughly
constant elevation. Complicating the reconstruction is that the camera poses
are imperfect due to estimation and unmodeled camera distortion. Much more
significant is that the Mask RCNN silhouettes used for reconstruction are often
extremely under or over segmented.
Despite these issues in the ”ground truth” used for optimization, the low
degree of freedom of Fuzzy Metaballs allows the model to reasonably recover
from the massive artifacts. While the result in the main paper shows the default
50% threshold, to recover some areas, we have to lower our α threshold to 10%.

