TransFGU: A Top-down Approach to
Fine-Grained Unsupervised Semantic
Segmentation
Zhaoyuan Yin1,2∗ , Pichao Wang2† , Fan Wang2 , Xianzhe Xu2 ,
Hanling Zhang3‡ , Hao Li2 , and Rong Jin2
1

College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, China
zyyin@hnu.edu.cn
2
Alibaba Group, China
{pichao.wang, fan.w, xianzhe.xxz, lihao.lh, jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com
3
School of Design, Hunan University, China
jt hlzhang@hnu.edu.cn

In this supplementary material, we first present more training details. Then
we present more ablation studies to reveal the effectiveness of K, the semantic
prior model used in our pipeline, the cropping manner and the foreground prior.
Our re-defined labels for 5 and 16 categories in LIP are also presented. Finally,
we show failure cases, the visualization of CAM and more qualitative results on
Cityscapes and LIP.
Training Details. We train our model on 4 × Tesla V100 32G GPUs with Adam
optimizer. In general, a larger batch-size benefits the learning stability, and a
larger amount of images and target classes requires a larger learning rate and
training epochs. Different learning rates, batch-size, and epochs are used for the
four benchmarks for a better trade-off between the performance and the GPU
memory cost. Specifically, we set 256/1e-4/200 (batch size/learning rate/epochs)
for MS-COCO, 512/1e-4/100 for PascalVOC, 256/5e-5/50 for Cityscapes and
256/2e-5/100 for Lip. The learning rate is fixed during the whole training process.
The α in peer loss linearly increases from 0.03 to 0.1 according to the number
of training epochs. The background threshold T bg , loss weights ω1, ω2, and the
parameter β in the step size of sliding window is fixed across all the benchmarks.
The Effectiveness of K. We perform overclustering on the Pascal-VOC to
reveal the effectiveness of different settings of K to a certain target semantic
granularity level. Specifically, we set different K which larger than the number
of ground-truth categories as the target amount of cluster when performing KMeans to the top-level semantic features, and use the Hungarian algorithm to
find the greatest matching. Note that the unmatched categories are discarded
when calculating the mIoU and accuracy. The results shown in Table 1 indicate
a reasonable K value that closed to the amount of ground-truth categories can
benefit the evaluation performance, while an over-large K leads to the performance drop. It is due to the over-clustering in top-level semantic features leads to
* Work done during an internship at Alibaba Group.
† Corresponding author, project lead.
‡ Corresponding author.

