1

Domain Adaptive Hand Keypoint and
Pixel Localization in the Wild
– Supplementary Material –
In this supplementary material, we present details of datasets, preprocessing,
and augmentation, training and evaluation protocol, and additional qualitative
analysis.
1.1

Dataset Details

– DexYCB [2] contains 582K RGB-D frames captured by 10 subjects interacting 20 different YCB objects [1] from eight different views. In our experiment, we split the dataset by the subject IDs to create train, validation, and
test sets with 212K, 71K, and 80K images, respectively.
– HO3D [7] contains 103K RGB-D frames captured by 10 subjects interacting 10 different YCB objects [1] from a single third-person view. In our
experiment, we randomly split the video sequences to train, validation, and
test sets with 51K, 12K, and 8K images, respectively.
– HanCo [13] is an extended FreiHAND [14] dataset captured in a multiview camera setup with eight cameras, which consists of 518K, 106K, and
104K RGB images for training, validation, and testing, respectively. The
backgrounds are randomly synthesized using diverse scenery images.
– FPHA [4] is an egocentric video dataset capturing users’ actions in daily
indoor environments from a first-person perspective, and their hand poses
are tracked by hand magnetic sensors. It contains 69K training images and
16K validation images. Due to lacking hand mask annotation, we annotated
50 hand masks in the validation set.
– Ego4D [6] is a collection of daily-life egocentric activity videos lasting over
3,000 hours and gathered across the world. Due to the lack of annotation for
the two tasks, we show qualitative examples in our experiments. We treated
each video sequence as the domain to adapt.
1.2

Preprocessing and Augmentation

For creating an input of a training network, we assumed to have hand center
positions, cropped hand regions of the original images, and resized them to 128×
128 pixels. To extract hand centers and regions in Ego4D videos without ground
truth, we used an off-the-shelf hand detector [11]. Inspired by [9,3,8], we used
two different augmentation sets: strong augmentation for the student’s learning
(Equation 4) and weak augmentation for the teacher’s learning (Equation 5).
We used horizontal flip, rotation, transition, gaussian blur, brightness/contrast
jitter, hue/saturation/input value jitter, and cutout as the strong augmentation.
In contrast, we adopted horizontal flip, rotation, transition, and gaussian blur
as the weak augmentation.

