Supplementary Material of Flow-Fill
Cairong Wang1 , Yiming Zhu1 , and Chun Yuan1,2
1

1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, China
2
Peng Cheng National Laboratory, China

Network Architecture

Feature extraction network. We use the reimplemented generator proposed
in [3] as the masked images’ feature extraction network Eθ . It is a coarse-tofine inpainting generator with gated convolution. Different from [3], we do not
employ the contextual attention but a self-attention layer [1] instead in the refine
network, and we add batch norm to each layer. Details are shown in Tab. 1. All
selected feature maps are scaled to 128×128 by convolution and then concatenate
together as the f t.
Guided texture generator. Given masked image Im and upscaled structural
prior Is ↑ as input, guided texture generator Gϕ generates the final texturerich result in the second stage. Following [2], Gϕ is composed of an encoder,
decoder, and several residual blocks. The difference is that we replace all vanilla
convolutions with gated convolution [3]. Fig. 1 shows the details.

2

More Qulitative Results on Benchmark Datasets

In order to demonstrate the inpainting performance and diversity of Flow-Fill,
we present more qualitative results on the benchmark dataset in this section.
As shown in Fig. 2 (Places2 dataset), the inpainting result of our method
can generate more photorealistic and diverse texture details. On the other hand,
results from ICT and PIC tend to be ambiguous and inconsistent with boundaries.
Fig. 3 shows the inpainting results on Celeb-HQ datasets. It is obvious that
Flow-Fill can produce various visual-pleasing inpainting results if the input image is badly damaged.
We designed a GUI operation interface to perform real-time image matting
and restoration functions. As shown in Fig. 4, Flow-Fill can also apply in the
specified object erasure for an image. It is worth noting that the speed of FlowFill is significantly faster (0.192s per image) than the current diverse inpainting
methods. Therefore Flow-Fill offers a good prospect for real-time object erasure
for video.

