Supplementary Material of “Delving into
Details: Synopsis-to-Detail Networks for Video
Recognition”
Shuxian Liang1,2⋆ , Xu Shen2 , Jianqiang Huang2 , and Xian-Sheng Hua1⋆⋆
1

Zhejiang University
shuxian.lsx@zju.edu.cn, huaxiansheng@gmail.com,
2
Alibaba Cloud Computing Ltd.
{shenxuustc,jianqiang.jqh}@gmail.com

In the supplementary material, we will provide more technical background,
technical details, training details and efficiency analysis of our method. Specifically, we discuss the differences between S2DNet and some related works in
Sec. 1. Then, we present more details about the detail sampler in Sec. 2 and
more details about the training in Sec. 3. At last, we compare the efficiency of
S2DNet to efficient action recognition methods in Sec. 4.

1

Differences between S2DNet and Some Related Works

Differences vs. Space-time Attention. The space-time attention is one of the
basic components of the transformers-based works [1, 2, 4, 10]. The differences
between the space-time attention and our space-time sampling lie in: 1) the
attention uses global information and the sampling uses local information; 2) the
attention works by importance weighting and the sampling works by Gaussian
filtering or linear interpolation; 3) the attention is performed at the feature level
while the sampling is performed at the input level (explained in Sec. 2).
Differences vs. Ensemble Models. Previous works for video recognition
[5, 9, 12] use different variants of their proposed methods for ensemble, so as to
further improve the accuracy. A key difference between the ensemble models and
S2DNet is: the different variants for ensemble are parallel while SNet and DNet
of S2DNet are arranged in a serial and progressive way. Notably, in our case, a
direct ensemble of SNet and DNet is 4.0% worse on top-1 accuracy compared to
the proposed S2DNet (b1 vs. b0 in Tab. 2b of the main paper).

2

Details about Detail Sampler

The representation of the top-k likely actions: hard top-k scheme vs.
soft top-k scheme. Using hard top-k scheme (where s is a k-hot vector), DNet
treats each of the k classes equally and is enforced to extract discriminative
features that differentiate them. Using soft top-k scheme (where s is the softmax
⋆
⋆⋆

This work was done when the author was visiting Alibaba as a research intern.
Corresponding author.

