Improving the Reliability for Confidence
Estimation (Supplementary)
Haoxuan Qu1⋆ , Yanchao Li1⋆ , Lin Geng Foo1 , Jason Kuen2 , Jiuxiang Gu2 , and
Jun Liu1⋆⋆
1

Singapore University of Technology and Design
{haoxuan qu, lingeng foo}@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, {yanchao li,
jun liu}@sutd.edu.sg
2
Adobe Research
{kuen, jigu}@adobe.com

1

Relationship between Our Framework and
Train-Validation Split Scheme

In our framework, in each iteration, we first train the confidence estimator on
the virtual training set (i.e. virtual training). After that, the trained confidence
estimator is evaluated on the virtual testing set (i.e. virtual testing). Finally,
the evaluation result (virtual testing loss Lv te (ϕ′ )) computed on the virtual
testing set is used as a feedback to the training procedure of the confidence
estimator to drive it to learn more distribution-generalizable knowledge (i.e. via
meta-optimization). We notice that the classical train-validation split scheme
has some relationships in concept with our meta framework, as it also trains the
model on the training set first, and then evaluates the model on the validation
set. However, we want to highlight here that our framework with the virtual
training and testing scheme incorporated is totally different from the classical
train-validation split scheme. We explain the two reasons in more detail below.
Firstly, the classical train-validation split scheme is often used to adjust the
model parameters indirectly through adjusting the hyperparameters, which lacks
a mechanism to directly and automatically optimizes the model parameters,
while our framework incorporates a feedback mechanism to directly optimize the
confidence estimator parameters during training to drive the confidence estimator to learn more distribution-generalizable knowledge. This cannot be done by
simply utilizing the train-validation split scheme.
Secondly, we intentionally design distribution differences between the constructed virtual training and virtual testing sets in our framework. Hence, utilizing the evaluation result computed on the virtual testing set with a different
distribution from the virtual training set as the feedback, our framework further
encourages the knowledge learned by the confidence estimator during training
to be more distribution-generalizable.
⋆
⋆⋆

Both authors contributed equally to the work.
Corresponding Author

