Classification-Regression for Chart
Comprehension
Matan Levy1† , Rami Ben-Ari2 , and Dani Lischinski1
1

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
2
OriginAI, Israel

In the supplementary material we elaborate on some results shown in the
main paper, as well as present new ones. We start with further elaboration on
the characteristics of Chart Question Answering (CQA) benchmarks in Sec. 2,
showing the shortcomings of previous public datasets such as FigureQA [15]
and DVQA [13] by examples. Next, we elaborate on PlotQA [20] question type
distribution, presenting the richness, realistic lingual relations, as well as regression requirement in this dataset. In Sec. 4 we show further justifications for
the new accuracy metric. We show additional explainability results in Sec. 5 to
strengthen the reasoning process in our results. Next, we show our results on
DVQA, emphasizing the shortcomings of this dataset to showcase our method.
In Sec. 7, we show a new experiment for language robustness and compare our
CRCT model with the PReFIL [14] which showed high performance in previous
benchmarks. Finally, In Sec. 8, we run our model on a newly generated example
(not from PlotQA) as a single demo case.

1

Model Architecture

In this section we provide some equations in order to further clarify our model
descriptions in the paper. Let us denote the Query, Key and Value for each
branch at certain block as Qv , Kv , Vv ∈ Rnv ×d and Qt , Kt , Vt ∈ Rnt ×d corresponding to the visual and textual branch respectively. Each branch is attended
by the other, as the following:
Qv Kt T
zt = attnd (Qv , Kt , Vt ) := softmax ( √
)Vt ∈ Rnt ×d
d
Qt Kv T
zv = attnd (Qt , Kv , Vv ) := softmax ( √
)Vv ∈ Rnv ×d
d

(1)
(2)

The co-encoder output is followed by a regular self-attention encoder, namely:
∀i ∈ {t, v} Oi = attnd (Q(zi ), K(zi ), V (zi ))

(3)

Note that Qt , Qv are exchanged, to allow interaction between different modalities. Then the outputs of each branch, Ot , Ov , are fed to the next co-transformers
block in their proper branch. Finally, the resulting hv0 , hw0 pooling tokens from
†

Part of this research was conducted at IBM Research AI, Israel.

