Inverted Pyramid Multi-task Transformer for
Dense Scene Understanding
–Supplementary Materials–
Hanrong Ye and Dan Xu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, HKUST
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong
{hyeae,danxu}@cse.ust.hk

1

More Implementation Details

In this section, we provide more details about our model implementation in
addition to those discussed in the paper. The code and trained models for our
method are publicly available on https://github.com/prismformore/InvPT.
Model Optimization. For evaluation on NYUD-v2 [6] and PASCAL-Context [2],
we totally consider six dense prediction tasks, including semantic segmentation
(Semseg), monocular depth estimation (Depth), surface normal estimation (Normal), human parsing (Parsing), saliency detection (Saliency), and object boundary detection (Boundary). For the continuous regression tasks (i.e. Depth and
Normal) a L1 Loss is employed. For the discrete classification tasks (i.e. Semseg,
Parsing, Saliency, and Boundary), a cross-entropy loss is utilized. For the sake of
simplicity, we use the same set of loss functions for both intermediate and final
supervision. The whole model can be end-to-end optimized.
Data Processing. For a fair comparison with ATRC [1], we follow its data
processing pipeline. On PASCAL-Context, we pad the image to the size of 512 ×
512, while on NYUD-v2, we randomly crop the input image to the size of 448 ×
576 as Swin Transformer [4] requires both the height and width to be even for
conducting patch merging. We use typical data augmentation including random
scaling, cropping, horizontal flipping and color jittering.
Implementation Details of Encoder Feature Aggregation (EFA). For
Swin Transformer encoders [4], we pass feature sequences from the first three
stages to Inverted Pyramid Transformer Decoder (InvPT decoder). For ViT encoders [3], since they do not explicitly define the concept of stage, we evenly
choose 3 layers based on the depth and unfold their output spatially, and then
use transposed convolution to upsample the resolution of feature maps to match
the spatial resolution in the corresponding decoder stage before further transformation. Specifically, for ViT-base encoder, we use the output token sequences
of layer 3, 6, and 9, while for ViT-large encoder we use output token sequences
of layer 6, 12, and 18. The kernel size and stride of the transposed convolution
for the feature at the first scale are 4, and those at the second scale are 2.
Details about Self-attention in InvPT Decoder. The specific shapes of the
query, the key, and the value matrices (i.e. Q, K, V) in different UP-Transformer

