Uncertainty-aware Self-training for
Few-shot Text Classification
Ahmed Hassan Awadallah
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA
hassanam@microsoft.com

Subhabrata Mukherjee
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA
submukhe@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recent success of pre-trained language models crucially hinges on fine-tuning
them on large amounts of labeled data for the downstream task, that are typically
expensive to acquire or difficult to access for many applications. We study selftraining as one of the earliest semi-supervised learning approaches to reduce the
annotation bottleneck by making use of large-scale unlabeled data for the target task.
Standard self-training mechanism randomly samples instances from the unlabeled
pool to generate pseudo-labels and augment labeled data. We propose an approach
to improve self-training by incorporating uncertainty estimates of the underlying
neural network leveraging recent advances in Bayesian deep learning. Specifically,
we propose (i) acquisition functions to select instances from the unlabeled pool
leveraging Monte Carlo (MC) Dropout, and (ii) learning mechanism leveraging
model confidence for self-training. As an application, we focus on text classification
with five benchmark datasets. We show our methods leveraging only 20-30 labeled
samples per class for each task for training and for validation perform within 3%
of fully supervised pre-trained language models fine-tuned on thousands of labels
with an aggregate accuracy of 91% and improvement of up to 12% over baselines.

1

Introduction

Motivation. Deep neural networks are the state-of-the-art for various applications. However, one
of the biggest challenges facing them is the lack of labeled data to train these complex networks.
Not only is acquiring large amounts of labeled data for every task expensive and time consuming,
but also it is not feasible to perform large-scale human labeling, in many cases, due to data access
and privacy constraints. Recent advances in pre-training help close this gap. In this, deep and large
neural networks like BERT [Devlin et al., 2019], GPT-2 [Radford et al., 2019] and RoBERTa [Liu
et al., 2019] are trained on millions of documents in a self-supervised fashion to obtain general
purpose language representations. However, even with a pre-trained model, we still need task-specific
fine-tuning that typically requires thousands of labeled instances to reach state-of-the-art performance.
For instance, our experiments show 16% relative improvement when fine-tuning BERT with the full
training set (25K-560K labels) vs. fine-tuning with only 30 labels per class. Recent work [Wang
et al., 2020a] show this gap to be bigger for structured learning tasks such as sequence labeling.
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) [Chapelle et al., 2010] is one of the promising paradigms to address
this shortcoming by making effective use of large amounts of unlabeled data in addition to some
labeled data for task-specific fine-tuning. Recent work [Xie et al., 2019] on leveraging SSL with
consistency learning has shown state-of-the-art performance for text classification with limited labels
leveraging auxiliary resources like back-translation and forms a strong baseline for our work.
Self-training (ST, [Scudder, 1965]) as one of the earliest SSL approaches has recently been shown to
obtain state-of-the-art performance for tasks like neural machine translation [He et al., 2019], named
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

