Perception-Distortion Balanced ADMM
Optimization for Single-Image Super-Resolution
Supplementary Material
Yuehan Zhang1 , Bo Ji1 , Jia Hao2 , and Angela Yao1
1

National University of Singapore, {zyuehan,jibo,ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg
2
HiSilicon Technologies, Shanghai, hao.jia@huawei.com

The Supplementary features the following sections:
– Section A: detailed architecture of our model.
– Section B: full comparison between our method and other perception-distortion
balanced methods, which traverse a trade-off curve.
– Section C: comparison of the inference complexity of our model and the
post-processing based method, WDST [1].
– Section D: more ablation studies, including
• comparison of training processes with regularizer-based variants.
• comparison of the results from objective and perceptual stage.
• weights of the loss terms of the no-constraint variant.
• bandwidth of LF information involved in the low-frequency constraint.
– Section E: more qualitative examples and comparisons with competing methods.
– Section G: challenging cases for our method.

A

Model Architecture

The architecture of the objective and perceptual-focused stage is borrowed from
other state-of-the-art work. As shown in Fig. 1, we adopt the architecture of
HAN [10] as the objective-focused stage. HAN is constructed based on RCAN [20]
with a novel layer attention module and a channel spatial attention module, the
composition of which is in Fig. 2. The objective-focused stage has ten residual
groups with 20 RCAB blocks in each group, and the reduction ratio in the attention layer is 16. All convolution layers use 64 channels, 3 × 3 kernels, and a
padding size of 1. Finally, we upsample feature maps with a PixelShuffle [11]
module.
The perception-focused stage works in the wavelet domain. We first apply
the discrete wavelet transform (DWT) at the beginning of the network and
an inverse discrete wavelet transform (IWT) at the very end. We use 15 ResClique Blocks introduced in Zhong et al . [21] as the building blocks, as shown in
Fig. 3. The perception-focused stage takes the output from the objective-focused
module as input. The input has a size of c × H × W . We apply DWT to the
input to split it into four half-resolution channels (LL, LH, HL, HH), which are
W
then concatenated into a feature map of size 4c × H
2 × c . Note that DWT

