SPSN: Superpixel Prototype Sampling Network
for RGB-D Salient Object Detection
(Supplementary Material)
Minhyeok Lee⋆ , Chaewon Park⋆ , Suhwan Cho, and Sangyoun Lee
Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea
{hydragon516, chaewon28, chosuhwan, syleee}@yonsei.ac.kr

1

Visualization of our results

In this section, we supplement the qualitative results of the proposed SPSN.
Fig. 1 visualizes our results in various challenging scenes. AMpred is the auxiliary prediction superpixel map, which is the sampling result of PSNM, and
AMgt is the auxiliary ground truth superpixel map mentioned in Section 3.4
of the paper. Furthermore, RelyWR and RelyWD are values representing the
reliability of RGB feature maps and depth feature maps, respectively, and are
mentioned in Section 3.5 of the paper. As shown in Fig. 1, the proposed SPSN
can properly sample only the salient prototypes in complex scenes or scenes that
contain multiple objects. Moreover, through RelyWR and RelyWD values, our
method adaptively weighs feature maps based on RGB and depth reliability.
Consequently, our model is robust to low-quality depth maps and the inconsistency between RGB images and depth maps, leading to excellent performance.

2

Qualitative comparison

This section supplements the qualitative results of our model. In Fig. 2, we
compare our outputs with those of the following eight state-of-the-art methods: DCF [2], D2F [7], CASG [5], PGAR [1], CMWM [4], CoN [3], CIM [8],
and DMRA [6]. We selected 12 challenging scenes to validate the accuracy of
our model. Generally, all the results show that our model accurately generates
saliency maps, which is because our model precisely discriminates the foreground
objects and the background by utilizing PSNM. Furthermore, the results in Fig. 2
show that our model is capable of selecting the more reliable modality between
RGB image and depth map. Especially, our model choose to rely more on the
depth map for samples with indiscriminate RGB images caused by long distance
to the foreground, multiple objects, and low lighting (e.g., the fourth, the eighth,
and the ninth row). Similarly, the mechanism works same for input images with
unreliable depth maps, applying more weight to the RGB images when generating saliency maps (e.g., the first and the fifth row). Also, it is observed that our
model is robust to samples with camouflaged objects (e.g., the first row).
⋆

These authors contributed equally

