Semantic Query Network

15

Appendix
7

Details of Sparse Annotation Tool

(1) Annotation Pipeline. As mentioned in Section 3, we develop a userfriendly annotation pipeline based on the off-the-shelf software. Note that, this
tool is important to justify the feasibility/suitability of the low-cost random
sparse annotation scheme, as most existing methods have directly overlooked this
or taken it for granted that such tool is available. Here, we provide more detailed
information on the pipeline. Specifically, given large-scale raw point clouds, the
sparse annotation pipeline could be generally divided into the following steps:
1. Load the raw point clouds;
2. Random downsample to a specified ratio (e.g., 0.1%);
3. Increase the point size of the downsampled points;
4. Visualize the original point cloud and the down-sampled point cloud simultaneously;
5. Annotate downsampled points in polygonal edition mode;
6. Refine point labels.
We also provide a video illustrating the annotation pipeline, which can be
viewed at: https://youtu.be/N0UAeY31msY.
(2) The Number of Annotated Points on 7 Datasets. Considering that
the existing large-scale point cloud datasets usually have millions of points, and
typically have relatively high density, we therefore follow [66,24] to perform grid
downsampling of raw point clouds at the beginning, and then execute the random
based annotation steps in practice. Note that, all experiments of our SQN on the
seven public datasets follow this setting. As shown in Table 9, the grid downsampling at the beginning can significantly reduce the number of raw points. Taking
the Semantic3D dataset which has high density as an example, the total number
of points after grid downsampling becomes 1/50 of the original point clouds.
Following the 0.1% sparse annotation pipeline in our SQN, the total number of
annotated points is only 78100, which is an approximately 0.002% of the total
raw points. To avoid confusion, we still report the 0.1% labeling ratio in the main
paper to keep consistency (i.e., the number of annotated points after grid downsampling / the total number of points after grid downsampling). Importantly,
this is significantly different from 1T1C [37] and cannot be directly compared,
which calculates its labeling ratio by using the number of labeled instances divided by the total number of points, so as to achieve an over-exaggerated labeling
ratio.
(3) Annotation Cost. The sparse annotation scheme used in our SQN can
greatly reduce the annotation cost in practice, especially for extremely largescale 3D point clouds with billions of points. Taking 0.1% sparse point annotation as an example, with the developed CloudComapre-based labelling tool, a
professional annotator can finish the annotation of the whole SensatUrban [23]
dataset within 16 hours. By comparison, the original dense point-wise labeling

