RadioTransformer: A Cascaded Global-Focal
Transformer for Visual Attention–guided
Disease Classification
— Supplementary Material —
Moinak Bhattacharya

, Shubham Jain

, and Prateek Prasanna

Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York, USA
{moinak.bhattacharya,prateek.prasanna}@stonybrook.edu

In this supplementary material, we provide detailed illustration of the globalfocal block (Section 1), additional information on the datasets used in this work
(Section 2), the different augmentations in student-teacher network (Section 3),
more quantitative (Section 4), and qualitative (Section 5) results. We also present
an analogy of the global-focal block with cellular pathways (Section 6).

1

Illustration of Global-Focal block

The global-focal block in the RadioTransformer architecture is detailed in Figure 1. The global and focal blocks are cascaded in parallel. The shifting window
for each block is shown with the window in red color. High contrast patterns
are learned by the focal blocks, shown in the orange box in Figure 1 and low
contrast patterns are learned by global blocks, shown in the blue box in Figure 1.
The TWL connection averages the features between the intermediate global and
focal blocks.

2

Datasets

RSNA Pneumonia Detection challenge[14], and Cell Pneumonia[8] are pneumonia classification datasets consisting of radiographs with presence and absence of pneumonia. SIIM-FISABIO-RSNA COVID-19 Detection[9] dataset categorizes radiographs as negative for pneumonia, and typical, indeterminate,
or atypical for COVID-19. COVID-19 Radiography database[1,12] comprises
chest radiographs with COVID-19, normal, lung opacity and viral pneumonia classes. NIH Chest X-rays[17] and VinBigData Chest X-ray Abnormalities
Detection[11] datasets comprise 14 common thorax diseases. We further include
the more recent large-scale RSNA-MIDRC[16,15,2] and TCIA-SBU COVID-19
datasets [13,2] that contain only COVID-19 chest radiographs.

3

Augmentation

Figure 2 illustrates the various augmentations for different blocks of RadioTransformer. The images in the first and second rows are the inputs to the student

