Supplementary Material for RFLA: Gaussian
Receptive Field based Label Assignment for
Tiny Object Detection
Chang Xu1 , Jinwang Wang2 , Wen Yang1⋆ , Huai Yu1 , Lei Yu1 , and Gui-Song
Xia3
1

School of Electronic Information, Wuhan University
2
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
{xuchangeis,yangwen,yuhuai,ly.wd,guisong.xia}@whu.edu.cn
wangjinwang3@huawei.com

1

The approximation of effective receptive field

The size of Effective Receptive Field (ERF) varies dynamically during the training process [5], thus it requires much additional computation to get the precise
ERF of each layer. As a compromise, in the design of Effective Receptive Field
(ERF), we heuristically multiply a decay factor αn to the Theoretical Receptive
Field (TRF) and approximate the Effective Receptive Field (ERF). In this part,
we will thoroughly analyze the effect of αn on the performance of the proposed
RFLA. According to our observations, the performance of RFLA is stable under
the several proposed strategies of estimating ERF, thus the decay factor αn can
be regarded as a minor point of the whole design which will not greatly affect
the performance of RFLA.
In this paper, we deploy two strategies to approximate the ERF, including
setting α√n to a constant and setting αn to a variable which shrinks linearly
w.r.t. 1/ n [5], where n denotes the n-th layer of the convolution network. The
results are shown in Tab. 1, it can be seen that the best performance of 21.1
AP on AI-TOD dataset can be achieved when setting αn to the constant 1/2
or constant 1/3, while directly setting TRF (i.e. αn = 1) as prior information
generates the sub-optimal performance. This observation implicitly echoes the
claim that the ERF only takes up a fraction of TRF. Moreover, it further convinces that leveraging ERF as prior information for label assignment can achieve
a promising result on TOD. Therefore, in all our experiments, we choose 1/2 as
the default setting.
Moreover, although the best performance is achieved when setting αn to 1/2
or 1/3, the gap between TRF or other strategies and the best performance is
not significant (smaller than 1.0 AP points). Intuitively, it can be explained from
the following two aspects. First, although the effective radius is not completely
precise, we can assure that the centre point of Gaussian prior coincides with the
⋆

Corresponding Author

