Supplementary Materials:
StyleHEAT: One-Shot High-Resolution Editable
Talking Face Generation via Pre-trained
StyleGAN
Fei Yin1 , Yong Zhang2† , Xiaodong Cun2 , Mingdeng Cao1 , Yanbo Fan2 , Xuan
Wang2 , Qingyan Bai1 , Baoyuan Wu3 , Jue Wang2 , and Yujiu Yang1†
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Tencent AI Lab
3
School of Data Science, Secure Computing Lab of Big Data, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen

1

Details of Audio-Driven Reenactment

We introduce the extension of our framework to tackle the audio-driven facial
reenactment task via directly predicting the motion from audio features in the
manuscript. Here, we complete the remaining details of network structure and
training objectives.
Network Structure. The network structure of the audio-driven motion generator is similar to the proposed video-driven motion generator. Differently, the
driving signal comes from audio. Thus, we transform the original audio to MelSpectrogram first. Then we use an MLP to squeeze the temporal dimension.
Finally, these features are injected into the network via AdaIN.
Training Objectives. As for the loss function, similar to our video-driven
motion generator, we calculate the loss between the driving image It and the
warped image Iˆaudio using the perceptual loss and the L1 loss. Differently, we use
a mask strategy to increase the weight of the mouth area. The mask is obtained
by calculating the bounding-box of the landmark points around mouth. The loss
is defined as:
X
Lat =
∥M · ϕi (It ) − M · ϕi (Iˆaudio )∥1 + λa1 · ∥M · It − M · Iˆaudio )∥1 , (1)
i

where λa1 is the hyper-parameter. And in practice, the mask M

is in the soft
form.
Besides, since the artifacts always happen in the masked region, we design
a regularization loss to make sure the consistency of the non-masked region
between the proxy input Iˆvisual and the warped image Iˆaudio :
X
Lareg =
∥(1 − M ) · ϕi (Iˆvisual ) − (1 − M ) · ϕi (Iˆaudio )∥1 .
(2)
i
†

Corresponding author: Yong Zhang (zhangyong201303@gmail.com) and Yujiu Yang
(yang.yujiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn).

