Supplementary Material for KD-MVS:
Knowledge Distillation Based Self-supervised
Learning for Multi-view Stereo
Yikang Ding1,2 Qingtian Zhu1 Xiangyue Liu1 Wentao Yuan1
Haotian Zhang1⋆ Chi Zhang1
1

1

Megvii Research

2

Tsinghua University

More Insights of KD-MVS

In this section, we discuss the potential reasons why self-supervised methods can
obtain comparable (even better) results compared to supervised methods. Here
we elaborate this from the following two perspectives.
(a) Self-supervised methods are able to generate accurate pseudo labels with
cross-view check. According to Eq. (4) of the paper, only the inliers (whose depth
prediction is accurate) can be kept given a strict threshold. We also visualize the
depth error of the pseudo depth in Fig. 8, which is relevant to the overall error
of point cloud results. The first and the second row indicate the pseudo depth
has already been to some extent accurate in most scenes. Similar conclusion can
also be inferred from the Tab. 7(2)(3) of the paper.
(b) The pseudo labels have advantages over GT in some aspects. Generally
speaking, the datasets contain many pixels (namely training samples) that are
normally textureless and considered as “toxic” for training. For example, if we
force the network to estimate depth values for a purely white region, which should
be inherently unpredictable, the network will be confused since there are simply
no valid features extracted. Fig. 1 shows visualized comparisons of GT depth
and pseudo depth, the red boxes highlight the textureless regions, which are
nearly unpredictable. The pseudo depth maps contain fewer misleading regions
by filtering the outliers with cross-view check. By reducing the toxic samples,
the training process will be more stable and the performance will be improved.
Fig. 2 shows the comparison of several metrics in the training phase. Compared
with using the original depth (the orange curve), reducing the toxic samples by
using the mask of the pseudo depth makes the training phase more stable and
helps the student model converge faster.
Besides, we propose to leverage the probabilistic knowledge, which is verified to be effective in classification task [8,6,10,11]. Some works [5,13] call this
probabilistic knowledge as dark knowledge and believe they contain inter-class
information. As MVS can also be handled as a classification task, it can benefit
from probabilistic knowledge too.
⋆

This work is done by the first four authors as interns at Megvii Research.
Corresponding author (zhanghaotian@megvii.com).

