3D-Aware Semantic-Guided Generative Model for
Human Synthesis
–Supplementary Material–
Jichao Zhang1 , Enver Sangineto2 , Hao Tang3 , Aliaksandr Siarohin1,4 ,
Zhun Zhong1 , Nicu Sebe1 , and Wei Wang1
1

University of Trento 2 University of Modena and Reggio Emilia 3 ETH Zurich 4 Snap Research

Abstract. This document supplements our paper 3D-Aware GAN by providing
more details of the implementation, training, the proposed metric as well as the
additional experimental results on DeepFashion and another VITON dataset. Finally, we provide the detailed discussion about the training strategy and limitations of the model.

1

Implementation details

Training. Besides the training details reported in Sec. 5 of the paper, here we add
that, in order to stabilize the training of G3D , the loss weight λ2 controlling the influence of ℓps (Sec. 4.4 of the main paper) is set to 0 for the initial 100,000 training
steps.
Dataset-specific parameters. The field of view is 10◦ for both datasets (DeepFashion and VITON). The camera elevation is 10◦ on both datasets, and the object
rotation is 360◦ for DeepFashion and 72◦ for VITON. We estimated these parameters
from the empirical distribution of each dataset. More details about the parameters and
the network architecture can be found in our code. For the baselines, i.e., GRAF [9],
pi-GAN [2], GIRAFFE [6], ShadeGAN [7] and CIPS-3D [10], we used their publicly
available code and we trained all the models using the architecture and the configuration corresponding to CelebA dataset [5]. The details of the CelebA configuration can
be found in corresponding paper or in the public code of each baseline. However, for a
fair comparison, we changed a few baseline parameters, such as the field of view, to be
consistent with our model.
Average Matched Points (aMP). And we propose the average Matched Points
(aMP) to evaluate the 3D-view consistency of the generated images based on local
region matching. Specifically, we use Patch2Pix [11] to compute a point-wise matching between two generated images (I˜1 , I˜2 ) of the same person with different viewpoints,
then we count the number of Matched Points M P (I˜1 , I˜2 ). M P is applied to image pairs
with the same identity (texture) but different rotation angles. In more detail, for each
method, we randomly generate 500 samples by varying the texture content while keeping fixed the other variation factors. Then, for each of these 500 samples, we change
the camera viewpoint in order to get 3 different random rotations. We can now compute
M P (I˜1 , I˜2 ) for all the 6 possible pairwise combinations of these 3 samples (note that

