Supplementary Material
Tailoring Self-Supervision for Supervised Learning
WonJun Moon, Ji-Hwan Kim, and Jae-Pil Heo⋆
Sungkyunkwan University

As elaborated in the main paper, our proposed LoRot is a self-supervision
task tailored for supervised learning. Our motivation is that self-supervisions previously adopted in supervised learning were originally designed for unsupervised
representation learning, thus significant extra computational costs for training
were required to achieve insignificant gains. To maximize the benefits for supervised learning, we first introduced three desirable properties of self-supervision
and how can pretext tasks can satisfy these conditions by proposing LoRot. To
learn rich features, LoRot discovers subdiscriminative features within the part of
the image that are not usually considered by current supervised models. Also,
LoRot only rotates a part of the image which does not make much changes within
the image. Lastly, LoRot is utilized in the form of multi-task learning to have
high efficiency. In this supplementary report, we provide ablation and further
studies of LoRot, as following outline.
Part 1: Ablation study on the hyperparameter λ
Part 2: Ablation study / analysis on the patch sizes for LoRot-I
Part 3: Ablation study on spatial pooling methods for LoRot-E
Part 4: Detailed results on OOD detection with SupCLR [7]
Part 5: Results on imbalanced classification with the baseline
Part 6: Further study of LoRot on other datasets in OOD detection
Part 7: Implementation details
Throughout this supplementary report, bolds and underlines in tables indicate
the best and the second best scores, respectively. Also note that colored references,
e.g. Tab., Fig. denotes table and figure in the main paper.

1

Effect of λ in Objective Function

In Tab. 1, we report the performances with varying λ which controls the loss
ratio between the primary objective and our self-supervision task. We found that
λ does not lead significant performance variations, while λ = 0.2 usually provides
higher scores than the second-best among tested methods in all the tasks. For
the classification tasks on CIFAR datasets, we ran experiments under the same
setting with Tab. 1 in our main paper.

2

Effect of the Patch Sizes in LoRot-I

To investigate the performance variations of our LoRot-I with respect to the
patch sizes, we perform experiments with two configurations, the fixed-sized and
⋆

Corresponding author

