Map-Free Visual Relocalization: Metric
Pose Relative to a Single Image
Eduardo Arnold1,2(B) , Jamie Wynn1 , Sara Vicente1 ,
Guillermo Garcia-Hernando1 , Áron Monszpart1 , Victor Prisacariu1,3 ,
Daniyar Turmukhambetov1 , and Eric Brachmann1
1

Niantic, London, UK
eduardoarnold@nianticlabs.com
2
University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
3
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
http://github.com/nianticlabs/map-free-reloc

Abstract. Can we relocalize in a scene represented by a single reference
image? Standard visual relocalization requires hundreds of images and
scale calibration to build a scene-speciﬁc 3D map. In contrast, we propose
Map-free Relocalization, i.e., using only one photo of a scene to enable
instant, metric scaled relocalization. Existing datasets are not suitable
to benchmark map-free relocalization, due to their focus on large scenes
or their limited variability. Thus, we have constructed a new dataset of
655 small places of interest, such as sculptures, murals and fountains,
collected worldwide. Each place comes with a reference image to serve as
a relocalization anchor, and dozens of query images with known, metric
camera poses. The dataset features changing conditions, stark viewpoint
changes, high variability across places, and queries with low to no visual
overlap with the reference image. We identify two viable families of existing methods to provide baseline results: relative pose regression, and feature matching combined with single-image depth prediction. While these
methods show reasonable performance on some favorable scenes in our
dataset, map-free relocalization proves to be a challenge that requires
new, innovative solutions.

1

Introduction

Given not more than a single photograph we can imagine what a depicted place
looks like, and where we, looking through the lens, would be standing relative
to that place. Visual relocalization mimics the human capability to estimate
a camera’s position and orientation from a single query image. It is a wellresearched task that enables exciting applications in augmented reality (AR) and
robotic navigation. State-of-the-art relocalization methods surpass human ruleof-thumb estimates by a noticeable margin [10,33,53–55,58], allowing centimeter
accurate predictions of a camera’s pose. But this capability comes with a price:
E. Arnold—Work done during internship at Niantic.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13661, pp. 690–708, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7_40

