Supplementary Material: Sports Video Analysis
on Large-Scale Data
Dekun Wu⋆1 , He Zhao⋆2 , Xingce Bao3 , and Richard P. Wildes2
1
University of Pittsburgh, 2 York University
3
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
dew104@pitt.edu, {zhufl, wildes}@cse.yorku.ca,
xingce.bao@alumni.epfl.ch

1

Summary

This document provides additional material that is supplemental to our main
submission. Two additional human evaluation experiments for video captioning
as well as for dataset quality are provided in Sections 2 & 3, respectively. In
Section 4, we provide a concrete example showing where we collect the data.
Sections 5 and 6 elaborate on details of finer feature collection and report the
used codebase resources. We then provide a detailed description of baseline methods in Section 7, extended analysis on results of video captioning in Section 8
and introduce metrics used for action recognition and player identification in
Section 9. Finally, we present a long table for the whole action name list of our
NSVA in Section 10.

2

Human evaluation on generated texts

To additionally assess the quality of the sentences generated by our video captioning approach, we conducted a human evaluation by randomly selecting 50
videos from the test set. Based on these 50 videos, we collect caption outputs generated by four models, i.e., our full model (T+PB+BAL+BAS+PA),
S3D+PB+BAL+BAS+PA, TimeSformer only and S3D only. We created a website for this assessment; see Figure 1. We ask two human annotators to assess
model outputs on three aspects: Relevance (Player), Relevance (Action) and
Naturalness. The definitions of these aspects are shown below:
– Naturalness denotes to what degree a text is natural. 1 means the lowest
naturalness and 5 means the highest naturalness. To achieve the highest
naturalness score, a generated text must be grammatically correct and free
of repeated words.
– Relevance (Action) denotes to what degree a text is relevant to the
ground-truth text on the level of action. 1 means the lowest relevance and 5
⋆

Equal contribution
Corresponding author: dew104@pitt.edu

