Supplementary Material for
AEFT with GPP Layer for WSSS
Sung-Hoon Yoon ⋆ , Hyeokjun Kweon ⋆ , Jegyeong Cho , Shinjeong Kim ,
and Kuk-Jin Yoon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
{yoon307,0327june,j2k0618,aakseen,kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

1

Additional Discussions

By replacing the GAP layer with the proposed Gated Pyramid Pooling (GPP)
layer, the performance is increased to 54.2% (+5.8%). By incorporating the
proposed Adversarial Erasing Framework via Triplet (AEFT) with the GPP
layer, the mIoU performance is further increased to 56.0% (+7.6%). Though
the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art in segmentation level, ours show
comparable or even inferior performance in seed level than other methods (Refer
Table 4). Although the performance of seed itself is important, the quality of
pseudo-labels is much more important in WSSS. Since the seed with high mIoU
does not ensure the good quality of pseudo-labels (Refer Table 4), it is also important to generate CAMs that can benefit from the post-processing techniques
(CRF/RW/IRN), which are commonly used in WSSS. In this section, we provide
additional experimental results (ablation) on PASCAL VOC 2012.
1.1

GPP: Compatibility with other state-of-the-art

To verify whether the proposed GPP layer can be applied to other state-ofthe-art methods or not, we incorporate the GPP layer with SEAM [50]. The
reported performance of CAMs of SEAM is 55.4% with a classifier based on
the GAP layer. By replacing the GAP layer with the proposed GPP layer, the
performance of resulting CAMs is increased to 57.5% (+2.1%) in mIoU. Since
the GPP layer does not require the specific architecture or learning framework,
we expect that it can be employed in subsequent WSSS studies as the baseline.
1.2

GPP: Eq.4 and Eq.5

Activation functions of which ranges are positive (e.g. ReLU, Sigmoid) usually
have been applied to focus on positive activation when generating CAMs. Previous WSSS works for spatially varying pooling method [3,10] also regarded the
positive values of CAMs only by using softmax function on CAMs. However,
in the perspective of generating precise CAMs, it is important to consider the
⋆

Equal contribution.

