PlaneFormers: From Sparse View Planes
to 3D Reconstruction
Samir Agarwala(B) , Linyi Jin, Chris Rockwell, and David F. Fouhey
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA
{samirag,jinlinyi,cnris,fouhey}@umich.edu

Abstract. We present an approach for the planar surface reconstruction of a scene from images with limited overlap. This reconstruction task
is challenging since it requires jointly reasoning about single image 3D
reconstruction, correspondence between images, and the relative camera pose between images. Past work has proposed optimization-based
approaches. We introduce a simpler approach, the PlaneFormer, that
uses a transformer applied to 3D-aware plane tokens to perform 3D
reasoning. Our experiments show that our approach is substantially
more eﬀective than prior work, and that several 3D-speciﬁc design decisions are crucial for its success. Code is available at https://github.com/
samiragarwala/PlaneFormers.

1

Introduction

Consider the two images shown in Fig. 1. Even though you are not provided with
the relative pose between the cameras that took the pictures you see, and even
though you have never been to this particular location, you can form a single
coherent explanation of the scene. You may notice, for instance, the doors and
closet that are visible in both pictures. From here, you can deduce the relative
positioning of the cameras and join your 3D perception of each image. The goal
of this paper is to further the ability of computers to solve this problem.
The sparse view (wide and unknown baseline, few image) setting is challenging for existing systems because it falls between two main strands of 3D
reconstruction in contemporary computer vision: multiview 3D reconstruction
(usually by correspondence) and learned single view 3D reconstruction (usually
by statistical models). In particular, traditional multiview tools [17,25,41,46,47]
depend heavily on triangulation as a cue. Thus, in addition to struggling when
view overlap is small, their cues usually entirely fail with no overlap. While
single-view tools [12,19,34] can reconstruct single views via learning, merging the
overlap between the views to produce one coherent reconstruction is challenging:
identifying whether one extracted wall goes with another requires understanding
appearance, the local geometry, as well as the relationship between the cameras.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5 12.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13663, pp. 192–209, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5_12

