HuMMan: Multi-Modal 4D Human Dataset for
Versatile Sensing and Modeling
– Supplementary Material –
Zhongang Cai⋆,1,2,3 , Daxuan Ren⋆,2 , Ailing Zeng⋆,4 , Zhengyu Lin⋆,3 ,
Tao Yu⋆,5 , Wenjia Wang⋆ ,3 , Xiangyu Fan3 , Yang Gao3 , Yifan Yu3 ,
Liang Pan2 , Fangzhou Hong2 , Mingyuan Zhang2 , Chen Change Loy2 ,
Lei Yang†,1,3 , Ziwei Liu†,2
1

A

Shanghai AI Laboratory, 2 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, 3 SenseTime
Research, 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 5 Tsinghua University
yanglei@sensetime.com, ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

Overview

We provide additional details of data collection (Section B), hardware (Section
C), toolchain (Section D), action set (Section E), subjects (Section F), experiments (Section G), and a more complete dataset comparison (Section H).

B

Additional Details of Data Collection

The data collection has two stages for each subject. 1) each subject receives
two high-resolution scans, one with natural clothes on and the other with a
tight-fitting suit on, both captured by the Artex Eva 3D Scanner. To ensure
the high quality of the scans, the subjects are instructed to stand in a special
pose (the canonical pose) on a turntable, that allows for a 360-degree full-body
scanning with minimal self-occlusion. Each high-resolution scan includes an MTL
information file, an OBJ mesh file, and a BMP texture file. 2) After that static
body scanning, the subject enters the framework and follows instructions to
perform 40-60 actions, randomly sampled from the action set that contains 500
actions. Each action that a subject performs is a sequence, that consists of ten
Kinect RGB-D sequences and an iPhone RGB-D sequence. We show sample
frames collected with our hardware setup in Fig. 1. Each sequence takes 5-15
seconds and 150-450 frames at 30 FPS per view. We compress all sequential
data in a custom data format SMC that is developed based on HDF5 format.
The SMC file also contains additional information such as camera parameters,
subject ID, and action ID.

