Supplementary: ESS: Learning Event-based
Semantic Segmentation from Still Images
Zhaoning Sun⋆

, Nico Messikommer⋆ , and Daniel Gehrig
and Davide Scaramuzza

,

Dept. of Informatics, Univ. of Zurich and
Dept. of Neuroinformatics, Univ. of Zurich and ETH Zurich
zhasun@student.ethz.ch {nmessi,dgehrig,sdavide}@ifi.uzh.ch

1

DSEC-Semantic

Our newly introduced event-based semantic segmentatation dataset, termed
DSEC-Semantic, is constructed based on sequences of the large-scale DSEC [3]
dataset, see Fig. 1. To generate the semantic labels, we first warp the images
from the left frame-based camera with a resolution of 1440 × 1080 to the view of
the left event camera with a resolution of 640 × 480. The last 40 rows are then
cropped since the frame-based camera does not capture these regions. Thus, the
the DSEC-semantic labels have a resolution of 640 × 440. In a second step, we
apply a state-of-the-art semantic segmentation method [10] to the warped images
to generate the labels. We use pre-trained weights provided by the author.
By doing so, we obtain fine-grained labels for 19 classes in the first place,
which have the same classes than the Cityscapes labels for evaluation. We then
further convert the 19 class labels into 11 classes (background, building, fence,
person, pole, road, sidewalk, vegetation, car, wall, and traffic sign) for our
experiments. Since frame cameras suffer from image degradation in challenging
illumination scenes, we only label a subset of sequences of the DSEC dataset
which are recorded during the day to ensure high-quality labels. For the training
set, we labeled 8082 frames of the following sequences: ’zurich city 00 a’,
’zurich city 01 a’, ‘zurich city 02 a’, ‘zurich city 04 a’, ‘zurich city 05 a’,
‘zurich city 06 a’, ‘zurich city 07 a’, ‘zurich city 08 a’. For the test set, we
generated labels for 2809 frames of the following sequences: ‘zurich city 13 a’,
‘zurich city 14 c’, ‘zurich city 15 a’.
The dataset and detailed instructions are available at https://dsec.ifi.uzh.
ch/dsec-semantic/

2

Event Representation

We convert an event stream E to a sequence of grid-like representations [2],
such as voxel grids [11] Vk . Each voxel grid is constructed from non-overlapping
⋆

equal contribution

