Appendix: When Deep Classifiers Agree:
Analyzing Correlations between Learning Order
and Image Statistics
Iuliia Pliushch1 , Martin Mundt2 , Nicolas Lupp1 , and Visvanathan Ramesh1
1

Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany
{pliushch,vramesh}@em.uni-frankfurt.de
2
TU Darmstadt and hessian.AI, Germany
martin.mundt@tu-darmstadt.de

In this supplementary material we provide additional details, experimental
setup and descriptions for the employed methodology of the main body. The
structure is as follows:
A. Experimental setup and training hyper-parameters.
B. Additional plots for initial experiments on different batch-sizes and architectures, as well as expected random agreement and a discussion of an alternative agreement definition, as well as importance of our findings in the light
of data shuffling during training.
C. Additional discussion of the reasons for the weakness of correlations for CIFAR10, as well as experimental results for Pascal trained on ResNet, omitted
in the main body. In this context also an explanation of the relationship between Pearson correlation coefficient and the p-value.
D. More precise description of the computed dataset metrics, as well as additional visualization thereof.
E. Visualization of dataset metrics histograms
F. Discussion on correlation vs. causation

A

Experimental details

Since our aim is to analyze the training process on the original images, we did
not use data augmentation techniques, apart from random cropping for train and
center cropping for test images on Pascal, ImageNet and KTH-TIPS2b due to
the difference in size between images in these datasets. For Pascal and ImageNet,
we resize the smaller size to 256 and randomly crop to obtain patches of width
and height 224 pixels [6, 9]. For KTH-TIPS2b, in analogy we resize to 200 and
then randomly crop to the size 190 pixels. Note that we perform dataset metrics
computation on the original non-cropped (training) images. Only for ImageNet’s
entropy and frequency calculation we downsample the images to 128x128 for
computational reasons.
For CIFAR10, we trained (5 times) LeNet5 (with added batch normalization
after each layer), VGG16, ResNet50 and DenseNet121 on original labels using
SGD with momentum 0.9 for 60 epochs with batch-size 128, batch-normalization

