BEAT: A Large-Scale Semantic and Emotional
Multi-Modal Dataset for Conversational
Gestures Synthesis: Supplementary Materials
Haiyang Liu1 , Zihao Zhu2 , Naoya Iwamoto3 , Yichen Peng4 ,
Zhengqing Li3 , You Zhou3 , Elif Bozkurt5 , Bo Zheng3
1

The University of Tokyo. 2 Keio University.
Digital Human Lab, Huawei Technologies Japan K.K.
4
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology. 5 Huawei Turkey R&D Center.
2

A. Annotation Interface and Measurement of Agreement.
B. Details of Text Content and Speaker Information.
C. Details of Data Release Formats.
D. Additional Discussions for SRGR, FGD and BeatAlign.
E. More Subjective Results and Videos.
F. Details of Baselines Training Setting.
G. Answers in Self-Talk Session (cf. answers.doc).

A

Annotation Interface and Measurement of Agreement.

Our annotation interface, as shown in Figure 1a, is adapted from a modified
version of VGG Image Annotator (VIA) [1] by [5]. We use the same interface for
annotating both emotions and semantics. However, annotations are performed
by a different group of annotators for each task. For emotion annotations, two
annotators annotate the start and end times of each video segment of Conversation sessions. For semantics annotations, annotators would i) agree or disagree
whether the current gesture is semantically related to the text content according
to their perception; ii) if agreed, they annotate the start and end times for the
current gesture; iii) and then, the select keyword(s) that they think the gesture
exactly corresponds to from the list of keywords separated by a comma.
Our post-processing algorithm will input the separated keywords, text alignment and gesture segment-level semantic annotation to generate frame-level annotation. As shown in Figure 1b, the final semantic relevance for each frame
is calculated as the multiplication of the gesture segment semantic score and
the keyword semantic score. It is to be mentioned that two levels of semantic
annotation can also be adopted separately.
We calculate the inter-rater agreement rate of the annotations by Measurement of inter-rater reliability for both emotional and semantic annotations. For
the emotion annotations, we present scores in Table 1, the agreement is marked
only two annotators give the same label. The final agreement for around 16M
frames is 96%, which is high enough that we did not conduct the annotation for
emotion with more than two annotators.

