Supplementary Material of
CramNet: Camera-Radar Fusion
with Ray-Constrained Cross-Attention
for Robust 3D Object Detection
Jyh-Jing Hwang, Henrik Kretzschmar, Joshua Manela, Sean Rafferty,
Nicholas Armstrong-Crews, Tiffany Chen, Dragomir Anguelov
Waymo

A

Appendix

We propose an efficient camera-radar sensor fusion approach for robust 3D object
detection for autonomous driving. The method uses a ray-constrained crossattention mechanism to leverage the range measurements from radar to improve
camera depth estimates, leading to improved detection performance. More importantly, the architecture is designed in a way that training with dropout allows
the method to fall back to a single modality when one of the sensors malfunctions.
Here, we include more details on the following aspects:
1. We describe the experimental details and present more complete results on
the Waymo Open Dataset in A.1.
2. We study the trade-off between latency and foreground thresholds in A.2.
3. We present ablation study on hyperparameters related to the fusion design,
e.g., ray-constrained cross-attention and sensor dropout in A.3.
4. We document the detailed architecture of CramNet in A.4.
A.1

Experiment on Waymo Open Dataset

We use the same hyperparameters as on the RADIATE dataset [3] for training
a camera-only CramNet on the Waymo Open Dataset [4]. We adopt a longer
training procedure, i.e., 60k warm-up steps and 120k total steps, due to the larger
size of the dataset. We align our setting with CaDDN [2] to train and evaluate
our performance using the front camera. However, we train our model on a lower
resolution (640, 960), than in CaDDN [2], (832, 1248).
We report the 3D AP/APH with 0.5 and 0.7 IoU threshold on the LEVEL 1
and LEVEL 2 difficulties in Table 1. We conclude that our camera-only model,
CramNet-C, achieves competitive performance among the state-of-the-art models.
We notice that our model performs significantly better (+50% ∼ 300%) in
the longe range region (50 m - ∞). This suggests the sparse operation in 3D
after the 2D segmentation filtering can better handle the long range objects, even
without implicitly or explicitly modeling depth uncertainty.

