Supplemental Material:
Differentiable Zooming for Multiple Instance
Learning on Whole-Slide Images
Kevin Thandiackal1,2∗ , Boqi Chen1,2∗ , Pushpak Pati1 , Guillaume
Jaume3† , Drew F. K. Williamson3 , Maria Gabrani1 , and Orcun Goksel2,4
1

IBM Research Europe, Zurich, Switzerland
{kth,che,pus,mga}@zurich.ibm.com
2
ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
3
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA
{gjaume,dwilliamson}@bwh.harvard.edu
4
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
orcun.goksel@it.uu.se

In this supplemental material, we include additional results, visualizations, and
analyses. The contents of the individual sections are:
– Appendix A: Confusion matrices for ZoomMIL on all datasets. Additional
results for the competing methods operating at different magnifications
– Appendix B: Analyzing the limitations of ZoomMIL
– Appendix C: Analyzing the impact of the number of selected patches in the
differentiable Top-K module
– Appendix D: ZoomMIL attention maps at different magnifications
– Appendix E: Training details of the competing baselines
– Appendix F: Derivation of the Jacobian for differentiable patch selection
A

Additional Classification Analysis

In Figure 1, we present the confusion matrices of ZoomMIL on all datasets. Results are averaged over three runs with different weight initializations. On CRC,
ZoomMIL performs very well and correctly classifies 95.63% and 94.55% of the
non-neoplastic and low-grade cases, respectively. Out of all high-grade, cases, our
model identifies 83.33% correctly. We can see that BRIGHT is the most difficult
dataset due to its challenging pre-cancerous class, which is often confused with
either the non-cancerous or the cancerous class. On CAMELYON16, ZoomMIL
accurately identifies 97.92 % of non-metastatic cases, while correctly classifying
61.90 % of metastatic cases.
Additionally, we report the classification performance of all single-scale baselines operating at different magnifications in Table 1, 2, and 3. It can be observed
in Table 1 and 2 that lower magnifications severely impact the performance of
the baselines, while ZoomMIL-Eff performs significantly better. These results
indicate the efficacy of our method, and conclude the benefits of zooming and
combining information across magnifications.
∗
†

Contributed equally.
Work done while at IBM Research Europe

