Share with Thy Neighbors: Single-View
Reconstruction by Cross-Instance
Consistency
Tom Monnier1(B) , Matthew Fisher2 , Alexei A. Efros3 , and Mathieu Aubry1
1

LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiﬀel, Marne-la-vallée, France
tom.monnier@enpc.fr
2
Adobe Research, Stanford, USA
3
UC Berkeley, Berkeley, USA

Abstract. Approaches for single-view reconstruction typically rely on
viewpoint annotations, silhouettes, the absence of background, multiple
views of the same instance, a template shape, or symmetry. We avoid
all such supervision and assumptions by explicitly leveraging the consistency between images of diﬀerent object instances. As a result, our
method can learn from large collections of unlabelled images depicting
the same object category. Our main contributions are two ways for leveraging cross-instance consistency: (i) progressive conditioning, a training
strategy to gradually specialize the model from category to instances
in a curriculum learning fashion; and (ii) neighbor reconstruction, a loss
enforcing consistency between instances having similar shape or texture.
Also critical to the success of our method are: our structured autoencoding architecture decomposing an image into explicit shape, texture, pose,
and background; an adapted formulation of diﬀerential rendering; and
a new optimization scheme alternating between 3D and pose learning.
We compare our approach, UNICORN, both on the diverse synthetic
ShapeNet dataset—the classical benchmark for methods requiring multiple views as supervision—and on standard real-image benchmarks (Pascal3D+ Car, CUB) for which most methods require known templates
and silhouette annotations. We also showcase applicability to more challenging real-world collections (CompCars, LSUN), where silhouettes are
not available and images are not cropped around the object.
Keywords: Single-view reconstruction · Unsupervised learning

1

Introduction

One of the most magical human perceptual abilities is being able to see the 3D
world behind a 2D image – a mathematically impossible task! Indeed, the ancient
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7 17.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13661, pp. 285–303, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7_17

