New Datasets and Models for Contextual
Reasoning in Visual Dialog
(Supplementary Materials)
Yifeng Zhang , Ming Jiang , and Qi Zhao
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis MN 55455, USA
{zhan6987, mjiang}@umn.edu, qzhao@cs.umn.edu

1

Introduction

The supplementary materials provide additional results and details of our proposed work. Specifically, they are organized as follows:
1. Sec. 2 presents details of the dataset construction method.
2. Sec. 3 presents supplementary analysis and visualization of our datasets.
3. Sec. 4 presents supplementary quantitative and qualitative results.
4. Sec. 5 presents details of the proposed NDM method.

2

Dataset Construction Details

While the main paper focuses on leveraging sampled contexts and the question
engine to create diverse and context-rich visual dialogs, in this section, we present
more details about the dataset construction. First, we present the details of the
compounds and question templates used in the generation of dialogs. Next, we
describe the details of sanity check rules applied to correct contextual errors
introduced by decoy questions.
2.1

Compounds and Question Templates

In total, CLEVR-VD is constructed based on a set of 90 unique compounds and
240 question templates, while GQA-VD is constructed based on a set of 120
unique compounds and 360 question templates. Tab. 1 and Tab. 2 demonstrate
the list of major compounds and sampled templates for CLEVR-VD and GQAVD datasets. Note that for creating datasets with satisfactory diversity, each
compound can be matched with one or multiple question templates.
As shown in these tables, depending on the existence of contextual dependencies, there are two types of compounds: Independent compounds such as
Find-[Output], Find-Find-[Output], Find-Relate-[Output] do not depend on the
dialog history. The [Output] primitive can be one of the following output modules: Count, Exist, Compare, or Describe. Therefore, questions generated from
independent compounds can be answered independently. The others are more or

