Supplementary Material for
Registration based Few-Shot Anomaly Detection
Chaoqin Huang1,3,4 , Haoyan Guan2 , Aofan Jiang1 , Ya Zhang1,3
Michael Spratling2 , and Yan-Feng Wang1,3
1

1

,

Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{huangchaoqin, stillunnamed, ya zhang, wangyanfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn
2
King’s College London
{haoyan.guan, michael.spratling}@kcl.ac.uk
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
4
National University of Singapore

Main Contributions

This paper targets a challenging yet practical setting for anomaly detection,
with 1) a single model for all categories (i.e., generalizable without fine-tuning),
2) only a few images for each novel category (i.e., few shot), and 3) only normal samples available (i.e., unsupervised setting). To our best knowledge, it is
the first attempt to explore such a setting, as a critical step toward practical
large-scale industrial applications, a point appreciated by the other reviewers.
To learn a category-agnostic model, we further propose a novel comparisonbased solution, which is quite different from the popular reconstruction-based
or classification-based methods. We adopt STN to align the images and Siamese
network to implement the comparison. The SOTA results achieved on MVTec
and MPDD show the effectiveness of our method.

2

Experiments

2.1

Ablation Studies on Support Set Augmentations.

The proposed support set augmentations are shown to be essential for both detection and localization. Table 1 further presents the ablation studies of comparing different augmentation methods for support images with k = 2. The experimental results have validated the effectiveness of all the proposed augmentation
methods. In particular, rotation and translation are shown to perform better on
MVTec, while flipping and rotation seem to perform better on MPDD.
2.2

Comparisons with Metaformer [3].

Although using different training settings, according to the reported results
in [3], Metaformer achieves about 88% AUC for MVTec when k=8, while RegAD achieves 91.2% AUC, an ≈3% improvement, with the same test set and

