Hierarchically Self-Supervised Transformer for
Human Skeleton Representation Learning
(Supplementary Material)
Yuxiao Chen1 , Long Zhao2 , Jianbo Yuan3 , Yu Tian3 , Zhaoyang Xia1 , Shijie
Geng1 , Ligong Han1 , and Dimitris N. Metaxas1
1

1

Rutgers University, 2 Google Research, 3 ByteDance Inc.

Implementation Details of Pre-training

The implementation details for pre-training are introduced in this section.
Data Augmentation. During training, data augmentations are applied to
both the spatial and temporal domains of a skeleton sequence. Specifically, the
spatial augmentation method includes: (1) shearing [3]: the skeleton of each
frame is sheared at a random angle by applying a linear transformation matrix
whose elements are uniformly sampled from the range [-0.5, 0.5]; (2) adding noise:
a noise sampled from the uniform distribution with the range [-0.2, 0.2] is added
to 5 randomly sampled joints at each frame. The temporal augmentation method
contains: (1) time interpolation [6]: it generates a new skeleton sequence by
linearly interpolating the positions of each joint between consecutive time with
a random scale whose range is from 0 to 1; (2) temporal cropping: it temporally
crops a random portion of frames from the original sequence as the training
sample. Note that for each training sample, only one spatial and one temporal
augmentation method are used.
Model Pre-training. We pre-train the model using the Nvidia A100 GPU.
The batch size is set to 256. The dropout rate [7] is set to 0.2, and the L2
weight decay is set to 0.01. The Adam optimizer [2] with the learning rate of
4 × 10−4 is used for training. We use linear learning rate warmup for the first
1,000 iterations followed by polynomial decay. The model is trained for 30,000
iterations. The window size, stride, and dilate of the sliding window are set to
7, 7, and 2, respectively. For the training samples which contain two subjects,
we divide them into two samples, each of which contains the skeleton sequence
of one subject.

2

Implementation Details of Downstream Tasks

This section describes the implementation details for each downstream task.
Action Recognition. For the action recognition task, we use the entire HiTRS model as the encoder. The outputs from the V-TRS model are fed to
a linear classifier (a fully-connected layer) to predict action categories. To train

