Minimal Neural Atlas: Parameterizing
Complex Surfaces with Minimal Charts
and Distortion
Weng Fei Low1,2,3(B)

and Gim Hee Lee1,2,3

1

Institute of Data Science (IDS), National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore
{wengfei.low,gimhee.lee}@comp.nus.edu.sg
2
NUS Graduate School’s Integrative Sciences and Engineering Programme (ISEP),
Singapore, Singapore
3
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore
https://github.com/low5545/minimal-neural-atlas

Abstract. Explicit neural surface representations allow for exact and
eﬃcient extraction of the encoded surface at arbitrary precision, as well
as analytic derivation of diﬀerential geometric properties such as surface
normal and curvature. Such desirable properties, which are absent in
its implicit counterpart, makes it ideal for various applications in computer vision, graphics and robotics. However, SOTA works are limited in
terms of the topology it can eﬀectively describe, distortion it introduces
to reconstruct complex surfaces and model eﬃciency. In this work, we
present Minimal Neural Atlas, a novel atlas-based explicit neural surface representation. At its core is a fully learnable parametric domain,
given by an implicit probabilistic occupancy ﬁeld deﬁned on an open
square of the parametric space. In contrast, prior works generally predeﬁne the parametric domain. The added ﬂexibility enables charts to admit
arbitrary topology and boundary. Thus, our representation can learn a
minimal atlas of 3 charts with distortion-minimal parameterization for
surfaces of arbitrary topology, including closed and open surfaces with
arbitrary connected components. Our experiments support the hypotheses and show that our reconstructions are more accurate in terms of
the overall geometry, due to the separation of concerns on topology and
geometry.
Keywords: Surface representation · 3D shape modeling

1

Introduction

An explicit neural surface representation that can faithfully describe surfaces
of arbitrary topology at arbitrary precision is highly coveted for various downSupplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1 27.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 465–481, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_27

