Supplementary Material for
AutoAvatar: Autoregressive Neural Fields
for Dynamic Avatar Modeling
Ziqian Bai1,2∗

Timur Bagautdinov2 Javier Romero2
Ping Tan1 Shunsuke Saito2
1

Simon Fraser University

2

Michael Zollhöfer2

Reality Labs Research

We provide additional implementation details and evaluations in this supplementary
material, including network architectures (Sec. A), analysis on input pose accuracy
(Sec. B), comparison between our SDF decoding based on k-NN and the closest surface
projection approach proposed in Neural Actor [3] (Sec. C), ablations on number of
used history frames (Sec. D) and vertex subsampling (Sec. E), time and memory cost
(Sec. F), an experiment for a clothed human (Sec. G), and other limitations (Sec. H
and Sec. I). Please refer to the supplementary video for qualitative comparisons and
animation results.

A

Network Architectures

In our experiments, we use a UV map of resolution 256×256, T = 3, and k = 20. Before
the k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) query in Sec. 3.3, we subsample 3928 vertices by poissondisk sampling on the SMPL mesh, and only use these subsampled vertices for k-NN
computation. This subsampling ensures that vertices are distributed uniformly, leading
to consistent area coverage by k-NN selection (see Supp. Mat. for more discussions).
Before being fed into the UNet, L(pt+1 ) and {L(ṗt+i )} are compressed to 32 channels
using 1 × 1 convolutions. The UNet uses convolution and transposed convolution layers
with untied biases, a kernel size of 3, no normalization, and LeakyReLU with a slope
of 0.2 as the non-linear activation, except for the last layer which uses TanH. The SDF
decoder is implemented as an MLP, which takes as input 64-dim features from the
UNet, positional encoded dj and cj up to 4-th order Fourier features. The number of
intermediate neurons in the first part of the MLP is (128, 128, 129), where the output
is split into a 128-dim feature vector and a 1-dim scalar, which is converted into nonnegative weights by softmax across the k-NN samples. After weighted average pooling,
the aggregated feature is fed into another MLP with a neuron size of (128, 128, 1) to
predict the SDF values. The MLPs use Softplus with β = 100 and a threshold of 20 as
non-linear activation except for the last layer which does not apply any activation.

B

Analysis on Input Pose Accuracy

We investigate how the accuracy of the input SMPL fitting influences the results on
subject 50002 of DFaust [1]. As discussed in Sec. 4.1, the fitted SMPL parameters in
∗

Work done while Ziqian Bai was an intern at Reality Labs Research, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

