Supplemental Material to:
Sound-guided Semantic Video Generation
Seung Hyun Lee1 , Gyeongrok Oh1 , Wonmin Byeon2 , Jihyun Bae1 ,
Chanyoung Kim1 , Won Jeong Ryoo1 , Sang Ho Yoon3 , Hyunjun Cho1 ,
Jinkyu Kim4∗ , and Sangpil Kim1∗
1

Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University
2
NVIDIA Research, NVIDIA Corporation
3
Graduate School of Culture Technology, KAIST
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University

Overview
This supplementary material provides implementation details including the dataset
details for sound-guided video generation in Section A. We also provide an additional ablation study with an effect of CLIP prior knowledge for sound inverting into the StyleGAN latent space and change in movement size according
to hyperparameters as listed in Section B. Next, in Section C, we provide our
detailed analysis of the movement of latent code’s trajectory. Lastly, in Section D, we provide more diverse qualitative results with a variety of sound
sources. Moreover, we also provide diverse examples in the following project
website: https://kuai-lab.github.io/eccv2022sound/.

A. Implementation Details
CLIP-based Sound Representation Learning. We use the VGG-Sound [2]
dataset to create Lee’s [12] audio-visual embedding space. VGG-Sound is a largescale audio-visual dataset including more than 310 classes with over 200,000
video clips. VGG-Sound dataset was collected from YouTube under unconstrained conditions with audio-visual correspondence. We train the encoder with
VGG-Sound dataset to project audio embedding space into CLIP [15] embedding space. Thus, since the CLIP embedding space is aligned with the three
modalities: text, image and audio, CLIP embedding space can be utilized as
prior knowledge to create image frames with the semantic meaning of audio by
handling StyleGAN inversion.
Dataset Details. Conventional audio-video pair public dataset does not consist
with high quality audio and fidelity video [2,10]. Therefore, we curate and release a new high-fidelity landscape scene dataset for training our video generation
model. Table 1 shows the number of clips per scene class and the distribution of
∗

Corresponding authors: Jinkyu Kim and Sangpil Kim.

