Supplementary: Rethinking Few-Shot Object
Detection on a Multi-Domain Benchmark
Kibok Lee1,2⋆ , Hao Yang1† , Satyaki Chakraborty1 , Zhaowei Cai1 ,
Gurumurthy Swaminathan1 , Avinash Ravichandran1 , and Onkar Dabeer1
1

AWS AI Labs 2 Yonsei University
{kibok,haoyng,satyaki,zhaoweic,gurumurs,ravinash,onkardab}@amazon.com
kibok@yonsei.ac.kr

A

Natural K-Shot Sampling

In this section, we describe how we perform natural K-shot sampling in detail:
Step 1. Sample C × K images. C is the number of classes of the original
dataset S. In this step, without worrying about class labels, we sample S from
the entire dataset D. Unlike the standard K-shot sampling algorithm in recent
FSOD works [11,26,21], we do not apply stratified sampling. This is because an
image usually contains multiple annotations, such that stratified sampling might
result in an artificial class distribution [11].
Step 2. Check missing classes. The initial sampled dataset might not
contain some classes, particularly those present only in a few images in the
original dataset. To compensate for this, we check if there are any missing classes
and update the sampled dataset. Specifically, we manage two datasets: P is a set
of images to be added, and Q is a set of images to be kept. Then, for each class,
if no image in S contains the class, we sample an image from the D containing
the class and put it in P; otherwise, we sample an image from S containing the
class and put it in Q.
Step 3. Update the sampled dataset. As the final step, we adjust the
initial dataset S to guarantee that all classes are present. To match the number
of added and removed images, we sample a set of images to be removed R from
S − Q where the size of R is the same as P. Here, Q guarantees that any class
in S does not become empty. Finally, we add P and remove R from S.
The complete algorithm is in Algorithm 1.

B

Dataset Size Reduction

We initially collected more than 100 public detection datasets, and then selected
32 datasets based on availability, diversity of domains, annotation quality, and
number of citations. After initial experiments on them, to reduce the computational burden for future research, we picked 10 datasets out of the 32, which
show similar performance trends with the 32 datasets, while covering a variety
of domains based on the domain distance.

