Dynamic 3D Scene Analysis by
Point Cloud Accumulation
(Supplementary material)
Shengyu Huang1 Zan Gojcic2 Jiahui Huang3
Andreas Wieser1 Konrad Schindler1
1

ETH Zürich

2

NVIDIA

3

BRCist

In this supplementary document, we first present additional information
about our network architecture and implementation in § A. We then elaborate on
technical details of ego-motion estimation, iterative pose refinement, and scene
reconstruction in § B. Precise definitions of loss functions and evaluation metrics
are provided in § C. Further analysis of the two datasets, nuScenes and Waymo,
is presented in § D, followed by additional quantitative results including scene
flow estimation, instance association, and the TubeNet motion model in § E.
Finally, we show more qualitative results in § F.

A

Network and implementation

Network architecture. The detailed network architecture is depicted in
Fig. S6. Our network is a sequential model consisting of (i) per-frame feature
extraction used to estimate ego-motion, (ii) multi-frame feature extraction to
segment dynamic objects and regress offset vectors towards the associated instance center, and (iii) TubeNet to regress the rigid motions of dynamic objects.
The Pillar encoder and the two UNets operate without Batch Normalisation [5],
this speeds up training and inference without any loss in performance [9]. Our
network achieves flexibility w.r.t. the number of input frames via global maxpooling along the temporal dimension in the InitConv3D block (Fig. S6).
Implementation details. We use torch scatter1 to efficiently convert pointwise features to pillar/instance-level global features. To spatially align the backbone features we use grid sample, implemented in PyTorch [8]. Before clustering, we apply voxel down-sampling implemented in TorchSparse [11] to reduce
the point density and improve clustering efficiency. The voxel size is set to 15 cm.
Instance labels at full resolution are recovered by indexing points to their associated voxel cell.
1

https://github.com/rusty1s/pytorch_scatter

