Learning to Train a Point Cloud Reconstruction
Network Without Matching
Tianxin Huang1 , Xuemeng Yang1 , Jiangning Zhang1,2 , Jinhao Cui1 , Hao Zou1 ,
Jun Chen1 , Xiangrui Zhao1 , and Yong Liu1,3(B)
1

APRIL Lab, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn
2
Tencent Youtu Laboratory, Shanghai, China
3
Huzhou Institute of Zhejiang University, Huzhou, China
Abstract. Reconstruction networks for well-ordered data such as 2D images and
1D continuous signals are easy to optimize through element-wised squared errors,
while permutation-arbitrary point clouds cannot be constrained directly because
their points permutations are not fixed. Though existing works design algorithms
to match two point clouds and evaluate shape errors based on matched results,
they are limited by pre-defined matching processes. In this work, we propose a
novel framework named PCLossNet which learns to train a point cloud reconstruction network without any matching. By training through an adversarial process together with the reconstruction network, PCLossNet can better explore the
differences between point clouds and create more precise reconstruction results.
Experiments on multiple datasets prove the superiority of our method, where
PCLossNet can help networks achieve much lower reconstruction errors and
extract more representative features, with about 4 times faster training efficiency
than the commonly-used EMD loss. Our codes can be found in https://github.
com/Tianxinhuang/PCLossNet.
Keywords: Learning to train · No matching · Point cloud reconstruction

1 Introduction
To reconstruct a series of data, a network such as auto-encoder is usually adopted to
predict an output as similar to the original data as possible, which is usually trained
with reconstruction errors between original data and the network output. Reconstruction
errors for 2D images or 1D signals are quite easy to calculate directly with elementwised mean squared errors (MSE) because their elements such as pixels are arranged
in a certain order. However, matching algorithms are required to synchronize different
data when calculating reconstruction errors for point clouds because permutations of
input and output point sets in reconstruction networks may be different.
Different matching algorithms match points between point clouds according to
different rules. Figure 1-(a) and (b) illustrate the matching processes adopted by two
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7 11.
c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022

S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13661, pp. 179–194, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7_11

