Supplementary Material for
MVSTER: Epipolar Transformer for Efficient
Multi-View Stereo

1

Discussion

Analysis of attention formulation The attention module is designed to enhance the fusion of the cost volumes from different views. Therefore, it is straightforward to use view-wise attention (VA) as a guidance for fusion. However, VA
ignores depth-wise associations, which is critical for reducing depth ambiguity in
cost volumes. Therefore, the proposed epipolar Transformer utilizes depth-wise
attention (DA) to fuse cost volumes, which highlights the matched depth bin
and surpasses irrelevant ones. To demonstrate the effectiveness of DA, we compare DA with VA on DTU. Specifically, the overall score of DA (0.313) relatively
improves the baseline (0.323) by 3.1%, which validates that the relation across
depth hypotheses is more beneficial for depth prediction.

The novelty compared with MVS2D [8] (i ) MVS2D uses epipolar attention
module to implicitly embed depth information into 2D feature maps. In contrast,
our epipolar Transformer leverages depth-wise attention to fuse 3D cost volumes,
which explicitly maintains the importance of each depth hypothesis and makes
depth prediction more tractable. (ii ) MVS2D introduces additional trainable
linear maps to transform features before cross attention, while the proposed
epipolar Transformer learns data-dependent associations without introducing
learnable parameters. We further compare model performance and efficiency on
DTU. Specifically, MVSTER (0.303@0.17s) shows comparable efficiency with
MVS2D (0.342@0.13s). Besides, MVSTER relatively improves the overall score
by 11.4%, which demonstrates that explicit usage of 3D depth-wise attention is
beneficial for depth prediction.

2

Additional Implementation Details

Network Architecture of Feature Extractor We use a four-stage Feature
Pyramid Network (FPN) [5] to extract image features, and the detailed parameters with layer descriptions are summarized in Table 1. For Deformable Convolutional Networks (DCN) [3] and Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling (ASPP) [2]
that are used in the ablation study of our main text, the network parameters
are listed in Table 2.

