Drive&Segment: Unsupervised Semantic
Segmentation of Urban Scenes
via Cross-modal Distillation
– Supplementary material –
Antonin Vobecky1,2 , David Hurych2 , Oriane Siméoni2 , Spyros Gidaris2 ,
Andrei Bursuc2 , Patrick Pérez2 , and Josef Sivic1
1

Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, CTU in Prague
2
valeo.ai

A

Additional quantitative results

A.1

Results with another training dataset

We report in Tables 4 and 5 the performance of Drive&Segment when trained
using a subset of ∼8k images from the nuScenes dataset [1]. As shown in Table 4,
the mIoU on Cityscapes is 19.8. Although there is a small drop from the 21.8
achieved with Drive&Segment trained on Waymo Open, the results are still
significantly better than those of the competing methods. This drop might be
caused by differences in statistics between the two datasets, e.g., nuScenes has
fewer examples of smaller-object classes, such as pedestrians.
A.2

Ablation of the number of clusters in unsupervised labeling

Here we investigate the sensitivity of our method to the number k of clusters
used for unsupervised labeling. Figure 7 shows the mIoU results on Cityscapes
for k ∈ {20, 25, 30, 35, 40}. In all cases, we use a ViT-S/16 feature extractor
trained with DINO. The results show that for k ∈ {20, 25, 30, 35} the mIoU performance is fairly stable. As expected, when the number of clusters becomes
much higher than the number of Cityscapes classes (e.g., k = 40), the performance drops.
A.3

Influence of the LiDAR’s density

We investigate here the performance of Drive&Segment when provided with
sparser LiDAR data. We performed experiments on the Waymo Open dataset
and downsampled the LiDAR data from 64 to 32 beam channels by dropping
every other channel. We re-trained the teacher model three times and report
the average performance (following the setup of the main paper). We obtained
20.3 mIoU, which is only slightly lower than the 20.4 obtained with the full
LiDAR resolution, demonstrating the robustness of our method to this considerable decrease of LiDAR resolution. However, as already discussed in the main

