DFNet: Enhance Absolute Pose Regression with
Direct Feature Matching Supplementary
Shuai Chen, Xinghui Li, Zirui Wang, and Victor A. Prisacariu
Active Vision Lab, University of Oxford

1

Supplementary

1.1

Implementation

Histogram-assisted NeRF Here, we provide more implementation details of
our methods. As we mentioned in Section 3.3 of the main paper, our histogramassisted NeRF model renders at a speed of 12.2 fps (benchmarked by a 3080Ti
GPU) to achieve online RVS training. In order to achieve a balanced trade-off
between speed and quality, we choose to render small images with a shorter side
of 60 pixels. In addition, we set the NeRF model architecture to 64 coarse and
64 fine sampling with an MLP width of 128.
DFNet Our DFNet takes an image input with a shorter side of 240 pixels.
For feature extractor module G of DFNet, features are fed through a ConvRelu-Conv-Batch Norm architecture with 64 kernels and 128 output channels.
The DFNet is trained with a batch size of 4 or 8, depending on the GPU’s
memory. We implement an early stopping strategy with a patient value of 200
and schedule the learning rate decay of 0.95 when validation loss plateaus for
every 50 epochs. For every N = 20 epochs, we will randomly generate the same
amount of views as the training sample size using RVS.
Direct Feature Matching To train the DFNetdm model with feature-metric
direct matching using unlabeled data, we set the batch size to 1 and the learning
rate to 1 × 10−5 with the same early stopping strategy mentioned above. We
discover that only low-level features (i.e., features from the first blocks of VGG)
are needed to achieve the best performance, which we discussed earlier in Section
4.5 of the main paper.
1.2

Visualization

Qualitative Comparison on 7-Scenes We show a selection of qualitative
comparisons on the 7-Scenes dataset with several baseline APR methods [4,1,2]
in Fig. 1. We also encourage our readers to check out our supplementary video,
in which we rendered views of the predicted pose using NeRF synthesis.

