Supplementary Material
Open Vocabulary Object Detection with
Pseudo Bounding-Box Labels
Mingfei Gao⋆ , Chen Xing⋆ , Juan Carlos Niebles, Junnan Li,
Ran Xu, Wenhao Liu, Caiming Xiong
Salesforce Research, Palo Alto, USA
{mingfei.gao,cxing,jniebles,junnan.li}@salesforce.com
{ran.xu,wenhao.liu,cxiong}@salesforce.com

1

Additional Analysis

We conduct the following analysis to understand more about the performance
of our method and our major baseline, Zareian et al., [2].
The effect of data amount for pre-training vision-language model. Both
Zareian et al. and our method leverage a vision-language (VL) model. Intuitively,
a VL model can be improved by training with more data that will potentially
improve both our method and baseline. We verify this hypothesis as follows.
First, we attempt to improve Zareian et al. by training their VL model with
more data. We observe that the performance of [2] drops when pre-training with
more data. This observation aligns well with the findings in their original paper
(see Table 2 of [2]). Specifically, [2] is originally pre-trained with COCO Caption
(the baseline we compared with in our main paper). When pre-trained with
COCO Caption, VG and SBU (1M images in total), their performance drops by
4.2% on COCO novel categories. When pre-trained with COCO Caption, VG,
SBU and CC3M (4M images in total), their performance drops further by 10.8%
compared to our baseline.
Then, we also try to weaken our method by re-training our VL model (ALBEF) with COCO caption data only. The comparison is shown in Table A1.
The results suggest that our method still outperforms our baseline largely by
5% even when we do not leverage one main strength of our method: being able
to effectively employ more image-caption data without much extra cost.
Also, our method can benefit from more image-caption data, as suggested by
our performance in Table A1 (27.8) vs. our performance (30.8) in Table 1 in our
main paper.
Why Zareian et al. cannot easily take advantage of more powerful VL
models? We find that Zareian et al. cannot easily incorporate more powerful VL
models, e.g., ALBEF [1] due to its core designs. First, it requires the same model
architecture for the VL model’s visual encoder and the detection backbone, since
the main idea of [2] is to initialize their open vocabulary detector using the
⋆

Mingfei and Chen contributed equally.

