Supplementary Material:
Camera Pose Estimation and Localization
with Active Audio Sensing
Karren Yang2⋆

Michael Firman1
1

A

Niantic

Eric Brachmann1
2

MIT

3

Clément Godard3⋆

Google

Implementation Details

In this section, we describe the implementation details for our pretraining task
and our device localization tasks. All models are implemented and trained in
PyTorch [14].
A.1

Pretraining Task

Input Representation. The network inputs are derived from 60ms of audio
echo recordings (2 channels). For the Replica dataset [18], we sample the recordings at 44.1kHz and obtain magnitude spectrograms via STFT in Librosa [12]
with 512 frequency bins and Hanning window of 64, following [6, 13]. For the
Matterport3D dataset [3], we sample the recordings at 16kHz and obtain magnitude spectrograms with 512 frequency bins and Hanning window of 32, following
[13]. In addition to magnitude spectrograms, we also compute the angle between
the complex spectrograms of the two channels to take phase information into
account. For the final input, we stack the spectrograms of the two audio channels
with the angle information.
Audio Feature Extractor Network (f ). The backbone of our audio feature
extractor network is a ResNet18 model [8]. We input the audio as described
above and extract features prior to the global pooling layer. The features are
passed through a 1×1 convolution block with 32 output channels, ReLU activation and batch normalization. The resulting output is flattened to remove the
time axis and processed through two more 1×1 convolution blocks to obtain 1D
feature embeddings of sizes 512 and 512×6 respectively. Each length-512 subset
of the latter embedding represents scene geometry from a different view along
an egocentric cube map and is input to the depth decoder network separately.
Depth Decoder Network (g). The depth decoder takes length-512 audio
feature embeddings as input and processes them through 7 up-convolution blocks
to produce a 128×128 depth map with values between 0 and 1 (normalized by
maximum depth of dataset), following [6, 13]. Each up-convolution block except
the final one consists of nearest-neighbor up-sampling by a factor of 2, followed
⋆

Work done while at Niantic, during Karren’s internship.

