Dress Code:
High-Resolution Multi-Category Virtual Try-On
Supplementary Material
Davide Morelli1 , Matteo Fincato1 , Marcella Cornia1 , Federico Landi1,∗ ,
Fabio Cesari2 , and Rita Cucchiara1
1

1

University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy
{name.surname}@unimore.it
2
YOOX NET-A-PORTER, Italy
{name.surname}@ynap.com

Dress Code Dataset

In Table 1, we report the total number of images and the dimensions of the
train/test splits in the Dress Code dataset. Additionally, we detail the dimension
of each split with respect to the different macro-categories of the dataset (upperbody clothes, lower-body clothes, and dresses). In our experiments, we train
our models on all training pairs of the dataset and test both on each category
separately and on the entire test set. Additional sample image pairs from Dress
Code are shown in Fig. 1, 2, and 3 with the corresponding pose keypoints, dense
pose of the reference model, and segmentation mask of the human body. As it
can be seen, images of our dataset have a great variety considering both the body
pose of the reference models and category and textures of try-on garments. This
can lead to virtual try-on architectures becoming more general and adapting to
more challenging scenarios.

2

Additional Implementation Details

Data Pre-Processing. To extract the person pose representation p, we employ
either OpenPose [1] or DensePose [2]. Specifically, the keypoints of the human
body extracted with OpenPose [1] are used to compute the 18-channel pose
heatmap, where each channel corresponds to one body keypoint represented as
an 11 × 11 white rectangle. While both the 25 channels label map and the 2
channels UV map estimated by DensePose [2] are concatenated and used with
no further processing.
In order to create the masked person representation m, we remove the information regarding the target clothes and the interested part of the body from I.
Hence, the model only sees the face, the hair, and the target person part of the
body which do not contain ground-truth information. To produce such masked
∗

Now at Huawei Technologies, Amsterdam Research Center, the Netherlands.

