PoserNet: Refining Relative Camera Poses
Exploiting Object Detections ⋆ - Supplementary
Material
Matteo Taiana, Matteo Toso, Stuart James, and Alessio Del Bue
Pattern Analysis and Computer Vision (PAVIS), Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT),
Genoa, Italy
{name.surname}@iit.it

1

Introduction

In the main paper, we introduced a novel approach to relative pose refinement (PoserNet) and evaluated its effectiveness in correcting initial relative pose
estimates. We then investigated the effect of PoserNet on Motion Averaging
performed via either an optimisation-based method (EIG-SE3 [1]), or a deeplearning-based method (MultiReg [7]). In both cases, we used as training and
testing dataset a collection of graphs generated using images from 7-Scenes[3].
In this document, we provide additional details about i) how the 7-Scenes
graphs were obtained by generating and matching ROI detections; ii) the implementation details for our PoserNet and for the third-party MultiReg [7] and
EIG-SE3 [1] methods; iii) a more detailed discussion of the error distribution
after motion averaging (Table 4 of the main paper); iv) the effect of increasing PoserNet’s complexity by increasing its “depth”; v) PoserNet generalisation
capabilities.

2

Generating Graphs from 7-Scenes

In this section, we provide additional details on how we generated object detections and on how we established matches between them. We provide an example
of the resulting graphs in Figure 2. Moreover, we share general considerations
on the difficulties we encountered in the process.
ROIs generation – We computed ROIs for our experiment applying the pretrained Object Localisation Network (OLN) [4] on the images of the 7-Scenes
dataset. Examples of ROIs computed via OLN, and a comparison with those
obtained using a part of Faster R-CNN [5] are shown in Figure 1. We opted
for using OLN in our work because we found it more reliable at localising small
objects. We selected the 50 best-scoring detections for each image, a number empirically large enough to capture most objects present in the scene. We discarded
detections larger than 25% of the image size, as they were likely associated with
⋆

This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme under grant agreement No 870743.

