Supplemental Material for “Is It Necessary to
Transfer Temporal Knowledge for Domain
Adaptive Video Semantic Segmentation?”
Xinyi Wu1 , Zhenyao Wu1 , Jin Wan2 , Lili Ju1 , and Song Wang1
1

University of South Carolina
{xinyiw,zhenyao}@email.sc.edu ju@math.sc.edu songwang@cec.sc.edu
2
Beijing Jiaotong University
jinwan@bjtu.edu.cn

In this supplementary material, we provide the following additional results
and discussions of this paper.

1

Additional Results

1.1

Quantitative results

The impact of optical-flow computation for testing. In the main paper, our reported results are based on per-frame inference without optical-flow computation. Here, we further study the impact of optical-flow computation for testing.
The comparison results under the VIPER → Cityscapes scenario and the SYNTHIA → Cityscapes scenario are shown in Table S1 and Table S2, respectively.
To be specific, the “I2VDA (two-frame)” is implemented by a non-parametric
fusion defined as:
  P = \mathcal M (I_f)+ \gamma \mathcal M (\mathcal W (I_{f-1}, F)), 
(1)
where W(·, ·) is the warping function and M is the segmentation network that
have been defined in the main paper, If is the current frame, If −1 represents its
previous frame, F is the optical flow between If −1 and If , and γ is set to 0.5 to
balance the fusion. We observe that the improvements for both scenarios are not
very obvious by further using two frames and computing optical flow for testing.
These results, to some extent, indicate that our proposed temporal augmentation
strategy is effective to help learn diverse temporal patterns during training thus
there is no need to explicitly consider the temporal consistency during testing.
1.2

Qualitative results

Static results. For qualitative comparisons, we first provide some visualization results of independent frames for both VIPER → Cityscapes and SYNTHIA → Cityscapes scenarios scenarios in Figure S1 and Figure S2, respectively.
It is observed that our method achieves more accurate results, especially on the
small-size classes such as person and traffic light.

