18

A

G. Ghiasi et al.

Potential societal impacts

OpenSeg provides a language interface for recognition and localization of visual
concepts. Such an interface may facilitate downstream applications such as interactive intelligent home assistants, interactive content creation, and instructing
robot actions with language [43]. However, OpenSeg models are trained on largescale datasets, which may contain bias towards certain image and text distributions. As a result, we share the similar concern as recent studies for evaluating
image-text models like Clip [1]. Thus OpenSeg is not suitable for deployment in
the real world without properly studying the model biases and calibrating the
predictions.

B

Limitations of our approach

The limitations come with the strength of our method. The mask representations
can organize an image into a small number of regions, and thus enable scalable
visual-semantic alignments. However, our method will not be able to segment
visual concepts that do not have associated segmentation proposals. That being
said, we still believe the generalization to unseen concepts with class-agnostic
mask representations is easier than pixel-wise representations. How to improve
generalization or adaptation of mask predictions will be an interesting research
topic.

C

Architecture of the cross-attention module

Figure 6 shows the model architecture of the cross-attention module. The mask
queries q(t) interact with the position-augmented image features F∫ + P E to
generate mask queries q(t+1) . The first mask queries q(0) is randomly initialized
at the beginning of training. The module is stacked three times (T = 3) in our
experiments. We try to include self-attention of queries followed by the queryimage cross-attention as in [10], but that does not improve performance.

Cross-Attention Module

l2
norm

NxD

MLP

l2
norm

+

MLP

NxD

(HxW) x D

MLP

Figure 6. Model architecture of the region-image cross-attention module.
The module is stacked repeatedly to generate mask queries for region segmentation.

