Supplementary Material: Self-Supervised Sparse
Representation for Video Anomaly Detection
Jhih-Ciang Wu⋆1,2 , He-Yen Hsieh⋆1 , Ding-Jie Chen1 , Chiou-Shann Fuh2 ,
and Tyng-Luh Liu ⋆⋆1
1

Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
2
National Taiwan University, Taiwan

This document provides more qualitative results and experimental setting
details of our self-supervised sparse representation (S3R) model, which is designed to locate exact video segments of abnormal activities for simultaneously
tackling two sorts of video anomaly detections, i.e., oVAD (one-class) and wVAD
(weakly-supervised) video anomaly detection tasks. We first present more details
of dictionary construction. Then, we provide the statistics of the three datasets,
including ShanghaiTech, UCF-Crime, and XD-Violence, for assessing oVAD and
wVAD tasks. Finally, we visualize more prediction results of our model.

1

Dictionary Configurations

The dictionary learning aims to keep the representative atoms and filter out the
redundant ones in the original set. We collect half of |X̃ | atoms for all datasets to
construct task-specific dictionaries DT , where |X̃ | is the number of normal training videos. The universal dictionary DU contains 2000 atoms after the dictionary
learning procedure.

2

Reorganized Datasets

The proposed S3R model is a unified framework capable of solving both the
oVAD and wVAD tasks. For fairly assessing our model compared to previous
VAD methods, we follow [1,2] to reorganize video datasets, in which the dataset
statistics for both tasks are summarized in Table 1.

3

Qualitative Results

Fig. 1 to Fig. 3 shows the qualitative results on tackling the wVAD task using
our S3R model, in which the results are assessed on the ShanghaiTech or the
UCF-Crime datasets. For each subfigure, the top row shows the corresponding
frames over the temporal dimension and highlights abnormal events using red
boxes; the bottom chart shows the predicted probabilities in the y-axis using a
solid brown line and displays the corresponding time over the x-axis. Note that
the higher prediction scores indicate the higher probabilities of abnormal events
the model believes, and we annotate the ground-truth by filling it in light-red.
⋆
⋆⋆

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author

