Supplementary Material: Studying Bias in GANs
through the Lens of Race
Vongani H. Maluleke*, Neerja Thakkar*, Tim Brooks, Ethan Weber, Trevor
Darrell, Alexei A. Efros, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Devin Guillory
UC Berkeley

In this supplementary material document, we first discuss the selected perceived race label categorization. We then describe in detail the three Amazon
Mechanical Turk tasks and implementation information. Followed by an analysis of the performance of both AMT annotations and the automatic classifier in
evaluating perceived race. Visualizations of various truncation levels are shown
next, and finally, we present more details and visualizations of quality ranking.

1

Race Labels Categorization

We start with the the FairFace dataset labels, and then collect annotations
based on our own condensed categorization. The FairFace dataset started with
the commonly accepted race categories from the U.S. Census Bureau—white,
Black, Asian, Hawaiian and Pacific Islanders (HPI), Native Americans (NA),
and Latino. They dropped the HPI and NA categories due to insufficient image
examples, and expanded the Asian category into four distinct subgroups: Middle Eastern, East Asian, Southeast Asian, and Indian [2]. To reduce perceptual
ambiguity (see main paper in section 4.1), we condense the race class labels
from seven FairFace classes to three classes—Black, white, and Non-Black or
Non-white—where Non-Black or Non-white comprises the Middle Eastern, East
Asian, Southeast Asian, Latino Hispanic, and Indian as labeled by FairFace. We
also relabel all the images we analyze using our own annotation protocol with
three categories and a “Cannot Determine” category.

2

Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) Details

Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) was used to collect annotations for three label
tasks, namely; (1) race classification, (2) quality classification, and (3) quality
ranking. As mentioned in the paper, these tasks consist of the following questions:
1. Race Classification: What is the race of the person in the image?
2. Real/Fake Classification: Is this image real or fake?
3. Image Quality Ranking: Which image is more likely to be a fake image?

