Generative Multiplane Images

19

Supplementary Material:
Generative Multiplane Images:
Making a 2D GAN 3D-Aware
This supplementary is structured as follows:
– Sec. A: Details of the differentiable rendering in GMPI;
– Sec. B: Additional quantitative results;
– Sec. C: Implementation details;
– Sec. D: More qualitative results.

A

Differentiable Rendering in GMPI

In Sec. 3.3, we obtain the desired image Ivtgt which illustrates the generated MPI
representation M = {C, {↵1 , . . . , ↵L }} from the user-specified target view vtgt in
two steps: 1) a warping step transforms the representation M from its canonical
pose vcano to the target pose vtgt ; 2) a compositing step combines the planes into
the desired image Ivtgt . Importantly, both steps entail easy computations which
are end-to-end differentiable such that they can be included into any generator.
Here we provide details.
Warping. We warp the RGB image and the alpha map of the ith plane from
the canonical view to the target view via
(Ci0 , ↵i0 ) = Hi,vcano !vtgt (C, ↵i , di ).

(S1)

Here, Hi,vcano !vtgt represents the homography operation. Essentially, the homography Hi,vcano !vtgt specifies a mapping: for each pixel coordinate (p0x , p0y ) in the
image Ci0 and in the alpha map ↵i0 of the target view vtgt , we obtain corresponding coordinates (px , py ) in the image C and in the alpha map ↵i of the canonical
view vcano . Bilinear sampling is applied on (px , py ) to obtain values for the pixel
locations (p0x , p0y ). Concretely,
◆
✓
⇥
⇤>
⇥
⇤>
tv !v n>
px py 1 = Kvcano Rvtgt !vcano − tgt cano
Kvtgt1 p0x p0y 1 ,
(S2)
bi
where n ∈ R3 is the normal of the plane defined in target camera coordinate
system vtgt , which is identical for all planes. bi is the depth of the plane from
the target camera vtgt . We let Kvcano ∈ R3⇥3 and Kvtgt ∈ R3⇥3 refer to the
intrinsic matrices of the canonical view vcano and the target view vtgt . Further,
Rvtgt !vcano ∈ R3⇥3 and tvtgt !vcano ∈ R3⇥1 are the rotation and the translation
from vtgt to vcano .
Alpha Compositing. Given the warped image Ci0 and the warped alpha map
↵i0 for each plane i, we compute the final rendered 2D image Ivtgt via
1
0
iY
1
L
X
@Ci0 · ↵i0 ·
(S3)
(1 − ↵j0 )A .
Ivtgt =
i=1

j=1

