Supplementary Material
FS-COCO: Towards Understanding of Freehand
Sketches of Common Objects in Context
Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1, 2 Aneeshan Sain1, 2 Ayan Kumar Bhunia1
Tao Xiang1, 2 Yulia Gryaditskaya1, 3 Yi-Zhe Song1, 2
1

SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.
3
Surrey Institute for People Centred AI, CVSSP, University of Surrey.
2

S1

Ethical considerations in data collection

Our dataset contains scene sketches of photos with paired textual description of
the sketches. It does not include any personally identifiable information. Each
sketch and caption are associated only with an ID.
Prior to agreeing to participate in the data collection, each participant was
informed of the purpose of the dataset: namely that the dataset would be publicly
available and released as part of a research paper with potential for commercial
use. The participants were asked to accept the Contributor License Agreement
that explains legal terms and conditions, and in particular it specifies that the
data collector has the rights to distribute the data under any chosen license:
The participants granted to the data collectors and recipients of the data distributed by the data collectors a perpetual, worldwide, non-exclusive, nocharge,
royalty-free, irrevocable copyright license to reproduce, prepare derivative works
of, publicly display, publicly perform, sub-license, and distribute participants
contributions and such derivative works. We further requested a written confirmation from annotators that they give the data collector permission to conduct
research on the collected data and release the dataset.
Each participant who approved these terms, was assigned a random user
ID. Each participant was given the option of deleting any or all their annotations/collected data at any point during the data collection process.
We also included an anonymous public discussion forum in our annotation
web portal which could be used by any participant to raise concerns and collectively inform others. Annotators were also given the option of directly contacting
us to raise concerns privately.

S2

A detailed description of FSCOCO and comparison
with existing SketchyCOCO [5] and SketchyScene [22]

In Sec. 4.1 in the main document, we compare with existing datasets SketchyCOCO [5] and SketchyScene [22]. Here, we provide the detailed statistics on cat-

