Fashionformer: A Simple, Effective and Unified
Baseline for Human Fashion Segmentation and
Recognition-Appendix
Shilin Xu1,3∗ Xiangtai Li1,3 Jingbo Wang2
Guangliang Cheng3 Yunhai Tong1 Dacheng Tao4
1

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of Artificial Intelligence,
Peking University
2
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
SenseTime Research
4
The University of Sydney
lxtpku@pku.edu.cn, xushilin@stu.pku.edu.cn,chengguangliang@sensetime.com

Overview. In this supplementary, we provide the following information: more
experimental details in experiment sections, more discussion on our work contribution and limitation, more visualization results on Fashionpedia, DeepFashion
and ModaNet. We will open source all the model and code.

1

More Experimental Details and Discussion.

Detailed Training on Fashionpedia. Since this dataset is smaller than
COCO, following original work, we enlarge the dataset by repeating several
times of origin size to match the size of COCO dataset. We report standard 1×
and 3× training schedules for fair comparison, following [4] where 1× is nearly
36 epochs. We use the same standard COCO data augmentation settings in
mmdetection [1].
Training Settings on DeepFashion and ModaNet. We follow the main
standard setting for training on both datasets. The main difference is we use
the AdamW [5] with the initial learning rate 1e-4. We use multiscale training [1]
where the short size is ranging from 800 to 1333. Since there is no clear benchmark for recently introduced models including CondInst [6], MaskFormer [2]
and K-Net [7]. We re-implement all these methods in the same codebase. All the
model use the single scale inference on both datasets.
Ablation on interaction number. We also increase the interaction number
of our Fashionformer to 4 and 5. We find a minor performance gain (0.3%-0.5%
mask
mAPmask
IoU , 0.2%-0.3% mAPF1 ) for 12 epochs training. However, when adopting
more epochs training, there is no difference with interaction number 3. Thus, we
set the default interaction number to 3.
Effectiveness of learned gating in Dynamic Convolution. Removing the
gating in DC results in 1.0% mAPmask
IoU drop. This indicates the learned query
should depend on the query feature conditionally rather simple addition.
Discussion on main contribution. Our main contribution is to provide a new
DETR-like baseline for fashion analysis including both fashion segmentation and

