Interpretable Open-Set Domain Adaptation via
Angular Margin Separation
Xinhao Li1 , Jingjing Li1,2(

)

, Zhekai Du1 , Lei Zhu3 , and Wen Li1

1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Mc1114207918@outlook.com, lijin117@yeah.net, dzk1996411@163.com,
liwenbnu@gmail.com
2
Institute of Electronic and Information Engineering of UESTC in Guangdong
3
Shandong Normal University
leizhu0608@gmail.com

A

Appendix

A.1

Openness Analysis

Since the relation between the number of seen and unseen classes could be uncertain in reality, it is necessary to further verify that our proposed AMS can
s|
perform robustly under diﬀerent openness: O = 1 − |C
|Ct | . To achieve this, we
set up three diﬀerent configurations of task P→R, in which the number of seen
classes is 3, 6, and 10, respectively, and the corresponding number of unseen
classes is 14, 11, and 7. Therefore, the openness value in each scenario is 0.82,
0.64, and 0.41. For performance on open-set domain adaptation, we take the
recent SR-OSDA framework and the state-of-the-art OSDA method BCA as
baselines. As is shown in Fig. 1 (a), (b), and (c), AMS achieves superior or
competitive results on OS ∗ , OS ⋄ , and H1 under all openness values. For performance on semantic recovery, we only compare with SR-OSDA since BCA
is a pure OSDA method. Fig. 1 (d), (e), and (f) show that our method still
consistently outperforms SR-OSDA by a notable margin in terms of all metrics.
A.2

Qualitative Evaluation of Semantic Recovery

We qualitatively evaluate the capability of AMS to interpret novelties by showcasing its semantic recovery results in Fig. 2. To emphasize the interpretation
of unseen novelties, we test a model trained in task R→A with samples from
the unseen classes in the AwA2 dataset. Moreover, the rightmost two images
in the last row are from classes outside the R and A domains, which are used
to further confirm that AMS can reasonably interpret completely new novelties
encountered in deployment. From Fig. 2 we can see that AMS can not only
correctly recover salient attributes of unseen classes (notes in black), but also
reasonably and flexibly predict attributes for individual samples (notes in green),
which corroborates that AMS is a practical step towards interpretable OSDA.
We also compare the semantic recovery results of AMS and SR-OSDA by
visualizing their confusion matrices in task R→A. From Fig. 3 we can observe

