GLASS: Global to Local Attention for
Scene-Text Spotting - Supplementary Material
Roi Ronen1 ⋆ , Shahar Tsiper2∗ , Oron Anschel2 ,
Inbal Lavi2 , Amir Markovitz2 , and R. Manmatha2
1

Viterbi Faculty of Electrical & Computer Eng., Technion, Haifa, Israel
2
AWS AI Labs

In the supplementary material, we share further details and analysis for our
work. In Sec. 1, we provide estimates for the latency and computations costs
added when using GLASS. In Sec. 2, we discuss our recognition head selection
and further implementation details of our main method. Finally, in Sec. 3, we explore GLASS’s effect over detection performance, share results for the TextOCR
validation set, present failure cases and further explore GLASS’s contribution
across different scales.

1

GLASS Computational Cost

In Table 1 we report the number of parameters in our model’s detection branch,
GLASS component and the recognition branch. During inference, GLASS preforms two main operations: (a) Sampling high-resolution crops and extracting
their local features, and (b) Fusing the global features of each detected bounding
box with its local feature counterparts.
To minimize the added computational cost, we utilize a light-weight ResNet34
backbone [2] for extracting the local features. As described in the manuscript,
we use a block-based attention for fusing the local and global feature maps. This
alleviates much of the fusion computational cost, while still benefiting overall performance, as demonstrated in our experiments. Overall, the addition of GLASS
leads to an inference time increase of roughly 10%. The latency increment is
similar when incorporating GLASS into Mask TextSpotter v3 [4] and ABCNet
v2 [5] frameworks, shown in Table 1. GLASS has no effect on the computational
cost of the detector, including its mask branch, and the recognizer heads.

2

Implementation Details

2.1

Recognition Head

We follow recent art [5], and design a light-weight recognition head. The recognition head consists of 2 convolution layers, a two-layer BiLSTM encoder, and an
attention decoder [1]. The input to the first block of the recognizer, the encoder,
is the expressive feature map zfused computed by GLASS component. The loss
⋆

Equal contribution. For correspondence: tsiper@amazon.com

