ViewFormer: NeRF-free Neural Rendering
from Few Images Using Transformers
–
Supplementary Material
Jonáš Kulhánek1,2 , Erik Derner1 , Torsten Sattler1 , and Robert
Babuška1,3
1

Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics,
Czech Technical University in Prague
2
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
3
Cognitive Robotics, Faculty of 3mE, Delft University of Technology
https://jkulhanek.github.io/viewformer

In this supplementary material, we give more details on the results presented
in the main paper and provide more details on the network architecture. First,
in Sec. A, we present additional qualitative results on various datasets. We also
show examples of context views used to render the final view. The attached
video is described in Sec. B. We include the camera pose estimation results on
the 7-Scenes dataset [12] in Sec. C, and we also show qualitative results of the
novel view synthesis task on the same dataset. In Sec. D, we present an ablation
study. We also show how the performance increases with larger context sizes. In
Sections E and F, we include additional results on the ShapeNet dataset and
the Shepard-Metzler-Parts-7 (SM7) dataset, respectively. Quantitative results of
the codebook model are given in Sec. G. Finally, we give details on the training
hyperparameters and architecture of the models in Sections H and I.

A

Qualitative results

We add qualitative results to the ones presented in the paper (see Fig. 1, 6,
and 8 in the main paper). We show the context views together with the rendered
images on the InteriorNet [16], the Common Objects in 3D (CO3D) [23], and
the 7-Scenes [12] datasets. The generated images are displayed in Fig. 1, Fig. 2,
and Fig. 4, respectively. We also show images generated with full context sizes
in Fig. 3. It is important to note that all the visualizations, including the video,
were rendered on previously unseen scenes (objects).
The images rendered on the largest and most complex dataset – InteriorNet,
although slightly blurry, resemble the ground truth (GT) images well. For the
7-Scenes dataset, the trained model overfitted the data, and the quality of the
generated images was not as good as on other datasets. Notice how the image
rendered on CO3D is smoother than the ground truth image. In the case of the
flower pot (Fig. 2), we can see that the model could not represent the particular
shape and used a simpler shape instead. This is an intriguing property of the

