Appendix for CLOSE: Curriculum Learning On
the Sharing Extent Towards Better One-shot
NAS
Zixuan Zhou13⋆ , Xuefei Ning12∗ , Yi Cai1 , Jiashu Han1 ,
Yiping Deng2 , Yuhan Dong3 , Huazhong Yang1 , and Yu Wang1†
1

∗

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
zhouzx21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, ∗ foxdoraame@gmail.com,
†
yu-wang@tsinghua.edu.cn
2
Huawei TCS Lab
3
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School

1

Additional Discussions on CLOSE and CLOSENet

1.1

Insights into the Improvements by Increasing Sharing Extent

Sec. 3.1 of the main paper shows that Supernet-2 (with larger sharing extent)
significantly outperforms Supernet-1 (with vanilla sharing extent) in the early
training stages. This observation is a bit counter-intuitive, since the previous
studies have shown that a large sharing extent would aggravate the parameter
coupling and multi-model forgetting phenomenon [1,8,5,3]. Therefore, it might
be confusing where these improvements come from. To further understand our
observation, we conduct a deeper inspection into the estimation results of the
Supernet-1 and Supernet-2, and find out that there are two reasons underlying
the observation.
First, a larger parameter sharing extent accelerates the training process of the supernet. This is due to the reduced number of the supernet’s
parameters. Previous studies reveal that a longer training can improve the ranking quality, yet brings extra computational costs [2,3]. In our case, the highlyshared supernet (Supernet-2) can achieve the same training performance under
a smaller computational budget, thus improve the ranking quality.
Second, a large parameter sharing extent alleviates the well-known
under-estimation phenomenon of larger architectures in vanilla oneshot estimations [2,3]. Following the visualization technique of a recent study [3],
we divide the candidate architectures into five groups based on their complexities, and obtain the average ranking difference of architectures in each group.
The ranking difference (RD) of an architecture is defined as the difference of
its true ranking and its estimated ranking by supernets. A negative RD indicates the under-estimation of an architecture. As shown in Fig. A1, the average
⋆

Equal contribution.

