1

Supplementary Material for
Domain Randomization-Enhanced Depth
Simulation and Restoration for Perceiving and
Grasping Specular and Transparent Objects
In the supplementary material, we present the additional sections for this
paper, including domain randomization details, network implementation details,
additional experiments and results, and additional dataset details.

1

Domain Randomization Details

In this work, we propose the Domain Randomization-Enhanced Depth Simulation (DREDS) approach, leveraging domain randomization and depth sensor
simulation to generate photorealistic RGB images and simulated depths with
realistic sensor noises. Specifically, during the simulated data generation, we
perform domain randomization in the following aspects:
Scene and Object Setting. We focus on hand-scale objects and a table-top
setting. We set the scene into the following two types: 1) Category-aware scenes
that mainly utilize ShapeNetCore [4] objects from 7 object categories – camera,
car, airplane, bowl, bottle, can, and mug. We also have some distractor objects
from categories of phone, guitar, cap, etc. In total, we leverage 1536 objects for
training and 265 objects for evaluation. In our simulated scenes, we load a random number of objects ranging from 6 to 10 with random scales and categories
and let them fall freely under gravity onto a ground plane to create random
but physically plausible spatial arrangements of objects and prepare cluttered
scenes. 2) Category-agnostic scenes. To evaluate the generalization ability to
category-novel objects and the performance of grasping, we adopt 60 objects
from GraspNet-1Billion [6]. We follow their original poses and arrangements but
transfer random types of material as described in the next section.
Material Modeling and Assignment. Few of the existing depth sensor
simulators consider modeling a variety of randomized real-world materials, especially specular and transparent materials. In this work, we adopt a bidirectional
scattering distribution function (BSDF) [1], a unified representation covering the
most common materials. BSDF defines how the light is scattered on a surface
to determine the material of each point on the object.
Specifically, we use Disney principled BSDF [2,3] fD&S (ϕ) for diffuse and
specular material modeling, where ϕ is the set of scalar parameters or nested
functions, including the base color, subsurface, metallic, specular, roughness,
anisotropic, etc. We use a mix of BSDF fT (ψ) to represent transparent materials,
containing glass BSDF, transparent BSDF, and translucent BSDF to adjust
transparency, as well as refraction BSDF to add refraction, and glossy BSDF to
add reflection on the surface, etc, where ψ means the parameter set from each
BSDF function like surface color, index of refraction (IOR), and roughness.
Based on the above BSDF models, we collect an asset of materials with
different categories that cover common objects in life, including 1) 27 specular

