Neural Color Operators
for Sequential Image Retouching
Supplementary Material
Yili Wang1 , Xin Li2 , Kun Xu1 , Dongliang He2 , Qi Zhang2 ,
Fu Li2 , and Errui Ding2
1

2

A

BNRist, Department of CS&T, Tsinghua University
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.

Visual Comparison

In this section, we provide more visual comparison with state-of-the-art methods
on five dataset variants. Figures 1 and 2 show the retouching results of MITAdobe-5K-lite dataset. For each pair, we show the input and ground truth (GT)
image alongside the retouched images under which suggest the corresponding
approaches being applied. We can observe that the input of MIT-Adobe-5K-Lite
tends to have dim tones and low contrast, while all approaches have successfully
increase the contrast, our results are more consistent with the GT and greatly
surpass other methods in terms of color tone correction, which is clearly shown
in Figure 1 fifth row and Figure 2 first row. Moreover, our results appear more
vibrant in saturation (see last two rows of Figure 2).
Figures 3, 4, 5, and 6 show the visual comparison on MIT-Adobe-5K-Dark.
The input of MIT-Adobe-5K-Dark is rather challenging since it has very low
pixel intensity, which makes finding appropriate color transform extremely diﬃcult. However, all methods have done a great job in ‘shedding the light’ on these
challenging examples. Nevertheless, we can observe similar retouching patterns
for some specific methods. For example, while Pix2Pix [20] performs comparable
with NeurOp in correcting the tones, it sometimes creates artifacts which are apparently undesirable (see Figure 3-2, Figure 5-3); Distort-and-Recover [38] tends
to have less colorful results compared with other approaches; White-Box [16],
DUPE [42], MIRNet [48] perform poorly when image need white balance adjustment (see Figure 3-3, Figure 4-1). Generally, NeurOp, CSRNet [14,33], 3DLUT [49] and HDRNet [11] perform better in most cases compared to the above
methods. However, 3D-LUT [49] sometimes generates color banding artifacts
due to the use of color space interpolation (see Figure 5-3); noticeable color
shifts sometimes appear in the results generated by HDRNet [11] (greenish in
Figure 5-4, Figure 6-1) and CSRNet [14,33] (purplish in Figure 3-2, Figure 4-1).
Figures 7, 8, and 9 show the visual comparison results on PPR10K-a, PPR10Kb, and PPR10K-c, respectively. The input of all these three variants are the same,
and the results exhibit specific style and preference of a particular artist. Therefore, we believe that the consistency of tonal style and similarity compared with
GT are crucial for evaluating the retouching results. We can see that NeurOp
and NeurOp+HRP are more consistent and visually more similar to GT for all
variants of PPR10K.

