Supplementary Material for
“Towards Efficient and Scale-Robust
Ultra-High-Definition Image Demoiréing”
Xin Yu1 , Peng Dai1 , Wenbo Li2 , Lan Ma3 ,
Jiajun Shen3 , Jia Li4 , and Xiaojuan Qi1B
1

2

The University of Hong Kong
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
TCL AI Lab
4
Sun Yat-sen University

Outline
We supplement the main body of our paper with additional details, discussions,
and results in this document. In Section A, we present more details about our
dataset capture, which includes a brief analysis of the formation of degraded
screen images. In Section B, we provide more implementation details of our network architecture as well as a simple empirical study of loss functions to assist
us in selecting a suitable training objective for moiré removal. In Section C, we
provide more implementation details of experiments and show more qualitative
results and comparisons with other state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, as
shown in Section C.2, we investigate why FHDe2 Net fails on this more challenging 4K dataset. We conduct a more detailed discussion of current methods’
strategies for handling scale-variation of moiré patterns in Section D.

A

Dataset Capture and Analysis

In this section, we first present a brief introduction of the formation of the moiré
pattern, and then we provide more details about our capture settings.
A.1

Image Degradation Analysis

The formation of degraded screen images taken with mobile devices can be divided into two processes: the generation of moiré patterns caused by frequency
aliasing; and the global color degradation of the image, caused by a series of
ISP operations (e.g., auto exposure control, white balance correction, gamma
correction, and global tone mapping).
We can model the formation of moiré patterns as a local color unbalanced
scaling in the camera’s color filter array (CFA). Without loss of generality, consider how one of the green channels in the RGBG raw pattern is collected. As
B

indicates the corresponding author.

