Supplementary Material for D3 Net: A Unified
Speaker-Listener Architecture for 3D Dense
Captioning and Visual Grounding
Dave Zhenyu Chen1 Qirui Wu2 Matthias Nießner1 Angel X. Chang2
1
2
Technical University of Munich
Simon Fraser University
In this supplementary material, we provide results on the ReferIt3D dataset
in Sec. 1. To showcase the effectiveness of our speaker-listener architecture, we
provide additional results on extra ScanNet [6] data in Sec. 2. We also include
details about our PointGroup implementation as well as the detection and segmentation results in Sec. 3 and Sec. 4, respectively.

1

Experiments on ReferIt3D

1.1

Quantitative Results

We conduct additional experiments on the ReferIt3D Nr3D dataset [1]. It contains about 33k free-form object descriptions annotated by human experts for
training and 8k for validation. We report our results on the validation split since
there is no test set.
3D dense captioning We compare our 3D dense captioning and object detection results against the baseline Scan2Cap [3] in Tab. 1. Our method trained
with the speaker MLE loss (marked “Ours (MLE)”) outperforms Scan2Cap by
a big margin, leveraging the improved object detection backbone. After training
with the CIDEr reward (marked “Ours (CIDEr)”), our dense captioning results
are further boosted. Training with the listener loss as the additional reward
(marked “Ours (CIDEr+lis.)”) further improves our results due to the explicit
reinforcement of the discriminability of generated object descriptions. Here, our
object detection mAP is also improved due to the end-to-end joint fine-tuning of
our speaker-listener architecture. We showcase the effectiveness of training with
extra ScanNet data in the last row in Tab. 1, where 3D dense captioning and
object detection results are improved simultaneously.
3D visual grounding We compare our 3D visual grounding results against the
baseline ScanRefer [2] and 3DVG-Transformer [14] in Tab. 2. As the descriptions
in ReferIt3D dataset all refer to objects in the scene where multiple similar
objects with the same class label are present, there is no such case that can
be allocated to “Unique” subset where only one object with a specific class
label can be found in the scene. Therefore, we allocate our results to “Multiple”
and “Overall”. Our method trained with the detector loss and the listener loss
(marked “Ours(w/o fine-tuning)”) clearly outperforms the baseline methods.

