Vote from the Center: 6 DoF Pose Estimation in
RGB-D Images by Radial Keypoint Voting
(Supplementary Material)
Yangzheng Wu , Mohsen Zand , Ali Etemad , and Michael Greenspan
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ingenuity Labs Research Institute
Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada

S.1

Overview

We document here some addition implementation details, results and further
hyperparameter experiments. In Sec. S.2, the complete details of the Fully Convolutional ResNet backbone are provided, in sufficient detail to recreate the
network. In Sec. S.3, the 6 DoF pose estimation accuracy results for each individual object in the three data sets are presented, as well as some extra bounding
box image samples. Finally in Sec. S.4, six additional experiments are included
investigating the impact of the number of keypoints, the number of skip connections in the backbone network, the use of a combined vs. separate networks
for each keypoint, the depth of the backbone network, the accumulator space
resolution, as well as the impact of combining the three different voting schemes
into various multi-scheme voting configurations.

S.2

ResNet Backbone Structure

As shown in Table S.10, we modified ResNet into a Fully Convolutional Network.
To start with, we replaced the Fully Connected Layer with a convolutional layer
for the following up sampling layers. We then applied up-sampling to the feature map with a combination of convolution, bilinear interpolations, and skip
concatenations from the residual blocks. We apply more skip layers than did
PVNet [S.17], under the assumption that the convolutional feature maps would
preserve more local features than the alternative bilinear interpolation, especially for deeper small scale feature maps. This design choice was supported by
the experiment described in Sec. S.4.2.
We conducted an experiment on three objects, ape, driller and eggbox in
Occlusion LINEMOD with different fully convolutional ResNets structures. Each
network is trained until fully convergence with consistent hyper parameter sets.
The resutls are shown in Table S.1. Deeper ResNet has a tiny performance
improvement on three objects tested with a minor sacrifice of speed. We ended
up with ResN et152 32s when conducting the full test on all three datasets.

