Photo-realistic Neural Domain Randomization
– Supplementary Material –
Sergey Zakharov1 , Rares, Ambrus, 1 , Vitor Guizilini1 , Wadim Kehl2 , and
Adrien Gaidon1
1

1

Toyota Research Institute, Los Altos, CA
2
Woven Planet, Tokyo, Japan

RenderNet

Our RenderNet is a UNet-based encoder-decoder CNN. It takes a 15D input (see
Fig. 1 of the main submission) consisting of concatenated scene coordinates in
camera space X (3D), surface normals map N (3D), albedo A (3D), roughness R
(1D), specularity S (1D), light direction map Ldir (3D), and light distance map
Ldist (1D). Its inference results in four 3D maps: Ddir , Dind , Gdir , and Gind being
the diffuse and glossy BSDF outputs for direct and indirect lighting, respectively.
Predicted outputs are then used to form a final rendering.
To train it, we used the Adam optimizer [12] with a learning rate of 1e−4 .
Each of the four RenderNet outputs is supervised with respective ground truth
images using an L1 loss.

2

CBOD

Our CBOD detector consists of two modules: the correspondence module and
the pose estimation module. This section provides their detailed description. Our
detector largely follows [20, 11, 16, 13, 9].
Correspondence Module. Our correspondence module is a ResNet12-based
encoder-decoder CNN with four decoder heads to regress the ID mask and three
channels of the dense 2D-3D correspondence map (U, V, W) from a 320×240×3
RGB image. However, we would like to note that any other backbone architecture
could be used without any need to change the rest of the pipeline. The decoders
upsample features up to their original size using a stack of bilinear interpolations
followed by convolutional layers.
Correspondence heads regress tensors of size H×W ×C, where C is the discretization density of the correspondence map, which equals to 256 in our case.
Each channel stores the probability values for the class corresponding to a specific channel number. Once regressed, we compose single channel tensors (U, V,
W) storing the class ID with maximal probability using the argmax operation.
Defining correspondence estimation as a classification problem allows us to significantly decrease the output solution space, which subsequently results in a

