Supplementary Material for A Unified
Framework for Domain Adaptive Pose
Estimation
Donghyun Kim2⋆ , Kaihong Wang1⋆ ,
Kate Saenko1,2 , Margrit Betke1 , and Stan Sclaroff1
1

Image and Video Computing, Department of Computer Science, Boston University,
2
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{donhk, kaiwkh, saenko, betke, sclaroff}@bu.edu

1

Appendix

In this supplementary material, we provide additional training details of our
method. In addition to the ablation studies in the main paper, we also provide
additional ablation studies on the SURREAL→Human3.6M dataset. Finally, we
show additional qualitative examples.
1.1

Additional Training Details

We follow settings from AdaIN to train the generator g from Eq. 2 with a
content loss and a style loss balanced by style loss weight λ = 0.1, on images
with a resolution of 256 × 256. Exemplar results are illustrated in Fig. 1. During
the training process of our framework, the pre-trained style transfer module will
be fixed and perform bidirectional style transfer with a probability of 0.5 in both
our supervised and unsupervised learning branch with the content-style trade-off
parameter α uniformly sampled from 0 to 1.
Our pose estimation model h is trained with input images with a resolution
of 256 × 256 and output heatmaps with a size of 64 × 64, with the batch size of
32 in each iteration, following our baselines [1].
As for our adaptive keypoint occlusion, we randomly select keypoints with
maximum activation greater than the occlusion threshold τocc and occlude it
with a probability of 0.5. The keypoints will be occluded by a patch from a
random position in the same image with the size of 20 × 20.
1.2

Additional Ablation Studies

In addition to RHD→H3D and SynAnimal→TigDog, we also present ablation
studies on another major benchmark, SURREAL→Human3.6M in Table 1.
Based on the results we can observe a greater improvement after applying
heatmap normalization (the first and the second row), showing the necessity
⋆

Equal Contribution.

