Resolution-Free Point Cloud Sampling Network
with Data Distillation
Tianxin Huang1 , Jiangning Zhang1,2 , Jun Chen1 , Yuang Liu1 , and Yong Liu1,3(B)
1

APRIL Lab, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn
2
Tencent Youtu Laboratory, Shanghai, China
3
Huzhou Institute of Zhejiang University, Huzhou, China

Abstract. Down-sampling algorithms are adopted to simplify the point clouds
and save the computation cost on subsequent tasks. Existing learning-based sampling methods often need to train a big sampling network to support sampling
under different resolutions, which must generate sampled points with the costly
maximum resolution even if only low-resolution points need to be sampled. In
this work, we propose a novel resolution-free point clouds sampling network to
directly sample the original point cloud to different resolutions, which is conducted by optimizing non-learning-based initial sampled points to better positions. Besides, we introduce data distillation to assist the training process by considering the differences between task network outputs from original point clouds
and sampled points. Experiments on point cloud reconstruction and recognition
tasks demonstrate that our method can achieve SOTA performances with lower
time and memory cost than existing learning-based sampling strategies. Codes
are available at https://github.com/Tianxinhuang/PCDNet.
Keywords: 3D point clouds · Down sampling · Resolution-free

1 Introduction
With the rapid development of 3D tasks such as SLAM [3] and recognition [23, 24, 28],
point cloud has attracted more and more attentions in computer vision and robots. However, large point clouds limit the efficiency of related algorithms and bring up higher
device requirements. Sampling original point clouds to lower resolutions might be an
alternative solution to reduce the computational cost on subsequent tasks. Existing
works [13, 14, 18, 22, 24, 33] use random sampling or Farthest Point Sampling (FPS)
to down sample the point clouds. However, non-learning-based sampling strategies are
lack of relevance to down-stream tasks, which blocks their further improvements on
task-oriented performances.
In this condition, some researchers [8, 16] propose learning-based sampling methods to improve the task-oriented performances through optimization. S-Net [8] generates initial sampled points directly by fully-connected networks and project them back
T. Huang and J. Zhang—Indicates equal contributions.
c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022

S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 54–70, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_4

