LaTeRF: Label and Text Driven Object
Radiance Fields
Ashkan Mirzaei(B) , Yash Kant, Jonathan Kelly, and Igor Gilitschenski
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
ashkan@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract. Obtaining 3D object representations is important for creating photo-realistic simulations and for collecting AR and VR assets. Neural ﬁelds have shown their eﬀectiveness in learning a continuous volumetric representation of a scene from 2D images, but acquiring object representations from these models with weak supervision remains an open
challenge. In this paper we introduce LaTeRF, a method for extracting
an object of interest from a scene given 2D images of the entire scene,
known camera poses, a natural language description of the object, and a
set of point-labels of object and non-object points in the input images. To
faithfully extract the object from the scene, LaTeRF extends the NeRF
formulation with an additional ‘objectness’ probability at each 3D point.
Additionally, we leverage the rich latent space of a pre-trained CLIP
model combined with our diﬀerentiable object renderer, to inpaint the
occluded parts of the object. We demonstrate high-ﬁdelity object extraction on both synthetic and real-world datasets and justify our design
choices through an extensive ablation study.
Keywords: Image-based rendering · Neural radiance ﬁelds · 3d
reconstruction · 3d computer vision · Novel view synthesis

1

Introduction

Extracting a partially-occluded object of interest (OOI) from a 3D scene
remains an important problem with numerous applications in computer vision
and elsewhere. For example, OOI extraction enables the creation of faithful photo-realistic simulators for robotics, supports the creation of digital
content (e.g. animated movies), and facilitates the building of AR and VR
tools. Although 3D scene reconstruction from 2D images has been extensively
explored [14,18,23,35,46], the ability to extract semantically consistent and
meaningful objects from complex scenes remains an open challenge.
Early approaches [34,56] attempted to segment objects from real images,
but could not extract their 3D geometry and did not consider the underlying image formation process. Recent work has attempted to disentangle objectcentric representations from a scene by learning to decompose the scene into a
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5 2.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13663, pp. 20–36, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5_2

