Supplementary Material for
EclipSE: Efficient Long-range Video
Retrieval using Sight and Sound

Our supplementary material consists of:
1. Implementation Details.
2. Additional Quantitative Results.
3. Additional Qualitative Results.
4. A Supplementary Video.

1

Implementation Details

Experimental Setting. In all experiments, the visual frames are extracted at
3 fps. We adopt pretrained CLIP [1] on both text and visual encoder, which is
based on the ViT-B/32 visual backbone. We initialize the weights of our proposed
audiovisual block using the corresponding spatial attention weights of CLIP. To
gradually incorporate audio information into visual features, we attach a learnable fully connected layer to each audiovisual attention block and initially set
it to zero. For visual representations, we first "patchify" 224 × 224 video frames
into 32 × 32 patches as is done in [1]. Each video frame is then tokenized into
49 patches and a learnable 768-dimensional CLS token. At the end, the framelevel CLS tokens are averaged to obtain a video-level feature embedding that
is used to optimize our model as described in Eq. (5),(6) of the main paper.
For audio encoder, we use ResNet-18 [2] pre-trained on VGGSound [3]. We sample 10-second audio clips in the neighborhood around the sampled video frame
and process the raw audio into spectrogram as is done in [3]. Lastly, for textual
features, we adopt CLIP tokenizer for all text inputs. Specifically, the textual
encoder processes all textual tokens and a special 768-dimensional CLS token as
its inputs. Afterward, we only consider the CLS textual token to match a given
video with the corresponding textual description.
Training Details. We implement EclipSE using Pytorch [4] and conduct the
training on four NVIDIA A6000 GPUs. For fair comparison with the baseline
methods, we set the batch size to 64. We train our model with Adam optimizer [5]
and set the learning rate to 1e − 7 for text encoder and spatial attention in E.q
(2) of main paper with weight decay 0.2. For our audiovisual attention blocks,
A2V and V2A (see E.q (3) and E.q (4) in our main draft) , we set the learning
rate to 1e − 5 with no weight decay. The maximum text input is set to 64 tokens
for ActivityNet Captions, DiDeMo, and QVHighlight. We set 128 for YouCook2
due to longer paragraph.

