CHORE: Contact, Human and Object
Reconstruction from a Single RGB Image
Xianghui Xie2(B) , Bharat Lal Bhatnagar1,2 , and Gerard Pons-Moll1,2
1

University of Tübingen,Tübingen, Germany
bbhatnag@mpi-inf.mpg.de, gerard.pons-moll@uni-tuebingen.de
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken,
Germany
xxie@mpi-inf.mpg.de
Abstract. Most prior works in perceiving 3D humans from images reason human in isolation without their surroundings. However, humans
are constantly interacting with the surrounding objects, thus calling for
models that can reason about not only the human but also the object
and their interaction. The problem is extremely challenging due to heavy
occlusions between humans and objects, diverse interaction types and
depth ambiguity. In this paper, we introduce CHORE, a novel method
that learns to jointly reconstruct the human and the object from a single
RGB image. CHORE takes inspiration from recent advances in implicit
surface learning and classical model-based ﬁtting. We compute a neural reconstruction of human and object represented implicitly with two
unsigned distance ﬁelds, a correspondence ﬁeld to a parametric body and
an object pose ﬁeld. This allows us to robustly ﬁt a parametric body
model and a 3D object template, while reasoning about interactions.
Furthermore, prior pixel-aligned implicit learning methods use synthetic
data and make assumptions that are not met in the real data. We propose
a elegant depth-aware scaling that allows more eﬃcient shape learning on
real data. Experiments show that our joint reconstruction learned with
the proposed strategy signiﬁcantly outperforms the SOTA. Our code and
models are available at https://virtualhumans.mpi-inf.mpg.de/chore

1

Introduction

In order to deploy robots and intelligent systems in the real world, they must
be able to perceive and understand humans interacting with the real world from
visual input. While there exists a vast literature in perceiving humans in 3D
from single images, the large majority of works perceive humans in isolation [6,
37,40,54,63,75]. The joint 3D perception of humans and objects has received
much less attention and is the main focus of this work. Joint reconstruction of
humans and objects is extremely challenging. The object and human occlude
each other making inference hard; it is diﬃcult to predict their relative size and
spatial arrangement in the 3D world, and the visual evidence for contacts and
interactions consists of only a very small region in the image Fig. 1.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1 8.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 125–145, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_8

