Structure-Aware Editable Morphable
Model for 3D Facial Detail Animation
and Manipulation
Jingwang Ling1 , Zhibo Wang1 , Ming Lu2 , Quan Wang3 ,
Chen Qian3 , and Feng Xu1(B)
1

BNRist and School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
xufeng2003@gmail.com
2
Intel Labs, Beijing, China
3
Sensetime Research, Shanghai, China

Abstract. Morphable models are essential for the statistical modeling
of 3D faces. Previous works on morphable models mostly focus on largescale facial geometry but ignore facial details. This paper augments morphable models in representing facial details by learning a Structure-aware
Editable Morphable Model (SEMM). SEMM introduces a detail structure representation based on the distance ﬁeld of wrinkle lines, jointly
modeled with detail displacements to establish better correspondences
and enable intuitive manipulation of wrinkle structure. Besides, SEMM
introduces two transformation modules to translate expression blendshape weights and age values into changes in latent space, allowing eﬀective semantic detail editing while maintaining identity. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed model compactly represents facial
details, outperforms previous methods in expression animation qualitatively and quantitatively, and achieves eﬀective age editing and wrinkle
line editing of facial details. Code and model are available at https://
github.com/gerwang/facial-detail-manipulation.

1

Introduction

Morphable face models [24] capture the statistical distribution of human faces,
which provides them with capabilities to generate and edit 3D faces. Therefore,
they are widely used in face reconstruction [8], expression animation [15], and
interactive editing [39]. In these applications, facial details play a vital role in
conveying the perception of expression and age and enhancing the realism of the
generated face. For example, during animation, facial details appear or disappear as muscles contract or relax, vividly reﬂecting the subtle expression. During
interactive editing, animators may wish to manipulate wrinkles at speciﬁc positions. However, current morphable models usually only represent the large-scale
facial geometry, making the results of the above applications over-smooth and
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5 15.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13663, pp. 249–267, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5_15

