Supplementary Material for “SpOT:
Spatiotemporal Modeling for
3D Object Tracking”
Colton Stearns1 , Davis Rempe1 , Jie Li2 , Rares Ambrus2 , Sergey Zakharov2 ,
Vitor Guizilini2 , Yanchao Yang1 , and Leonidas J. Guibas1
1

2

1

Stanford University
Toyota Research Institute

Overview

In this document, we provide additional implementation details, experimental
analysis, qualitative results, and discussion. In Sec. 2, we provide further details
of our encoding architecture. In Sec. 3, we discuss all implementation details of
SpOT not covered in Sec. 4.3 of the main paper. In Sec. 4, we provide metrics
definitions for the two benchmarks. Finally, in Sec. 5, we provide a more finegrained discussion of our method with qualitative results, a reporting of SpOT’s
performance on the nuScenes test-split, a supplemental analysis of runtime on
the nuScenes dataset, and a supplemental ablation study.

2

Additional Architecture Details

Split Self-Attention Positional Encoding We refer the reader to Sec. 3.2 of
the main paper for an overview of the split self-attention encoder used by our SSR
module. We highlight that our positional encoding differs from previous works
that utilize self attention [5]. First, our positional encoding does not utilize a
fourier coordinate transformation, i.e. there is no [sin(x), cos(x)] transformation.
Second, we concatenate, instead of add, the positional encoding to the anchor
features. Experimentally, we find these modifications improve training in our
novel 4D setting.
Network Loss Hyperparameters. Sec. 3.2 of the main paper provides an
overview of our network’s training losses. We set our network loss weights as
follows: wc = 3.0, wθ = 3.0, wvel = 1.5, wwlh-cls = 1.0, wwlh-res = 1.5, and
wconf = 1.0. We set the confidence-loss temperature to α = 0.75 for nuScenes
cars, 1.0 for nuScenes pedestrians, 1.2 for Waymo vehicles, and 2.4 for Waymo
pedestrians.

3

Additional Implementation Details

3.1

Training-Time Augmentations

Iterative Sequence Refinement. During training, we stochastically update
each batch of training sequences multiple times, i.e. the network sees its own

