Supplemental Material for “Unsupervised
Segmentation in Real-World Images via Spelke
Object Inference”
Honglin Chen1 , Rahul Venkatesh1 , Yoni Friedman4 , Jiajun Wu1 ,
Joshua B. Tenenbaum4 , Daniel L. K. Yamins1,2,3 **, Daniel M. Bear2,3 **
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford
2
Department of Psychology, Stanford
3
Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford
4
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences and CBMM, MIT

A

Additional Methods

A.1

Details and Extensions of EISEN

Learning a prior over Spelke objects. Relational supervision is natural for
motion-based learning in part because motion is sparse. But the output segments
of a well-trained EISEN are not sparse, so they can be used for learning nonrelational features of Spelke objects. For instance, an image patch on the nearer
side of a depth edge may “look like” it lies on the interior of an object segment
– a cue known as border ownership. EISEN can take advantage of these nonrelational features by learning a nonrandom, pixelwise initialization for KProp.
Specifically, we let the Q channels of the plateau map code for possible object
centroid locations. Let QH , QW be the encoding resolutions of height and width,
with QH · QW = Q. Then the centroid encoding is constructed by creating the
QH ⇥ QW ⇥ Q feature tensor q defined by
qijk = 1 if (k == iQW + j) else 0,

(1)

then bilinearly upsampling this tensor from size (QH , QW , Q) to the usual plateau
map resolution (H 0 , W 0 , Q) = (H/4, W/4, Q) and `2 normalizing along the channel dimension. In this encoding, there is not just a ground truth segmentation
map but also a ground truth plateau map – namely, the one in which each feature vector has a value equal to the encoded centroid of the true object segment
it belongs to.
We train two modified RAFT networks5 to (1) classify whether each pixel belongs in an EISEN-predicted Spelke object or not and, if it belongs to an object,
(2) predict the relative o↵set between that pixel’s location and the centroid of the
1 ⇤⇤
5

= Equal senior authorship
We simply replace the output head that predicts predicts a H ⇥ W ⇥ 2 flow map
with one that predicts the H ⇥ W ⇥ 1 “objectness” logits or H ⇥ W ⇥ 2 centroid
o↵sets.

