Supplementary Materials: Translating Visual
LEGO Manuals to a Machine-Executable Plan
Ruocheng Wang1 , Yunzhi Zhang1 , Jiayuan Mao2 ,
Chin-Yi Cheng3⋆ , and Jiajun Wu1
1

2

Stanford University
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
Google Research

First, we introduce our data generation pipeline for LEGO synthetic dataset
in Section 1 and 3D-Craft in Section 2. Then we provide more implementation
details and hyperparameters of models in Section 3. Section 4 explains some
details of the 3D Pose Inference stage of MEPNet. Section 5 explains some
details of camera parameter estimation of our datasets. Section 6 presents some
additional ablation studies. Section 7 discusses the limitations of our paper.
Section 8 lists the attribution and license for assets used in this paper. Finally,
we provide some step-by-step building visualization of our model in Section 9.

1

Synthetic Dataset Generation

We generate the synthetic dataset in two stages: the first stage (the “forward”
stage) randomly builds a complete LEGO shape, and the second stage (the
“backward” stage) decomposes the final shape into multiple synthetic manual
assembly steps.
Forward Stage In the forward stage, we first sample the length, width and
maximum height of the bounding box of the final shape. Next, we repeat the
following process iteratively.
At each iteration, we randomly partition the bounding box into smaller boxes,
and apply one of the following operations to each box:
1. Randomly fill the box with as many arbitrary components as possible.
2. Sample edges from the box, “grow” the height of the edges by adding random
components. Afterwards, fill the non-edge area within the region with random
components.
To add components, each time we randomly sample a position first, and then use
one of the three strategies: 1. randomly select a primitive brick and add it at the
sampled position ; 2. build a submodule by randomly stacking multiple bricks
within a small 3D bounding box and add it at the sampled position; 3. randomly
select a primitive brick and stack multiple instances together and add them at
the sampled position. We use rejection sampling to ensure each component will
be connected to at least one of the other components and there is no collision
between components.
⋆

Work done when working at Autodesk AI Lab.

