OIMNet++: Prototypical Normalization and
Localization-aware Learning for Person Search
Sanghoon Lee1 , Youngmin Oh1 , Donghyeon Baek1 ,
Junghyup Lee1 , and Bumsub Ham1,2⋆
1

Yonsei University

2

Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)

In this supplementary material, we present qualitative analysis on head/tail
classes for person search (Sec. S1) and visualizations of positive proposals that
sufficiently overlap with ground-truth bounding boxes during training (Sec. S2).

S1

Quantitative analysis

ProtoNorm calibrates feature distributions while considering minority IDs during training. To demonstrate the effectiveness, we categorize training IDs into
head and tail classes by splitting at the median occurrence value. For each ID,
we compute cosine similarity scores with all features within the LUT. We then
average the scores w.r.t the head/tail classes separately and visualize in Fig. S1
the results. Lower similarity scores indicate stronger inter-class separability, indicating higher discriminative power of person representations. We compare the
results between three variants; vanilla OIMNet [2], OIMNets adopting either
BatchNorm [1] or ProtoNorm. We can observe that vanilla OIMNet shows the
worst inter-class separability as it does not consider feature distribution prior
to L2 normalization. Employing BatchNorm alleviates this problem. This, however, calibrates feature distribution without considering the long-tail distribution
across person IDs, restraining the discriminative power of person representations.
ProtoNorm computes feature statistics that are less biased to head IDs for the
calibration. This allows to encourage inter-class separateness regardless of the
sample distribution across person IDs. As a result, ProtoNorm strengthens the
inter-class separability offers lowest similarity scores for both cases.

S2

Visualizations of positive proposals

During training, we have observed that features extracted from positive proposals contain different extents of noise, e.g., background clutter and person overlaps. We provide in Figs. S2 and S3 the visual examples of positive proposals on
the PRW [3] and CUHK-SYSU [2] datasets, respectively. These proposals overlap
with the corresponding ground-truth bounding boxes more than 0.5 intersectionof-union (IoU) scores. Nevertheless, they depict detrimental noise that can distract learning discriminative person representations. For both figures, proposals
in the left three columns contain background clutter, and the remaining ones
depict other pedestrian instances. The LOIM loss assigns adaptive momentum
value for each proposal, discouraging severely misaligned proposals to contribute
in discriminative feature learning for re-identification.
⋆

Corresponding author.

