Supplementary Material for Transform your
Smartphone into a DSLR Camera: Learning the
ISP in the Wild
Ardhendu Shekhar Tripathi1 , Martin Danelljan1 , Samarth Shukla1 , Radu
Timofte1,2 , and Luc Van Gool1,3
1

2

ETH Zurich, Switzerland
University of Wurzburg, Germany
3
KU Leuven, Belgium

In the supplementary material, we present details such as the network architecture for each of the components in our architecture. We also provide additional
full-resolution results for our approach. Further, we provide additional ablations
and some more qualitative results. Concretely:
ś We provide the closed-form solution for the minimization problem stated for
our color mapping in the main paper (Sec. A).
ś We provide details about the network architecture and some other important
details for all the components in our framework (Sec. B).
ś We provide some additional ablations and qualitative results for the ablations
stated in the main paper (Sec. C).
ś We provide some additional full resolution results for our approach (Sec. D).
ś We provide some more qualitative results for state-of-the-art comparisons of
our method with other approaches (Sec. E).
ś We provide some example captures from our ISPW dataset (Sec. F).
ś We provide quantitative comparisons of our approach with some more methods (Sec. G).
ś We provide a detailed study on the computation time and model complexity
of our approach (Sec. H).
ś We visualize the intermediate results for our ISP in the wild pipeline (Sec. I).
ś We provide some additional experiments for our approach (Sec. J).

A

Color Mapping

Here, we present the closed form solution to the minimization problem for learning the affine transformation for each bin centroid in our color mapping scheme
(Sec. 3.3 of the main paper) stated in equation (4) of the main paper. We deőne
Vbj ∈ R4×1 as the affine transform calculated for bin centroid b and channel j.
Vbj is a column vector of length 4 that contains Ajb ∈ R3×1 as the őrst 3 elements
and Bbj ∈ R as the last element. Using pseudo-inverses:
Vbj = (X̃ T X̃)−1 X̃ T cj

(1)

