Supplementary Material:
Instance Contour Adjustment via Structure-driven CNN
Shuchen Weng1 , Yi Wei2 , Ming-Ching Chang3 , and Boxin Shi*1
1

NERCVT, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Samsung Research America AI Center
3
University at Albany, State university of New York
{shuchenweng,shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn
yi.wei1@samsung.com
mchang2@albany.edu

In this supplementary material, we show more details about input preparation, model design and training.

1

Structural Cue Completion

The first stage of our method completes the structural cues for the dilated and
eroded areas using different approaches because of their respective exclusion rule.
Specifically, we propose a diffusion algorithm based on the iterative Gaussian
blur operations which under the guidance of the inclusion mask, can propagate
the structural cues from the instance area to the corresponding dilated area. Due
to the lack of clear correspondences between the eroded area and the external
area, the hypothetical distribution of the external instances needs to be inferred
for the eroded area. Thus, we modify the structure reconstruction model in [5]
to complete the eroded area on the structure image and depth map. To avoid the
interference from the instance area, we temporarily cut out the instance which
will be pasted back after the completion, and complete the entire instance area
as doing the eroded area.
1.1

Preparation of the inclusion mask

The inclusion mask is an important input to our method. An inclusion mask specifies correspondences between the adjusted area and the others. Corresponding
areas are set the same label, and visualized in the same color in Fig. 1. In this
subsection, we use the “flying pigeon” and “Merlion” in Fig 1 as two examples
to illustrate how to prepare an inclusion mask for a dilation case and an erosion
case, respectively.
In the inclusion mask of the “flying pigeon” example, the instance area and
the dilated areas are both colored in light blue, which indicates that the instance
area and the dilated areas are corresponding to each other, and they have no
correspondences with the non-instance and non-dilated area which is colored in
orange. Therefore, preparing the inclusion mask for a dilation case includes two
* Corresponding author.

