COO: Comic Onomatopoeia Dataset for
Recognizing Arbitrary or Truncated Texts
– Supplementary Material –
Jeonghun Baek , Yusuke Matsui , and Kiyoharu Aizawa
The University of Tokyo
{baek,matsui,aizawa}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

The following materials are provided in the supplementary material:
Supplement A: We show more details of the visualization, annotation guideline,
statistics, and analysis of our dataset COO.
Supplement B: We describe the details of text detection and link prediction
methods in §3.
Supplement C: We provide more details of experimental settings.

A

More Details of Comic Onomatopoeia Dataset

We have created the dataset COO to encourage studies on more irregular texts
and to further improve text detection, recognition, and link prediction methods. Recognizing Japanese comic onomatopoeias is very difficult. If a model can
recognize them, we expect that the model can also recognize other less difficult
texts. A similar case exists in another task. Although Manga109, the base of
COO, is a Japanese comic dataset, Manga109 [10] is widely used as a benchmark dataset in the super-resolution task [14,11]. If a model works not only
in the major domain but also in minor sub-domain such as Japanese comics,
we expect that the model has the potential to be generalized to various minor
sub-domains.
A.1

Details of Annotation Guidelines

We define comic onomatopoeia as the texts that represent the sound or state
of objects. In comics, the dialogue (line or quote) is usually in speech balloons.
However, the dialogue is sometimes outside of speech balloons and written in
similar fonts to onomatopoeias. For example, when the character shouts another
character’s name, the name is sometimes written in informal fonts. The dialogue written in informal fonts confused the annotators whether it should be
regarded as an onomatopoeia. Following our guideline, they are not regarded as
onomatopoeias because they do not represent the sound or state of objects.
When the annotators encountered ambiguous cases such as the dialogue written in informal fonts, annotation checker and we (authors) discussed how to handle them. To determine whether the text is onomatopoeia or not, we followed
two main rules: 1) If the text is the part of the dialogue or similar to the dialogue, the text is not regarded as onomatopoeia. 2) If the text is not the part of

