Supplemental Material
Haoquan Li∗1 , Laoming Zhang∗2 , Daoan Zhang1 , Lang Fu2 , Peng
Yang2,3 , and Jianguo Zhang†1,4
1

Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous Systems, Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen,
China
2
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Computation,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science
and Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Southern University of Science and
Technology, Shenzhen, China
4
Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen, China
{12032492, 12032505, 12032503, 12032485}@mail.sustech.edu.cn, {yangp,
zhangjg}@sustech.edu.cn

1

Implementation Details

1.1

Pre-training

The default setting is in Table 1. Most of the configurations are consistent with
MAE [9]. For example, a standard ViT [6] model is used as an encoder. Due
to the small dataset and GPU limitation, we adjust batch size to 128. We use
xavier uniform [7] to initialize all transformer blocks and use the linear lr scaling
rule [8]: lr = base lr × batch size/256.
1.2

Fine-tuning

Our fine-tuning strategy follows the common practice of supervised ViT training.
The default setting is in Table 4. We adjust the learning rate to 7e-4 and use
layer-wise lr decay [4] following BEiT [1].

2

Image Reconstruction

The target of MAE pre-training is to reconstruct masked patches, and the image
quality of the reconstruction can reflect the degree of pre-training learning. To
explore how well the MAE pre-trained model performs on its own and other
datasets, we visualize them in Fig. 1.
From the figure, MAE pre-trained models produce distinct reconstructions of
images from the same dataset (pre-trained dataset) and other datasets. Meanwhile, the model pre-trained on mini ImageNet performs better than on CIFARFS. It is consistent with our previous cross-domain results. This is probably
∗
†

H. Li and L. Zhang made equal contributions to this work.
J. Zhang is the corresponding author.

