Supplementary for “TIDEE: Tidying Up Novel
Rooms using Visuo-Semantic Commonsense
Priors”
Gabriel Sarch1∗ , Zhaoyuan Fang1 , Adam W. Harley1 , Paul Schydlo1 ,
Michael J. Tarr1 , Saurabh Gupta2 , and Katerina Fragkiadaki1
1

2
∗

1

Carnegie Mellon University
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Correspondence to gsarch@andrew.cmu.edu

Overview

Section 2 contains more details of the methods described in the main paper.
Section 3 provides additional details on the experiments. Section 4 provides
additional evaluation of the networks.

2

Implementation details

2.1

Virtual environment and action space

We use the following actions: move forward, rotate right, rotate left, look up,
look down, pick up, put down. We rotate in the yaw direction by 90 degrees,
and rotate in the pitch direction by 30 degrees. We do not constrain our agent
to grid locations. The RGB and depth sensors are at a resolution of 480x480,
a field of view of 90 degrees, and lie at a height of 0.9015 meters. The agent’s
coordinates are parameterized by a single (x, y, z) coordinate triplet with x and
z corresponding to movement in the horizontal plane and y reserved for the
vertical direction. Picking up objects occurs by specifying an (x,y) coordinate
in the agent’s egocentric frame. If by ray-tracing, the point intersects an object
that is pickupable and within 1.5 meters of the agent, then the pickup action
succeeds. Placing objects occurs by specifying an (x,y) coordinate in the agent’s
egocentric frame to place the object. If by ray-tracing, the point intersects an
object that is a receptacle class, has enough free space in the radius of the target
location, and within 1.5 meters of the agent, then the place action succeeds if
the agent is holding an object. Since some objects require their state to be open
for placement to successfully occur (e.g. Fridge), the agent will also try to open
the receptacle if placement initially fails.
2.2

Pseudo code for TIDEE

We present pseudo code for the TIDEE algorithm in Algorithm 1. We denote
FMM to mean Fast Marching Method [6], g to denote the point goal in the 2D

