Supplemental Material for LDET

A

Experimental Details

In this appendix, we provide experimental details, additional analysis, and visualizations.
Data augmentation. Alg. 1 shows the pytorch-style pseudo-code for our data
augmentation.
Implementation. We use the default hyper-parameters, provided by Detectron2, to train and test LDET, Mask RCNN, Mask RCNNS , and Mask RCNNP .
Default configuration files are used for COCO 1 and Cityscapes 2 respectively. 2
GPUs of NVIDIA RTX A6000 with 48GB are used to train models.
One-Stage Detector. We use the same hyper-parameters for data augmentation as in Mask RCNN. Also, we follow the default hyper-parameters of RetinaNet and TensorMask. Since RetinaNet does not have mask head by default,
we add the mask head on top of the feature pyramid following Mask RCNN. We
will publish the code of one-stage detector upon accepntance.
Baselines.
1) Mask R-CNN. We do not make any change to the default training configuration.
2) Mask RCNNS . We compute the area of intersection with ground truth
boxes over the area of the proposal box, which we call IoA, and sample background boxes with a large value of this criterion. In both region proposal network
and roi head, we pick background regions whose IoA is larger than 0.7.
3) Mask RCNNP . Given the classification output (after softmax) from roi
head, boxes confidently predicted as one of the foreground classes are choosen
from background regions. The threshold to pick the pseudo-foreground is set as
0.9. The classification loss on the pseudo-foreground regions is incorporated to
train the detector.
Experiments on texture dataset. To make a background using images of
DTD [2], we crop the patch with the size of 256 x 256, and rescale it to the size
of a detection training image. Then, we blend the foreground and background
in the same way as LDET.

B

Analysis

Precision-Recall curve. Fig. B (a) shows precision and recall curve measured
on non-VOC classes. In most points, the precision of LDET is better than that of
1

detectron2/blob/main/configs/COCO-InstanceSegmentation/mask_rcnn_R_50_
FPN_1x.yaml
2
detectron2/blob/main/configs/Cityscapes/mask_rcnn_R_50_FPN.yaml

