Supplemental Material:
Hallucinating Pose-Compatible Scenes
Tim Brooks, Alexei A. Efros
UC Berkeley

A

Humans in Context Meta-dataset Details

Our dataset contains diverse footage of humans immersed in everyday environments. Each image is supplemented with pseudo-ground truth human pose
attained using OpenPose [4,3]. The data is sourced from 10 existing human and
action recognition datasets, with the numbers of clips and frames from each
source dataset detailed in Table 1. Video footage provides a vast source of diverse human activity, and ensures all poses are represented, rather than only
human poses photographers choose to capture in still images. For the MPII [2]
dataset, which is primarily a still image dataset, we use short video clips of the
frames preceding and following each image.
Each dataset contains unique biases, and combining data sources is less subject to the bias of any particular dataset. Different datasets also offer different
types of scenes. For example, Moments [20] includes classes absent from HVU [6],
and Oops [8] contains uncommon accidental actions. The number of useful examples from each source was only evident after extensive curation.
We filter out videos where either dimension is shorter than 256 pixels, and
we resize remaining videos using Lanczos resampling [7] such that the smaller
edge is exactly 256 pixels. We exclude videos with an average bitrate below 0.9
bits per pixel, or with a framerate that does not fall between (and cannot be
subsempled to fall between) 23.9 fps and 30 fps. Videos are truncated to 3000
frames. Source datasets which provide pre-extracted frames only undergo quality
filtering by spatial resolution.
Frames are then filtered to contain a single person using pretrained Keypoint
R-CNN [11,23] person detection. Person bounding boxes are detected for each
frame, with a minimum accuracy of 95%, a minimum bounding box area of 1%
of the total frame area, and non-maximum suppression of overlapping bounding
boxes with an intersection over union greater than 0.3. With these thresholds,
any frame with more than a single person detected is removed. Stricter thresholds
are then applied to the remaining frames with a single person bounding box: a
minimum accuracy of 98%, a minimum bounding box area of 4% of the total
frame area, and a maximum bounding box area of 80% of the total frame area.
These thresholds ensure with high accuracy that there is a single person present
in the frame at a reasonable size. Frames are then cropped to a 256 × 256
resolution toward the average bounding box center for each contiguous segment
of frames.

