Supplementary Material: Scaling Adversarial
Training to Large Perturbation Bounds
Sravanti Addepalli⋆

, Samyak Jain⋆ , Gaurang Sriramanan
R.Venkatesh Babu

, and

Video Analytics Lab, Department of Computational and Data Sciences,
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore

1

Oracle-Invariant Attacks

1.1

Square Attack

The strongest Oracle-Invariant examples are generated using the Square attack
[1]. Images so generated are Oracle-Invariant since the Square Attack is querybased, and does not utilise gradients from the model for attack generation. However this attack uses 5000 queries, and is thus computationally expensive. Hence
it cannot be directly incorporated for adversarial training, although it is one of
the strongest attacks for evaluation purposes. We note that the computationally efficiency can be improved by reducing the number of queries; however it
also reduces the effectiveness of the attack significantly. The adversarial images
generated using the Square attack and their corresponding perturbations are
presented in Fig.1.
1.2

RayS Attack

Another technique that is observed to generate strong Oracle-Invariant examples
is the black-box RayS attack [4]. Similar to the Square attack, the images so
generated are also Oracle-Invariant since it is a query-based attack and does
not utilise gradients for attack generation. Although the RayS attack requires
10000 queries which is highly demanding from a computational viewpoint, it
is observed to be weaker than the Square attack. Adversarial images generated
using the RayS attack and their corresponding perturbations are presented in
Fig.2.
1.3

PGD based Attacks

While the most efficient attack that is widely used for adversarial training is the
PGD 10-step attack, it cannot be used for the generation of Oracle-Invariant
samples as adversarially trained models have perceptually aligned gradients, and
tend to produce Oracle-Sensitive samples. Therefore, we explore some variants
⋆

Equal contribution.
Correspondence to: Sravanti Addepalli <sravantia@iisc.ac.in>

