Learning Robust Global Representations
by Penalizing Local Predictive Power
Haohan Wang, Songwei Ge, Eric P. Xing, Zachary C. Lipton
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{haohanw,songweig,epxing,zlipton}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Despite their well-documented predictive power on i.i.d. data, convolutional
neural networks have been demonstrated to rely more on high-frequency (textural)
patterns that humans deem superficial than on low-frequency patterns that agree
better with intuitions about what constitutes category membership. This paper
proposes a method for training robust convolutional networks by penalizing the
predictive power of the local representations learned by earlier layers. Intuitively,
our networks are forced to discard predictive signals such as color and texture that
can be gleaned from local receptive fields and to rely instead on the global structure
of the image. Across a battery of synthetic and benchmark domain adaptation tasks,
our method confers improved generalization. To evaluate cross-domain transfer,
we introduce ImageNet-Sketch, a new dataset consisting of sketch-like images and
matching the ImageNet classification validation set in categories and scale.

1

Introduction

Consider the task of determining whether a photograph depicts a tortoise or a sea turtle. A human
might check to see whether the shell is dome-shaped (indicating tortoise) or flat (indicating turtle).
She might also check to see whether the feet are short and bent (indicating tortoise) or fin-like and
webbed (indicating turtle). However, the pixels corresponding to the turtle (or tortoise) itself are not
alone in offering predictive value. As easily confirmed through a Google Image search, sea turtles
tend to be photographed in the sea while tortoises tend to be photographed on land.
Although an image’s background may indeed be predictive of the category of the depicted object, it
nevertheless seems unsettling that our classifiers should depend so precariously on a signal that is in
some sense irrelevant. After all, a tortoise appearing in the sea is still a tortoise and a turtle on land is
still a turtle. One reason why we might seek to avoid such a reliance on correlated but semantically
unrelated artifacts is that they might be liable to change out-of-sample. Even if all cats in a training
set appear indoors, we might require a classifier capable of recognizing an outdoors cat at test time.
Indeed, recent papers have attested to the tendency of neural networks to rely on surface statistical
regularities rather than learning global concepts (Jo and Bengio, 2017; Geirhos et al., 2019). A
number of papers have demonstrated unsettling drops in performance when convolutional neural
networks are applied to out-of-domain testing data, even in the absence of adversarial manipulation.
The problem of developing robust classifiers capable of performing well on out-of-domain data is
broadly known as Domain Adaptation (DA). While the problem is known to be impossible absent
any restrictions on the relationship between training and test distributions (Ben-David et al., 2010b),
progress is often possible under reasonable assumptions. Theoretically-principled algorithms have
been proposed under a variety of assumptions, including covariate shift (Shimodaira, 2000; Gretton
et al., 2009) and label shift (Storkey, 2009; Schölkopf et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2013; Lipton et al.,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

