1

A

PSG Dataset Details

A.1

More comparisons between VG and PSG

More comparisons between VG-150 and PSG examples are shown in Fig. A1. In
particular, we would like to highlight some specific advances in the PSG dataset
from sub-figure (a), which readers can confirm from other sub-figures.
In (a), VG-150 does not contain key information of ‘woman flying kite’,
and also has ambiguous relations like ‘at’. Fortunately, PSG addresses the key
information but with a more general predicate ‘playing’. It is because in PSG,
the predicate definition follows the rule of ‘being representative with proper
granularity, not too specific’. Refer to Sec. A.4 for more information. Also, PSG
gathers far more comprehensive and accurate triplets.
For object groundings, it is noticeable that in VG, the grounding of ‘beach’
is inaccurate, which only covers half of the actual beach. It can be problematic since a successful recall of a triplet requires a correct matching (big IOU)
between predicted groundings and ground truth, in addition to a correct classification of triplets. Therefore, an incorrect annotation on object grounding can
cause an inaccurate evaluation on scene graph generation too. Apparently, object
grounding of PSG is far more accurate than VG.

A.2

PSG Dataset Statistics

The PSG dataset has a total of 48,749 annotated images with 56 predicate
classes, and 80 thing and 53 stuff classes (same as the COCO dataset [5]).
Here is a list of average statistics for each image:
– 11.0 instances per image
– 5.6 relations per image
– 1.9 (34%) thing-thing relations per image
– 1.2 (21%) stuff-stuff relations per image
– 2.5 (45%) thing-stuff relations per image

A.3

PSG Dataset Construction Details

Built on COCO and Visual Genome In order to create a dataset with
both panoptic segmentation and relationship annotations, we took advantage of
the overlap between the COCO [5] and Visual Genome datasets [3], where they
share 48,749 images. Namely, for a given image, it has panoptic segmentation annotations from COCO, as well as scene graph annotations from Visual Genome.
However, we cannot merge the two datasets directly as not only do they have different object annotations, they also define different object categories. Therefore,
we attempted to conduct the following dataset merging process.

