Supplementary material: Temporal and
cross-modal attention for audio-visual zero-shot
learning
In the supplementary material, we provide additional details about baselines
(Section 1), and present further model ablations (Section 2). Additionally, we
study t-SNE visualisations for TCaF and [3] (Section 3), and provide a comparison of the computational complexity of TCaF and some of the baselines
(Section 4).

1

Additional details about baselines

In the following, we detail our adaptations of Attention Fusion [1] and of the
Perceiver [2] to the (G)ZSL setting (which we briefly summarised in Section 4.2
of our manuscript).
1.1

Attention Fusion

In order to use Attention Fusion [1] in the (G)ZSL setting, we take the same
temporal audio and visual features as inputs as TCaF. Following TCaF, we
embed the input features into the same feature dimension using Aenc and Venc .
Instead of directly mapping to the number of classes, as the authors originally
proposed, Aenc and Venc map the features to Rddim . The embedded features are
then temporally averaged to obtain a single ddim −dimensional feature vector for
each modality. The attention weight α, which is used for fusing both modalities,
is computed using the channel-wise concatenation of the audio and visual embeddings through a linear layer fattn : R2∗ddim → Rddim , followed by a sigmoid
function. Both modalities are then fused to create the output token oc through
oc = α ⊙ ϕa,avg + (1 − α) ⊙ ϕv,avg , where ϕa,avg and ϕv,avg are the temporally
averaged audio and visual features. oc is then projected using the same projection function Oproj , decoder Do , and text embedding projections as in TCaF.
We train Attention Fusion using the same learning rate and loss functions as
TCaF.
1.2

Perceiver

The Perceiver [2] takes the same audio and visual features as input as TCaF.
For consistency between frameworks, we again embedded the input features to
the same feature dimension using Aenc and Venc , and equip both TCaF and the
Perceiver with the same temporal and modality information by adding positional
embeddings as described in the main paper. Our goal was to directly compare our
cross-attention mechanism with the Perceiver attention. Therefore, we adapted

