Few-Shot Video Object Detection
Qi Fan1 , Chi-Keung Tang1 , and Yu-Wing Tai1,2
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 Kuaishou Technology
fanqics@gmail.com, cktang@cs.ust.hk, yuwing@gmail.com

1

More Implementation Details

1.1

Matching Network Architecture

We adopt the multi-relation head from FSOD [3] as our matching network (MN),
which consists of three relation heads for learning to match support and query
features {fs , fq } ∈ R1×C×7×7 in multiple levels.
Global-relation head. Designed to learn a global matching embedding,
this head first concatenates fs and fq along the channel dimension to feature
′
fc ∈ R1×2C×7×7 , which is then average pooled to fc ∈ R1×2C×1×1 . Finally, a
MLP M containing three fully connected layers with ReLU (except the last one)
is applied to fc to predict the matching score sg = M(fc ).
Patch-relation head. Designed to learn a non-linear metric to capture the
complex relation between patches, this head is derived from the RelationNet [5]
′
where the concatenated feature fc is fed to a small convolution network, which
consists of two 3 × 3 average pooling operators at the first and last layers separately, two 1 × 1 convolutional layers for reducing and then restoring dimensions, and one 3 × 3 convolutional layer (all convolutional layers are equipped
with ReLU). Note that all these operations and layers use one stride and zero
padding to generate the final feature vector fq ∈ R1×C×1×1 . Finally, a fully connected layer is employed to generate the matching score sp , and a sibling fc layer
to generate the box prediction for better supervision from multi-task learning.
Local-relation head. Designed to capture the pixel-level relation between
support and query features, fs and fq are first processed using a weight-shared
convolution layer with ReLU. Then their pixel-wise relation is calculated by
depth-wise correlation [4] with the resulting feature vector fd ∈ R1×C×1×1 fed
to a fully connected layer to generate the matching score sl .
These three relation heads cooperate together to capture the relation between support and query features in different levels. The final matching score is
obtained by summing all the aforementioned matching scores: s = sg + sp + sl .
1.2

Deformable RoIAlign

Deformable RoIAlign dynamically changes its sample locations according to the
input features. In our implementation, two frame features are concatenated and
sent to the deformable RoIAlign so that it is aware of the object positions in
both frames and therefore dynamically adapt the sample locations to enlarge
the search region to capture objects in both frames.

