Sound Localization by Self-Supervised Time Delay Estimation

A.1

1

In-the-wild Evaluation

Video results.
We provide some random samples of prediction results from
our in-the-wild dataset on our webpage. We also provide qualitative results for
motion correlation along with our predicted time difference on our webpage.
Please click here for videos. When watching, we recommend wearing headphones,
since it can be difficult to perceive stereo sound without them.

A.2

Visually-guided Time delay Estimation

Video results.
We provide more qualitative results for the visually-guided
speaker localization task along with audio on our webpage. When watching, we
recommend wearing headphones, since it can be difficult to perceive stereo sound
without them.

A.3

Qualitative Results on Phone Recordings

L

R

Frame

We also ran our model on ordinary iPhone-recorded videos, exploiting the
fact that portrait-mode recordings have a sufficiently large baseline for estimating
time delays. We use a combination of self-collected videos and internet videos (we
used an iPhone 12 for self-recorded videos and searched Flickr for videos with tags
indicating that they were recorded with an iPhone 13). We provide qualitative
results in Fig. 9. Please see our webpage for more video results.

Fig. 9: Qualitative results for iPhone videos. We show time delays both for our
method and for GCC-PHAT over time. The left video shot by the authors records
several vehicles driving from left to right. The right video, from Flickr user Black
Diamond Images, shows a waterfall that is recorded by a moving camera. In the first
frame, the waterfall is to the right. The camera then moves to face it directly.

A.4

Ablation Study

Post-processing. We study the effect of the number of votes, m, used during
post-processing for both StereoCRW and GCC-PHAT. We evaluate 1024-sample
audio using m ∈ {1, 32, 128, 256, 512} for both mean and mode. In the special
case m = 1, the result is not affected by post-processing, and purely measures
the quality of the representation. As shown in Fig. 10(a), both methods improve
with the number of votes. Our method benefits from mode post-processing, while

