Calibration-free Multi-view Crowd Counting
Supplemental
Qi Zhang1,2
1
2

1

and Antoni B. Chan2

College of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR,
China
{qzhang364-c@my., abchan@}cityu.edu.hk

Extra experiments

We train the proposed models with ground-truth homography and ground-truth
density map, whose results are shown in Table 1. It shows the performance can
be increased a lot with ground-truth density map, which indicates the good
potential of the proposed framework if better single-view density map prediction can be obtained. And the proposed CF-MVCC-C can also achieve better
performance than CF-MVCC.
Besides, it is not suitable to directly use SVC methods for the multi-view
counting task, which targets at large scenes that cannot be covered by one
camera. To show this, we use the ground-truth single-view density maps as
the “oracle” single-view counting method with various baselines, and the results on CVCS dataset are in Table 3. The first two baselines totally neglect
the geometry between camera views, and thus are not suitable for multi-view
crowd counting. Our method (with predicted density maps) performs better
than Dmap weightedH w/ oracle SVC because our method performs matching
between views to handle occlusions.
We directly test the proposed model trained on the large synthetic dataset
on the CityStreet dataset with ground-truth and predicted homography matrix,
shown in Table 3. The testing performance is improved using ground-truth homography matrix, but not significant enough, which also shows the homography
estimation is not the bottleneck of the adaptation performance to real scenes.
Therefore, we finetune the single-view counting network for better performance.

2

Visualization results

We show the example of the projection in Fig. 1, and the predicted confidence
maps C, weight maps W , density maps D and matching scores Mij in Fig. 2.
Projection. The example of the projection with ground-truth homography
matrix and with predicted homography matrix is shown in Fig. 1. Each column
shows the projected images from other camera views to View i(i = [1, 5]). From
the example, we can observe that the projection with the predicted homogrphy

