Eﬃcient Point Cloud Analysis Using
Hilbert Curve
Wanli Chen, Xinge Zhu, Guojin Chen, and Bei Yu(B)
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Ma Liu Shui, Hong Kong
{wlchen,gjchen21,byu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract. Some previous state-of-the-art research on analyzing point
cloud rely on the voxelization quantization because it keeps the better
spatial locality and geometry. However, these 3D voxelization methods
and subsequent 3D convolution networks often bring the large computational overhead and GPU occupation. A straightforward alternative is
to ﬂatten 3D voxelization into 2D structure or utilize the pillar representation to perform the dimension reduction, while all of them would
inevitably alter the spatial locality and 3D geometric information. In
this way, we propose the HilbertNet to maintain the locality advantage
of voxel-based methods while signiﬁcantly reducing the computational
cost. Here the key component is a new ﬂattening mechanism based on
Hilbert curve, which is a famous locality and geometry preserving function. Namely, if ﬂattening 3D voxels using Hilbert curve encoding, the
resulting structure will have similar spatial topology compared with original voxels. Through the Hilbert ﬂattening, we can not only use 2D convolution (more lightweight than 3D convolution) to process voxels, but
also incorporate technologies suitable in 2D space, such as transformer,
to boost the performance. Our proposed HilbertNet achieves state-ofthe-art performance on ShapeNet, ModelNet40 and S3DIS datasets with
smaller cost and GPU occupation.

1

Introduction

Point clouds are the principal data form for 3D world; they also constitute the
output of the 3D sensing device including LiDAR. Pioneering works often process
point clouds directly, including PointNet [31], PointNet++ [34], SO-Net [19], etc.
Point-wise methods bypass the mesh or voxelization reconstruction and possess
the permutation invariance. However, in these methods the spatial locality of
point clouds is not suﬃciently attended. Recently, the success of deep convolutional networks for image processing has motivated the learning-based approach
for point clouds and convolution is a natural function focusing on the spatial
locality. One common methodology to manipulate the point cloud using convolutional neural networks is to ﬁrst convert the raw point cloud into a volumetric
representation, and then utilize 3D convolutional neural networks to extract the
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1 42.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 730–747, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_42

