20

M. Peychev et al.

Ethics Statement
This work proposed a novel method for certifying the individual fairness of
models operating on high-dimensional data. Progress on this challenging problem
could enable fairness auditing for high-risk computer vision applications, such
as facial recognition. Recent work [74] argues that facial recognition algorithms
can have undesirable, socially toxic, and divisive consequences. For instance, it
was demonstrated that they may perpetuate and reinforce racial and gender
bias [7,13]. Therefore, they must be applied carefully, considering the social
dynamics and context in which they occur. Accordingly, following prior work [13],
we refrained from using unstable social constructs, such as gender, or normatively
judgemental attributes, such as “attractive” or “chubby”, in our research.
One way to limit the potential harms of facial analysis technologies is to
control and regulate their usage. Our work aims to help fill this gap by presenting
a methodology for enforcing individual fairness via certification. As highlighted
in our paper, we acknowledge that the quality of the generative models is a
significant bottleneck of our certificates. For example, they may encode various
biases present in the data. Another possible source of bias is the human perception
and social constructs which can potentially impact the validity of our similarity
specifications. Nevertheless, we believe that we can still leverage generative
models and their latent space to construct more meaningful individual fairness
specifications on high-dimensional data than those allowed by prior work. More
broadly, developing rigorous, standardized processes for auditing and certifying
facial recognition models (including human inspection, e.g., by considering the
reconstructed images in App. G) should complement the contributions presented
in our work. Finally, future quality advancements in generative modelling and
normalizing flows can directly translate into stronger guarantees of our method,
enabling certified fair application of models using rich, high-dimensional data.

A

Proof of Thm. 1

This section provides a formal proof of the following:
Theorem 1. Assume that we have a bijective generative model G = (E, D)
used to define the similarity set S in (x) for a given input x. Let Alg. 1 perform
center smoothing [44] with confidence 1 − αcs and randomized smoothing [10]
with confidence 1 − αrs . If Alg. 1 returns Certified for the input x, then the
b◦R
b ◦ E is individually fair for x with respect to S in (x)
end-to-end model M = C
with probability at least 1 − αcs − αrs .
To prove Thm. 1, we will make use of the following randomized and center
smoothing theorems proved in the literature:
Theorem 2 (Adapted from [10]). Let C : Rk → Y be a classifier and let
2
b be defined such that C
b (r) = arg maxc∈Y Pε (C(r + ε) = c).
ε ∼ N (0, σrs
I). Let C

