MHR-Net: Multiple-Hypothesis
Reconstruction of Non-Rigid Shapes from
2D Views
Haitian Zeng1,2 , Xin Yu1 , Jiaxu Miao3 , and Yi Yang3(B)
1

University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia
haitian.zeng@student.uts.edu.au, xin.yu@uts.edu.au
2
Baidu Research, Beijing, China
3
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
jiaxu.miao@yahoo.com, yangyics@zju.edu.cn

Abstract. We propose MHR-Net, a novel method for recovering NonRigid Shapes from Motion (NRSfM). MHR-Net aims to ﬁnd a set of
reasonable reconstructions for a 2D view, and it also selects the most
likely reconstruction from the set. To deal with the challenging unsupervised generation of non-rigid shapes, we develop a new Deterministic
Basis and Stochastic Deformation scheme in MHR-Net. The non-rigid
shape is ﬁrst expressed as the sum of a coarse shape basis and a ﬂexible
shape deformation, then multiple hypotheses are generated with uncertainty modeling of the deformation part. MHR-Net is optimized with
reprojection loss on the basis and the best hypothesis. Furthermore,
we design a new Procrustean Residual Loss, which reduces the rigid
rotations between similar shapes and further improves the performance.
Experiments show that MHR-Net achieves state-of-the-art reconstruction accuracy on Human3.6M, SURREAL and 300-VW datasets.
Keywords: NRSfM · Multiple-hypothesis

1

Introduction

Recovering 3D structures from multiple 2D views is a classic and important task
in computer vision. Non-Rigid Structure-from-Motion (NRSfM), which aims at
reconstructing deformable shapes, is a challenging task and has been studied for
decades.
The major diﬃculty of NRSfM is the ambiguity of solutions due to arbitrary
deformation of shapes. Most of the NRSfM methods are based on the assumption
of Bregler et al. [9] where the deformable shape is a linear combination of a small
number of atom shapes. This assumption greatly reduces the degree of freedom
in NRSfM, yet it is still not enough for researchers to reach a deterministic and
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1 1.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 1–17, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_1

