Realistic One-Shot Mesh-Based Head
Avatars
Taras Khakhulin1,2(B) , Vanessa Sklyarova1,2 , Victor Lempitsky3 ,
and Egor Zakharov1,2
1

Samsung AI Center – Moscow, Moscow, Russia
t.khakhulin@gmail.com
2
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia
3
Yandex Armenia, Yerevan, Armenia
https://samsunglabs.github.io/rome/

Abstract. We present a system for the creation of realistic one-shot
mesh-based (ROME) human head avatars. From a single photograph, our
system estimates the head mesh (with person-speciﬁc details in both the
facial and non-facial head parts) as well as the neural texture encoding,
local photometric and geometric details. The resulting avatars are rigged
and can be rendered using a deep rendering network, which is trained
alongside the mesh and texture estimators on a dataset of in-the-wild
videos. In the experiments, we observe that our system performs competitively both in terms of head geometry recovery and the quality of
renders, especially for cross-person reenactment.

1

Introduction

Personalized human avatars are becoming a key technology across several application domains, such as telepresence, virtual worlds, and online commerce. In
many practical cases, it is suﬃcient to personalize only a part of the avatar’s
body, while the remaining areas can then be picked from a pre-deﬁned library of
assets or omitted from the interface. Towards this end, many applications require
personalization at the head level, i.e., the creation of person-speciﬁc head models,
thus making it an important and viable intermediate step between personalizing
only the face and the entire body. Alone, face personalization is often insuﬃcient, while the full-body reconstruction remains a complicated task and leads
to the reduced quality of the models or requires cumbersome data collection.
Acquiring human avatars from a single photograph (in a “one-shot” setting) oﬀers the highest convenience for the end-user. However, their creation
process is particularly challenging and requires strong priors on human geometry and appearance. To this end, parametric models are long known to oﬀer
good personalization solutions [3] and were recently adapted to one-shot performance [9,13,41]. Such models can be learned from a relatively small dataset
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1 20.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 345–362, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_20

