Supplementary Material for
SALVe: Semantic Alignment Verification
for Floorplan Reconstruction from Sparse Panoramas
John Lambert2 ⋆, Yuguang Li1 , Ivaylo Boyadzhiev1 , Lambert Wixson1 , Manjunath
Narayana1 , Will Hutchcroft1 , James Hays2 , Frank Dellaert2 , and Sing Bing Kang1
1

2

Zillow Group
Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract. In this Supplementary Material, we provide additional analysis and
implementation details. In Section 1, we provide qualitative comparisons of our
floorplan reconstructions, vs. an upper-bound oracle baseline that uses groundtruth global pose estimation. In Section 2, we provide quantitative analysis of
SALVe’s relative pose classification accuracy with various input modalities. In
Section 3, we provide pseudo-code for our layout stitching algorithm. In Sections
4 and 5, we report detailed quantitative analysis of W/D/O detection accuracy,
and W/D/O and layout estimation failure cases. In Section 6, we describe the coordinate systems used in our work. In Sections 7, 8, and 9, we provide additional
implementation details about rendering, vanishing-point based axis alignment,
and pose graph optimization and spanning tree aggregation. In Section 10, we
describe ablation experiments that compare the use of ground truth W/D/O and
ground truth layout, vs. estimated W/D/O and estimated layout. In Section 11,
we provide additional discussion about our evaluation procedures versus those
of concurrent work [7]. In Sections 12-15, we provide additional analysis and
further examples of positive and negative training examples. In Section 16, we
discuss additional details about verifier training and data augmentation, and in
Section 17, we discuss ethical concerns associated with the work

1

Qualitative Results: Predicted vs. Oracle Poses

In this section, we provide qualitative comparisons with a baseline that stitches predicted layouts placed at ‘oracle’ global pose locations (referred to by Section 6.1 of the
main paper). For this baseline, the high fidelity of reconstructed shapes (middle column
of Fig. 1 and Fig. 2) demonstrates the maturity of modern layout estimation networks.
This baseline also illustrates the impact of global pose estimation on the entire system.

2

Additional Analysis of Relative Pose Classification Accuracy

Here we provide a more comprehensive quantitative analysis of the influence of input
modalities and CNN backbone architecture on SALVe’s relative pose classification accuracy (referred to in Section 5.5 of the main paper). We compare ceiling-only texture
map input, vs. floor-only texture map input, vs. using both as input.
⋆

Work completed during an internship at Zillow Group.

