Appendix
Image2Point: 3D Point-Cloud Understanding with
2D Image Pretrained Models
Chenfeng Xu1⋆ , Shijia Yang1⋆ , Tomer Galanti2 , Bichen Wu3 , Xiangyu Yue1 ,
Bohan Zhai1 , Wei Zhan1 , Peter Vajda3 , Kurt Keutzer1 , and Masayoshi
Tomizuka1
1

2

A

University of California, Berkeley
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
Meta Reality Labs

Implementation Details

Datasets. Our experiments are conducted on ModelNet 3D Warehouse, S3DIS,
and SemanticKITTI datasets. For the ModelNet 3D Warehouse dataset, we
train all models on the train set and evaluate on the validation set. For the
S3DIS, we train all models on area 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 and evaluate on area 5. For the
SemanticKITTI dataset, we train all models on splits 00-10 except 08 which is
used for evaluation. For each of the datasets, all ResNet series models use the
same training scheme, and all experiments are implemented with PyTorch.
Training on ModelNet 3D Warehouse dataset. In this case, coordinates of pointclouds are randomly scaled, translated, and jittered. We employ the SGD optimizer with momentum 0.9, weight-decay 10−4 , and initial learning rate 0.1
with cosine learning rate scheduler. Each mini batch is set to 32, and models are
trained for 300 epochs. For both training and inference phase, we only utilize
x, y, z coordinates without other features and set the voxel size to be 0.05. The
experiments for ModelNet 3D Warehouse are all conducted on a Titan RTX
GPU.
Training on the S3DIS dataset. In this case, we concatenate all subparts of an
indoor scene to train and validate on. Along x, y directions, scenes are applied
horizontal flip randomly. RGB features are randomly jittered, translated, and
auto contrasted. Finally, we normalize and clip point-clouds. We set voxel size to
0.05, use SGD optimizer with momentum 0.9, weight-decay 10−4 , and initialize
learning rate to 0.1 with polynomial learning rate scheduler. Each mini batch is
set to 3, and models are trained for 400 epochs on 2 Titan RTX GPUs.
⋆

Equal contribution

