A Reliable Online Method for Joint
Estimation of Focal Length and Camera
Rotation
Yiming Qian1
1

and James H. Elder2(B)

A*star, Institute of High Performance Computing, Singapore, Singapore
qian yiming@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg
2
Centre for Vision Research, York University, Toronto, Canada
jelder@yorku.ca

Abstract. Linear perspective cues deriving from regularities of the built
environment can be used to recalibrate both intrinsic and extrinsic camera parameters online, but these estimates can be unreliable due to irregularities in the scene, uncertainties in line segment estimation and background clutter. Here we address this challenge through four initiatives.
First, we use the PanoContext panoramic image dataset [27] to curate
a novel and realistic dataset of planar projections over a broad range of
scenes, focal lengths and camera poses. Second, we use this novel dataset
and the YorkUrbanDB [4] to systematically evaluate the linear perspective deviation measures frequently found in the literature and show that
the choice of deviation measure and likelihood model has a huge impact
on reliability. Third, we use these ﬁndings to create a novel system for
online camera calibration we call f R, and show that it outperforms the
prior state of the art, substantially reducing error in estimated camera
rotation and focal length. Our fourth contribution is a novel and eﬃcient
approach to estimating uncertainty that can dramatically improve online
reliability for performance-critical applications by strategically selecting
which frames to use for recalibration.

1

Introduction

Online camera calibration is an essential task for applications such as traﬃc analytics, mobile robotics, architectural metrology and sports videography. While
intrinsic parameters can be estimated in the lab, these parameters drift due
to mechanical ﬂuctuations. Online estimation of extrinsic camera parameters is
crucial for translating observations made in the image to quantitative inferences
about the 3D scene. If a ﬁxed camera is employed, extrinsics can potentially be
estimated manually at deployment, but again there will be drift due to mechanical and thermal variations, vibrations and wind, for outdoor applications. With
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7 15.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13661, pp. 249–265, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7_15

