Supplement for
Cross-Modal Knowledge Transfer Without
Task-Relevant Source Data
Sk Miraj Ahmed1 , Suhas Lohit2 , Kuan-Chuan Peng2 , Michael J. Jones2 ,
and Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury1
1

University of California, Riverside, CA 92507, USA
{sahme047@,amitrc@ece.}ucr.edu
2
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL), Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
https://www.merl.com {slohit,kpeng,mjones}@merl.com

1

Dataset example images

In Figure 1 and Figure 2 we show some example samples from SUN RGB-D
dataset, whereas in Figure 3 and Figure 4, samples from RGB-NIR scene dataset
has been shown. For both datasets, some random samples of Task-Relevant (TR)
and and Task-Irrelevant (TI) classes are shown. As DIML dataset has most of
the classes overlapped with SUN RGB-D, we do not show examples for that
dataset here. For the TR classes, source data are discraded after training the
source models and we transfer knowledge from those models to the unlabeled
data of target modality. For the TI classes, we have paired samples from both
modalities. Note that for all the cases, TR and TI classes are completely disjoint.

2

Calculation of pseudo-labels

For these steps, we mainly follow [1, 2]. We first compute the cluster centroids
of all the classes, followed by linearly combining the centroids using the current
learned weight vector. We then take each of the weighted features and label
it according to it’s nearest neighbors from the set of K weighted centroids. In
the next step, we update the pseudo labels by repeating these steps. Below, we
describe mathematically these steps in detail:
1. We first compute the cluster centroids of all the classes k ∈ {1, 2, . . . N }
induced by source j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n} for the 0-th iteration, by the following
equation:
 mS

P
˜
m
xT ∈XT T F̃Sj (xT ) k fj (xT )
(0)
ckj =
(1)
 mS

P
m
xT ∈XT T F̃Sj (xT ) k

where . k indicates the k-th element of the vector in argument , f˜j denotes
the j-th source model’s feature extractor and F̃SmjS = gj ◦ f˜j represents the
complete j-th source model from the last iteration.

