Supplementary Material for ECCV Submission
#5595:
Joint Learning of Localized Representations
from Medical Images and Reports
Philip Müller1 , Georgios Kaissis1,2,3 , Congyu Zou4 , and Daniel Rueckert1,3
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Technical University of Munich,
81675 Munich, Germany
philip.j.mueller@tum.de
2
Institute of Radiology, Technical University of Munich, 81675 Munich, Germany
3
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London SW7 2BX, UK
4
Department for Internal Medicine I, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technical University
of Munich, 81675 Munich, Germany

1

Analysis and Ablation Study

In this section we analyze the relevance of different components of LoVT (as
proposed in the main paper) and study its learned representations. In order to
save computational resources, all further analysis and the ablation study are
conducted on 30% of the pre-training data.
Ablation Study We conduct an ablation study to analyze the relevance of components of LoVT and the effects of the changes we made compared to ConVIRT.
Focus of our ablation study are (i) the local weighting, (ii) the global and local losses, (iii) and attention pooling. We compare different model variants and
their results on the RSNA YOLOv3 Frozen 10% task in Tab. 1. Note that we
focus our ablation study on this single task as this is the task used for tuning all
models and baselines while the other tasks are only used for the final evaluation
(see Sec. 5.3).
Starting from the unmodified LoVT model we first remove the local (region
I
and sentence) weighting in the local losses, i.e. we use constant weights wi,k
and
R
wi,m , and observe inferior results, showing the relevance of these weights. We
then also remove attention pooling and replace it by average (avg) pooling for
images and max pooling for reports. The performance further decreases highlighting the importance of attention pooling. Note that the local weights cannot
be computed without attention pooling, making a model with local weighting
but without attention pooling non-realizable. We further remove the global loss
Lglobal , i.e. set γ = 0 and only use the local losses without local weighting, and
observe a large drop in downstream performance. We assume that this is caused
by missing contrast between samples. Without the global loss, local weights can
again not be computed, making a model with local weighting but without global
loss non-realizable.

