Supplementary Materials to “Efficient and
Degradation-Adaptive Network for Real-World
Image Super-Resolution”
Jie Liang1,2 , Hui Zeng2 and Lei Zhang1,2,⋆
1

The HongKong Polytechnic University, 2 OPPO Research
{liang27jie, cshzeng}@gmail.com; cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

In this supplementary file, we provide: (1) the details of our training losses; (2)
the detailed settings of our degradation modeling; (3) more sample images in our
constructed dataset; (4) more qualitative comparisons and (5) more quantitative
ablation studies to further validate the effectiveness of the proposed DASR.

1

Details of Training Losses

As discussed in Section 3.1 of the main paper, the total training loss is defined
as
Ltotal = Lpixel + λ1 Lregression + λ2 Lperceptual + λ3 Ladversarial ,
where the regression loss Lregression has been provided in Eq. (1) of the main
paper. For the other three losses, the settings are the same as in Real-ESRGAN.
Specifically, the pixel loss is defined as the ℓ1 distance Lpixel = ∥ŷ − y∥1 , where
ŷ and y denote the super-resolved image and the ground-truth HR image, respectively. For the perceptual loss Lperceptual , we first extract the {conv1 , conv2 ,
conv3 , conv4 , conv5 } feature maps of ŷ and y by using the pre-trained VGG19
network [1], then calculate the weighted sum of the respective ℓ1 distances between the feature maps of ŷ and y as the perceptual loss, where the weights
are set to be [0.1, 0.1, 1, 1, 1]. For the adversarial loss Ladversarial , the U-Net
discriminator with spectral normalization is adopted.

2

Detailed Settings of Degradation Modeling

We report the detailed parameter settings of our degradation modeling in Table 1. We partition the whole degradation space S into 3 levels [S1 , S2 , S3 ],
and randomly select one of them to generate the LR-HR image pairs during
training with a balanced probability of [0.3, 0.3, 0.4]. For the blur operation, we
use isotropic and anisotropic Gaussian kernels with a probability of [0.65, 0.35],
where we set σ1 = σ2 if isotropic blur kernel is specified. In the second degradation stage of S3 , following the practice in Real-ESRGAN, we skip the blur
⋆
⋆⋆

Corresponding author.
This work is supported by the Hong Kong RGC RIF grant (R5001-18) and the
PolyU-OPPO Joint Innovation Lab.

