Semantic-Aware Implicit Neural Audio-Driven
Video Portrait Generation
Supplementary Material
Xian Liu1 , Yinghao Xu1 , Qianyi Wu2 , Hang Zhou1 ,
Wayne Wu3 , and Bolei Zhou1
1

Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Monash University
3
SenseTime Research
alvinliu@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

In the supplemental document, we introduce additional quantitative comparisons with baselines (Sec. A); model architecture details (Sec. B); analysis on
the generalize ability to unseen persons (Sec. C); additional qualitative results
(Sec. D); user study details (Sec. E); ethical considerations with possible prevention measures against potential negative social impact (Sec. F). Note that
due to the Youtube video copyright issues, we can not directly release the raw
videos. The Youtube link of portrait videos we used in this work are recorded in
Sec. G. The licenses of existing assets involved in this paper are listed in Sec. H.

A

Additional Quantitative Comparisons

We conduct additional quantitative evaluations on the Testset A in terms of:
CSIM, which firstly extracts the embedding vectors from generated results
through a pretrained face recognition model [5], then measures the cosine similarity to account for the identity preserving performance; CPBD, which measures
the sharpness of synthesized images. The results are reported in Table 1. We can
see that both our method and AD-NeRF [7] achieve high performance on two
metrics. This mainly derives from the ability of implicit function to generate
full-resolution images of higher quality, while the explicit model-based methods [3,13,18,17] generate comparatively low-quality images. Such low-fidelity
generation makes results blurry and difficult to preserve the speaker’s identity.

B

Architecture Details

Deformation Implicit Function. The deformation implicit function FΦdeform
takes 3D spatial coordinate x, time t, head pose ph (t) and canonical pose pc
as input, and outputs the 3D coordinate’s displacement ∆x = (∆x, ∆y, ∆z).
Note that both x and t are firstly processed by positional encoding of function
γ(q) =< (sin(2l πq), cos(2l πq)) >L
0 , where we use L = 10 for x, and L = 4 for t.
Then all the inputs are concatenated together and fed into an 8-layer MLP of
hidden size 128 and ReLU activation.

