Supplementary Material for
Uncertainty Learning in Kernel Estimation
for Multi-Stage Blind Image Super-Resolution
Zhenxuan Fang1 , Weisheng Dong1( ) , Xin Li2 , Jinjian Wu1 , Leida Li1 , and
Guangming Shi1
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
zxfang@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {wsdong, jinjian.wu}@mail.xidian.edu.cn
{ldli, gmshi}@xidian.edu.cn
2
Lane Dep. of CSEE, West Virginia University, Morgantown WV, USA
xin.li@mail.wvu.edu

In this supplementary material, we provide more details of the DCNN in
kernel estimation network, more visualization results of the learned regularization parameters w and more visual comparison results on both synthetic and
real-world images. Besides, we present the unsatisfactory result of the spatially
variant degradation in blind SR.
The code is available at https://github.com/Fangzhenxuan/UncertaintySR.

1

DCNN in Kernel Estimation Network

In the proposed uncertain kernel estimation network, we use a DCNN to extract
the features of the underlying blur kernel, the architecture of the DCNN is
shown in Fig. 1. We adopt a U-net structure in [2]. Two encoding and decoding
blocks are used to reduce and increase the size of feature maps, respectively.
The downsampling layer in encoding block is a 3 × 3 Conv layer with stride of
2, the upsampling layer in decoding block is an inverse transpose Conv layer.
Feature maps produced by encoding blocks are concatenated with the features
in decoding blocks using long connections. There are 5 Conv layers with ReLU
activation function in the middle convolution module.

2

More Visual results of the learned regularization
parameters w

Fig. 2 shows the ground truth images and their corresponding regularization
parameters w (with normalization) estimated in 4 stages. We can see that w
is rather sparse and the values clearly reflect the edges and textures of images.
With the help of the well-learned w, the proposed SR network will pay more
attention to reconstruct the high-frequency edges and textures.

