Supplementary Materials of
ScaleNet: Searching for the Model to Scale
Jiyang Xie1 , Xiu Su2 , Shan You3 , Zhanyu Ma1 , Fei Wang4 , and
Chen Qian3
1

A

Pattern Recognition and Intelligent Systems Lab., Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, China. {xiejiyang2013,mazhanyu}@bupt.edu.cn
2
The University of Sydney, Australia. xisu5992@uni.sydney.edu.au
3
SenseTime Research Centre, China. {youshan,qianchen}@sensetime.com
4
University of Science and Technology of China. wangfei91@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Detailed Experimental Settings

In this section, we describe the detailed experimental settings of the proposed
ScaleNet for super-supernet training, jointly base model and scaling strategies
searching, model retraining, and fine-tuning tasks, respectively.
FLOPs Budgets: For both ImageNet-1k and ImageNet-100 datasets [17],
we used same method to determine the FLOPs budgets for various scaling stages.
We first selected the FLOPs budget of base model by Monte Carlo simulation
according to the search space in Table 1. We randomly sampled about 100, 000
paths of base model and calculated the mean FLOPs of them. We chose a multiple of 50M near the mean as the FLOPs budget f0 of base model. For scaling
stage j, we selected 2j ·f0 as the FLOPs budget and searched the optimal scaling
strategy near it.
Super-supernet Training: For ImageNet-1k, we sampled the base model
from the search space in Table 1 and the scaling strategies in Table 2. We used a
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) optimizer with momentum as 0.9 and weight
decay as 4 × 10−5 to train the super-supernet. Initial learning was set as 0.12
with a cosine annealing strategy for 750, 000 iterations. Learning rate warmup was also included for 3, 750 iterations, linearly increasing from zero to 0.2.
We train the super-supernet with batch size as 1024. In data augmentation, we
randomly resized the batches according to the resolution values in the sampled
scaling strategies, with common hyper-parameters of the augmentation. Then,
we resized the batch to the scaled resolutions again. The maximum scaling stage
M was set as 3 in the experiments.
For ImageNet-100 dataset in ablation studies, we followed the class selection [25] and reduced the channel number of the super-supernet to a half with
batch size as 256, total iterations as 150, 000 and warm-up for 375 iterations. All
the other settings are same to those for ImageNet-1k experiments. The visualization of search space in the ablation studies is shown in Figure 1, which has
similar trends with that for ImageNet-1k experiments.
We divided a mini validation set (50 images per class) from the training
set for evaluation. The rest images in the training set were all used for super-

