MoFaNeRF: Morphable Facial Neural
Radiance Field
Yiyu Zhuang, Hao Zhu, Xusen Sun, and Xun Cao(B)
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{yiyu.zhuang,xusensun}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {zhuhaoese,caoxun}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract. We propose a parametric model that maps free-view images
into a vector space of coded facial shape, expression and appearance
with a neural radiance ﬁeld, namely Morphable Facial NeRF. Speciﬁcally, MoFaNeRF takes the coded facial shape, expression and appearance along with space coordinate and view direction as input to an
MLP, and outputs the radiance of the space point for photo-realistic
image synthesis. Compared with conventional 3D morphable models
(3DMM), MoFaNeRF shows superiority in directly synthesizing photorealistic facial details even for eyes, mouths, and beards. Also, continuous
face morphing can be easily achieved by interpolating the input shape,
expression and appearance codes. By introducing identity-speciﬁc modulation and texture encoder, our model synthesizes accurate photometric
details and shows strong representation ability. Our model shows strong
ability on multiple applications including image-based ﬁtting, random
generation, face rigging, face editing, and novel view synthesis. Experiments show that our method achieves higher representation ability than
previous parametric models, and achieves competitive performance in
several applications. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst
facial parametric model built upon a neural radiance ﬁeld that can be
used in ﬁtting, generation and manipulation. The code and data is available at https://github.com/zhuhao-nju/mofanerf.
Keywords: Neural radiance ﬁeld · 3D morphable models · Face
synthesis

1

Introduction

Modeling 3D face is a key problem to solve face-related vision tasks such as 3D
face reconstruction, reenactment, parsing, and digital human. The 3D morphable
model (3DMM) [2] has long been the key solution to this problem, which is a
parametric model transforming the shape and texture of the faces into a vector
Y. Zhuang and H. Zhu—These authors contributed equally to this work.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5 16.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13663, pp. 268–285, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5_16

