Supplementary Material
How Stable are Transferability Metrics
evaluations?
Andrea Agostinelli, Michal Pándy⋆ , Jasper Uijlings, Thomas Mensink, and
Vittorio Ferrari
Google Research
{agostinelli, michalpandy, jrru, mensink, vittoferrari}@google.com

Abstract. In the supplementary material we study a third, somewhat
separate, scenario of correlating transferability metrics of subsampled
target datasets with the accuracy of fine-tuned models.

A

Bonus Scenario: target dataset transferability on
image classification

As a somewhat separate investigation, we take a closer look at a commonly used
scenario where the source model is fixed and the target task is constructed by
sub-sampling classes from a large target dataset [5, 3, 6]. More formally, in this
scenario an experiment consists of the following three components: (1) A source
model S. (2) A target dataset from which we create a target dataset pool T . (3)
An evaluation measure E. In this scenario, we investigate the effect of how to
use a single target dataset to create the target dataset pool T .
Experimental setup and creating T . It is common practice to construct
T by sampling uniformly between 2% and a 100% of the target classes [5, 3].
This results in target datasets which vary in the number of classes. In this paper
we compare this approach with sampling uniform 50% of the target classes,
resulting in target datasets with an equal number of classes. In both cases we
use all images for the selected classes both for training and testing.
For our setup, we use as source model S a ResNet50 pre-trained on ImageNet.
We consider four target datasets: CIFAR100 [2], Stanford Dogs [1], Sun397 [7],
and Oxford Flowers 102 [4]. For every target dataset we construct 100 datasets.
The transferability metrics are evaluated as described in Sec. 3.1 (main paper).
New transferability metric: NumClasses (#C). For the purpose of our
investigation, we define a new transferability metric. Intuitively, target datasets
that contain more classes are more complex than target datasets with fewer
classes. Therefore, to determine to what extent is transferability is trivially explained by the number of target classes, our NumClasses metric is simply defined
as the number of classes of a given target dataset in T .
⋆

Currently at Waymo.

