Supplemental Material:
KVT: k-NN Attention for Boosting Vision
Transformers
Pichao Wang? , Xue Wang? , Fan Wang, Ming Lin, Shuning Chang, Hao Li, and
Rong Jin
Alibaba Group
{pichao.wang, xue.w, fan.w, ming.l, shuning.csn, lihao.lh,
jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com

1

Differences with the arXiv paper: Explicit Sparse
Transformer: Concentrated Attention Through Explicit
Selection (EST)

Similarities: Our method part is similar to EST in terms of the calculation of
top-k.
Differences:
– Our paper is focused not only on the methodology part, but also the deep
understanding. There are many variants of Transformers in the NLP and
vision community now, but few of them provide a deep and thorough analysis
of their proposed methods. The proposed k-NN attention indeed happens to
be similar to EST, which was arxived 2 years ago and we were not aware of it
when conducting our research. In addition to applying the idea to transformers
and conducting extensive experiments as EST did, we provide theoretical
justifications about the idea, which we think is equally or more important
than the method itself, and helps with a more fundamental understanding.
– The conclusion about how to select k is different. In EST, it is found that a
small k is better (8 or 16), but we find a larger k, namely, ≥ 21 N is better
(N is the sequence length).
– The motivations of these two papers are different: EST targets to get sparse
attention maps while ours aims to distill noisy patches.
– Our paper focuses on vision transformers but EST focuses on NLP tasks,
even though EST applied it to the image captioning task. Since late 2020,
vision transformer backbones have become very popular, and k-NN attention
deserves a deeper analysis. Therefore, we apply the k-NN attention on 11
different vision transformer backbones for empirical evaluations and find it
simple and effective for vision transformer backbones.
– More analysis about the properties of k-NN attention in the context of vision
transformer backbones are provided in our paper. Besides the k selection
?

The first two authors contribute equally.

