RealFlow: EM-based Realistic Optical Flow
Dataset Generation from Videos
(Supplementary Materials)
Yunhui Han1 , Kunming Luo2 , Ao Luo2 , Jiangyu Liu2 , Haoqiang Fan2 ,
Guiming Luo1 , and Shuaicheng Liu3,2,†
1

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
{hanyh19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, gluo@tsinghua.edu.cn}
2
Megvii Technology, Beijing, China
{luokunming,luoao02,liujiangyu,fhq}@megvii.com
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
liushuaicheng@uestc.edu.cn
†
Corresponding Author

To make our RealFlow self-contained, we provide more details in this document including: 1) detailed information of the datasets 2) experiments of the
dataset quantity. 3) results of splatting and hole filling. 4) the efficiency of generation. 5) limitation of our method. 6) more qualitative comparison results and
visualization of RealFlow samples from various videos.

1

Datasets Detail

In this section, we describe the detailed information of relevant datasets and
the generated datasets of our RealFlow. For convenience, we summarize our
generated datasets in Table.1.
Flying Chairs [4] and Flying Things [17]: These two synthetic datasets are
generated by randomly moving foreground objects on top of a background image.
State-of-the-art supervised networks usually train on Chairs and Things.
Virtual KITTI [5]: Virtual KITTI is a synthetic dataset, which contains 50
high-resolution videos generated from 5 different virtual urban environments
under different weather conditions. These environments are created by the Unity
engine and the flow labels are automatically generated.
DAVIS [3]: DVAIS dataset consists of high-quality video sequences under various kinds of scenes, which have been widely used for video object segmentation.
It only provides densely annotated segmentation labels but not optical flow labels. We use 10,581 images from DAVIS challenge 2019 to generate RF-DAVIS.
ALOV [13] and BDD100K [18]: ALOV dataset is a diverse real-world video
sequence for tracking, ranging from easy to difficult, which covers as diverse
circumstances as possible. This dataset consists of 315 video sequences and we
capture 75,581 image pairs from them. BDD100K dataset is a large-scale diverse
driving video database. It consists of 100,000 videos covering different weather
conditions and urban scenes, ranging from daytime to nighttime. We sampled
part of the videos and capture 86,128 images pairs. There is no flow label for

