Learning Spherical Convolution
for Fast Features from 360° Imagery

Yu-Chuan Su
Kristen Grauman
The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
While 360° cameras offer tremendous new possibilities in vision, graphics, and
augmented reality, the spherical images they produce make core feature extraction non-trivial. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained on images from
perspective cameras yield “flat" filters, yet 360° images cannot be projected to a
single plane without significant distortion. A naive solution that repeatedly projects
the viewing sphere to all tangent planes is accurate, but much too computationally
intensive for real problems. We propose to learn a spherical convolutional network
that translates a planar CNN to process 360° imagery directly in its equirectangular projection. Our approach learns to reproduce the flat filter outputs on 360°
data, sensitive to the varying distortion effects across the viewing sphere. The key
benefits are 1) efficient feature extraction for 360° images and video, and 2) the
ability to leverage powerful pre-trained networks researchers have carefully honed
(together with massive labeled image training sets) for perspective images. We
validate our approach compared to several alternative methods in terms of both raw
CNN output accuracy as well as applying a state-of-the-art “flat" object detector
to 360° data. Our method yields the most accurate results while saving orders of
magnitude in computation versus the existing exact reprojection solution.

1

Introduction

Unlike a traditional perspective camera, which samples a limited field of view of the 3D scene
projected onto a 2D plane, a 360° camera captures the entire viewing sphere surrounding its optical
center, providing a complete picture of the visual world—an omnidirectional field of view. As such,
viewing 360° imagery provides a more immersive experience of the visual content compared to
traditional media.
360° cameras are gaining popularity as part of the rising trend of virtual reality (VR) and augmented
reality (AR) technologies, and will also be increasingly influential for wearable cameras, autonomous
mobile robots, and video-based security applications. Consumer level 360° cameras are now common
on the market, and media sharing sites such as Facebook and YouTube have enabled support for
360° content. For consumers and artists, 360° cameras free the photographer from making real-time
composition decisions. For VR/AR, 360° data is essential to content creation. As a result of this great
potential, computer vision problems targeting 360° content are capturing the attention of both the
research community and application developer.
Immediately, this raises the question: how to compute features from 360° images and videos?
Arguably the most powerful tools in computer vision today are convolutional neural networks (CNN).
CNNs are responsible for state-of-the-art results across a wide range of vision problems, including
image recognition [17, 42], object detection [12, 30], image and video segmentation [16, 21, 28], and
action detection [10, 32]. Furthermore, significant research effort over the last five years (and really
decades [27]) has led to well-honed CNN architectures that, when trained with massive labeled image
datasets [8], produce “pre-trained" networks broadly useful as feature extractors for new problems.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

