Supplementary Material
Overview of Supplementary Material. This supplementary material consists of 6 sections: (1) related literature and context of our paper (Section 1), (2)
details of data creation process (Section 2), (3) additional AnimeCeleb samples
and experimental results (Section 3), (4) implementation details of the AniMo
and the baselines (Section 4), (5) additional head reenactment results of AniMo
(Section 5), and (6) discussions and future work (Section 6).

1

Related Work

With abundance of digital contents, numerous animation datasets collected
from different media are released to community. Focusing on animation head
datasets, there exist multiple studies [1, 2, 4, 16, 26] that provide the preprocessed animation heads. Based on these datasets, early animation-related
research [14, 20, 24] mainly focused on recognizing and detecting an animation character in animation scenes. However, an extension of animation research
to generative modeling is non-trivial. One major bottleneck is that the released
datasets are collected from unlisted online source, thereby containing unexpected
and noisy images (e.g., an occluded head). In this regard, existing datasets are
forced to narrow their application scope; for example, current animation datasets
are not suitable to train head reenactment models [3, 5, 18, 21, 22, 23].
Head reenactment aims to drive a source image to mimic a motion of a
target image while preserving identity of the source image. Most approaches [3,
5, 18, 21, 22, 23] use two frames from the same video during training; an image
conveys the identity-related information while the other provides the motionrelated information, which are combined to produce a final output. Also, multiple
pose representations (e.g., keypoints and 3DMM parameters) play vital roles to
deliver the head motion in previous literature [5, 15, 22, 23]. In fact, the pose
representation is an important aspect for head reenactment approaches as shown
in previous work [3] when training a high-performing model.
Undoubtedly, the collected animation images of current datasets [1, 2, 4,
16, 26] do not include its detailed pose annotations, and obtaining accurate pose
representations is also non-trivial. In opposition, AnimeCeleb provides numerous
groups of images that have the same identity, and detailed pose annotations,
which bear a potential to be used for various generation tasks.

