Super-Resolution 3D Human Shape
from a Single Low-Resolution Image
Marco Pesavento(B) , Marco Volino, and Adrian Hilton
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing (CVSSP), University of Surrey,
Guildford, UK
{m.pesavento,m.volino,a.hilton}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract. We propose a novel framework to reconstruct superresolution human shape from a single low-resolution input image. The
approach overcomes limitations of existing approaches that reconstruct
3D human shape from a single image, which require high-resolution
images together with auxiliary data such as surface normal or a parametric model to reconstruct high-detail shape. The proposed framework represents the reconstructed shape with a high-detail implicit
function. Analogous to the objective of 2D image super-resolution,
the approach learns the mapping from a low-resolution shape to its
high-resolution counterpart and it is applied to reconstruct 3D shape
detail from low-resolution images. The approach is trained end-to-end
employing a novel loss function which estimates the information lost
between a low and high-resolution representation of the same 3D surface shape. Evaluation for single image reconstruction of clothed people demonstrates that our method achieves high-detail surface reconstruction from low-resolution images without auxiliary data. Extensive experiments show that the proposed approach can estimate superresolution human geometries with a signiﬁcantly higher level of detail
than that obtained with previous approaches when applied to lowresolution images. https://marcopesavento.github.io/SuRS/.

1

Introduction

The demand for user-friendly frameworks to create virtual 3D content is increasing at the same pace as the rise in the application of immersive technologies.
This has led research to a focus on ﬁnding practical solutions to replace existing
sophisticated multi-view systems for 3D reconstruction, which are impractical
and expensive to build for the general community. With the recent advance of 3D
deep learning, several approaches have been proposed to estimate the 3D shape
directly from a single RGB image for speciﬁc object classes such as human bodies, faces or man made objects. Although consumer cameras are nowadays able to
capture high-resolution (HR) images, there are several scenarios where the image
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1 26.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 447–464, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_26

