K-centered Video Recognition

A

19

Experimental Details

In this section, we present implementation details for the proposed greedy Kcenter sampling and the frame-based sampling used in our experiments.
A.1

Pre-processing Video Clips

For a fair comparison, we carefully extract a clip out of raw video prior to
performing K-centered sampling in order to set the physical time range covered
by our method and the frame-based sampling method to be equal. Since the
precise procedures for pre-processing clips from raw videos in Kinetics and
Something-Something datasets are different, we describe them separately.
Kinetics dataset. We transcode all raw videos to play at 30 frames-per-second
refresh rates beforehand of any sampling, then perform either the frame-based
sampling or the K-centered search executed as follows. For the frame-based
sampling, we take the equally-spaced F frames at the sampling period of S
frames (i.e., the grid-frame-sampling strategy). On the other hand, for the
K-centered search, we perform the greedy K-centered sampling given a clip
S
composed of an equally-spaced set of R · F frames at the sampling period of R
frames. That is, we pick a set of frames lying in the equal time range covered by
the frame-based sampling at R times denser rates, then apply the K-centered
search within those R · F frames.
Something-Something dataset. We transcode all raw videos to play at 12
frames-per-second refresh rates beforehand of any sampling, then perform either
the frame-based sampling or the K-centered search executed as follows. For the
frame-based sampling, we split a video into equally-sized, non-overlapping F
segments and then select a frame from each segment; we randomly select a frame
in training time and the frame at the center of a segment in test time. For the
K-centered search, we similarly split a video into equally-sized non-overlapping
R · F segments, select one frame per segment, then perform the K-centered search
within the selected R · F frames.

Table 7. Choices for the pre-processing clips used for our K-centered sampling with
ViT, TimeSformer, and XViT under Something-Something v2 (SSv2) and Kinetics
datasets.
Model
S

SSv2

Kinetics

F R

S

F R

ViT [11]

- 8

4

16 8

4

TimeSformer [3]

- 8

4

32 8

4

XViT [4]

- 16 2

16 8

4

