Revisiting Point Cloud Simplification:
A Learnable Feature Preserving Approach
Rolandos Alexandros Potamias(B) , Giorgos Bouritsas, and Stefanos Zafeiriou
Imperial College London, London, UK
{r.potamias,g.bouritsas,s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract. The recent advances in 3D sensing technology have made
possible the capture of point clouds in signiﬁcantly high resolution. However, increased detail usually comes at the expense of high storage, as
well as computational costs in terms of processing and visualization operations. Mesh and Point Cloud simpliﬁcation methods aim to reduce
the complexity of 3D models while retaining visual quality and relevant salient features. Traditional simpliﬁcation techniques usually rely on
solving a time-consuming optimization problem, hence they are impractical for large-scale datasets. In an attempt to alleviate this computational
burden, we propose a fast point cloud simpliﬁcation method by learning
to sample salient points. The proposed method relies on a graph neural
network architecture trained to select an arbitrary, user-deﬁned, number of points according to their latent encodings and re-arrange their
positions so as to minimize the visual perception error. The approach is
extensively evaluated on various datasets using several perceptual metrics. Importantly, our method is able to generalize to out-of-distribution
shapes, hence demonstrating zero-shot capabilities.
Keywords: Point clouds · Simpliﬁcation · Sampling · GNN

1

Introduction

The progress in sensing technologies has signiﬁcantly expedited the 3D data
acquisition pipelines which in turn has increased the availability of large and
diverse 3D datasets. With a single 3D sensing device [39], one can capture a
target surface and represent it as a 3D object, with point clouds and meshes
being the most popular representations. Several applications, ranging from virtual reality and 3D avatar generation [26,46] to 3D printing and digitization of
cultural heritage [43], depend from such representations. However, in general, a
3D capturing device generates thousands of points per second, making processing, visualization and storage of captured 3D objects a computationally daunting
task. Often, raw point sets contain an enormous amount of redundant and putatively noisy points of points with low visual perceptual importance, which results
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1 34.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 586–603, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_34

