Grasp’D: Differentiable Contact-rich Grasp
Synthesis for Multi-fingered Hands
Supplementary Material
Dylan Turpin1,2,3 , Liquan Wang1,2 , Eric Heiden3 , Yun-Chun Chen1,2 , Miles
Macklin3 , Stavros Tsogkas4 , Sven Dickinson1,2,4 , and Animesh Garg1,2,3
1

University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 Nvidia, 4 Samsung
dylanturpin@cs.toronto.edu

Overview
In this supplementary material, we provide additional details and results to
complement the main paper. Specifically:
-- We describe the details of our implementation and experimental setting.
(Appendix A).
-- We provide additional results of our method applied to the YCB dataset [2]
with both a human MANO hand model [14] and a robotic Allegro hand
model. (Appendix B).
-- We provide visualizations of optimization trajectories for MANO hand grasps
of YCB and ShapeNet objects, which show how grasps improve as optimization progresses. (Appendix C)
-- We provide additional results for the validation of grasp synthesis with RGBD reconstruction presented (Section 4.3 of the main paper). (Appendix D).

A

Details of implementation and experiments

A.1 Dataset listings
-- Table 1 - ShapeNet object listing (for main experiment in section 4.2).
-- Table 2 - YCB object listing (for rgb-d experiment in section 4.3).
-- Table 3 - YCB object listing (for ablation experiment in section 4.4).
A.2 Initialization and smoothing schedule
Initialization. Since our grasp synthesis pipeline relies on gradient-based optimization, the final result depends on how the parameters are initialized, i.e.,
different initial hand poses will recover different final grasps. This is a useful
quality in that it allows us to sample a variety of grasps for each object by
sampling different starting poses. The force variables b
fc are always initialized
to zero. We employ a simple heuristic (adapted from [1]) to initialize the hand
(0)
pose qh . We set all hand joints to their fully open position. To find an initial
rotation and position for the hand base link, we uniformly sample an approach
point a on the object surface and a roll angle θ around the approach vector.
We use an approach vector opposing the object surface normal at the approach
point, and set the hand rotation such that the palm’s normal is aligned with

