Supplementary Material for
FOSTER: Feature Boosting and Compression for
Class-Incremental Learning
Fu-Yun Wang , Da-Wei Zhou , Han-Jia Ye

, and De-Chuan Zhan

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
wangfuyun@smail.nju.edu.cn,{zhoudw, yehj, zhandc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract. The ability to continuously learn new knowledge is considered to be one of the most important symbols of strong artificial intelligence. However, deep neural networks suffer from the severe problem
known as catastrophic forgetting when training on new classes. Inspired
by the idea that gradient boosting algorithm continuously creates new
weak classifiers to fit the residuals between the target and the ensemble
model, we propose FOSTER, where we dynamically expand and compress the model when new tasks come, empowering the model to learn
new categories adaptively. In the supplementary material, we provide:
(i) Rationality analysis of the substitution (Sec. 1).
(ii) Influence of the initialization of the weight O (Sec. 2).
(iii) Introduction to compared methods (Sec. 3).
(iv) Visualization of detailed performance (Sec. 4).

1

Rationality Analysis of the Substitution.

We argue that our simplification of replacing the sum of softmax with softmax
of logits sum and substituting the distance metric Dis(·, ·) for the KullbackLeibler divergence (KLD) KL(· || ·). KLD can evaluate the residual between
the target and the output by calculating the distance between the target label
distribution and the output distribution of categories. KLD is more suitable
for classification tasks, and there are some works [2,6] that point out that the
KLD has many advantages in many aspects, including faster optimization and
better feature representation. Typically, to reflect the relative magnitude of each
output, we use non-linear activation softmax to transform the output logits into
P|Ŷt
the output probability. Namely, p1 , p2 , . . . , p|Ŷt | , where 0 ≤ pi ≤ 1, i=1
pi = 1
and |Ŷt | is the number of all seen categories. In classification tasks, the target
label is usually set to 1, and the non-target label is set to 0. Therefore, we
expect the output of the boosting model can be constrained between 0 and 1.
Simply combining the softmax outputs of the original model Ft−1 and Ft can
not satisfy the constraints. Suppose that the output of Ft−1 and Ft in class i
are poi and pni , the combination of pni and poi is not in line with our expectation
since 0 ≤ poi + pni ≤ 2. By replacing the sum of softmax with softmax of logits
sum, we can limit the output of the boosting model between 0 and 1, and the
judgment of the two models can still be integrated.

