18

P. Cervantes et al.

A

Appendix

A.1

Training details

The optimization is done with an Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 1e-3
for the MLP-based models and 1e-4 for the Transformer-based models. We put
some effort in tuning the learning rate for both models and settle on such simple settings to preserve comparability. We train for 10000 epochs, but find that
strong performance is often already reached earlier. Unless otherwise stated we
report performance for the model after 10000 epochs. During training, we find
that frequent sampling of representations is important for motion generation
performance. Thus for each training iteration, we sample a sequence representation and an action representation per-sequence (as opposed to sampling a single
action representation per-batch). We set the weight for the Kullback-Leibler
divergence to 1e-5, following the findings in [31].
Since the sequence and action representations are persistent parameters, we
need to explicitly initialize them. We set a unit log-variance for all MLP-based
experiments and a log-variance to -10 for all Transformer-based experiments
according to our findings in Appendix B.1.
The full representation can be composed either through addition or concatenation of action-wise and sequence-wise representations. For additive composition we set the representation size of both action representation to α ∈ R256 and
sequence-wise representations to β ∈ R256 and the resulting sequence representation is given by α + β. For concatenation we set both action representation to
α ∈ R128 and sequence-wise representations to β ∈ R128 . We investigate the effect of both approaches in Appendix B.4 and find that the MLP-based decoder is
best trained with composition through concatenation and the Transformer-based
decoder is best trained with additive composition.
The optimization problems in Eqs. 6 - 8 require joint optimization with
sequence-wise, action-wise and dataset-wise parameters. We employ an alternating updating scheme where first all sequence-wise and action-wise parameters
are updated with respect to a fixed model and then the model parameters are
updated with respect to all other parameters.
Because our work produces persistent sequence representations, our decoder
is trained with temporal embeddings τ corresponding to an absolute position
within a groundtruth sample. In other words, during training τ0 always corresponds to the element at t = 0 of a real sample. This is different from the
previous work [31], which samples fixed-length subsequences during each training iteration. In their case, τ0 corresponds to the first element of the subsequence
that was input to the encoder. As a consequence of training with random subsequences, the sequence representations of [31] are entangled with the starting
point of the sequence and randomly sampling a new sequence may produce a
representation at any starting point including the middle of an ongoing action.
In our work, on the other hand, τ0 always corresponds to the beginning of an
action.

