– Supplementary material –
PromptDet: Towards Open-vocabulary
Detection using Uncurated Images
Chengjian Feng1 , Yujie Zhong1 , Zequn Jie1 , Xiangxiang Chu1
Haibing Ren1 , Xiaolin Wei1 , Weidi Xie2, , and Lin Ma1
1

1

Meituan Inc.

2

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Open-vocabulary COCO benchmark details

Standard MS-COCO [3] contains 80 categories. Following [1, 4], we only select
48 classes as base classes, and 17 classes as novel classes. The train set and
minival set are the same as the standard MS-COCO 2017, however, only images
containing at least one base class are used for the training. For self-training, we
search for the images from LAION-400M and download about 1500 images for
each novel category. We summarise the dataset statistics for open-vocabulary
COCO benchmark in Table 1.
Since there are no class descriptions in the meta data of MS-COCO, we
use the descriptions from LVIS if the category is convered by LVIS. For the
other categories, we get their descriptions by searching on Google, for instance,
{category: “donut”, description: “a small fried cake of sweetened dough, typically
in the shape of a ball or ring”}.
We conduct the experiment using Mask-RCNN [2] with a ResNet-50-FPN
backbone. The model is trained with a batchsize of 64 on 8 GPUs, for 24
epochs (2x learning schedule). Similar to open-vocabulary LVIS benchmark, we
use COCO-base to train an initial open-vocabulary object detector. Then we
use a combination of COCO-base and LAION-novel datasets for self-training.
Considering the small number of the base categories on open-vocabulary COCO
benchmark, we select 1000 images for each base category during the regional
prompt learning, and set K = 10 to retain the precise bounding boxes for the
pseudo labeling. Besides, the COCO-base images contain abundant objects of
the novel categories. To enhance the recall of the region proposal network (RPN)
for the novel categories, we compute the similarity between the features from the
negative box proposals and the text embedding of novel categories, and treat the
box proposals with high similarity (i.e. lager than 0.1) as the positive samples,
during the training of RPN.

2

Cross-dataset transfer

To demonstrate the generalisation, we directly evaluate the detector from openvocabulary LVIS benchmark on MS-COCO [3], without any finetuning on it.

