Learning-Based Point Cloud Registration
for 6D Object Pose Estimation
in the Real World
Zheng Dang1(B) , Lizhou Wang2 , Yu Guo2 , and Mathieu Salzmann1,3
1

CVLab, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
{zheng.dang,mathieu.salzmann}@epfl.ch
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
dzyxwanglizhou@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, yu.guo@xjtu.edu.cn
3
Clearspace, Renens, Switzerland
Abstract. In this work, we tackle the task of estimating the 6D pose of
an object from point cloud data. While recent learning-based approaches
to addressing this task have shown great success on synthetic datasets,
we have observed them to fail in the presence of real-world data. We thus
analyze the causes of these failures, which we trace back to the diﬀerence
between the feature distributions of the source and target point clouds,
and the sensitivity of the widely-used SVD-based loss function to the
range of rotation between the two point clouds. We address the ﬁrst challenge by introducing a new normalization strategy, Match Normalization,
and the second via the use of a loss function based on the negative log
likelihood of point correspondences. Our two contributions are general
and can be applied to many existing learning-based 3D object registration frameworks, which we illustrate by implementing them in two of
them, DCP and IDAM. Our experiments on the real-scene TUD-L [26],
LINEMOD [23] and Occluded-LINEMOD [7] datasets evidence the beneﬁts of our strategies. They allow for the ﬁrst time learning-based 3D
object registration methods to achieve meaningful results on real-world
data. We therefore expect them to be key to the future development
of point cloud registration methods. Our source code can be found at
https://github.com/Dangzheng/MatchNorm.
Keywords: 6D object pose estimation · Point cloud registration

1

Introduction

Estimating the 6D pose, i.e., 3D rotation and 3D translation, of an object has
many applications in various domains, such as robotics grasping, simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), and augmented reality. In this context,
great progress has been made by learning-based methods operating on RGB(D)
images [32,36,42,44,48,57,58,61,62,74]. In particular, these methods achieve
impressive results on real-world images.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13661, pp. 19–37, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7_2

