Supplementary Material for
Is Geometry Enough for Matching in Visual
Localization?
Qunjie Zhou⋆1 , Sérgio Agostinho⋆2 , Aljoša Ošep1 , and Laura Leal-Taixé1
1

Technical University of Munich, Germany 2 Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
1
{qunjie.zhou,aljosa.osep,leal.taixe}@tum.de
2
sergio.agostinho@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
https://github.com/dvl-tum/gomatch

In this supplementary material, we provide additional insights and details
about certain aspects of the main paper that were not fundamental for its understanding, but that are helpful for interested readers, to fully comprehend and
replicate our method. In Section 1, we provide in-depth descriptions of each network component with mathematical definitions as well as architecture diagrams.
Next, we present dataset preparation details including dataset processing, query
sampling and correspondence ground truth generation in Section 2, followed by
the implementation details regarding our training procedure, hyper-parameter
choices and an overview of inference process in Section 3. In Section 4, we provide
additional details on how to compute the metrics used in the paper, in particular
the mean reprojection error Area Under the cumulative Curve (AUC). Finally,
in Section 5 we detail how we generate Table 1 in the main paper and provide more insights about the practical challenges of large-scale structure-based
localization.

1

Architecture Details

Feature Encoder. We adopt the same encoder architecture as the one presented in [3, 17], which is shown in Fig. 1. The encoder (left) consists of a
cascade of residual blocks, where each block (right) is composed of sequential
point-shared fully connected layers, followed by instance normalization and nonlinearity (ReLUs). We use two siamese encoders with shared weight parameters
to encode bearing vectors of both 2D image keypoints and 3D points, since it
has been shown to improve GoMatch’s performance (c.f . Section 5.3 in the main
paper).
Attention. We use a graph neural network to update features from the same
modality (self-attention) and multi-head attention layers to exchange features
across modalities (cross-attention). This is similar to PREDATOR [12], although
in that work, the attention module is inserted in the bottleneck of the keypoint
encoder, i.e., KPConv [25], and thus it is applied to the downsampled keypoints.
In our case, the feature encoder does not have a bottleneck and we instead apply
⋆

Equal contribution.

