TISE: Bag of Metrics for Text-to-Image
Synthesis Evaluation
— Supplementary Material —
Tan M. Dinh⋆ , Rang Nguyen, and Binh-Son Hua
VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam
{tan.m.dinh.vn,rangnhm,binhson.hua}@gmail.com

Abstract. This supplemental document provides more details of our
bag of metrics. We first present the details of our improved IS* metric
including the impact of the calibration step on the IS* score (Section 1.1)
and the implementation details for the counter model for reproducing the
inconsistency problem of IS (Section 1.2). We then detailed our improved
versions of RP and SOA and show how our metrics can mitigate the overfitting issues in the original versions in the multi-object text-to-image
synthesis (Section 2). Next, we detail our benchmark including the statistics of our test data (Section 3.1), a complete benchmark of multi-object
text-to-image models based on each assessment criterion (Section 3.2),
the architecture and network configurations of our AttnGAN++ baseline (Section 4) as well as more visual examples (Section 5) and t-SNE
visualization (Section 6). Finally, we provide the caption ids we used in
our user study (Section 7).

1

Details for our IS* metric

1.1

Impact of calibration on the classifier and IS*

In the main paper, we showed that severe miscalibration of the classifier used
to compute IS on the CUB dataset in previous methods led to inconsistent IS
scores of a counter model, and we proposed IS* to fix this issue. In this section,
we further conduct another experiment to verify the impact of the calibration
step causing on computing IS*. In detail, this experiment is performed on the
vanilla GAN task, which is the Tiny ImageNet [11] image generation. The classifier used to measure IS in these works is the Inception-v3 network pre-trained on
ImageNet [21]. It is worth noting that this classifier is used popularly for measuring IS in the traditional GAN image generation task. The IS and IS* results
are shown in Table 1.1. We also plot the reliability diagrams and ECE errors
of this classifier before and after calibration in Figure 1. As can be seen, even
before calibration, this classifier is noticeably well calibrated. Hence, the effect
of the calibration process on this classifier is negligible demonstrated through
the temperature T after calibration is 0.909 (T = 1 means calibration does not
have any effects on classifier). Therefore, we would only see the local ranking
differs in IS and IS*.
⋆

Corresponding author

