Zero-Shot Temporal Action Detection via
Vision-Language Prompting
Sauradip Nag1,2 , Xiatian Zhu1,3 , Yi-Zhe Song1,2 , and Tao Xiang1,2
1

CVSSP, University of Surrey, UK
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence, UK
3
Surrey Institute for People-Centred Artificial Intelligence, University of Surrey, UK
{s.nag,xiatian.zhu,y.song,t.xiang}@surrey.ac.uk
2

Abstract. Existing temporal action detection (TAD) methods rely on
large training data including segment-level annotations, limited to recognizing previously seen classes alone during inference. Collecting and annotating a large training set for each class of interest is costly and hence
unscalable. Zero-shot TAD (ZS-TAD) resolves this obstacle by enabling
a pre-trained model to recognize any unseen action classes. Meanwhile,
ZS-TAD is also much more challenging with significantly less investigation. Inspired by the success of zero-shot image classification aided by
vision-language (ViL) models such as CLIP, we aim to tackle the more
complex TAD task. An intuitive method is to integrate an off-the-shelf
proposal detector with CLIP style classification. However, due to the sequential localization (e.g., proposal generation) and classification design,
it is prone to localization error propagation. To overcome this problem, in
this paper we propose a novel zero-Shot Temporal Action detection model
via Vision-LanguagE prompting (STALE). Such a novel design effectively eliminates the dependence between localization and classification
by breaking the route for error propagation in-between. We further introduce an interaction mechanism between classification and localization
for improved optimization. Extensive experiments on standard ZS-TAD
video benchmarks show that our STALE significantly outperforms stateof-the-art alternatives. Besides, our model also yields superior results on
supervised TAD over recent strong competitors. The PyTorch implementation of STALE is available on https://github.com/sauradip/STALE.
Keywords: Zero-shot transfer, Temporal action localization, Language
supervision, Task adaptation, Detection, Dense prediction.

1

Introduction

The introduction of large pretrained Visual-Language (ViL) models (e.g., CLIP
[36] and ALIGN [16]) has surged recently the research attempts on zero-shot
transfer to diverse downstream tasks via prompting. Central in this research
line is a favourable ability of synthesizing the classification weights from natural language which can describe almost all the classes of interest, along with a

