Supplementary Materials for “Improving Robustness by
Enhancing Weak Subnets”
Yong Guo , David Stutz , and Bernt Schiele
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken
{yongguo,david.stutz,schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

In the main paper, we observed the phenomenon that most sub-networks (subnets)
of deep models perform rather poorly on perturbed images. We further demonstrate that
these weak subnets are highly correlated with the overall lack of robustness. Regarding
this correlation, we developed a training method which identifies and enhances weak
subnets (EWS) during training to improve the overall robustness. In the experiments, we
have shown that our EWS greatly improves the robustness against corrupted data of standard benchmarks, e.g., CIFAR-10-C, CIFAR-100-C, and ImageNet-C/P. Moreover, we
further highlight the flexibility of our EWS by combining it with adversarial training to
improve adversarial robustness. In the supplementary, we provide more implementation
details, complementary experimental results, and additional discussions.
We organize the supplementary as follows:
– In Section A, we provide a concrete example to show how the controller model
generates/finds weak subnets.
– In Section B, we provide more implementation details and results of improving
corruption robustness.
– In Section C, we demonstrate the flexibility of our EWS by elaborating how to apply
it to popular adversarial training methods, e.g., TRADES [15]. We also provide
more implementation details and results of improving adversarial robustness.
– In Section D, we provide additional ablations by compare different losses for enhancing subnets in our EWS. We also investigate the effectiveness of our controller
model in finding weak subnets.

A

Generating Weak Subnets using the Controller Model

As mentioned in Section 3.2, following [11,4,5], the controller model takes an initial
hidden vector as input and then sequentially selects candidate paths/channels starting
from the first block/layer to the last one. Essentially, the subnet generation process is
a Markov Decision Process (MDP). In other words, we sequentially make decisions
and each decision relies on a previous one. To better illustrate this, we show a concrete
example of subnet generation using our controller model. In Figure I, we take a block
with 2 paths, each of which has 4 channels, for example. As illustrated in the figure, the
controller model first predicts the hidden vector as output and then exploits a softmax
classifier (i.e., a single full-connected layer) to compute the probability of degrading
the accuracy (see objective in Eqn. (1)) for all candidate paths. Based on the predicted
probability distribution, we perform sampling without replacement to determine the weak

