Supplementary Materials for
ActionFormer: Localizing Moments of Actions
with Transformers
Chen-Lin Zhang⋆1,2 , Jianxin Wu1 , and Yin Li3
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
4Paradigm Inc, Beijing, China
3
University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA
{zclnjucs, wujx2001}@gmail.com
yin.li@wisc.edu

This supplement provides further details of the main paper. We describe (1)
additional ablation experiments (Sec. A); (2) further error analysis of our results
(Sec. B); (3) implementation details and how to reproduce our results (Sec. C);
(4) additional visualizations of our results (Sec. D); and (5) limitation of our
approach (Sec. E). For sections, figures, tables, and equations, we use numbers
(e.g, Sec. 1) to refer to the main paper and capital letters (e.g, Sec. A) to refer to
this supplement. We hope that this document will complement our main paper.

A

Additional Ablation Experiments

Here we present additional ablation experiments, as mentioned in Sec. 4.4 of the
main paper. These are omitted from the main paper due to lack of space. All
experiments are reported on THUMOS14, consistent with our ablation experiments in the main paper. We follow our best design and use a local window
size=19 with layer norm, center sampling, and score fusion enabled.
Loss Weight. We provide additional ablation on the loss weight λreg in Eq.
7. Specifically, we varied the loss weight λreg ∈ [0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 5], retrained the
model, and reported the mAP scores. The results are presented in Table A. For
a large range of λreg , our model has quite stable results with a maximum gap
of 1.4% in average mAP. λreg = 1 yields the best results, as we used in all our
experiments.
Maximum Input Sequence Length during Training. A possible explanation of our superior results is that our model might benefit from training using
a long sequence (2304 time steps as in our previous experiments). Here we examine the effects of maximum input sequence length during training. Table B
reports mAP scores for different training sequence lengths. The results of our
model remain fairly consistent even with much shorter input sequence length.
Note that when truncating an input sequence, our training scheme is equal to
training with sliding windows as in [17]. The differences are (1) the windows are
dynamically sampled rather than pre-generated; (2) windows without foreground
actions are removed. When using a input seqence length of 512, similar to what
⋆

Work was done when visiting UW Madison.

