Predicting is not Understanding:
Recognizing and Addressing
Underspecification in Machine Learning
Damien Teney1,3
1

Maxime Peyrard2

Ehsan Abbasnejad3

Idiap Research Institute 2 EPFL 3 Australian Inst. for Machine Learning
firstname.lastname@{idiap.ch,epfl.ch,adelaide.edu.au}

Abstract. Machine learning (ML) models are typically optimized for
their accuracy on a given dataset. However, this predictive criterion
rarely captures all desirable properties of a model, in particular how well
it matches a domain expert’s understanding of a task. Underspecification [12] refers to the existence of multiple models that are indistinguishable in their in-domain accuracy, even though they differ in other desirable properties such as out-of-distribution (OOD) performance. Identifying these situations is critical for assessing the reliability of ML models.
We formalize the concept of underspecification and propose a method to
identify and partially address it. We train multiple models with an independence constraint that forces them to implement different functions.
They discover predictive features that are otherwise ignored by standard
empirical risk minimization (ERM), which we then distill into a global
model with superior OOD performance. Importantly, we constrain the
models to align with the data manifold to ensure that they discover meaningful features. We demonstrate the method on multiple datasets in computer vision (collages, WILDS-Camelyon17, GQA) and discuss general
implications of underspecification. Most notably, in-domain performance
cannot serve for OOD model selection without additional assumptions.1

1

Introduction

Is data all you need? A finite set of i.i.d. examples is almost never sufficient
to learn a task. Inductive biases have long been known to be necessary for indomain generalization [49,82]. OOD2 generalization complicates things further
since one also needs to determine which predictive patterns of the training data
will remain relevant at test time. Correlations between inputs and labels that are
important for the task may be indistinguishable from spurious ones that result
from dataset-specific artefacts such as selection biases.
An example in image recognition. Image labels are often correlated with
objects and the backgrounds they appear in (e.g. cars in cities, birds in nature).
Recognizing either often suffice to predict correct labels. However, robust OOD
1
2

See https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.02598 for the full-length version of this work.
In this paper, OOD means there is a covariate shift between training and test data [67].

