Learning Self-prior for Mesh Denoising using
Dual Graph Convolutional Networks
–Supplementary Document–
Shota Hattori, Tatsuya Yatagawa, Yutaka Ohtake, and Hiromasa Suzuki
School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo
{hattori,tatsy,ohtake,suzuki}@den.t.u-tokyo

A

Choice of Input Features

Although we explained the original DIP [29] input a static random code to the
neural network, the paper of DIP also reported the better performance of different input features for specific tasks (e.g., they input pixel coordinates for the
sake of image completion). Therefore, we investigate what features are appropriate to reproduce positional displacements and facet normals. We compare the
denoising performances of several input features and evaluate their effectiveness
for mesh denoising.
In this experiment, we consider six feature vectors, which are (r6) the 6D
random vector, (r16) the 16D random vector, (p-r) the 3D coordinates of a position (the position of vertex for PosNet, but that of face’s centroid for NormNet)
concatenated with a 3D random vector, (n-r) the 3D normal vector (of a vertex
for PosNet, but of a face for NormNet) concatenated with a 3D random vector,
(p-n) the 3D coordinates of a position concatenated with the 3D normal vector,
and (p-n-a) the 7D vector comprised of the 3D coordinates of a position, 3D
normal vector, and area of a facet. The last one is tested only with NormNet
because it uses the area of a facet. Note that the positions and normals included
by the feature vectors involve noise because our method only uses noisy input
meshes.
The results for PosNet and NormNet are shown in Tabs. A.1 and A.2, respectively. According to Tab. A.1, random vectors (i.e., (r6) and (r16)), rather than
those including vertex positions and normals, obtain better reproduction for positional displacements. Intuitively, we may obtain better performances if input
features are correlated with positional displacement. However, the coordinates of
positions do not correlate with the magnitude of vertex displacements. Neither
do the normal vectors, although the orientation of the displacement may somewhat correlate with them. According to these observations, the performances
using (p-r), (n-r), and (p-n) may not have been very high. In contrast, it is
demonstrated that random vectors obtain the structural patterns of positional
displacements due to the nature of neural networks.
On the contrary, the results in Tab. A.2 suggest that the feature vectors
involved with positions and normals increase the performance of NormNet. During the experiment, we found that the convergence of training NormNet became

