Supplementary Material

1

Hyperparameters

Neural network architecture We adapted the default architecture in [2] for
our U-Net marker detection module. The difference was that we only used three
downsampling operations to prevent overfitting. We used ResNet-18 [1] for the
object feature extraction module. For the GCN tracking module, we used the
PyTorch Geometric library 1 . The GCN branch contains a GCNConv layer (1024
input channels and 256 output channels), a EdgeConv layer (512 input channels
and 128 output channels), and a EdgeConv layer (256 input channels and 64
output channels), with a ReLU layer after each layer. The FC branch has one
fully-connected layer with 1024 input channels and 256 output channels. Then
outputs of GCN branch and FC branch were combined and passed to a fullyconnected layer with 320 input channels and 1 output channel.
Loss function In Eq. 8, λ1 = 1, λ2 = 2. In Eq. 9, α = 1, β = 2.

2

Results

We used a fixed threshold cutoff (0.6) for identifying positive predictions (i.e.
markers with probability greater than 0.6 were selected) to calculate the evaluation metrics shown in Table 1, 2, and S3. Here, we also demonstrate the
performance of CenterTrack and our method (Table S1 and Table S2) when two
markers with the highest probabilities in each frame were identified as markers
detected, since it is the most straightforward way to identify a single stent based
on the outputs of neural networks. Fig. S1 shows examples of tracking results
from CenterTrack and the proposed method with this top-2 selection criterion,
and the stent enhancement results based on the tracking results. It can observed
that false positives dramatically affect enhancement results (Fig. S1b) and our
method has a high precision score (Table S1 and Table S2), which demonstrates
its robustness in clinical applications. Lower two rows of Fig. S1 show results
of CenterTrack and the proposed method with representative MAEs (0.382 and
0.511) respectively. It can be observed that even though the MAE of our method
is worse than that of CenterTrack, the enhancement results do not show much
difference.

1

https://pytorch-geometric.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

