KeypointNeRF:
Generalizing Image-based Volumetric Avatars
using Relative Spatial Encoding of Keypoints
— Supplementary Material —

A

Overview

In this document we provide additional implementation details (Sec. B), information about the baseline methods (Sec. C), more qualitative and quantitative
results (Sec. D), and reflect on the limitations of KeypointNeRF and future work
(Sec. E).

B

Implementation Details

Image Encoders. We employ a single HourGlass [43] network to learn a geometric prior of humans and condition the density estimation network. The input
image is normalized to [−1, 1] range and processed by four convolutional blocks
(256 filters) interleaved with group normalization. We then employ an HourGlass
block (down-sampling rate of four) with group normalization layers and refine
the final output with four convolutional layers to produce the deep feature map
Fngl ∈ RH/8×W/8×64 . Additionally, after the second convolutional block, we employ the transposed convolutional layer to produce the shallow high-resolution
feature map Fngh ∈ RH/2×W/2×8 . As activation function we use ReLU for all
layers. We implemented a second convolutional encoder that is independent of
the density prediction branch to produce an alternative pathway for the appearance information Fna ∈ RH/4×W/4×8 as in DoubleField [54]. We follow the
design of [25] and implement this encoder as a 15-layer convolutional network
with residual connections and ReLU activations.
Multi-view Feature Fusion. The feature fusion network is implemented as a
four-layer MLP (128, 136, 120, and 64 neurons with Softplus activations) that aggregates features from multiple views. Its output is aggregated via mean-variance
pooling [62] to produce the geometry feature vector GX ∈ R128 .
Density Fields. The geometry feature vector is decoded as density value σ via
a four-layer MLP (64 neurons with Softplus activations).
View-dependent Color Fields. To produce the final color prediction c for
a query point X, we implemented an additional MLP that predicts blending
weights as an intermediate step which are used to blend the input pixel colors.
This network follows the design proposed in IBRNet to communicate information among multi-view features by using the mean-variance pooling operator.
The per-view input feature vectors (described in Sec. 4.4) are first fused into a

