Learning to learn by gradient descent
by gradient descent
Marcin Andrychowicz1 , Misha Denil1 , Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo1 , Matthew W. Hoffman1 ,
David Pfau1 , Tom Schaul1 , Brendan Shillingford1,2 , Nando de Freitas1,2,3
1

Google DeepMind

2

University of Oxford

3

Canadian Institute for Advanced Research

marcin.andrychowicz@gmail.com
{mdenil,sergomez,mwhoffman,pfau,schaul}@google.com
brendan.shillingford@cs.ox.ac.uk, nandodefreitas@google.com

Abstract
The move from hand-designed features to learned features in machine learning has
been wildly successful. In spite of this, optimization algorithms are still designed
by hand. In this paper we show how the design of an optimization algorithm can be
cast as a learning problem, allowing the algorithm to learn to exploit structure in
the problems of interest in an automatic way. Our learned algorithms, implemented
by LSTMs, outperform generic, hand-designed competitors on the tasks for which
they are trained, and also generalize well to new tasks with similar structure. We
demonstrate this on a number of tasks, including simple convex problems, training
neural networks, and styling images with neural art.

1

Introduction

Frequently, tasks in machine learning can be expressed as the problem of optimizing an objective
function f (✓) defined over some domain ✓ 2 ⇥. The goal in this case is to find the minimizer
✓⇤ = arg min✓2⇥ f (✓). While any method capable of minimizing this objective function can be
applied, the standard approach for differentiable functions is some form of gradient descent, resulting
in a sequence of updates
✓t+1 = ✓t

↵t rf (✓t ) .

The performance of vanilla gradient descent, however, is hampered by the fact that it only makes use
of gradients and ignores second-order information. Classical optimization techniques correct this
behavior by rescaling the gradient step using curvature information, typically via the Hessian matrix
of second-order partial derivatives—although other choices such as the generalized Gauss-Newton
matrix or Fisher information matrix are possible.
Much of the modern work in optimization is based around designing update rules tailored to specific
classes of problems, with the types of problems of interest differing between different research
communities. For example, in the deep learning community we have seen a proliferation of optimization methods specialized for high-dimensional, non-convex optimization problems. These include
momentum [Nesterov, 1983, Tseng, 1998], Rprop [Riedmiller and Braun, 1993], Adagrad [Duchi
et al., 2011], RMSprop [Tieleman and Hinton, 2012], and ADAM [Kingma and Ba, 2015]. More
focused methods can also be applied when more structure of the optimization problem is known
[Martens and Grosse, 2015]. In contrast, communities who focus on sparsity tend to favor very
different approaches [Donoho, 2006, Bach et al., 2012]. This is even more the case for combinatorial
optimization for which relaxations are often the norm [Nemhauser and Wolsey, 1988].
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

