GEB+: A Benchmark for Generic Event
Boundary Captioning, Grounding and Retrieval
Supplementary Material
Yuxuan Wang1 , Difei Gao1 , Licheng Yu2 , Weixian Lei1 , Matt Feiszli2 , and
Mike Zheng Shou1
1

Show Lab, National University of Singapore
2
Meta AI

Overview
In the supplementary material, we provide more details of annotations (Sec. 1)
and more implementation details of the baselines (Sec. 2). Moreover, we conduct
more experiments of Boundary Captioning and Grounding for more visual difference representation methods as well as the ablation study for our TPD Modeling
method (Sec. 3). Finally, we release some common failure cases in our prediction
of Boundary Captioning and further discussion on the benchmark (Sec. 4).

1

More Details of Annotations

1.1

Boundary Definition

Specifying the level of details. A great number of our video sources from
Kinetic-400 contain more than one actor or object with different levels of status changes, and different annotators could have high-variance opinions on the
boundary positions. According to [6], to reduce the variance among annotators,
the highest priority is to specify the level of the spatial and temporal details we
take into consideration. For the level of spatial details, we only focus on the event
changes that are performed by dominant subjects. Specifically, in the Example
2 of Fig. 2 in main body, the two girls are repeating the same event, the status
of which is unchanged (no event boundary). Instead, the boy performs different
events before and after the marked timestamp. For the level of temporal details,
we only consider the “one-level-deeper” granularity as in [6]. By specifying this,
we ensure that most of the boundaries are in the same granularity, rendering it
possible for annotators to basically reach an agreement on the boundary location
without predefined classes.
Embracing the Ambiguity. Knowing the specified level of details, however,
different annotators could still have some disagreements on the dominant subjects and the “one-step-deeper” granularity events. Following [6], we embrace
this varsity when annotating. For each video, we take all the annotations as
correct. Then we supervise the consistency among different annotations towards
the same video by calculating the F1 score in Sec. 1.2.

