ObjectNet: A large-scale bias-controlled dataset for
pushing the limits of object recognition models
Andrei Barbu∗
MIT, CSAIL & CBMM
Christopher Wang
MIT, CSAIL

David Mayo∗
MIT, CSAIL & CBMM

Dan Gutfreund
MIT-IBM Watson AI

Julian Alverio
MIT, CSAIL

Joshua Tenenbaum
MIT, BCS & CBMM

William Luo
MIT, CSAIL

Boris Katz
MIT, CSAIL & CBMM

Abstract
We collect a large real-world test set, ObjectNet, for object recognition with controls
where object backgrounds, rotations, and imaging viewpoints are random. Most
scientific experiments have controls, confounds which are removed from the data,
to ensure that subjects cannot perform a task by exploiting trivial correlations in
the data. Historically, large machine learning and computer vision datasets have
lacked such controls. This has resulted in models that must be fine-tuned for new
datasets and perform better on datasets than in real-world applications. When
tested on ObjectNet, object detectors show a 40-45% drop in performance, with
respect to their performance on other benchmarks, due to the controls for biases.
Controls make ObjectNet robust to fine-tuning showing only small performance
increases. We develop a highly automated platform that enables gathering datasets
with controls by crowdsourcing image capturing and annotation. ObjectNet is
the same size as the ImageNet test set (50,000 images), and by design does not
come paired with a training set in order to encourage generalization. The dataset
is both easier than ImageNet – objects are largely centered and unoccluded – and
harder, due to the controls. Although we focus on object recognition here, data
with controls can be gathered at scale using automated tools throughout machine
learning to generate datasets that exercise models in new ways thus providing
valuable feedback to researchers. This work opens up new avenues for research
in generalizable, robust, and more human-like computer vision and in creating
datasets where results are predictive of real-world performance.

1

Introduction

Datasets are of central importance to computer vision and more broadly machine learning. Particularly
with the advent of techniques that are less well understood from a theoretical point of view, raw
performance on datasets is now the major driver of new developments and the major feedback about
the state of the field. Yet, as a community, we collect datasets in a way that is unusual compared to
other scientific fields. We rely almost exclusively on dataset size to minimize confounds (artificial
correlations between the correct labels and features in the input), to attest unusual phenomena, and
encourage generalization. Unfortunately, scale is not enough because of rare events and biases –
Sun et al. [1] provide evidence that we should expect to see logarithmic performance increases as a
function of dataset size alone. The sources of data that datasets draw on today are highly biased, e.g.,
object class is correlated with backgrounds [2], and omit many phenomena, e.g., objects appear in
stereotypical rotations with little occlusion. The resulting datasets themselves are similarly biased [3].
∗ Equal contribution. Website https://objectnet.dev. Corresponding author abarbu@csail.mit.edu

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

