Curvilinear Distance Metric Learning

Shuo Chen† , Lei Luo‡∗ , Jian Yang†∗ , Chen Gong† , Jun Li§ , Heng Huang‡

Abstract
Distance Metric Learning aims to learn an appropriate metric that faithfully measures the distance between two data points. Traditional metric learning methods
usually calculate the pairwise distance with fixed distance functions (e.g., Euclidean distance) in the projected feature spaces. However, they fail to learn the
underlying geometries of the sample space, and thus cannot exactly predict the
intrinsic distances between data points. To address this issue, we first reveal that the
traditional linear distance metric is equivalent to the cumulative arc length between
the data pair’s nearest points on the learned straight measurer lines. After that, by
extending such straight lines to general curved forms, we propose a Curvilinear
Distance Metric Learning (CDML) method, which adaptively learns the nonlinear
geometries of the training data. By virtue of Weierstrass theorem, the proposed
CDML is equivalently parameterized with a 3-order tensor, and the optimization
algorithm is designed to learn the tensor parameter. Theoretical analysis is derived
to guarantee the effectiveness and soundness of CDML. Extensive experiments on
the synthetic and real-world datasets validate the superiority of our method over
the state-of-the-art metric learning models.

1

Introduction

The goal of a Distance Metric Learning (DML) algorithm is to learn the distance function for data
pairs to measure their similarities. The learned distance metric successfully reflects the relationships
within data points and significantly improves the performance of many subsequent learning tasks,
such as classification [22], clustering [23], retrieval [24], and verification [14]. It has recently become
an active research topic in machine learning community [30, 29].
The well-studied DML methods are usually linear, namely Mahalanobis distance metric based
models [23]. Under the supervisions of pairwise similarities, they intend to learn a Semi-Positiveb) =
Definite (SPD) matrix M = P P > ∈ Rd×d to decide the squared parametric distance Dist2P (x, x
b )>M (x− x
b ) between data points x and x
b in the d-dimensional space. It is notable that such
(x− x
a linear Mahalanobis distance is equivalent to the Euclidean distance in the m-dimensional feature
space projected by P ∈ Rd×m . To perform the learning of the parameter M , intensive efforts have
been put to design various loss functions and constraints in optimization models. The early works
Large Margin Nearest Neighbor (LMNN) [27] and Information-Theoretic Metric Learning (ITML)
[7] utilized the must-link and cannot-link information to constrain the ranges of the learned distances.
Instead of fixing the distance ranges in the objective, Geometric Mean Metric Learning (GMML) [31]
†

S. Chen, J. Yang, and C. Gong are with the PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for HighDimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for
Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
Nanjing 210094, China (E-mail: {shuochen, csjyang, chen.gong}@njust.edu.cn).
‡
L. Luo and H. Huang are with the Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, and also
with JD Finance America Corporation, USA (E-mail: lel94@pitt.edu, henghuanghh@gmail.com).
§
J. Li is with the Institute for Medical Engineering & Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA (E-mail: junli@mit.edu).
∗
L. Luo and J. Yang are corresponding authors.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

