HEAD: HEtero-Assists Distillation for
Heterogeneous Object Detectors
Luting Wang1,3 Xiaojie Li2 Yue Liao1,3⋆ Zeren Jiang4
Jianlong Wu5 Fei Wang2,6 Chen Qian2 Si Liu1,3
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University 2 SenseTime Research
3
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University 4 ETH Zurich
5
Shandong University 6 University of Science and Technology of China
https://github.com/LutingWang/HEAD

In the following sections, we provide additional information on our proposed
HEAD and TF-HEAD frameworks. Sec. 1 discusses the similarities and differences between our method and other knowledge distillation (KD) approaches
with assistants. Sec. 2 details the procedure of generating proposals with onestage students. Sec. 3 demonstrates the characteristics of heterogeneous detectors
through visualization. Finally, sec. 4 introduces the process of reproducing our
work in detail.

1

Comparison to KD Methods with Assistants

TAKD [5] employs intermediate-sized networks (teacher assistants) to improve
the effectiveness of knowledge distillation between the teacher and student networks when the capacity (accuracy) gap is large. In HEAD, we adopt an assistant
as the bridge between the student and teacher detectors. The assistant is homogeneous with the teacher head while sharing the backbone with the student, which
is similar to the teacher assistant networks used in TAKD. Different from TAKD,
which aims at bridging the capacity (accuracy) gap between homogeneous networks using the intermediate-sized networks, our approach adopts the assistant
to solve the heterogeneity between detector pairs. Moreover, TAKD trains the
intermediate-sized networks sequentially, which causes significant training time
costs. In contrast, our assistant predictors are trained in an online distilling
strategy, which is more efficient.
From another perspective, RCO [2] supervises the student network with different checkpoints of the teacher model, which is similar to the teacher assistant
networks used in TAKD. The checkpoints are saved per epoch during the training process of the teacher model. To find the optimal checkpoint for the student
network to learn, RCO proposes a greedy search strategy. Similarly, our HEAD
framework uses assistants to supervise the student predictor. Since our assistant predictors are trained in an online distillation strategy, the performance
gap between the assistant and the student is always kept small. Therefore, the
searching strategy in RCO becomes redundant for our framework.
⋆

Corresponding author (liaoyue.ai@gmail.com)

