Supplementary Material for
Speaker-adaptive Lip Reading with
User-dependent Padding

1

LRW-ID data split information

Table 1 shows the number of speakers, the number of word classes, and the
total number of videos for each train, adaptation (validation), and test splits of
LRW-ID dataset.

2

Comparison with finetuning methods

In order to validate the effectiveness of the proposed user-dependent padding,
we compare the adaptation performances with different finetuning methods. To
this end, three different parts of network are employed for finetuning as follows, 1) finetuning only the classifier (i.e., the last fully connected layer) (denoted Finetune classifier), 2) finetuning the last TCN block and the classifier
(denoted Finetune partial), and 3) finetuning the entire network (denoted Finetune whole). The comparison results on LRW-ID are shown in Fig. 1. The number of network parameters for the 20 speakers are 47.8M, 171.3M, and 811.6M
for Finetune classifier, Finetune partial, and Finetune whole, respectively. On
the other hand, the proposed user-dependent padding requires 43.58M parameters. By examining the adaptation results, we can confirm that when a small
number of adaptation data is accessible (∼50%), the proposed user-dependent
padding is the most effective in speaker adaptation. When the adaptation data
is sufficient, the method Finetune whole achieves the best performance as one
can expect. We found that finetuning the last classifier only is not effective for
any ratio of adaptation data.

3

Network Architecture

3.1

User-dependent Padding

The network architecture for sentence-level lip reading (GRID) is shown in Table
1. It has a modified architecture of LipNet [2]. The user-dependent padding is
inserted instead of the zero-padding used during pre-training, for all padded convolutions in front-end. For the 3D convolution, only spatial padding is changed
with the user-dependent padding while that of the temporal dimension remains
to zero since the temporal length can be varying to the inputs in practice. The
value of user-dependent padding in the table represents temporal Tp , height
Hp , and width Wp size of the padding multiplicated with the channel Cp size

