Supplementary Material:
Custom Structure Preservation in Face Aging
Guillermo Gomez-Trenado1 , Stéphane Lathuilière2 , Pablo Mesejo1 , and Óscar
Cordón1
1

DaSCI research institute, DECSAI, University of Granada, Granada, Spain
{guillermogomez,pmesejo,ocordon}@ugr.es
2
LTCI, Télécom-Paris, Intitute Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France
stephane.lathuiliere@telecom-paris.fr

In these supplementary materials, we provide additional experiments and visual examples that show the performance of our proposal. First, in Sec. 1, we provide experiments to illustrate the DEX-Face++ age misalignment mentioned in the main paper.
Second, in Sec. 2, we further describe our proposed architecture. Third, in Sec. 3, we
describe the user study in detail. In Sec. 4, we provide additional qualitative examples,
including failure cases and a discussion of examples to complete the ablation study of
the main paper. Then, in Sec. 5, we complete our comparison with the State of the Art,
including additional results. Finally, in Sec. 6, we list the licenses of the datasets used
in our experiments.

1

Age estimation correction

Our evaluation protocol uses Face++ to estimate the person’s age in the generated image. However, as mentioned in the main paper, the misalignment of DEX and Face++
classifiers may bias evaluation. In this section, we illustrate how the DEX-Face++ misalignment can bias evaluation.
As in previous approaches [6, 7], DEX is used at training time on the FFHQ-RR
dataset. Thus, the aging task consists in generating images that match DEX predictions.
The DEX-Face++ discrepancy may bias evaluation since an aging method that fails in
generating images corresponding to the target age could be favored if the method is
biased in the same direction as the Face++ classifier.
To visualize this discrepancy, we plot in Fig 1 the distribution of the DEX-Face++
predictions on the FFHQ-RR dataset. In the case of perfect agreement, all the blue
points would be located on the orange identity line. We also report the mean age of each
age group according to DEX (red horizontal lines). A vertical dotted line represents the
amplitude of the discrepancy. In this case, the discrepancy is especially noticeable in
older groups.
Therefore, in our evaluation protocol, we estimate the age of the original images
with Face++ and compute the mean for each group. Age MAE is then computed as the
distance between the mean group predicted age and the transformed image predicted
age.

