Hybrid Anomaly Detection for Dense Open-set Recognition

7

Supplement

7.1

Limitations

19

We term our method hybrid since it optimizes two different training objectives:
i) dense discrimination between inliers and negatives, and ii) high likelihood
of inliers and low likelihood of negative data. It may seem that our method
can generate samples due to likelihood evaluation being a standard feature of
generative models (except GANs). However, our formulation is not suitable for
sample generation due to dealing with unnormalized distributions. This would
require MCMC sampling which can not be performed at large resolutions, at
least not with known techniques. Even if sample generation was feasible, the
resulting approach would likely be too slow for real-time inference as shown by
other image resynthesis approaches [36,4].
7.2

Impact of Known Inliers on Anomaly Detection

Many real-world deployments of autonomous systems work in environment with
limited variety (e.g. warehouses or industrial plants). Such environments usually
have perfectly aligned training and test distributions. Still, anomalous objects
can occur. We show that anomaly detection performance in such cases is significantly more easier. Table 7 shows such setup. We used two DLv3+ segmentation
networks. The first one is trained on Cityscapes train while the second one is
trained on Cityscapes train and val splits. Since the Fishyscapes Static dataset
is created by pasting negative objects atop Cityscapes val images, we can measure anomaly detection performance when the inlier instances from test set are
known. We see that the average precision of anomaly detection is drastically improved from 60% to 89%. This indicates that the DenseHybrid anomaly detector
is feasible for scenarios with limited scene variety.
Table 7. Impact of known inlier instances on anomaly detection performance. Results
indicate that DenseHybrid is feasible for scenarios with limited scene variety
Training splits
train
train+val

7.3

FS Static
Closed world
AP
FPR95 Cityscapes val mIoU
60.0±2.0 4.9±0.6
81.0
88.5±0.8 1.1±0.1
89.9

More results

Table 8 shows the dense open-set recognition performance with generative and
discriminative anomaly detectors on the StreetHazards dataset. The proposed
hybrid anomaly score based on the ratio of these two distributions outperforms
each of the two components. Note that generative and discriminative outputs
are trained using the same mixed-content images.

