EdgeViTs: Competing Light-weight CNNs on
Mobile Devices with Vision Transformers
Supplementary Materials
Junting Pan1⋆ , Adrian Bulat2 , Fuwen Tan2 , Xiatian Zhu2 , Lukasz Dudziak2 ,
Hongsheng Li1 , Georgios Tzimiropoulos2,3 and Brais Martinez2
1

A

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Samsung AI Cambridge
3
Queen Mary University of London

Computing Complexity

We calculate the computational cost of spatial context modeling involved in
our proposed LGL bottleneck. We omit point-wise operations for simplicity as
the key difference is on the spatial modeling part. Let us assume an input
X ∈ Rh×w×c where h, w, c denotes the height, the width, and the channel
dimension, respectively. The cost of the local aggregation is O(k 2 hwc), where
k 2 is the local group size. By selecting one delegate out of r2 tokens with r the
sub-sampling rate, the complexity of our Sparse Global Self-Attention is then
2 2
2
O( h rw
4 c). Finally, the local propagation step takes a cost of O(r hwc). Putting
h2 w 2
2
all these together we have a total cost of LGL is O(k hwc + r4 c + r2 hwc).
When comparing with the cost of a standard multi-head self-attention O(h2 w2 c),
we can see that our LGL significantly reduces the computation overhead when
k ≪ h, w; and r > 1. In our experiments, for simplicity we set k = 3, and r to
(4,2,2,1) for the four stages.

B

Implementation Details

In Algorithm 1, we provide Pytorch Style pseudo-code for all the build blocks
of our EdgeViTs. All variants of EdgeViTs can be built upon these components
according to the schematic overview (Fig. 2a of the main paper), and the model
configuration parameters (Table 1a. of the main paper).For more details with
the ablation studies in the main paper, we have replaced or removed one of these
blocks with the details given below.
(1) In Table 4a, for the case of w/o LA, we aim to test the importance of
separate local and global context modeling. Thus we remove both LocalAgg and
GlobalSparseAttn, and instead use the Spatial-Reduced Self-Attention4 introduced in PVT [7], resulting in a single Self-Attention Block for both local and
⋆
4

Work done during an internship at Samsung AI Cambridge.
https://github.com/whai362/PVT/blob/v2/classification/pvt v2.py#L54-L126

