Where in the World is this Image?
Transformer-based Geo-localization in the Wild
(Supplementary Material)
Shraman Pramanick1 , Ewa M. Nowara1 , Joshua Gleason2 ,
Carlos D. Castillo1 , and Rama Chellappa1
1

Johns Hopkins University
University of Maryland, College Park
{spraman3,carlosdc,rchella4}@jhu.edu,
ewa.m.nowara@gmail.com,gleason@umd.edu
2

In this supplementary material, we provide additional details on geo-cell partitioning,
data augmentation, hyper-parameter values, baselines, evaluation metrics and illustrate
additional quantitative and qualitative results.

A

Implementation Details & Hyper-parameter Values

A.1

Adaptive Geo-cell Partitioning

We utilize the S2 geometry library3 to divide the earth’s surface into a fixed number of
non-overlapping geographic cells. To directly compare our results with baselines, we use
the same partitioning approach like [6], where we subdivide the earth’s surface into three
resolutions containing 3298, 7202, and 12893 geo-cells referred to as coarse, middle,
and fine cells, respectively. The partitioning ensures each cell contains at least 50 and at
most 5000, 2000, and 1000 training images for the coarse, middle, and fine resolution.
Limiting the number of training images into a minimum and maximum range per geo-cell
gives two advantages. First, the training set does not suffer from class imbalance, which
is pivotal for classifying many classes. Second, the geographic areas which are heavily
photographed are subdivided into smaller cells, allowing more precise geo-localization
of these regions (such as big cities and tourist attractions). However, one drawback of
this approach is that many geographic areas have less than the required minimum number
of images. Consequently, many locations (such as oceans, remote mountainous regions,
deserts, poles) are discarded because of insufficient images. With the minimum range of
50, the partitioning covers almost 84% of the entire earth’s surface.
In classification-based geo-localization, the number of geo-cells closely relates to the
prediction accuracy. In other words, since the predicted GPS coordinates are always the
mean location of all training images in the predicted geo-cell, coarse cells often can not
produce good street-level accuracy. On the other hand, fine cells improve localization
precision by generating smaller geo-cells in highly photographed areas. Figure A.1 shows
the improvement of street-level (1 km) and city-level (25 km) geolocational accuracy by
using the predictions from finer cells on four different datasets. Since the continent-level
(2500 km) accuracy is not directly related to the size of cells, it remains almost unchanged
with geo-cell resolution variation. Next, we use an ensemble of hierarchical classification
3

https://code.google.com/archive/p/s2-geometry-library/source

