Supplementary Material for DCCF: Deep
Comprehensible Color Filter Learning
Framework for High-Resolution Image
Harmonization
Ben Xue1⋆ , Shenghui Ran2 , Quan Chen2⋆⋆ ,
Rongfei Jia2 , Binqiang Zhao2 , and Xing Tang2
1

1

Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, China
2
Alibaba Group, China

Introduction

For better acknowledgement of details, we provide several supplementary sections to demonstrate the mechanism and capability of DCCF.
In Section 2 and 4, we provide more experiment results on high-resolution
images along with the efficiency comparison. In Section 5, we further show the
low-resolution results to demonstrate the efficacy of designed filters.
In Section 7.1, we show that a constrained rotation matrix in RGB space can
actually rotate the color angle in HSV space. Along with the disentanglement
in high resolution assembly module in Section 7.2, we also show that DCCF
like Fhue can learn unconstrained rotation matrix which can be projected on its
current HSV plane to directly affect the specific HSV channel.
In Section 8, we demonstrate the numerical procedure of standard and smoothing(ours) HSV supervision strategies.
In Section 9, we show the capability of DCCF to adjust specific image attribute. Each filter of this family can be picked out to qualify its sub-task. In
Section 10 and Section 11, we provide more visualization results of comprehensible interaction and high-resolution results. In Section 12, we discuss the potential
limitation of our framework.

2

High-Resolution Results with Different Backbones

Note that our DCCF can be plugged into different backbones, we select DIH [11]
and S2 AM [4] for experiment. [11] shares similary U-net[8] architecture with
iDIH-HRNet [9] except for the extra pretrained visual feature from HRNet [10].
[4] uses spatial-separated attention module in decoder to aggregate semantic information. For fair comparison, we keep learning strategy the same as DCCF
⋆
⋆⋆

Finish this work during an internship at Alibaba Group. Email: xueben@pku.edu.cn.
Corresponding author. Email: myctllmail@163.com.

