Supplementary Materials for
“Prototype-Guided Continual Adaptation for
Class-Incremental Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation”
Hongbin Lin1,3∗ , Yifan Zhang2∗ , Zhen Qiu1∗ ,
Shuaicheng Niu1 , Chuang Gan4 , Yanxia Liu1† , and Mingkui Tan1,5†
1

South China University of Technology 2 National University of Singapore
3
Information Technology R&D Innovation Center of Peking University
4
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
5
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education
{sehongbinlin,seqiuzhen,sensc}@mail.scut.edu.cn,
yifan.zhang@u.nus.edu, ganchuang1990@gmail.com,
{cslyx,mingkuitan}@scut.edu.cn

In this supplementary, we provide more related work and discussions to clarify
the differences of ProCA with existing methods. In addition, we also provide
more implementation details and more experimental results. We organize the
supplementary materials as follows.
1) In Appendix A, we review universal domain adaptation [18] and give more
discussions on partial domain adaptation and prototype-based methods.
2) In Appendix B, we present the pseudo-code of our prototype identification
scheme.
3) In Appendix C, we provide more construction details of class-incremental
domain adaptation data.
4) In Appendix D, we provide more training details of our proposed ProCA.
5) In Appendix E, we provide more results of applying ProCA to improve the
PDA method.
6) In Appendix F, we provide more ablation studies, including the influence
of hyper-parameters, the number of target prototypes and the number of
incremental classes.
7) In Appendix G, we examine the effectiveness of our shared class detection
strategy.
8) In Appendix H, we provide more detailed results of each subtask in the three
datasets in terms of the Step-level Accuracy and the Final S-1 Accuracy.

A

More related work and discussions

In this appendix, we first review the literature of universal domain adaptation.
After that, to better illustrate our novelty, we discuss the differences between
∗
†

Authors contributed equally.
Corresponding authors.

