Supplementary Conditional Stroke Recovery for
Fine-Grained Sketch-Based Image Retrieval
Zhixin Ling , Zhen Xing , Jian Zhou , and Xiangdong Zhou†
Fudan University, Shanghai, China
{20212010005,zxing20,19212010009,xdzhou}@fudan.edu.cn

In this document, we provide additional materials to supplement our main
submission. In Sec. 1, we provide more visualization for our stroke disorder
algorithm. In Sec. 2, we elaborate our experiment setup. In Sec. 3, we discuss
a loss similar to Lda . In Sec. 4, we present details of CSR-GoogLeNet, CSRInceptionV3, CSR-Densenet169 and CSR-ResNet18.

1

Some Details of Stroke Disorder Algorithm

In our main paper, to emphasize effectiveness of the recovery process, we present
some extremely disordered cases and simply introduce the stroke extraction process. Ine this section, we visualize the stroke disorder algorithm step by step. The
simplest case is shown in Fig. 1. Ln1 has already grouped the pixels into enough
strokes. In most cases, however, these exists only one or two stroke in the sketch.
So we execute Ln2-9 to divided the pixels into more strokes: 1) we find a chokepoint; 2) we obtain a direction of maximum variance in the neighborhood pixels,
i.e., v; 3) we cut the stroke along the direction perpendicular to v. The processes are visualized in Fig.2. We cut a long stroke at the chokepoint because we
assumes that a stroke is likely to end up there.
There exists some cases where the algorithm might not well even if the assumption is true. For example, when two ends of the stroke are connected to a
larger stroke, the stroke is unlikely to be truncated since both ends are unlikely
to be removed in Ln6. Case(1) in Fig.2 is a typical case. Many wheel spokes are
connected with the hub and the rim. Although the algorithm tries to cut the
rim side of the stroke, some strokes are still connected to the hub.
ns controls the integrity of strokes. A larger breaks the strokes into more
pieces. Empirically, setting ns = 10 is marginally better than ns = 5. Setting it
to 2 might be the best for visualization, but it yields unsatisfactory performance.

2

Experiment Setup

2.1

Implementation Details

CSR is implemented using PyTorch 1.2.0 on a single GTX 1080Ti GPU on
Ubuntu18.04 system with 64G memory. The CPU is i7-6800K. The GPU memory
is 11.2GB.
†

Corresponding author.

