Correspondence Reweighted Translation
Averaging
Supplementary Material
Lalit Manam and Venu Madhav Govindu
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India - 560012
{lalitmanam,venug}@iisc.ac.in

1

Additional results

Synthetic Experiments: In Sec. 4.1 of the main paper, we provided results for
NRMSE for one scenario, i.e. σ = 3 with outliers. Here, we present the results
for the rest of the cases. Fig. 1 shows the NRMSE distribution in 10 instances for
synthetic datasets with different noise levels and outliers. The leftward shift in
the NRMSE distribution implies significant improvement in performance using
our method over the corresponding translation averaging method used, especially in the cases that contain outliers.
Large-scale Errors: To understand the quality of camera translation estimates beyond mean and median errors, we checked for cameras with very large
errors (> 50 m). Table 1 shows the percentage of cameras with such errors. It
can be seen that, for most datasets, our framework reduces cameras with large
errors. In particular, CReTA-BATA has the least percentage of cameras with
large errors compared to other schemes.
Impact on 3D Reconstruction: In Fig. 4 of the paper, we presented 3D
reconstructions after triangulation and BA using CReTA-RLUD solution. We
provide reconstructions using CReTA-BATA solution in Fig. 2. It is observed
that in the case of CReTA-BATA as well, we get reasonable reconstructions
just with triangulation when compared to the reference BA results. Moreover,
the differences between reconstructions using CReTA-RLUD (Fig. 4 of the main
paper) and CReTA-BATA (Fig. 2) are not significant. This implies that our
approach of reweighting point correspondences can enhance any translation averaging scheme to similar levels in terms of the reconstruction quality.
We also provide a comparison of 3D reconstructions between different methods using 1DSfM provided relative translations (1DSfM-RT) and RANSAC refined relative translations (Ref-RT) after triangulation (refinement is done as
described in Sec 4.2 of the main paper). In Tables 3 and 4 of the main paper,
the relatively high mean errors for the Tower of London dataset (compared to
other datasets) using all the methods suggest that this is a challenging dataset
to solve. We compare the reconstructions of the Tower of London dataset in

