18

Dustin Schwenk et al.

A

Additional details of dataset collection

A.1

Examples of rejected questions

With a focus on overall question quality, we removed around 60% of questions
written for having any of several flaws. The vast majority of questions removed
exhibited one or more four flaws: 1) Only required recognition of a common
object, 2) only required counting a readily specified object, 3) did not require
looking at the image to answer, 4) only asked about the color of a readily specified
object. Examples of questions from each of these categories are shown in Fig. 4.

Reason rejected: Question only
requires recognition of a common
object.

Reason rejected: Question only
requires counting specified
objects.

Reason rejected: Question doesn’t
require looking at the image to
answer.

Reason rejected: Question only
asks about the color of a clearly
specified object.

Fig. 4: Examples of questions rejected for not meeting our criteria.

A.2

Data collection interface

The data-collection interface used by crowdworkers to write questions is shown in
Fig. 5. Detailed instructions along with examples of good and bad questions were
provided. After writing a question, workers were required to press the “Check
for similar question” button. This sent a request to a server which returned
the five questions closest to those already written in our growing dataset. We
asked workers to rewrite or rephrase questions that were too similar, but did
not enforce a minimum distance cuto↵. The set of questions queried were reset
when collecting the val and test sets to allow a greater degree of overlap with the
training set. After satisfied with their question, workers advanced to the next
image. Each task workers performed included four images, nearby neighbors in
a CLIP embedding space, which encouraged creative di↵erences in questions
written for similar images. Workers were only required to write two questions
(out of four possible images) to allow them to skip images they didn’t feel they
could write a suitable questions for. This cut down on unsuitable questions that
they would have otherwise been forced to write in order to complete the task.

