SAGA: Stochastic Whole-Body Grasping with
Contact
** Appendix **
Yan Wu∗1 , Jiahao Wang∗2 , Yan Zhang1 , Siwei Zhang1 , Otmar Hilliges1 , Fisher
Yu1 , Siyu Tang1
1

ETH Zürich, Switzerland
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Germany
yan.wu@vision.ee.ethz.ch, jiwang@mpi-inf.mpg.de,
{yan.zhang,siwei.zhang,otmar.hilliges,siyu.tang}@inf.ethz.ch, i@yf.io
2

In the Appendix, we first provide the body markers representation, architecture details, training and optimization setup, dataset pre-processing details,
and the AMT user study evaluation details in Appendix A. In Appendix B, we
illustrate the detailed baseline experiments and ablation study setup. We further
provide additional experimental results and visualization results in Appendix C,
and we discuss the existing limitations in Appendix D. Please see the video in
our project page for more random samples of synthesized grasping poses and
grasping motions.

A

Method and Implementation Details

A.1

Body Markers Placement

To have informative yet compact markers setup, as illustrated in Fig. S1, we
follow the placement of the markers in GRAB [10] MoCap system, having 49
markers for the body, 14 for the face, 6 for hands and 30 for fingers (see Fig. S1
(a)-(c)) on SMPL-X body surface. As hand poses are subtle and the palm is
frequently in contact with the object, we additionally have 44 markers on two
palms (see Fig S1 (d-1)) to further enrich the markers information for a better
grasp. For the grasping ending pose generation in stage1, we use all these 143
markers for training and optimization. For the motion infilling network training
in stage2, we only use a sparse set of palm markers with 10 markers on fingertips
(see Fig. S1(d-2)).
A.2

Architecture Details

WholeGrasp-VAE We have visualized the WholeGrasp-VAE architecture in
Fig. 3. This CVAE is conditioned on the object height information and the
object geometry feature extracted with PointNet++ [9] encoder. In the encoder, taking the body markers’ postions M ∈ RN ×3 and body markers contacts
*

Equal contribution.

