ByteTrack: Multi-Object Tracking by Associating Every
Detection Box
Yifu Zhang1 , Peize Sun2 , Yi Jiang3 , Dongdong Yu3 , Fucheng Weng1 ,
Zehuan Yuan3 , Ping Luo2 , Wenyu Liu1 , and Xinggang Wang1†
1

A

Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
The University of Hong Kong
3
ByteDance Inc.

Bounding box annotations

We note MOT17 [15] requires the bounding boxes [29] covering the whole body, even
though the object is occluded or partly out of the image. However, the default implementation of YOLOX clips the detection boxes inside the image area. To avoid the
wrong detection results around the image boundary, we modify YOLOX in terms of
data pre-processing and label assignment. We do not clip the bounding boxes inside the
image during the data pre-processing and data augmentation procedure. We only delete
the boxes which are fully outside the image after data augmentation. In the SimOTA label assignment strategy, the positive samples need to be around the center of the object,
while the center of the whole body boxes may lie out of the image, so we clip the center
of the object inside the image.
MOT20 [7], HiEve [14] and BDD100K clip the bounding box annotations inside
the image in and thus we just use the original setting of YOLOX.

B

Tracking performance of light models

We compare BYTE and DeepSORT [22] using light detection models. We use YOLOX
[10] with different backbones as our detector. All models are trained on CrowdHuman
and the half training set of MOT17. The input image size is 1088 × 608 and the shortest side ranges from 384 to 832 during multi-scale training. The results are shown in
Table 1. We can see that BYTE brings stable improvements on MOTA and IDF1 compared to DeepSORT, which indicates that BYTE is robust to detection performance.
It is worth noting that when using YOLOX-Nano as backbone, BYTE brings 3 points
higher MOTA than DeepSORT, which makes it more appealing in real applications.

C

Ablation Studies on ByteTrack

Speed v.s. accuracy. We evaluate the speed and accuracy of ByteTrack using different
size of input images during inference. All experiments use the same multi-scale training.
The results are shown in Table 2. The input size during inference ranges from 512×928
to 800 × 1440. The running time of the detector ranges from 17.9 ms to 30.0 ms and the

