Supplementary Material
Stripformer: Strip Transformer for Fast Image
Deblurring
Fu-Jen Tsai1 , Yan-Tsung Peng2 , Yen-Yu Lin3 , Chung-Chi Tsai4 , and
Chia-Wen Lin1
1

National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
cwlin@ee.nthu.edu.tw, fjtsai@gapp.nthu.edu.tw
2
National Chengchi University, Taiwan
ytpeng@cs.nccu.edu.tw
3
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
lin@cs.nycu.edu.tw
4
Qualcomm Technologies, Inc., San Diego
chuntsai@qti.qualcomm.com

This document provides additional materials to supplement our main submission. First, we further analyze the effectiveness of the proposed strip-wise attention regarding its directions. Next, we demonstrate the effect of pre-training
models with a larger dataset. Lastly, we show more deblurring results and comparisons on real-world blurred scenes.

1

Further Analysis on strip-wise attention

We propose intra/inter-strip attention (SA) to deal with motion blur, which
decomposes blur motions into horizontal and vertical directions to catch blur
orientations and magnitudes by strip-wise tokens. Figure A demonstrates some
attention maps obtained with the last horizontal and vertical SA after multiple
interlaced Intra-SA and Inter-SA blocks for two blurred images. Here, the last
horizontal and vertical SA refer to Intra-SA-H and Intra-SA-V of the last stacked
interlaced Intra-SA and Inter-SA blocks, as shown in Figure 3. Generally, the
maps in Figure A show that larger values represent largely blurred regions while
smaller for sharper regions.
Besides, we conduct an additional ablation on only horizontal or vertical
strips used to analyze them further. Table A shows that Stripformer with both
horizontal and vertical strips performs better than using single directional strips
alone, which again attests to the effectiveness of our design for deblurring. We
did not test the setting with no intra-SA and inter-SA since it would reduce our
model to a simple CNN architecture, which has proven insufficient to achieve
comparable deblurring performances in the literature.

2

Pre-training Data Analysis.

Compared to IPT [1], which utilizes ImageNet (1M images) as pre-training data
to achieve comparable performance to SOTA methods. Our Stripformer can

