Supplementary Material
Box2Mask: Weakly Supervised 3D Semantic
Instance Segmentation Using Bounding Boxes
Julian Chibane1,2 , Francis Engelmann3 , Tuan Anh Tran2 , and
Gerard Pons-Moll1,2
1

2

A

University of Tübingen, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
3
ETH Zurich AI Center, Switzerland

Baseline: Object Detector followed by Segmentation

In the main paper, we address how per-point instance masks can be learned
from bounding box annotations only. To show that this is a non-trivial task, and
that our proposed method generalizes beyond the weak supervision signal, we
present an additional baseline experiment. This baseline is an object detector
predicting bounding boxes and is trained on the given ground truth bounding
box annotations. Then, the instance masks are obtained by segmenting the points
inside each predicted bounding box into foreground and background. The baseline
implementation closely follows the implementation of our main model: using a
sparse convolutional network [2] we obtain deep learned features for each point in
the input point cloud. The learned point-features then vote for object bounding
box proposals. These steps are identical to the first part our main model shown
in Fig. 2 of the main paper. We then perform non-maximum-suppression (NMS)
to obtain object detection bounding boxes from the proposals. The final instance
masks are obtained from the predicted bounding boxes, which are segmented into
foreground and background based on the number of bounding boxes each point
is contained in. This is the same mechanism as described in the main paper to
obtain per-point supervision signals (Sec. 5, Eq. 2 in the main paper). By doing
so, it is guaranteed that the baseline is directly comparable with the proposed
weakly-supervised approach. Visual results, including the object detections are
shown in Fig. 1. Scores are shown in Tab. 1. Our proposed approach largely
outperforms this baseline (+11.8 mAP50 ). In particular, this experiment shows
that learning instance masks from bounding box annotations alone is non-trivial,
and that our trained model is able to generalize beyond the weak training signal
obtained from the bounding box annotations.

B

Per-Category Results

In this section, we show per-category results on the ScanNet validation and test
splits, and on S3DIS 6-fold cross validation, as summarised in Tab. 2, 3, 4 and
5. On ScanNet validation and S3DIS, we show also per-category scores for the
fully-supervised model trained with per-point instance labels.

