AutoAugment:
Learning Augmentation Strategies from Data

arXiv:1805.09501v3 [cs.CV] 11 Apr 2019

Ekin D. Cubuk ∗, Barret Zoph∗, Dandelion Mané, Vijay Vasudevan, Quoc V. Le
Google Brain

Abstract

horizontal flips or translation. Network architectures can
also be used to hardcode invariances: convolutional networks bake in translation invariance [16, 32, 25, 29]. However, using data augmentation to incorporate potential invariances can be easier than hardcoding invariances into the
model architecture directly.

Data augmentation is an effective technique for improving the accuracy of modern image classifiers. However, current data augmentation implementations are manually designed. In this paper, we describe a simple procedure called
AutoAugment to automatically search for improved data
augmentation policies. In our implementation, we have designed a search space where a policy consists of many subpolicies, one of which is randomly chosen for each image
in each mini-batch. A sub-policy consists of two operations, each operation being an image processing function
such as translation, rotation, or shearing, and the probabilities and magnitudes with which the functions are applied.
We use a search algorithm to find the best policy such that
the neural network yields the highest validation accuracy
on a target dataset. Our method achieves state-of-the-art
accuracy on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, SVHN, and ImageNet
(without additional data). On ImageNet, we attain a Top-1
accuracy of 83.5% which is 0.4% better than the previous
record of 83.1%. On CIFAR-10, we achieve an error rate of
1.5%, which is 0.6% better than the previous state-of-theart. Augmentation policies we find are transferable between
datasets. The policy learned on ImageNet transfers well to
achieve significant improvements on other datasets, such as
Oxford Flowers, Caltech-101, Oxford-IIT Pets, FGVC Aircraft, and Stanford Cars.

Dataset

GPU
Best published Our results
hours
results
CIFAR-10
5000
2.1
1.5
CIFAR-100
0
12.2
10.7
SVHN
1000
1.3
1.0
Stanford Cars 0
5.9
5.2
ImageNet
15000
3.9
3.5
Table 1. Error rates (%) from this paper compared to the best results so far on five datasets (Top-5 for ImageNet, Top-1 for the
others). Previous best result on Stanford Cars fine-tuned weights
originally trained on a larger dataset [66], whereas we use a randomly initialized network. Previous best results on other datasets
only include models that were not trained on additional data, for
a single evaluation (without ensembling). See Tables 2,3, and 4
for more detailed comparison. GPU hours are estimated for an
NVIDIA Tesla P100.

Yet a large focus of the machine learning and computer
vision community has been to engineer better network architectures (e.g., [55, 59, 20, 58, 64, 19, 72, 23, 48]). Less
attention has been paid to finding better data augmentation
methods that incorporate more invariances. For instance,
on ImageNet, the data augmentation approach by [29], introduced in 2012, remains the standard with small changes.
Even when augmentation improvements have been found
for a particular dataset, they often do not transfer to other
datasets as effectively. For example, horizontal flipping of
images during training is an effective data augmentation
method on CIFAR-10, but not on MNIST, due to the different symmetries present in these datasets. The need for
automatically learned data-augmentation has been raised recently as an important unsolved problem [57].
In this paper, we aim to automate the process of finding
an effective data augmentation policy for a target dataset.
In our implementation (Section 3), each policy expresses
several choices and orders of possible augmentation opera-

1. Introduction
Deep neural nets are powerful machine learning systems
that tend to work well when trained on massive amounts
of data. Data augmentation is an effective technique to increase both the amount and diversity of data by randomly
“augmenting” it [3, 54, 29]; in the image domain, common
augmentations include translating the image by a few pixels, or flipping the image horizontally. Intuitively, data augmentation is used to teach a model about invariances in the
data domain: classifying an object is often insensitive to
∗ Equal contribution.

1

