D2C-SR: A Divergence to Convergence Approach
for Real-World Image Super-Resolution
Youwei Li 1

Haibin Huang 2 Lanpeng Jia 3
Shuaicheng Liu 4,1,†

Haoqiang Fan 1

1

Megvii Technology, Beijing, China 2 Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China
3
Great Wall Motor Company Limited, Baoding, China
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
{liyouwei, fhq}@megvii.com jialanpeng@gwm.cn jackiehuanghaibin@gmail.com
liushuaicheng@uestc.edu.cn
†
Corresponding Author

1

Overview

In this supplementary material, we first introduce more details of our D2CRealSR
dataset in Sec. 2, including the collection and processing method. In Sec. 3, we
discuss more about simulated SISR and real-world SISR. Then, in Sec. 4, we
demonstrate more experimental results and details. Finally, we show more visual
comparison results and divergence results in Sec. 5, including the results on the
RealSR and D2CR RealSR datasets.

2

D2CRealSR Dataset

Existing real-world SISR datasets generally include images pairs on x2, x3 and
x4 scaling factors, such as RealSR dataset [2] and DRealSR dataset [13]. Our
proposed D2CRealSR dataset have images pairs on x8 scaling factor, which larger
than the existing real-world datasets. The ill-posed problem is more obvious on
D2CRealSR dataset.
Images pairs in our dataset are taken by zooming Sony α-7. The number
of training pairs in our dataset is 100, and testing set has 15 images pairs
selected randomly. The D2CRealSR provides, to the best of our knowledge, the
first general purpose benchmark on x8 scaling factor for real-world SISR. It is
difficult to obtain images pairs with good alignment effects in natural scenes.
These difficulties in the alignment process include depth-of-field misalignment,
noticeable perspective misalignment, lens distortion misalignment and resolution
alignment ambiguity [15]. Therefore, using the DSLR camera to directly acquire
natural scene images pairs generally cannot be well aligned. We have found
misalignment in DRealSR dataset, mostly due to depth-of-field misalignment.
To solve these misalignment problems, we collect some high-resolution images,
firstly. These images are mostly taken by DSLR from existing datasets or our
own shooting dataset. Different from City100 [3], which only have city scenes, we
have selected the images with different scenes including indoor and outdoor. It

