Meta-sampler: Almost-Universal
yet Task-Oriented Sampling for Point
Clouds
Ta-Ying Cheng, Qingyong Hu(B) , Qian Xie, Niki Trigoni,
and Andrew Markham
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
qingyong.hu@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract. Sampling is a key operation in point-cloud task and acts to
increase computational eﬃciency and tractability by discarding redundant points. Universal sampling algorithms (e.g., Farthest Point Sampling) work without modiﬁcation across diﬀerent tasks, models, and
datasets, but by their very nature are agnostic about the downstream
task/model. As such, they have no implicit knowledge about which points
would be best to keep and which to reject. Recent work has shown how
task-speciﬁc point cloud sampling (e.g., SampleNet) can be used to outperform traditional sampling approaches by learning which points are
more informative. However, these learnable samplers face two inherent
issues: i) overﬁtting to a model rather than a task, and ii) requiring training of the sampling network from scratch, in addition to the task network,
somewhat countering the original objective of down-sampling to increase
eﬃciency. In this work, we propose an almost-universal sampler, in our
quest for a sampler that can learn to preserve the most useful points for
a particular task, yet be inexpensive to adapt to diﬀerent tasks, models
or datasets. We ﬁrst demonstrate how training over multiple models for
the same task (e.g., shape reconstruction) signiﬁcantly outperforms the
vanilla SampleNet in terms of accuracy by not overﬁtting the sample network to a particular task network. Second, we show how we can train an
almost-universal meta-sampler across multiple tasks. This meta-sampler
can then be rapidly ﬁne-tuned when applied to diﬀerent datasets, networks, or even diﬀerent tasks, thus amortizing the initial cost of training.
Code is available at https://github.com/ttchengab/MetaSampler.
Keywords: Point cloud sampling · Point cloud processing ·
Meta-learning

1

Introduction

Modern depth sensors such as LiDAR scanners can capture visual scenes with
highly dense and accurate points, expanding the real-world applications of point
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1 40.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13662, pp. 694–710, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20086-1_40

