Boosting Event Stream Super-Resolution
with A Recurrent Neural Network
§Supplementary Material§
Wenming Weng , Yueyi Zhang(B) , and Zhiwei Xiong
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
wmweng@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhyuey, zwxiong}@ustc.edu.cn

1

Additional Visual Results

We provide additional visual results of event SR and video reconstruction among
bicubic, SRFBN [4], EventZoom [1], EventZoom-cr and our method. For large
factor SR results of SRFBN and EventZoom, we run 2×-model multiple times
due to high cost of training a single large factor SR model, which is also adopted
in [1]. The 16× SR results of EventZoom-cr are omitted because we cannot train
a 16×-model of EventZoom-cr.
On real-world dataset. We present more real-world results on ENFS-real
[1] in Fig. 1. The size of real LR events is 56×31, which is severely degraded.
For all methods, we use the pre-trained model on synthetic dataset (ENFSsyn) to super-resolve real LR events. It can be clearly observed that we can
achieve satisfactory results with fine details and sharp edges, demonstrating
strong ability of generalization and robustness when applied for real sensors.
On synthetic dataset. We present more synthetic results on ENFS-syn and
RGB-DAVIS-syn in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. The sizes of LR events on ENFS-syn and
RGB-DAVIS-syn are 80×45 and 190×180, respectively.
Video reconstruction. We present more visual results for event-based video
reconstruction on ENFS-syn in Fig. 4. We show LR/ground-truth events and
corresponding frames for better comparison. We also convert ground-truth events
to video, named “GT events recons”, which is upper bound. Compared with
baselines, our method is capable of producing relatively good reconstruction
results. To the best of our knowledge, we benchmark the methods of event-toframe with large factor (8×) for the first time.

2

Video Demonstration for Event SR and Video
Reconstruction

We also provide a video demonstration for event SR and video reconstruction. We
strongly recommend referring to it for intuitive comparisons of bicubic, SRFBN
[4], EventZoom [1], EventZoom-cr and our method.

