Supplementary Material for D2HNet: Joint
Denoising and Deblurring with Hierarchical
Network for Robust Night Image Restoration
Yuzhi Zhao1 , Yongzhe Xu2 , Qiong Yan2 , Dingdong Yang2 , Xuehui Wang3 , and
Lai-Man Po1
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, China
2
SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI
3
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
yzzhao2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, wangxuehui@sjtu.edu.cn, eelmpo@cityu.edu.hk,
{xuyongzhe1,yanqiong,yangdingdong}@tetras.ai

1

More Results on Captured Real Images

We show more visual results of D2HNet and SOTA methods on real images
in Figure 1, which are captured with Xiaomi Mi Note 10 smartphone. The
texture learning ability, denoising quality, and artifact removal performance of
the proposed D2HNet are all better than SOTA methods. The more detailed
analysis is in the captions.

2

More Results on Validation Set

We show more visual results of D2HNet and SOTA methods on the validation set
of the collected D2-Dataset. The results on 1440p data and 2880p data are shown
in Figure 2 and Figure 3, respectively. The D2HNet produces more distinguishable details and achieves better deblurring quality. It also achieves consistent
and better performance on different image resolutions.

3

Burst-image Method Experiments

We compare D2HNet with a burst-image denoising method KPN [1]. The training set of KPN is also generated from the same video source of D2-Dataset and
4 successive short-exposure images are synthesized by a similar process used in
D2-Dataset, then augmented with the same noise parameters as D2HNet. The
results are shown in Figure 4, where D2HNet produces richer textures (e.g., flowers in 72) and has fewer visual artifacts (e.g., black car in 71 and dark road in
73) than KPN. Since KPN defines a fixed size of output convolutional kernels,
it is not flexible to image resolutions larger than training images, i.e., it cannot
address the domain gap issue. In addition, burst capturing with 4 shots takes
more time than 2 shots due to hardware constraints. And more shots introduce
more misalignment issues. Hence our D2HNet framework is more favorable.

