Supplementary Materials for
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for One-Stage
Object Detector using Offsets to Bounding Box

A

Binning Strategies

A.1

The ratio of features assigned to each bin

In Sec. 3.4 of the main paper, we set mi of each bin to (m1 , m2 , m3 ) = (lv− 21 , lv+
3
1
2 , lv + 2 ) for each lv-th level feature to convert the offset value into a categorical
probability vector. Fig. 1 shows the average of the probabilities that the left l
and top t offset values belong to each bin as the training iteration progresses in
the CS → FoggyCS setting at different feature level. Initially, the probability of
the offset value belonging to each bin begins as a uniform distribution so that
( 13 , 13 , 13 ), and it gradually converges to the average of q̃, the probability vector of
the offset values, during the warm-up period (I iterations). Since mi is not finely
set to make the the ratio of the offset values corresponding to each bin equal,
in the case of F3 and F4 , the ratio belonging to the last bin is somewhat high.
However, setting the value of mi as mentioned in the main paper is sufficiently
effective. This is because it is not important to ensure that the proportion of
features belonging to each bin is equal, but important to similarly match the
distribution between the features of the two domains belonging to the same bin.
A.2

Setting of the mi values according to the number of bins

Table 3 of Sec. 4.5 in the main paper compares the effect of conditioning the
feature more strongly or loosely by changing the number of bins. Table 1 specifies
mi values for each Nbin setting at different feature level. We set mi values so
that more than a certain ratio of features can be assigned to each bin.

B

Training Details for the Self-Training

We basically follow the details of the method proposed in Liu et. al [2]. Even
though [2] is a work that tackles semi-supervised object detection, its proposed
method is applicable to unsupervised domain adaptation as well since the main
idea is about how to handle the unlabeled data. It suggests how to train the
object detector with the unlabeled data in a self-training manner using the
unbiased teacher network. Only difference in the setting of ours from [2] is that in
[2], the labeled and the unlabeled data are from the same distribution, but in our
case of unsupervised domain adaptation, the unlabeled data are from different
distribution of the labeled data. The idea of [2] is to utilize the unbiased teacher

