UC-OWOD: Unknown-Classified Open World
Object Detection (Supplementary Materials)
⋆

Zhiheng Wu1,2 , Yue Lu1,2 , Xingyu Chen3 , Zhengxing Wu1,2,
Liwen Kang1,2 , and Junzhi Yu1,4

,

1

2

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Xiaobing.AI
4
Peking University

The full quantitative experiment and more visualizations are included to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the method.

1

Quantitative Results

Table 1 shows the full results of the proposed UC-OWOD evaluation protocol.
The detection performance of known classes is calculated by mAP. As mentioned above, Oracle is a detector trained with annotations of all known and
unknown instances. Since the training set only has labels of known classes in
task 1, the detection result of Oracle on unknown classes are not considered.
Without finetuning, the model will completely forget previous classes, which
results in significant mAP drop (55.38% vs. 0%). By finetuning, part of the detection ability of the preciously known classes can be restored (40.90% mAP),
but WI/A-OSE performance does suffer. The finetuned detector is more inclined
to classify an object into known classes. Regarding the scores about unknown
classes, task 4 cannot be measured due to the lack of unknown ground-truth.
On tasks with the previous known, our method learns better than ORE on the
current known. However, due to incomplete annotations of the validation set,
detection of unknown objects such as house are regarded as false detection. For
this reason, Both mAP of our model is lower than the ORE. Therefore, mAP
can only measure the detection performance of the model for known classes to
a certain extent.

2

Qualitative Results

Since Faster-RCNN cannot detect any unknown objects, we only qualitatively
compare Oracle, ORE and our model, as shown in Fig. 1. For each test image,
columns from left to right are the detection results of Oracle, ORE, and our
model. Both Oracle and ORE failed to detect baseball bat and donut, etc. This
implies that our model is better at detecting unknown objects. In order to better
analyze the performance of the model on the UC-OWOD problem, we use some
images with multiple unknown instances to test, as shown in Fig. 2. The results

