TACS: Taxonomy Adaptive Cross-Domain
Semantic Segmentation
— Supplementary Material —
Rui Gong1 , Martin Danelljan1 , Dengxin Dai3 , Danda Pani Paudel1 , Ajad
Chhatkuli1 , Fisher Yu1 , and Luc Van Gool1,2
1

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{gongr,martin.danelljan,paudel,ajad.chhatkuli,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch
i@yf.io
2
VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven, Belgium
3
VAS, MPI for Informatics, Germany ddai@mpi-inf.mpg.de

In this supplementary material, we provide the additional information for,
S1 clarification on the code implementation, and discussion on the future work,
societal impact and limitations,
S2 comparison between our proposed TACS and other domain adaptation problems,
S3 detailed implementation of our proposed framework,
S4 detailed information of involved datasets in our experiments,
S5 additional quantitative and qualitative experimental results.

S1

Code, Future Work, Societal Impact and Limitations

Code Implementation. Our implementation is publicly available at https:
//github.com/ETHRuiGong/TADA.
Future Work. Inspired by [11, 14, 20], the integration of our method and the
active learning based methods [11, 14, 20], identifying the informative instances
to label under TACS setting, serves as a promising future work direction.
Potential Negative Societal Impact and Limitations. Societal Impact:
Our proposed approach provides the potential to adapt the semantic segmentation model even under the inconsistent taxonomy, saving much cost and effort for
labeling when new data and new requirements come. Thus, there is also a risk for
reduced need of data labelling, leading fewer jobs in this domain and potential
unemployment. Limitations: The main limitation is that the domain adaptation
approach is yet to achieve the performance of fully supervised training.

S2

Comparison with Other Domain Adaptation Problems

In Sec. 2 of the main paper, we compare different domain adaptation problems
with our newly proposed taxonomy adaptive cross-domain semantic segmentation (TACS) problem. Here we provide more clarification. We firstly clarify the
difference overview between TACS and other domain adaptation problems, and

