Temporal Saliency Query Network for Efficient
Video Recognition (Supplementary)

Table 1. Supplementary Material Overview.

A

Section

Content

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

Implementation Details.
Practical Inference Speed.
Additional Ablation study.
Additional Qualitative Analysis.
Additional Visualization of TSQ Embeddings.

Implementation Details

Here we provide some implementation details of TSQNet. We use MobileNetv2
and EfficientNet-B0 as the video encoder in VQM and object recognizer in TQM,
respectively. For video encoder in TQM, we use the ImageNet pre-trained model
and finetuned it on target datasets e.g., ActivityNet, etc., for 10 epochs. And
for Object recognizer, we directly use the officially released ImageNet model to
extract object score of the ImageNet 1000 classes. We use positional embedding
on frame sequence in transformer decoder to model temporal order information.
Next, we introduce how we obtain visual prototype based representation
for visual TSQ embeddings initialization. First we apply a classifier to get the
classification results for each frame. Then we select the top m percent of frames
which can correctly predict the ground truth video category, which are then
averaged to obtain the representation of each video. Finally, we pool all the
video representations of each category to get the prototype representation of
each category. We use m = 30 for all experiments in this paper.
Finally, we describe in detail how to fuse the VQM and TQM salient scores
into the final saliency measurement. Suppose we have the VQM salient scores
S v ∈ RT and TQM salient scores S t ∈ RT of one video. We join the top saliency
score frames from two modalities to get final K salient frames. Specifically, the
number of selected frames from two modalities are determined by λv K and λt K,
respectively, where λv +λt = 1. For example of selecting 5 frames from 16 frames
with λv = 0.6 situation, we select top 5 × 0.6 = 3 frames from VQM and top
5 − 3 = 2 ones are from TQM. And if there exists duplication, which results in
a final result of less than 5 frames, the selection will be deferred in the VQM
according to the descending order of S v until meeting the 5-frame budget. We
use λv = 0.6 and λt = 0.4 in experiments.

