WS3D Supplementary Material
Kangcheng Liu˚1 , Yuzhi Zhao2 , Qiang Nie3 , Zhi Gao4 , and Ben M. Chen1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China
2
City University of Hong Kong, China
3
Tencent Youtu Lab, China
4
Wuhan University, China
kcliu@mae.cuhk.edu.hk, yzzhao2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, qnie.cuhk@gmail.com,
bmchen@mae.cuhk.edu.hk, gaozhinus@gmail.com

Overview
In the supplementary material, additional details that are not included in the
main paper due to space limits are provided as follows:
– Details of our experimental datasets (see Section 1).
– Details of our data augmentation approach (see Section 2).
– Training details of the boundary prediction network (see Section 3).
– Some other experimental setting details (see Section 4).

1

Experimental Datasets Details

To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed WS3D, we tested it on both
indoor and outdoor 3D scene segmentation benchmarks, including S3DIS [1],
SemanticKITTI [2], and ScanNet [3] for semantic segmentation, and ScanNet [3]
for instance segmentation. Many prior works have used these datasets for benchmark comparisons [6–13]. Therefore, we continue to use these datasets in our
work. The detailed information of each dataset is listed as follows:
ScanNet-V2 is a standard large-scale and widely-acknowledged 3D indoor
scene understanding benchmark consisting of more than 1,600 3D scene scans.
It contains densely reconstructed point clouds from RGB-D images captured by
the depth camera. For the dataset partition in fully-supervised learning, we follow the official partition of ScanNet-V2 [3] using 1,201 scans as the training set,
312 scans as the validation set, and 100 scans as the test set.
SemanticKITTI [2] is a large-scale point cloud understanding benchmark
for self-driving applications. The point cloud of individual scene is obtained
densely by Velodyne VLP-64 LiDAR. The dataset covers long-range road scenes,
thanks to the vehicle driving in the complex road scenarios with mounted LiDAR
to capture the point clouds. More than 43,550 labeled LiDAR scans in total are
split into 21 sequences. Each LiDAR scan contains approximately 105 points.
We follow the official setting [2] that uses the sequences 00 to 07, and 09 to 10

