Supplementary Material for
A Visual Navigation Perspective for
Category-Level Object Pose Estimation
Anonymous ECCV submission
Paper ID 4677

Abstract. In this supplementary document, we first provide implementation details of our navigation strategies in Section 1. Next, we give
details of the datasets and baselines in Section 2 and Section 3, respectively. We then discuss additionally design choices in Section 4, including
the training efficiency and the policy horizon of the reinforcement learning strategy. We further present additional quantitative and qualitative
results in Section 5. Finally, we discuss the limitations in Section 6.

1

Implementation Details

1.1

Architecture

In this section, we present the network architecture of the RL and IL strategies.
Fig. 1 depicts the architecture of the policy network and the Q-value network
for RL, while Fig. 2 illustrates the policy network for IL. As shown in both
figures, we use two branches to predict θ and t, z independently, leading to
better performance in practice. Our intuition is that the non-convexity of θ is
more prominent than that of t, z. Thus better performance can be achieved by
allocating an independent branch to estimate θ. Each branch consists of two convolutional blocks to extract features from the target image I and the synthesized
image Î, respectively. The detailed architecture of a single convolutional block is
shown in Table 1. We flatten the output feature maps of the convolutional layers, concatenate them, and feed them as input to the subsequent fully connected
layers. We adopt the continuous action space and use Gaussian policy for both
RL and IL, where each item in the state θ, t, z is factorized by its mean and
log std. During training, we sample a policy from the corresponding Gaussian
distribution. At inference time, we take the mean as output directly. As show in
Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, three fully connected layers are used to to generate the mean
and log std for each item. For RL, the critic network shares the same convolutional blocks as the policy network, and predicts two q-values using three fully
connected layers. Following [9], we use two Q-functions to help mitigate positive
bias in the policy improvement step.

