Supplementary Material for GraphCSPN:
Geometry-Aware Depth Completion via
Dynamic GCNs

1

Overview

In this supplementary material, we first present a video demonstration of our
model on KITTI Depth Completion dataset [12]. An example of the video frame
can be found in Figure 1. We also provide additional analysis on spatial propagation networks from the physical perspective to demonstrate the advantages of
our model over previous methods [8, 3, 2, 9]. In addition, more experiments and
additional visualization results on indoor and outdoor datasets are also provided
in this material.

2

Anisotropic Diffusion Process

Spatial propagation networks originate in anisotropic diffusion which is a physical transport process and can be formulated by Fick’s law :
  j=-D \cdot \nabla u 

(1)

This equation describes the equilibration process during which a concentration
gradient ∇u causes a flux j to compensate for this gradient. And D denotes the
diffusion tensor. The case where j and ∇u are not parallel is called anisotropic
diffusion. By imposing continuity restrictions, the diffusion equation can be derived as follows:
  \partial _{t} u=\operatorname {div}(D \cdot \nabla u) 
(2)
The simple case where the diffusion tensor D is not changed during the diffusion
process is called linear diffusion. Previous methods [8, 3, 2, 9] only models the
linear diffusion process, and both the neighbors and affinity matrix are fixed
during the spatial propagation. Linear diffusion process dislocates edges and
blurs important features [13] which can easily lead to inaccurate predictions.
Our graph convolution based spatial propagation network models the nonlinear
diffusion process where the diffusion tensor is a function of the differential structure of the evolving image itself. And our method casts the diffusion process in
a more realistic manner and can effectively avoid those shortcomings of previous
approaches. Furthermore, the spatial propagation of our method is performed
between geometrically relevant neighbors in 3D space rather than in 2D plane of
previous methods, and can impede the propagation of errors during the iterative
refinement, as described in the main paper.

