Supplementary material:
Variance-Aware Weight Initialization
for Point Convolutional Neural Networks

A

Additional experiments

A.1

ModelNet40

We validate our algorithm on the task of shape classification on the M ODEL N ET 40 data
set [7], composed of only synthetic 3D models.
Data set: This synthetic data set is composed of 12 k shapes from 40 different humanmade objects, whereby the shapes are aligned into a canonical orientation. We use the
official training/test split which uses 9.8 k shapes for training and 2.4 k shape for testing.
We sample points using Poisson disk sampling with a radius of 0.05 from 2 k initial
random points on the surface of the objects, which results in roughly 1 k points per
model. As features, we use the surface normals, while we use random anisotropic scaling
(random scaling in each axis independently between 0.9 and 1.1) for data augmentation.
Performance is measured as overall accuracy accumulating the predicted probabilities
for each model with different anisotropic scalings.
Network architecture: We used the same architecture as the one used on the S CAN O B JECT NN data set, increasing the number of features by a factor of 2 and decreasing the
sampling radius and convolution receptive fields by a factor of 2.
Training: We trained the models using SGD with momentum for 500 epochs, batch size
equal to 16, and an initial learning rate of 0.005. We scaled the learning rate by 0.1 after
350 and again by 0.1 after 450, allowing all methods to converge. In order to prevent
overfitting, we used a dropout value of 0.2 before each convolution and 0.5 on the final
MLP, and we used weight decay loss scaled by 0.0001.
Results: The resulting accuracy is shown in Table 1. Our initialization scheme enables
us to eliminate batch normalization while still achieving accuracy values comparable to
the standard initialization with batch normalization. In contrast, when using standard
initialization without batch normalization, three tested approaches do not learn. This is
true for both variants of ours, the “direct” and the “transfer” one, as shown in the last two
columns. For the “transfer” one, we computed the initialization on the S CAN N ET data
set [2] for every method on a network with six consecutive layers without any pooling
operation. Then, we used this init on the network for the classification task. We see that
the performance remains the same as the “direct” setup.
Lastly, we compare our initialization with batch norm when the batch size is reduced.
In this experiment, we trained our classification network with and without batch normalization for batch sizes 2, and 4. The results, shown in Table 2, indicate that for a
small batch size of 2 our method is able to train the model while methods using batch
normalization are not able to converge.

