CADyQ: Content-Aware Dynamic Quantization
for Image Super-Resolution
– Supplementary Document –
Cheeun Hong1 , Sungyong Baik3 , Heewon Kim1 ,
Seungjun Nah1,4 , and Kyoung Mu Lee1,2
1

Dept. of ECE & ASRI, {cheeun914, ghimhw, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr
2
IPAI, Seoul National University
3
Dept. of Data Science, Hanyang University dsybaik@hanyang.ac.kr
4
NVIDIA seungjun.nah@gmail.com

This supplementary document presents additional experimental quantitative results to further demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework in
Section A; additional analyses of our proposed framework in Section B; implementation details in Section C; complexity analysis in Section D; and
additional qualitative results in Section E.

A

Additional Experiments

A.1

Effectiveness on Other Quantization Function

In this section, we provide experimental results to demonstrate that the proposed
quantization framework is applicable to other quantization functions. In the main
text, each quantization function candidate is implemented with PAMS, a linear
quantization function with a learnable scale parameter [31]. To demonstrate the
generalizability of CADyQ with different quantization functions in this section,
we employ another linear quantization function [52], which we refer to as LinQ.
The major difference between PAMS and LinQ is that PAMS uses a learnable
scale parameter to clip the outliers, whereas LinQ does not clip the outliers and
thus takes the whole feature range as the quantization range. Table S1 shows
the quantization results of CADyQ with LinQ (referred to as LinQ-CADyQ).
Our framework successfully achieves the reduction in average precision while simultaneously achieving the performance similar to or better than baselines or
its 8-bit counterpart quantized with LinQ. The results show that the proposed
quantization framework is flexible in terms of quantization functions. Note that
CADyQ achieves a larger average precision reduction with PAMS than with
LinQ. The results corroborate the previous findings that learnable scale parameters are effective for SR networks, which can have variant outliers in feature
distributions [31].
A.2

Experiments on SR Networks for Scale × 2

In addition to the scale ×4 experiments presented in the main manuscript, we
additionally evaluate our framework on SR models for scale ×2 : IDN [21], EDSRbaseline [34], SRResNet [29], and CARN [2]. As shown in Table S2, compared

