Supplementary Material for Domain Adaptive
Person Search

I

Additional Results

This is the supplementary material for the paper entitled “Domain Adaptive
Person Search”. Although the main paper stands on its own, it is still worthwhile
providing more experimental results and performance analysis.
I.1

Analysis on Balancing Factor λ

To investigate the effectiveness of our designed instance-level task-sensitive balancing term λ, we compare it with some manually assigned values. When CUHKSYSU serves as the target dataset, λ is set as 0.98. As illustrated in Table I, in
comparison with a wide range of values, our task-sensitive design achieves the
best performance. Moreover, it can be observed that the performance of detection is positively associated with λ, which validates our hypothesis in paper that
the detection performance mainly depends more on the first standard Faster
R-CNN head.
I.2

Comparison with Two-Step Person Search Models

To evaluate the performance and efficiency of our proposed end-to-end framework, we compare it with the baseline two-step model, where the detector is
first trained to localize pedestrians from raw images, and ReID model trained
with unified contrastive loss is subsequently employed for person retrieval from
the former detected crops. Specifically, to make a fair comparison, we use the
detection branch of SeqNet as the detector. From Table II, we can make the
observations that DAPS not only outperforms the two-step method, but also
takes a lead in efficiency by a large margin. Specifically, DAPS displays shorter
inference time (117 ms → 46 ms) and lower FLOPs (557G → 423G). It is also
noteworthy that the ReID training prototype adopted by two-step method is the
same with DAPS, and our proposed target data utilization strategies help boost
the performance of the end-to-end DAPS framework.
I.3

Comparison with Joint-Domain Fully-Supervised Settings

We further train the state-of-the-art fully supervised person search model with
both of the CUHK-SYSU and PRW to measure the theoretical upper bound
of DAPS, and the results are reported in Table III. When trained with both
datasets, the model trained with joint-domain achieves better performance on

