Supplementary Material for Objects Can Move:
3D Change Detection by Geometric
Transformation Consistency
Aikaterini Adam1,2 , Torsten Sattler1 , Konstantinos Karantzalos2 ,
Tomas Pajdla1
1

Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, CTU in Prague
{Aikaterini.Adam,Torsten.Sattler,pajdla}@cvut.cz
2
National Technical University of Athens, Greece
karank@scentral.ntua.gr

This is the supplementary material for our paper “Objects can move: 3D Change
Detection by Geometric Transformation Consistency”. The source code of the
paper can be found at at https://github.com/katadam/ObjectsCanMove. In Section 1, we discuss more quantitative results for the task of 3D object discovery,
and provide a more thorough investigation of the calculated transformations.
In Section 2, more visual results of our method and the baselines are shown.
We showcase corner cases where our output is inconsistent with the dataset’s
ground-truth annotation. We discuss in Section 3 why 3RScan [16] is the most
appropriate dataset for evaluating 3D change detection and 3D object discovery,
and we also evaluate our results on the sub-task of discovering added objects
(Section 4).

1

Quantitative Results

Accuracy of the Computed Transformations. As explained in the main
paper, the computation of the transformations induced by moving objects constitutes an essential component of the proposed method. We extract DGCNN
features [17] and establish correspondences on the whole scene based on nearest
neighbor search. Transformations are then computed using an iterative RANSAC
procedure [2]. We further evaluate the accuracy of the rigid transformations
with respect to the ground-truth ones. Results shown in Table 1, are evaluated
in terms of recall, capturing the percentage of correctly calculated transformations. We also provide the Mean Translation (MTE) and Mean Rotation (MRE)
Error, for all the correctly retrieved 3D rigid transforms. As in [16], we consider
a transformation as successfully calculated, if the alignment errors for the translation t∆ and rotation R∆ are lower than 10cm, 10◦ and 20cm, 20◦ respectively.
We compare our approach with handcrafted and learned descriptors for establishing correspondences. The baseline methods follow the object instance relocalization protocol of the 3RScan dataset [16]: having access to an instance
segmentation of the reference scan, they only need to find correspondences for
3D parts belonging to each instance. In contrast, our method does not use this
supervisory signal and performs full matching between the scenes. Thus, the

