18

O. Saha et al.

Appendix
A

PASCAL Pre-Processing

Birds in PASCAL Parts are segmented into 14 parts : ‘beak’, ‘head’, ‘left eye’,
‘left foot’, ‘left leg’, ‘left wing’, ‘neck’, ‘right eye’, ‘right foot’, ‘right leg’, ‘right
wing’, ‘tail’ and ‘torso’. We perform the following pre-processing steps to create
a dataset for bird part segmentation:
– Crop individual objects from a full image based on annotated pixel-wise
instance masks with a margin of 20 pixels on all sides
– Drop the cropped image if part of any other instance is present in the crop
– Check if the cropped instance is of bird class
– Filter out crops that have no part segmentation annotation
– Convert from 14 to 11 classes by dropping ’neck’ class and merging ’leg’/’feet’
classes due to inconsistencies in the annotated labels
– Filter out crops which are too small i.e. if either height or width  80 pixels
– Filter out crops which contains mostly the head of the bird by calculating
the ratio of area of body to head. If ratio is  0.95, we drop the crop2 .

After these pre-processing steps we have 536 centered bird images. Using the
standard split of PASCAL VOC, we separate out a training set of 271 images.
If the crop originates from a train set image it goes in the training set of our
dataset. We randomly split the rest of the images into validation and test sets
containing 132 and 133 images respectively.

B

Architectures

Image - x

Posterior Model
ƒ(y|x,y1,y2...yn,𝜃q)

Coarse Supervision Model
ƒ(yk|y,𝜃k)

Part Model
ƒ(y|x,𝜃)

||

Coarse
Labels
y1 || y2…|| yn

Posterior
prediction
μq

Posterior
prediction
μq

k = 1,2,...n

Legend

Coarse Label
prediction
μk
|| - concatenation

Part
prediction
μ/μp

Image
x/xp

ResNet-34 encoder

Shallow encoder

Decoder

Fig. 5: Architectures of networks used in the EM method. This figure shows
the input and output of each network. On the left is posterior model f (y|x, ymask , ykp ),
middle is f (yk |y) and right is f (y|x). Notations are consistent with Alg. 1. Note that
f (ymask |y) is deterministic, while f (ykp |y) is parameterized as a deep network and
trained as part of the EM algorithm (see § 5.2).

2

Note that we use this area ratio based method as the ’truncation’ and ’occlusion’
labels of PASCAL Part dataset would leave out many useful images

