InfiniteNature-Zero: Learning Perpetual
View Generation of Natural Scenes
from Single Images
Zhengqi Li1(B) , Qianqian Wang1,2 , Noah Snavely1 , and Angjoo Kanazawa3
1

Google Research, Mountain View, USA
zhengqili@google.com
2
Cornell Tech, Cornell University, Ithaca, USA
3
UC Berkeley, Berkeley, USA

Abstract. We present a method for learning to generate unbounded ﬂythrough videos of natural scenes starting from a single view. This capability is learned from a collection of single photographs, without requiring
camera poses or even multiple views of each scene. To achieve this, we
propose a novel self-supervised view generation training paradigm where
we sample and render virtual camera trajectories, including cyclic camera
paths, allowing our model to learn stable view generation from a collection of single views. At test time, despite never having seen a video, our
approach can take a single image and generate long camera trajectories
comprised of hundreds of new views with realistic and diverse content.
We compare our approach with recent state-of-the-art supervised view
generation methods that require posed multi-view videos and demonstrate superior performance and synthesis quality. Our project webpage,
including video results, is at https://inﬁnite-nature-zero.github.io.

1

Introduction

There are millions of photos of natural landscapes on the Internet, capturing
breathtaking scenery across the world. Recent advances in vision and graphics
have led to the ability to turn such images into compelling 3D photos [30,38,70].
However, most prior work can only extrapolate scene content within a limited
range of views corresponding to a small head movement. What if, instead, we
could step into the picture and ﬂy through the scene like a bird and explore the
world in 3D, and see diverse elements like mountain, lakes, and forests appear
naturally as we move through the landscape? This challenging new task was
recently proposed by Liu et al. [43], who called it perpetual view generation: given
a single RGB image, the goal is to synthesize a video depicting a scene captured
from a moving camera with an arbitrary long camera trajectory. Methods that
tackle this problem have applications in content creation and virtual reality.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7 30.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13661, pp. 515–534, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19769-7_30

