Supplementary Materials: A Fast Knowledge
Distillation Framework for Visual Recognition
Zhiqiang Shen1,2,3 and Eric Xing1,3
1

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
zhiqiangshen@cse.ust.hk,epxing@cs.cmu.edu
Project Page: http://zhiqiangshen.com/projects/FKD/index.html
2

Appendix
A

Visualization, Analysis and Discussion

To investigate the learned differences of information between ReLabel and FKD,
we depict the intermediate attention maps using gradient-based localization [3].
There are three important observations that align our aforementioned analyses
in Fig. 1 and 2.
(i) FKD’s predictions are less confident than ReLabel with more surrounding context; This is reasonable since in random-crop training, many crops are
basically backgrounds (context), the soft predicted label from the teacher model
might be completely different from the ground-truth one-hot label and the training mechanism of FKD can leverage the additional information from context.
(ii) FKD’s attention maps have a larger active area on the object regions,
which indicates that FKD trained model utilizes more cues for prediction and
also captures more subtle and fine-grained information. However, it is interesting
to see that the guided backprop is more focused than ReLabel.
(iii) ReLabel’s attention is more aligned with PyTorch pre-trained model,
while FKD’s results are substantially unique to them. It implies that FKD’s
learned attention differs significantly from one-hot and global label map learned
models.

B

Training Details and Experimental Settings

Training details for Table 3 of the main text. We employ the training
settings and hyper-parameters following Table 1, which are the same as ReLabel.
We use 4 as the number of crops in each image during training.
Training details for Table 5 of the main text. When comparing our FKD
with ViT [1]/DeiT [6]/SReT [4] (Table 5 of the main text), we employ the
training settings and hyper-parameters following Table 2.

