Supplementary Materials:
Video Activity Localisation with
Uncertainties in Temporal Boundary
Jiabo Huang1,4 , Hailin Jin2 , Shaogang Gong1 , and Yang Liu⋆3,5
1

Queen Mary University of London
{jiabo.huang, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk
2
Adobe Research
hljin@adobe.com
3
WICT, Peking University
yangliu@pku.edu.cn
4
Vision Semantics Limited
5
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence

In this supplementary, we provide additional evaluations of EMB using metrics aware of uncertainty [3] in Section. 1 and ablation studies on the importances
of alignment and bounding branches (Section. 2) as well as the optimisation of
elastic boundary (Section. 3) for more in-depth analysis.

1

Evaluation using uncertainty-aware metrics

Beyond the standard metrics which is agnostic to the uncertainty in annotations in inference, we adopted also the uncertainty-aware metrics introduced
in [3] for evaluation. Given five boundaries of each MoI annotated by different
annotators, we have an ‘NN’ metric to evaluate predicted moments w.r.t.the
nearest-neighbour reference and a ‘Rep.’ metric to take the most representative
boundary as the ground-truth. Specifically, for the ‘Rep.’ metric, a 5 × 5 IoU
matrix is computed given 5 annotations of an activity, then the boundary with
the greatest average IoU to the others is considered as the ground-truth. The
determined boundary (Eq. (11)) predicted by our model was tested.
As shown in Table. 3, the ‘NN’ performances of all methods are better than
their uncertainty-agnostic counterparts (cf. Table. 2) while the ‘Rep.’ results are
inferior to. The ‘NN’ metric provides multiple boundaries as the ground-truth of
every MoIs, therefore, the model’s predictions are more likely to be considered
correct regardless of the biased visual-textual correlations it derived from the
uncertain annotations. On the other hand, the ‘Rep.’ is a stricter metric that reduces the uncertainty in temporal boundary according to the agreements among
different annotators. This requires models to be robust to labelling uncertainty
during training, so as to learn universally interpretable video-text alignment.
The consistently lower performance drops of our ‘Rep.’ results compared to the
standard metrics in Table 2 further demonstrate the effectiveness of explicitly
modelling the uncertainties in annotations during training.
⋆

Corresponding author.

