Supplementary Material: Image Inpainting with
Cascaded Modulation GAN and Object-Aware
Training
Haitian Zheng1,2 , Zhe Lin2 , Jingwan Lu2 , Scott Cohen2 , Eli Shechtman2 ,
Connelly Barnes2 , Jianming Zhang2 , Ning Xu2 , Sohrab Amirghodsi2 , and Jiebo Luo1
1

University of Rochester
2
Adobe Research

Appendix
We provided more analysis, visual results and implementation details in the appendix, including analysis of object-aware training (Sec. 1), effect of the masked-R1
regularization (Sec. 2), visual comparison to other methods (Sec. 3), visual comparison
on other types of masks (Sec. 4) and more implementation details (Sec. 5). We also
introduce comparisons to the recent transformer-based approach TFill [11]. All visual
results are in high-resolution and best viewed by zoom-in on screen.

1

Visual Effects of Object-aware Training on Other Models

To analyze the generalization of object-aware training to other recent inpainting methods [4,10] while complementing the numerical results in Table 2 of the main paper, we
provide the supplemental visual effect of object-aware training in Figure 1 and Figure 2.
Figure 1 presents the visual comparison of LaMa [4] and CoModGAN [10] trained
without or with object-aware training (OT). Object-aware training in general improves
other state-of-the-art models including LaMa and CoModGAN on retaining object
boundaries and background under the distractor removal scenario.
Furthermore, Figure 2 presents the visual comparison of our method and the
state-of-the-art models trained with object-aware training, including LaMa-OT and
CoModGAN-OT. CM-GAN with object-aware training achieves better performance
than other state-of-the-art models trained with object-aware training, validating the
strong generation capacity of CM-GAN.

2

The Effect of The Masked-R1 Regularization

Figure 3 visualizes the effect of masked-R1 during the training. Specifically, we visualize
the baseline model trained with masked-R1 regularization (red) and R1 regularization
(orange). The masked-R1 regularization helps the model achieve lower FID scores,
higher discriminator classification loss and makes discriminator harder to distinguish
fake samples.

3

Additional Qualitative Results

In the following, we provide the supplementary qualitative results of methods evaluated
in Table 1 of the main paper. In addition, we include evaluation of a recent transformerbased approach, i.e. TFill [11] in Section 3.2.

