Controllable Video Generation through
Global and Local Motion Dynamics
– Supplementary Material –
Aram Davtyan

and Paolo Favaro

Computer Vision Group, University of Bern, Switzerland
{aram.davtyan,paolo.favaro}@inf.unibe.ch

Abstract. In the main paper we present GLASS, a method for Global
and Local Action-driven Sequence Synthesis. GLASS, trained on unlabeled video sequences, allows to animate an input image at test time.
The method builds a global and local action representation that is used
to generate transitions of the segmented foreground sequences. Moreover,
we introduced a novel dataset (W-Sprites) with a predefined action space
for analysis. This supplementary material provides details and visual examples that could not be included in the main paper due to the space
limitations. In section A we describe the implementation details, such as
network architecture and training parameters. Section B provides details
on the dataset generation protocol. In Section C we include more visual
examples of the evaluation of our method. Further details, the code and
example videos are available at https://araachie.github.io/glass/.

A

Implementation

In this section we report further details regarding the implementation of GLASS.
A.1

Network architecture

In our code we mostly adopt convolutional blocks from the publicly available
implementation of CADDY [5]. Those include residual blocks, upsampling and
downsampling blocks. The blocks mainly incorporate Leaky-ReLu activations
and Batch Normalization layers. Exceptions are the blocks that output masks
(sigmoid activation), the blocks that output images (tanh activation) and the
LSTM blocks (sigmoid and tanh activations) [1].
GMA. The architecture of our Global Motion Analysis (GMA) module is depicted in Fig. 1. GMA consists of 4 networks: the masking network, 2 identical
shift predictors and the inpainter.
LMA. The architecture of our Local Motion Analysis (LMA) module is depicted
in Fig. 2. The encoder E and the decoder D are mostly adopted from Menapace
et al. [5]. However, we introduce an additional 1 × 1-convolutional block C to
compress the feature vector before feeding it to the RNN. This is supposed to
prevent overfitting to the appearance of the agent. We also change the RNN to

