CANF-VC: Conditional Augmented Normalizing
Flows for Video Compression
Supplementary Materials
Yung-Han Ho1 , Chih-Peng Chang1 , Peng-Yu Chen1 , Alessandro Gnutti2 ,
and Wen-Hsiao Peng1
1

Department of Computer Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University,
Taiwan wpeng@cs.nctu.edu.tw
2
Department of Information Engineering, CNIT - University of Brescia, Italy
alessandro.gnutti@unibs.it

This supplementary document provides additional materials to assist with
the understanding of the performance and design of our CANF-VC. Specifically,
it includes:
– CANF implementations
– Complexity characterization
– Rate-distortion curves with GOP 32
– Comparison with ELF-VC [10]
– Network details: CANF and motion extrapolation
– Temporal prior for motion coding
– Training strategy
– Subjective quality comparison
– Command lines for x265 and HM

1

CANF Implementations

Fig. A1 depicts two possible CANF implementations. Fig. A1a corresponds to
the one presented in the main paper. It concatenates the motion-compensated
reference frame xc with the input frame xt as input to all the encoding transforms. In comparison, the scheme in Fig. A1b additionally accepts xc as input
to all the decoding transforms. The former (decoding transforms w/o xc ) can
be viewed as a special case of the latter (decoding transforms w/ xc ), which
utilizes xc for encoding transforms only. For the implementation of Fig. A1b,
the latent code is decoded first to produce 16-channel features having the same
spatial resolution as xc . The resulting features are then concatenated with xc
before being processed further by the three convolution layers (the orange part in
Fig. A1b) to complete the decoding transform. This implementation (Fig. A1b)
has a slightly larger model size than Fig. A1a.
Table A1 presents the BD-rate comparison between the two CANF implementations. For experiments, we use the motion coder from DVC [7], while the
inter-frame coder adopts the two different CANF implementations (Fig. A1a
vs. Fig. A1b). It is seen that the more generalized implementation (decoding

