Cross-Domain Ensemble Distillation
for Domain Generalization
Kyungmoon Lee1,2 Sungyeon Kim2 Suha Kwak2
1

NALBI Inc, Seoul, Korea

2

POSTECH, Pohang, Korea

This supplementary material presents additional experimental results, further analyses, and implementation details, all of which are omitted from the
main paper due to the space limit. In Sec. A, additional experimental results
of our method are provided. Sec. B and Sec. C present further analyses of the
proposed components, respectively. Lastly, implementation details are in Sec D.

A

Additional experimental results

A.1

Comparison to existing self-KD methods.

To further assess the impact of the ensemble distillation, we also compare XDED
with state-of-the-art self-knowledge distillation (self-KD) methods in spite of
sharing a similar methodology. Furthermore considering that our method does
not explicitly depend on domain labels, we investigate the impact of XDED on
the standard benchmark datasets for the image recognition task, which assume
the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) condition. As shown in Table a1, XDED outperforms not only the vanilla method but also other self-KD
methods for all datasets. Considering that XDED is not dedicated to the case
under the i.i.d. condition whereas other methods are dedicated to the case under
the i.i.d. condition, these experimental results support our view that XDED can
provide more meaningful supervisory signals thanks to the use of ensemble which
encodes the complementary knowledge from the data with the same label.

A.2

Results on input deformations

To further assess the quality of the robustness to unseen domains, we measure
the changes in test accuracy as the domain gap becomes larger. We simulate
larger domain gaps by increasing the degree of input deformations. Specifically,
we applied multiple augmentations defined in RandAugment [2] to images of
the unseen target domain (i.e., Cartoon of PACS), and gradually increased the
number of deformations1 . Similar to the result of table 9 in our main paper,
Fig. a1 shows that our method outperforms baseline methods against pixel-level
deformations on unseen domains.
1

For a fair comparison, we use the same operations for each setting.

