Supplemental Materials for The Shape Part Slot
Machine: Contact-based Reasoning for Generating 3D
Shapes from Parts
Kai Wang1 , Paul Guerrero2 , Vladimir Kim2 , Siddhartha Chaudhuri2 ,
Minhyuk Sung2,3 , and Daniel Ritchie1
1
2

1

Brown University
Adobe Research
3
KAIST

Data Preparation

We use the PartNet [5] dataset for all our experiments, following the train/validation/test
split provided in the original paper.
1.1

Obtaining Part Level Geometry

Each shape in the PartNet data comes with a semantic hierarchy that decomposes the
shape into parts in a coarse-to-fine manner. We use the finest-grained level of parts in
this hierarchy. We filter the data using the following criteria:
– We remove shapes that contain only 1 part or more than 30 parts.
– We detect inconsistent shapes with parts that do not equal the union of their children. For the chairs and tables dataset, we reject these inconsistent shapes. The
furniture and lamps dataset are smaller, so in these datasets, we keep the inconsistent parts, but discard their children.
– We remove shapes with parts that contain floating geometry due to annotation
errors. We detect such cases by first clustering the part’s point cloud with DBSCAN [1]. If there exist any cluster that is significantly smaller than other clusters,
we reject the entire shape. (We cannot reject all parts that consist of multiple disconnected clusters, because some parts contain multiple symmetric disconnected
components).
– We remove shapes that are disconnected based on the adjacency edges we detect.
Table 1 summarizes the size of the dataset before and after filtering.
1.2

Extracting Relationships Between Parts

After obtaining the geometry of individual parts, we sample the surface of each part
uniformly to obtain a 3000-point representation. We then detect relationships between
parts based on the protocol of StructureNet [4]:
Detecting Symmetry: We detect symmetry based on the methods proposed by Wang
et al. [7]. We restrict the symmetry types to translational symmetry, reflectional symmetry about planes parallel to the three coordinate planes, and 4-way rotational symmetry

