Adaptive Token Sampling For Efficient Vision
Transformers
Supplementary Document
Mohsen Fayyaz1,6,∗† Soroush Abbasi Koohpayegani2,∗† Farnoush Rezaei
Jafari3,4,∗ Sunando Sengupta1 Hamid Reza Vaezi Joze5 Eric
Sommerlade1 Hamed Pirsiavash2 Juergen Gall6
1

Microsoft 2 University of California, Davis 3 Machine Learning Group, Technische
Universität Berlin, 4 Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data
5
Meta Reality Labs 6 University of Bonn

1

Runtime

Throughput: While ATS is a super-light module, there is still a small cost associated with I/O operations. For a DeiT-S network with a single ATS stage, the
sampling overhead is about 1.5% of the overall computation which is negligible
compared to the large savings due to the dropped tokens. To further elaborate on this, we have reported the throughput (images/s) of the DeiT-S model
with/without our ATS module in Table 1. As it can be seen, the speed-up of our
module is aligned with its GFLOPs reduction.
Batch Processing: While for most applications the inference is performed for
a single image or video, ATS can also be used for inference with a mini-batch.
To this end, we rearrange the tokens of each image so that the sampled tokens
are in the lower indices. Then, we remove the last tokens completely to reduce
the computation. This way, we only process m tokens, where m = maxi (Ki′ + 1)
over all images i of the mini-batch. In the worst case scenario (e.g. a very large
minibatch), we will keep all K + 1 first tokens after rearrangement. This will still
N +1
reduce the computation by a factor of K+1
. For example, using a mini-batch of
size 512 on the ImageNet validation set, m is 129 in Stage 7 of the DeiT-S+ATS
model, which is smaller than the total number of tokens (197). Therefore, we
discard at least 68 tokens in stage 7 even in a mini-batch setting. Moreover,
for the fully connected layers in a transformer block, which requires most of
the computation [7], we can flatten the mini-batch dimension and forward only
non-zero tokens of the whole mini-batch in parallel through the fully connected
layers.
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Work has been done during an internship at Microsoft

