1

Supplementary Material for
Global-local Motion Transformer for
Unsupervised Skeleton-based Action Learning
A

Learned Positional Embedding

As illustrated in Fig. A, the positional embedding obtained through training
effectively reflects the sequential information of the motion sequence. Fig. A
presents similarity between learned positional embedding vectors Mt,j ∈ RD ,
where t = 1, · · · , T and j = 1, · · · , P K. Mt,j is a slice of the positional embedding tensor M ∈ RT ×P K×D , where t and j denote the frame and joint index,
respectively. Each tiled figure shows a cosine similarity between the positional
embedding vector of the indicated joint and frame and that of all other indices.
As indicated as red circles, closer frames tend to have similar positional embedding vectors. This implies that the positional embedding is effectively trained to
reflect temporal order within the motion sequence.

B

Effectiveness of Natural-speed Input

The performance of using the input sequence with a natural speed exceeds the
performance of using the sampled 150 and 300 frames as an input, as presented
in Table A. The results verify that the proposed scheme is effective in learning
the natural dynamics between joints. Note that H-tarnsformer [1] leverages the
input sequences as sampling to 150 frames. The result of sampling 300 frames
is worse than that of sampling 150 frames, owing to the large distortion of the
motion sequences.

C

Learned Attention Maps

Fig B. and Fig. C are supplementary figures for Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 in the main
manuscript, respectively. In Fig. B, we illustrates the average of learned temporal
attention maps for every head in each GL-Transformer block. Likewise, Fig. C
shows the average of learned spatial attention maps for every head in each GLTransformer block. The attention maps are averaged over 300 motion sequences
of the evaluation data.
Table A. Ablation study for verifying the effectiveness of natural-speed input sequences in the NTU-60 dataset with the linear evaluation protocol
Type

Accuracy(%)
xsub
xview

H-transformer [1]

69.3

72.8

Sampling (150 frames)
Sampling (300 frames)
Natural speed with attention mask

75.1
73.2
76.3

80.2
79.0
83.8

