Contextformer: A Transformer with
Spatio-Channel Attention for Context Modeling
in Learned Image Compression
Supplementary Material
A. Burakhan Koyuncu1,2 , Han Gao3 , Atanas Boev2 , Georgii Gaikov2 ,
Elena Alshina2 , and Eckehard Steinbach1
1

Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
burakhan.koyuncu@tum.de
2
Huawei Munich Research Center, Munich, Germany
3
Huawei Moscow Research Center, Moscow, Russia
4
Tencent America, Palo Alto, USA

A1

Illustration of the Runtime Optimization Methods

This section gives further details about the proposed runtime optimization methods; skip intermediate channel segments (SCS) and batched dynamic sequence
processing (BDS). Fig. A1 illustrates a few of the processing steps of a Contextformer (cf o). Since the transformers are sequence-to-sequence models, processing
step n + 3 also calculates the output for step n. The provided mask allows using
of subsequent elements for calculating the attention for each element. Thus, the
calculation of the output for step n can be skipped during the encoding without
harming the causality (SCS). In the figure, one can see that steps n + 3 and
n + 7 contain equal number of latent elements used for context modeling, which
enables processing them in batches efficiently (BDS). Our algorithm searches for
latent elements, which can be grouped into a batch, and then models the context accordingly (see Alg. A1). Fig. A2 illustrates the wavefront processing for
the decoding runtime optimization. Since latent tensor elements with the same
processing order can be encoded and decoded independently, we process them in
batches. The only requirement for using wavefront processing in the decoder is
that the latent tensor elements are coded into the bitstream in the same order as
in the encoder. That way, the entropy parameters can be computed regardless of
the algorithm optimizing the encoding and ordered according to the wavefront
processing index prior to bitstream coding.

A2

Architectural Details

Table A1 outlines the architectural details of the compression model with the
Contextformer.

