Online Domain Adaptation for Semantic
Segmentation in Ever-Changing Conditions – Supplementary Material
Theodoros Panagiotakopoulos1∗
1

King

2

Pier Luigi Dovesi2
Matteo Poggi5

Linus Härenstam-Nielsen3,4∗

3

Univrses
5

4
Kudan
Technical University of Munich
University of Bologna

This document introduces further details on the ECCV 2022 paper - ”Online Domain Adaptation for Semantic Segmentation in Ever-Changing Conditions”. In Section 1, we present results of the OnDA framework on the CityScapes dataset
[2] with qualitative samples and a video sequence, in Section 2 we detail the model implementation and hyperparameters,
while in Section 3 we further describe the working principle behind Domain Shift Detection. Then we provide additional
explanation on some experimental results presented in the paper, in particular we focus on the Standard deviation, Section 4,
and the Calibration Error, Section 5. Finally, in Section 6 we expand our Ablation Study and study the impact of the learning
rate, the effect of the confidence regularization and Batch Normalization.

1. CityScapes qualitative comparison between Source, Offline and Online Adapted Model.
We provide additional, qualitative results concerning our experiments on the Increasing Storm scenario. The whole adaptation process is also featured in a video sequence (23.46 minutes).
A shorter version of the video (3 minutes) is also available.
• short version: : https://youtu.be/cany-lUNWY8
• long version: https://youtu.be/igtmgafiurY

1.1. Video Analysis
To reproduce a realistic online adaptation set-up, we employed the Frankfurt CityScapes video sequence. We divided it
in equally sized intervals and then we rendered the rain according the Increasing Storm schema i.e. 0mm (clear), 25mm,
50mm, 75mm, 100mm, 200mm, 100mm, 75mm, 50mm, 25mm, 0mm. We sub-sample the video to 10fps, with a total length
of 23.46 minutes, and the duration of each target domain is 3239 frames, corresponding to around 5.4 minutes (the video
is accelerated 2.5 times, hence every domain is presented in 2.09 minutes). It is worth mentioning that the adopted rain
rendering methodology [6] does not limit to generating rain random particles, as it uses monocular depth prediction [3] and
depth refinement [1] to estimate the rain occlusion in the image. Moreover, other effects are employed to make the sky darker
and thus emulate the corresponding cloud coverage.
The OnDA framework employs the Hybrid Switch with same configuration presented in all the other experiments. The
only differences consisted in a minor update of the two Hybrid Switch thresholds (TcA and TcB ) and in the introduction of a
debouncing window on the switching indicator function, It , as introduced in Section 3.2 of the paper.
In Figure 1 we display video frames and the corresponding segmentation masks collected at regular time intervals so to
cover all the deployment domains. The video sequence does not present ground-truth for a quantitative evaluation, anyway the
qualitative analysis presents a clear pattern and we feel it significant of a real, online adaptation scenario. The Source model
is steadily degraded as the rain intensifies, presenting visible degradation right from the 25mm rain and completely collapsing
in the 100mm and 200mm domains. The Offline model instead has been pre-adapted offline on all the rain intensities (for
this task we used the CityScapes train split). The Offline model is visibly more robust to the easier targets, while struggling
in the 100mm case and collapsing in the 200mm. Finally, the Online model performs similarly or marginally better than the
Offline method in all easy targets, while still being robust to the 100mm and 200mm cases.
1

