ConCL: Concept Contrastive Learning for Dense Pre-training in Pathology

A

19

Bootstrapping

Bootstrapping. As stated in BYOL [12]: “the term bootstrap is used in its idiomatic sense rather than the statistical sense,” e.g., DeepCluster [2] uses bootstrapping on previous versions of its representation to produce targets (cluster
indices) for the next representation. Methods based on self-training or pseudolabels are also considered bootstrapping since they use information from previous
steps to provide targets for next step.
A.1

BYOL

BYOL [12] proposes to bootstrap the representations directly. In particular,
BYOL has two networks, referred to as online and target networks. Given two
augmented views of the same image, BYOL uses two networks to extract their
representations and employs an additional MLP head, called the prediction head,
to predict the latent representation produced by the target network from the
representation produced by the online network.
Learn from a randomly initialized model. One of the core motivations
for BYOL [12] is an interesting observation: they train a model to predict the
representations of a fixed randomly initialized model and can reach 18.8% top-1
accuracy in linear probing protocol1 on ImageNet, whereas the randomly initialized model itself only achieves 1.4% top-1 accuracy.
Improve latents with momentum. Learning from a randomly initialized
model can yield significantly better results (e.g., +17.4%). Therefore, learning
from a dynamically improved model seems to be intuitive. In practice, BYOL
[12] optimizes the online network to predict the target network’s latent (feature
representation). The target network is updated by a slowly moving exponential
average of the online network, i.e., the target network is a momentum copy of
the online network. The momentum mechanism is similar to the momentum
encoder in MoCo [14,5].
A.2

b-ConCL

Bootstrap your own perception. b-ConCL resembles BYOL [12] in terms
of using the cluster results from a momentum key encoder. b-ConCL bootstraps
the perception from the momentum encoder while simultaneously improving it
and refining it via momentum. Figure A.1 shows how the concepts grouped by
b-ConCL are refined as training continues.
1

In linear probing protocol, the backbone, e.g., a ResNet, is frozen, while a newly
added fully-connected layer is optimized with respect to ImageNet classification [8].

