Supplementary Material:
Locally Varying Distance Transform
for Unsupervised Visual Anomaly Detection

1

Comparison with Semi-supervised Methods

The main paper focused on unsupervised anomaly detection, where no training
data is available. Many anomaly detection papers focus on a different scenario,
where no example of anomalies are provided a-priori; but a a clean set of normal
data is available for training. This is termed semi-supervised anomaly detection
or one-class learning. To put LVAD’s results into perspective, we compare it
against the current state-of-the-art in sem-supervised anomaly detection.
Following the experimental protocol established in Sec. 4.1 of the main paper,
the definition of normality is rotated through each class of the dataset. When a
class is designated as normal, an anomaly detector is trained on a subset of its
instances. The remaining normal instances are mixed with instances from other
(anomalous) classes to form the test set. The anomaly detector is tasked with
identifying the anomalous instances. Performance is measured in terms of the
Area Under the Receiver Operator Characteristic Curve.
Results are reported in Table 1, where LVAD and OCSVM [2] from the main
paper are compared with state- deep learned techniques like Deep Structured
Energy-based Model (DSEBM) [8], Anomaly Detection with a Generative Adversarial Network (AD-GAN) [3], Deep Anomaly Detection Using Geometric
Transformations (Geo. Transform) [4] and Deep One-Class Classification (Deep
SVDD) [7]. Similar to the main paper, for MNIST and Fashion-MNIST, LVAD
used ratzerized pixels as its image representation; for the remaining datasets,
images were represented using ResNet-50 [5] features. Semi-supervised anomaly
detection were allowed to learn an appropriate representation from the training
data.
Table 1 shows that although LVAD is not designed semi-supervised anomaly
detection, its formulation generalizes well to this scenario. In Table 1, LVAD is
consistently the best or close to the best algorithm. This is even true on MNIST
and Fashion-MNIST, where its performance using raw pixels is respectably close
to the current state-of-the-art.

2

Ablation Study: Effects of Instance Normalization

In the main paper, instance normalization [1] is applied to the data whenever
possible. Table 2 illustrates the performance if normalization is not applied; for
the reader’s convenience, the normalized scores are copied from the main paper.

