SLiDE: Self-supervised LiDAR De-snowing
through Reconstruction Difficulty
(Supplementary Material)
Gwangtak Bae1 , Byungjun Kim1 , Seongyong Ahn2 ,
Jihong Min2 , and Inwook Shim3
1

Seoul National University,2 Agency for Defense Development,3 Inha University
{tak3452,peterbj95,seongyong.ahn,happymin77}@gmail.com, iwshim@inha.ac.kr

In the supplementary material, we present more details on the data synthesis
method used for quantitative evaluations in Section 1. Then, we demonstrate
more qualitative results on the synthetic data in Section 3 and on the real-world
data in Section 4.

1

Details on Data Synthesis Method

Here, we present detailed information on our data synthesis method which is
introduced to enable extensive quantitative evaluations. Real-world snowy point
clouds and clean point clouds are captured by using our stationary data capturing system. Then, snow points are picked out by comparing noisy point clouds
and clean point clouds. After augmenting the collected snow points, snow points
are synthesized into other road scene point clouds captured under favorable
weather conditions.
1.1

Data Capturing System

We set up a data capturing system that consists of a LiDAR sensor (Velodyne
‘HDL-32E’) and a control computer in a rainproof ruggedized case. Our system
captures data periodically. To capture weather effects only, the system is placed
in the controlled outdoor environment where people are not allowed to come
into the scene. Fig. 1 shows our data capturing system. LiDAR is installed at a
height of 1.7m which is similar to the height of LiDAR mounted on the top of
autonomous vehicles.
1.2

Data Acquisition

Noisy LiDAR point cloud sets (Noise-Set) are captured in snowy weather conditions, and clean point cloud sets (Clean-Set) are captured in favorable weather
conditions. In most cases, the detected snow noise point is located between a
sensor origin and a background point; that is, we cannot detect the background
point if the noise point is placed on the same ray of the LiDAR. The range
image representation inherently involves this ray direction property, and we can
directly pick out noise points by comparing range images of Noise-Set and CleanSet. We generate a reference range image from Clean-Set of 200 range images by
selecting the minimum range value of each sensor ray. Then, snow noise points
are collected from Noise-Set of 7, 687 range images.

