DICE: Leveraging Sparsification for Out-of-Distribution Detection

A

19

Reproducibility

Authors of the paper recognize the importance and value of reproducible research.
We summarize our eﬀorts below to facilitate reproducible results:
1. Dataset. We use publicly available datasets, which are described in detail in
Section 4.2 and Section 4.1.
2. Assumption and proof. The complete proof of our theoretical contribution
is provided in Appendix E, which supports our theoretical claims made in
Section 6.
3. Baselines. The description and hyperparameters of baseline methods are
specified in Appendix B.
4. Model. Our main results on ImageNet are based on ResNet50 [17] provided
by Pytorch. Due to the post hoc nature of our method, this allows the research
community to reproduce our numbers provided with the same model and
evaluation datasets.
5. Implementation. The simplicity of the DICE eases the reproducibility,
as it only requires a few lines of code modification in the PyTorch model
specification. Specifically, one can replace the weight matrix in the penultimate
layer of deep networks using the following code:
1
2
3

threshold = numpy . percentile (V , p )
M = V > threshold
W_new = W * M

6. Open Source. The codebase and the dataset is available in https://github.
com/deeplearning-wisc/dice.git.
7. Hardware: We conduct all the experiments on NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080Ti
GPUs.

B

Details of Baselines

For the reader’s convenience, we summarize in detail a few common techniques
for defining OOD scores that measure the degree of ID-ness on a given input. By
convention, a higher (lower) score is indicative of being in-distribution (out-ofdistribution).
MSP [20] This method proposes to use the maximum softmax score as the OOD
score.
ODIN [34] This method improves OOD detection with temperature scaling and
input perturbation. In all experiments, we set the temperature scaling parameter
T = 1000. For ImageNet, we found the input perturbation does not further
improve the OOD detection performance and hence we set ✏ = 0. Following the
setting in [34], we set ✏ to be 0.004 for CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100.
Mahalanobis [32] This method uses multivariate Gaussian distributions to
model class-conditional distributions of softmax neural classifiers and uses Mahalanobis distance-based scores for OOD detection. We use 500 examples randomly

