PointTree: Transformation-Robust Point
Cloud Encoder with Relaxed K-D Trees
Jun-Kun Chen(B) and Yu-Xiong Wang
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, USA
{junkun3,yxw}@illinois.edu

Abstract. Being able to learn an eﬀective semantic representation
directly on raw point clouds has become a central topic in 3D understanding. Despite rapid progress, state-of-the-art encoders are restrictive to canonicalized point clouds, and have weaker than necessary performance when encountering geometric transformation distortions. To
overcome this challenge, we propose PointTree, a general-purpose point
cloud encoder that is robust to transformations based on relaxed K-D
trees. Key to our approach is the design of the division rule in K-D
trees by using principal component analysis (PCA). We use the structure of the relaxed K-D tree as our computational graph, and model
the features as border descriptors which are merged with pointwisemaximum operation. In addition to this novel architecture design, we
further improve the robustness by introducing pre-alignment – a simple
yet eﬀective PCA-based normalization scheme. Our PointTree encoder
combined with pre-alignment consistently outperforms state-of-the-art
methods by large margins, for applications from object classiﬁcation to
semantic segmentation on various transformed versions of the widelybenchmarked datasets. Code and pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/immortalCO/PointTree.

1

Introduction

3D sensing technology has advanced rapidly over the past few years, playing a
signiﬁcant role in many applications such as augmented reality, autonomous driving, and geographic information systems [1,6,9]. As one of the most commonlyused output formats of 3D sensors, 3D point clouds ﬂexibly describe the surface
information of the sensed objects or scenes with collection of points. Therefore, being able to learn an eﬀective semantic representation directly on raw
point clouds, which is useful for high-level tasks such as object recognition, has
become a central topic in 3D understanding, with various powerful deep learning architecture based encoders emerging like PointNet [18] and PointMLP [17].
In real-world applications, a desired encoder is supposed to cope with a wide
range of geometric transformations – point clouds of the same object category
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5 7.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13663, pp. 105–120, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5_7

