TOCH: Spatio-Temporal Object-to-Hand
Correspondence for Motion Refinement
Keyang Zhou1,2(B) , Bharat Lal Bhatnagar1,2 , Jan Eric Lenssen2 ,
and Gerard Pons-Moll1,2
1

University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
{keyang.zhou,gerard.pons-moll}@uni-tuebingen.de
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus,
Munich, Germany
{bbhatnag,jlenssen}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract. We present TOCH, a method for reﬁning incorrect 3D handobject interaction sequences using a correspondence based prior learnt
directly from data. Existing hand trackers, especially those that rely on
very few cameras, often produce visually unrealistic results with handobject intersection or missing contacts. Although correcting such errors
requires reasoning about temporal aspects of interaction, most previous
works focus on static grasps and contacts. The core of our method are
TOCH ﬁelds, a novel spatio-temporal representation for modeling correspondences between hands and objects during interaction. TOCH ﬁelds
are a point-wise, object-centric representation, which encode the hand
position relative to the object. Leveraging this novel representation, we
learn a latent manifold of plausible TOCH ﬁelds with a temporal denoising auto-encoder. Experiments demonstrate that TOCH outperforms
state-of-the-art 3D hand-object interaction models, which are limited
to static grasps and contacts. More importantly, our method produces
smooth interactions even before and after contact. Using a single trained
TOCH model, we quantitatively and qualitatively demonstrate its usefulness for correcting erroneous sequences from oﬀ-the-shelf RGB/RGBD hand-object reconstruction methods and transferring grasps across
objects. Our code and model are available at [1].
Keywords: Hand-object interaction · Motion reﬁnement · Hand prior

1

Introduction

Tracking hands that are in interaction with objects is an important part of
many applications in Virtual and Augmented Reality, such as modeling digital

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5 1.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Avidan et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2022, LNCS 13663, pp. 1–19, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20062-5_1

