Appendix: A Transformer-based Decoder for
Semantic Segmentation with Multi-level Context
Mining
Bowen Shi1† , Dongsheng Jiang2† , Xiaopeng Zhang2 , Han Li1 , Wenrui Dai1 ,
Junni Zou1 , Hongkai Xiong1 and Qi Tian2⋆
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{sjtu shibowen,qingshi9974,daiwenrui,zoujunni,xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn
2
Huawei Cloud EI
dongsheng jiang@outlook.com, zxphistory@gmail.com, tian.qi1@huawei.com

1

Further Discussion about External Tokens

This section discusses the properties of Xexter (X̂exter ). First, we visualize the
attention map between Xinter and x̂class of X̂exter . The qualitative results shown
in Fig. 1 demonstrate that each external token is category-specific since it can
capture its corresponding class features. We further calculate the mean cosine
similarity (mCS) between Xinter and x̂inf o of X̂exter . As shown in Tab. 1, our
learnable external tokens enjoy lower mean similarity (0.0060) compared to the
momentum update type (0.6363). The result reflects that our Xexter has obtained
features with hierarchical differences, which can play a better complementary
role to Xinter and lead to better performance.

2

Comparison with Other Decoders

In this section, we replace the initial MLP decoder of SegFormer-B1 with some
famous CNN-based decoders and a transformer-based Segmenter decoder and
inspect their performance. Note that we only replace the structure and adapt
the input dimension of the decoder, while other training settings are the same
as before. The results shown in Tab. 2 are surprising. We witness performance
drops on all CNN-based decoders, probably because the features extracted by
the transformer backbone already have a global receptive field, which is totally
different from those of CNN. Using Segmenter decoder only achieved 38.88% accuracy, which is 2.09% lower than the baseline. We think this is because we only
use the decoder structure of Segmenter but the tricks of Segmenter have a dominant effect on performance, which greatly limits its transferability. In contrast,
our method is the only one that achieves a significant performance improvement,
and we have demonstrated the excellent transferability of our method to other
backbones in previous experiments.
⋆

Corresponding author. † Equal contribution.

