Generalized Focal Loss: Learning Qualified and
Distributed Bounding Boxes for
Dense Object Detection
Xiang Li1,2 , Wenhai Wang3,2 , Lijun Wu4 , Shuo Chen5,1 , Xiaolin Hu6 , Jun Li1 , Jinhui Tang1 ,
and Jian Yang1∗
1

4

Nanjing University of Science and Technology 2 Momenta 3 Nanjing University
Microsoft Research 5 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project 6 Tsinghua University
{xiang.li.implus, jinhuitang, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, wangwenhai362@163.com, shuo.chen.ya@riken.jp
lijuwu@microsoft.com, xlhu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, junl.mldl@gmail.com

Abstract
One-stage detector basically formulates object detection as dense classification and
localization (i.e., bounding box regression). The classification is usually optimized
by Focal Loss and the box location is commonly learned under Dirac delta distribution. A recent trend for one-stage detectors is to introduce an individual prediction
branch to estimate the quality of localization, where the predicted quality facilitates the classification to improve detection performance. This paper delves into
the representations of the above three fundamental elements: quality estimation,
classification and localization. Two problems are discovered in existing practices,
including (1) the inconsistent usage of the quality estimation and classification
between training and inference, and (2) the inflexible Dirac delta distribution for
localization. To address the problems, we design new representations for these elements. Specifically, we merge the quality estimation into the class prediction vector
to form a joint representation, and use a vector to represent arbitrary distribution of
box locations. The improved representations eliminate the inconsistency risk and
accurately depict the flexible distribution in real data, but contain continuous labels,
which is beyond the scope of Focal Loss. We then propose Generalized Focal
Loss (GFL) that generalizes Focal Loss from its discrete form to the continuous
version for successful optimization. On COCO test-dev, GFL achieves 45.0%
AP using ResNet-101 backbone, surpassing state-of-the-art SAPD (43.5%) and
ATSS (43.6%) with higher or comparable inference speed.

1

Introduction

Recently, dense detectors have gradually led the trend of object detection. Based on dense detectors,
researchers focus more on the representation of bounding boxes and their localization quality
estimation, leading to an encouraging advancement [26, 29] in the field. Specifically, bounding box
representation is modeled as a simple Dirac delta distribution [10, 18, 32, 26, 31], which is widely
used over past years. As popularized in FCOS [26], predicting an additional localization quality (e.g.,
IoU score [29] or centerness score [26]) brings consistent improvements of detection accuracy, when
∗
Corresponding author. Xiang Li, Jun Li and Jian Yang are from PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception
and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and
Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of
Science and Technology. Xiang Li is also a visiting scholar at Momenta.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

