Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020

O NCE - FOR -A LL : T RAIN O NE N ETWORK AND S PE CIALIZE IT FOR E FFICIENT D EPLOYMENT
Han Cai1 , Chuang Gan2 , Tianzhe Wang1 , Zhekai Zhang1 , Song Han1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

1

{hancai, chuangg, songhan}@mit.edu

arXiv:1908.09791v5 [cs.LG] 29 Apr 2020

A BSTRACT
We address the challenging problem of efficient inference across many devices
and resource constraints, especially on edge devices. Conventional approaches
either manually design or use neural architecture search (NAS) to find a specialized
neural network and train it from scratch for each case, which is computationally
prohibitive (causing CO2 emission as much as 5 cars’ lifetime Strubell et al. (2019))
thus unscalable. In this work, we propose to train a once-for-all (OFA) network that
supports diverse architectural settings by decoupling training and search, to reduce
the cost. We can quickly get a specialized sub-network by selecting from the OFA
network without additional training. To efficiently train OFA networks, we also
propose a novel progressive shrinking algorithm, a generalized pruning method
that reduces the model size across many more dimensions than pruning (depth,
width, kernel size, and resolution). It can obtain a surprisingly large number of subnetworks (> 1019 ) that can fit different hardware platforms and latency constraints
while maintaining the same level of accuracy as training independently. On diverse
edge devices, OFA consistently outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) NAS methods
(up to 4.0% ImageNet top1 accuracy improvement over MobileNetV3, or same
accuracy but 1.5× faster than MobileNetV3, 2.6× faster than EfficientNet w.r.t
measured latency) while reducing many orders of magnitude GPU hours and CO2
emission. In particular, OFA achieves a new SOTA 80.0% ImageNet top-1 accuracy
under the mobile setting (<600M MACs). OFA is the winning solution for the
3rd Low Power Computer Vision Challenge (LPCVC), DSP classification track
and the 4th LPCVC, both classification track and detection track. Code and 50
pre-trained models (for many devices & many latency constraints) are released at
https://github.com/mit-han-lab/once-for-all.

1

I NTRODUCTION

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) deliver state-of-the-art accuracy in many machine learning applications. However, the explosive growth in model size and computation cost gives rise to new challenges
on how to efficiently deploy these deep learning models on diverse hardware platforms, since they
have to meet different hardware efficiency constraints (e.g., latency, energy). For instance, one mobile
application on App Store has to support a diverse range of hardware devices, from a high-end Samsung Note10 with a dedicated neural network accelerator to a 5-year-old Samsung S6 with a much
slower processor. With different hardware resources (e.g., on-chip memory size, #arithmetic units),
the optimal neural network architecture varies significantly. Even running on the same hardware,
under different battery conditions or workloads, the best model architecture also differs a lot.
Given different hardware platforms and efficiency constraints (defined as deployment scenarios),
researchers either design compact models specialized for mobile (Howard et al., 2017; Sandler et al.,
2018; Zhang et al., 2018) or accelerate the existing models by compression (Han et al., 2016; He
et al., 2018) for efficient deployment. However, designing specialized DNNs for every scenario
is engineer-expensive and computationally expensive, either with human-based methods or NAS.
Since such methods need to repeat the network design process and retrain the designed network
from scratch for each case. Their total cost grows linearly as the number of deployment scenarios
increases, which will result in excessive energy consumption and CO2 emission (Strubell et al., 2019).
It makes them unable to handle the vast amount of hardware devices (23.14 billion IoT devices till
1

