Supplementary Material for “DiffuseMorph:
Unsupervised Deformable Image Registration
Using Diffusion Model”
Boah Kim , Inhwa Han , and Jong Chul Ye
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea
{boahkim, inhwahan, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr

A

Details of Implementation

The source code for this paper can be found at the following link: https://
github.com/DiffuseMorph/DiffuseMorph.
A.1

Network Architecture

Diffusion Network As we described in the paper, we employed the network
architecture of DDPM [8] for the diffusion network Gθ of the proposed method.
Fig. 1 illustrates the structure of the diffusion network. Specifically, it consists of
four encoder and four decoder blocks. Each block has the Resnet block composed
of the group normalization [13], the swish function [6], and convolution layers,
which takes the embedded time te as well as the output of the preceding layer.
At the last encoder block, the feature maps are attended by the self-attention
module [12]. Also, each decoder block additionally takes the feature maps of the
encoder outputs via skip-connection that enables the decoder to use the encoding
information of inputs. Accordingly, when the moving image m, fixed image f ,
and perturbed target image xt are given to the diffusion network with the time
step t, the network is trained to estimate the latent feature of the conditional
score function ϵ̂ of the deformation between the moving and fixed images. Here,
we configured the kernel dimension of convolution layers according to the input
image dimension.
Deformation Network For the deformation network Mψ , we implemented
VoxelMorph-1 [3] that presents the network architecture for image registration.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, the deformation network is a U-shape network with
encoder and decoder blocks, similar to the diffusion network. However, instead
of the Resnet block, each block has the convolution and leakyReLU [7] layers,
called CL units, which enables the network to focus on image processing and
learn the complex image features. Also, as the downsampling by the convolution
is with stride 2, the upsampling is performed by the transposed convolution with
stride 2. The final network output is generated by the convolution with stride 1.
Thus, given the moving image m and the latent feature of the diffusion network

