Neural Capture of Animatble 3D Human from
Monocular Video
- Supplemental Material Gusi Te1,2 , Xiu Li2,3 , Xiao Li2 , Jinglu Wang2 , Wei Hu1 , and Yan Lu2
1

2

Peking University
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Tencent

This supplemental material includes additional results, discussion, and applications to further demonstrate the advantages of our method. We organize
this supplemental material in 2 parts: Section 1 includes additional implementation details of our training pipeline, as detailed in the main submission. Section
2 includes additional results of our human modeling, as well as more ablation
studies and comparisons. We also provide a video in the supplemental materials
to visualize our synthesized results in animation.

1

Implementation details

Training details on each dataset. For one batch, we only select one single
image from the training dataset. During training, we sample 6000 rays and 32
points along each ray for each image and utilize a two-stage sampling strategy
for better efficiency as in [3]. Similar to [3], we implement two separate networks
with different weights: the first is to estimate spatial density, and the second is
to sample more intensive points with importance sampling. We hence aggregate
64 points for rendering. For datasets without background masks available, we
either apply an off-the-shelf matting algorithm or jointly model the background
during training. Specifically, we apply the off-the-shelf image matting method
of [2] on the Human3.6M [1] dataset and train our method on the foreground
part only. For the Doublefusion [5] dataset, we found the matting results are not
good enough and opt to jointly model a single background image for all training
frames by a small MLP network of 3 layers during training. The background
MLP network takes a 2D pixel position as input and outputs the background
image pixel value. We apply positional encoding to the input.

2

Additional experiment results.

More pose synthesis results. We show additional pose synthesis results of
our method in Fig. 1. In the top rows the images are rendered from different
views, and the bottom images are rendered given novel poses on the Doublefusion
dataset. The query embedding allows our model to represent the human body
and clothes given arbitrary pose and viewpoint. We refer to our supplemental
video for more animated pose synthesis results.

