Supplementary for MPPNet: Multi-Frame
Feature Intertwining with Proxy Points for 3D
Temporal Object Detection
Xuesong Chen1,4⋆ , Shaoshuai Shi2⋆⋆⋆ , Benjin Zhu1 , Ka Chun Cheung3 ,
Hang Xu4 , and Hongsheng Li1⋆⋆
1
MMLab, CUHK 2 MPI-INF 3 HKBU 4 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{chenxuesong@link, hsli@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk, shaoshuaics@gmail.com

1

Architecture Details of MPPNet

In this section, we show more details about our MPPNet.
3D Proposal-Trajectory Feature Generation with Proxy Points. We utilize the proposed proxy points as the medium to generate 3D trajectory features
of objects. With the help of inherently aligned proxy points, we can decouple
the object feature of each proposal in a 3D trajectory into geometry feature and
motion feature, which reduces the difficulty of modeling points with significantly
different spatial distributions among multi-frames. Specifically, as shown in the
green block of Fig. 1, we employ the Set Abstraction operation to aggregate
LiDAR geometry feature to proxy points and use the relative locations of proxy
point, projected by MLP, as motion feature. The summation of geometry feature
and motion feature serves as the object’s feature. Next, the proposed grouping
strategy temporally divide the long proposal trajectory into a small number of
non-overlapping groups for the following multi-frame feature interaction.
Multi-Frame Feature Interaction. As the red block shown in Fig. 1, we
illustrate more details of the temporal feature fusion among different frames
within a group. To reduce the computational and memory cost of intra-group
fusion, we first fuse the multi-frame features within each group by summarizing the temporally compressed multi-frame features as residuals to the feature
of each group’s first frame, using a weight-sharing MLP. With this per-frame
fused feature of each group, the following intra-group feature mixing and intergroup feature attention can further propagate and summarize information in an
iterative manner. Consequently, a transformer-based prediction head, where a
learnable feature embedding is employed as the query and the fused group feature Ĝi are utilized as key and value, can summarize each group’s output feature
to a global vector embedding with shape of 1 × 256, serving as the output of
multi-frame feature interaction block.
Prediction Head. We jointly utilize each group’s summarized vector embedding and embedding extracted from 3D trajectory parameters (7-dim geometry
and 1-dim time encoding) to obtain the combined feature vector (see blue block
⋆
⋆⋆

Equal contributions
Corresponding authors

