Learning Topological Interactions for Multi-Class
Medical Image Segmentation
— Supplementary Material —
Saumya Gupta ⋆ , Xiaoling Hu⋆ , James Kaan, Michael Jin, Mutshipay Mpoy,
Katherine Chung, Gagandeep Singh, Mary Saltz, Tahsin Kurc, Joel Saltz,
Apostolos Tassiopoulos, Prateek Prasanna , and Chao Chen
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook NY 11794, USA
{saumya.gupta, xiaoling.hu, chao.chen.1}@stonybrook.edu

In the supplementary material, we begin with an alternate implementation of
the naive method in Sec. 6. In Sec. 7, we provide illustrations of the connectivity
kernel in both 2D and 3D settings. In Sec. 8-11, we provide detailed descriptions of the experiments, namely the datasets, architectures, implementations,
additional ablation studies and qualitative and quantitative results.

6

Alternate Implementation of Naive Solution

In Sec. 3.1, we discussed the naive solution which involved simply looping over
all the pixels and scanning all its neighbors. The obvious issue with loops is
that though it takes O(1) time to access the neighborhoods of any single pixel,
it takes polynomial time to access the neighborhoods of all the pixels together.
Here we discuss an alternate implementation of the same idea. Although it is
more efficient than the naive method discussed in Sec. 3.1, it is still inferior to
the convolution-based method in terms of speed and complexity. We provide
details of the alternate naive method here in the supplementary due to space
constraints in the main paper.
We continue to use the same terminology for terms A, B, C, P , d, k etc. as
used in Sec. 3.1. We assume 2D 4-connectivity scenario.
Since the connectivity defined is constant for every pixel, we can translate
the idea of looping over every pixel to that of shifted maps instead. A map Pr
is obtained by shifting every pixel in P to the right by one pixel. Similarly we
can obtain maps Pl , Pu and Pd , which are obtained from P by shifting one pixel
to the left, up, and down, respectively. Thus for i, we have the 4-connectivity
neighbors of the pixel P [i], that is, Pr [i], Pl [i], Pu [i], and Pd [i]. And with the help
of these maps, we have access to the neighborhoods of every pixel simultaneously
without loops. We can now use algebraic manipulation to determine whether
pixel P [i] ∈ A has a C neighbor(s) or not.
We need to prune the neighborhood maps so that we are left with only the
critical pixel feature map. Let MA be a mask obtained from P such that it
contains a 1 at locations where the pixels are in A. Similarly, let MC be a mask
⋆

Equal contribution.

