DexMV: Imitation Learning for Dexterous
Manipulation from Human Videos
Yuzhe Qin∗ , Yueh-Hua Wu∗ , Shaowei Liu, Hanwen Jiang,
Ruihan Yang, Yang Fu, and Xiaolong Wang
University of California San Diego, La Jolla 92093, USA

A

Overview

This supplementary material provides more details, results and visualizations
accompanying the main paper. In summary, we include
– More details about video data collection;
– More details about the Relocate, Pour, and Place inside environments
– More details about demonstration translation;
– More visualization of hand-object pose estimation and hand motion retargeting results.

B

Video Data Collection

We use Intel RealSense D435 cameras to collect human demonstrations of
manipulating different objects for finishing diverse tasks on the table. In detail,
each captured demonstration is about 10 seconds. Moreover, after the demonstration is captured, only the pour task is in need to reset the particles back into
the mug, which tasks about 6 seconds. Thus, the time cost for data collection is
not high, and the procedure tends to be scalable on different objects and tasks.
In practice, it takes about 60 minutes to capture all 100 sequences for a task.

C

Environments

We propose three types of manipulation tasks along with the DexMV Platform: Relocate, Pour, and Place Inside. The manipulated objects come from YCB
Dataset [1]. Environments use the MuJoCo simulator [6] with timestep set to
0.002 and frame skip set to 5. We adopt the same contact friction parameters following the setting in the literature [5]. We use the open-source MuJoCo model of
Adroit Hand 1 . Figure 1 shows the seven different task used in DexMV:Relocate
with five different objects, Pour, and Place Inside.
Action. The action space is the same for all tasks, which is the motor command of 30 actuators on the robotic hand. The first 6 motors control the global
position and orientation of the robot while the last 24 motors control the fingers of the hand. We normalize the action range to (−1, 1) based on actuator
specification.
1

https://github.com/vikashplus/Adroit

