Supplementary for Human-centric Image
Cropping with Partition-aware and
Content-preserving Features
Bo Zhang , Li Niu⋆ , Xing Zhao , and Liqing Zhang
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{bo-zhang,ustcnewly,1033874657}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

In this document, we provide additional materials to supplement our main
submission. We first present more implementation details in Section 1 and describe how to determine the main subject for human-centric image in Section 2.
Next, we report the performance of our model using inaccurate human bounding
box in Section 3 and evaluate two simplest baselines that use human bounding
box to directly produce cropping box in Section 4. In Section 5, we study the
impact of using different hyper-parameters in our method. Then, we present the
results of evaluating our method on general image cropping and compare with
the state-of-the-arts in Section 6, and compare the running speed and model
complexity of different models in Section 7. Moreover, we show more qualitative
results in Section 8.

1

Implementation Details

We conduct experiments on Ubuntu 18.04 equipped with an NVIDIA RTX 3090
GPU and 64GB RAM. We use the Adam optimizer [6] with a weight decay of
1e−4 to train the model for 80 epochs. We randomly select 64 crops for one
image when training on GAICD dataset [15], while we use all the crops of an
image when training on CPC dataset [14]. Following [8], we use the warmup [4]
in the first five epochs to increase the learning rate from 0 to 1e−4 and decay
the learning rate with a cosine annealing [9] in the following epochs.

2

Main Subject Determination

Our method is proposed to handle images with a single person and considers the
other people as background when multiple subjects exist. In our implementation,
given multiple human objects in an image, we take the person that appears
in the ground-truth best crop of the image as the main subject. In real-world
applications, we can adopt a simple approach to determine the main subject, by
selecting the object with a larger area and closer to the image center through
weighted ranking.
score of a human object is defined as:
q Specifically, the rank
2
2
w ∗ h + α 1 − (x − 0.5) + (y − 0.5) and we take the object with largest rank
⋆

Corresponding author

