ObjectBox: From Centers to Boxes for
Anchor-Free Object Detection
(Supplementary Material)
Mohsen Zand , Ali Etemad , and Michael Greenspan
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ingenuity Labs Research Institute
Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada

S.1

Overview

We provide additional experiments to further explore the robustness of our
method. Experimental results on the PASCAL VOC 2012 [S.1] are represented
in Sec. S.2. In Sec. S.3, we investigate correlations between the object size and
the scale at which it is detected. We also utilize our IoU loss in other detectors
and report the results in Sec. S.4. Inference details are also discussed in Sec. S.5.
Finally, we qualitatively show some ObjectBox results in Sec. S.6.

S.2

PASCAL VOC 2012

To demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on different object categories
in a subtle way, we perform another experiment on the PASCAL VOC 2012
dataset. We trained the network under the same settings as we performed on
MS-COCO dataset. Notably, our method does not need to set dataset-dependent
hyperparameters like anchor boxes. The results are shown in Table S.1. ObjectBox outperforms the other methods, achieving a higher AP score on 13 of the 20
object classes. Overall, ObjectBox achieves an mAP of 83.7%, which is +2.4%
higher than the next best performing method. It can be observed that ObjectBox
works relatively well in both small object and large object classes. For example,
it achieves 92.1% in the class ‘plane’ and 93.3% in the class ‘car’. It can be
observed that ObjectBox is either the best or the second-best method in terms
of AP score in all categories except ‘cat’, ’dog’, and ‘bike’. This is probably due
to the use of YOLO’s Darknet backbone, as YOLOv2 similarly does not work
well in these categories.

S.3

Multiscale Prediction

We investigate correlations between the object size and the scale at which it is
detected. As shown in Table S.2, we consider predictions per individual scales,
observing that larger objects are better detected at coarser scales, and smaller
objects are better detected at finer scales, despite being trained without the
bias in defining the positive samples. Each scale level still contributes to the

