Supplementary Material
Haotian Bai⋆ , Ruimao Zhang ⋆⋆ , Jiong Wang, and Xiang Wan
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, The Chinese Univeristy of Hong Kong
(Shenzhen), China
haotianwhite@outlook.com, zhangruimao@cuhk.edu.cn

We give more experimental results and analysis on Spatial Calibration Module (SCM) proposed in the main paper. Firstly, we conduct more ablation studies
on the activation diffusion module, especially on the Newton Schulz Approximation iteration. Next, we study various strategies of combing S l and F l and
testify its influence on localization. To test SCM on more challenging measures,
we validate it on MaxboxAcc. Furthermore, we provide the complete proof of the
semantics-coupled Laplacian matrix Ll at Eqn.(4) in the main paper, followed
by a theoretical analysis of the semantic flow redistribution.

1

Additional ablation study

In this section, we conduct experiments on the influence of the iteration number
in Newton Schulz Iteration. We also test the methodology to build up the final
prediction score map using maps from various layers.
1.1

Selecting different iteration numbers

As shown in Fig.1, we observe that the approximation of L−1 by Newton Schulz
can be accelerated with the increasing number of iterations. It raises the question
of what its impact on the localization performance is. To answer this question,
we train several models with four ADB layers following the same setting as the
main paper, except that the number of iterations varies.
As depicted in Fig.3, we plot GT-Known and the hyperparameter threshold
γ above which we generate the binary map. It turns out that iteration p = 4
is still the optimal choice that exceeds other settings over 5% in GT-Known.
To explore the reason, we plot γ and observe that the iteration p = 4 yields
a much larger region of interest than others. It indicates that SCM may need
a relatively small number of iterations in each block, or semantic information
would be over-diffused, resulting in degraded performance.
1.2

Strategies on combining maps

We design SCM as an external module that calibrates Transformer trained on
the classification to weakly supervised localization scenarios. During inference,
⋆

Research done when Haotian Bai was a Research Assistant at The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, shenzhen.
⋆⋆
Corresponding Author

