Supplementary Material for Semantic-guided
Multi-Mask Image Harmonization
Xuqian Ren1[0000−0002−3811−0235] , Yifan Liu2[0000−0002−2746−8186]
Beijing Institute of Technology
University of Adelaide

In this supplementary material, we will first show more illustration cases
about the explainable property of our proposed framework. Second, we show
more qualitative results of baseline and our proposed framework. Third, more
visualizations in our user study will be provided. Next, some ablation studies
is conducted. Finally, we will compare our framework with other state-of-art
methods on a public benchmark with single masks.

1

Explainable property of our framework

Here we show more results to demonstrate the explainable property of our framework by visualizing operator masks. Figure 2 are the results from HScene, and
Figure 3 shows results from HLIP. We can see that our framework can sense
the disturbance in various directions and give a reasonable explanation for its
adjustment direction. Thus, our method can make the harmonization process interpretability as well as ensure the performance is similar to previous baselines.
We can also see that our framework can harmonize two completely different adjustment directions in an image (like results show in the 1, 7, 8, 9, 10th line of
Figure 2 and the 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10th line of Figure 3), which will not make
the framework adjust the foreground in only one direction, so our framework is
foreground-aware network.

2

Qualitative results between different output formats

In Figure 4, we show more qualitative visualization results between the RGB
output format and our operator masks output format. Our operator mask-based
framework is more suitable for structural adjustment, even there are different
harmonization directions in one image. Also, training in a GAN framework can
make the model pay more attention to the details(as can be seen in the 9th line
in Figure 4).

3

More User study results

Here we show more pictures used in the User Study in Figure 1. The first three
lines show results that only illumination needs to be changed. The 4, 5th shows
the results when foregrounds have already been processed by Instagram filters.

