The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Perturbation-Invariant Adversarial Training for Neural Ranking Models:
Improving the Effectiveness-Robustness Trade-Off
Yu-An Liu1,2 , Ruqing Zhang1,2 , Mingkun Zhang1,2 , Wei Chen1,2 , Maarten de Rijke3 ,
Jiafeng Guo1,2 , Xueqi Cheng1,2
1

CAS Key Lab of Network Data Science and Technology, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{liuyuan21b, zhangruqing, zhangmingkun20z, chenwei2022, guojiafeng, cxq}@ict.ac.cn, m.derijke@uva.nl
Abstract

method for attacking NRMs is the word substitution ranking attack (WSRA), which promotes a target document in
rankings by replacing important words with synonyms (Wu
et al. 2023). Given the prevalence of black-hat search engine
optimization (SEO) (Gyöngyi and Garcia-Molina 2005), enhancing the adversarial robustness of NRMs against such attacks is vital for their use in real-world scenarios.
Among adversarial defense mechanisms proposed to improve model robustness (Jia and Liang 2017; Raghunathan,
Steinhardt, and Liang 2018; Madry et al. 2018), adversarial training remains the top-performer (Shafahi et al. 2019;
Zhu et al. 2019). During adversarial training adversarial examples are fed to a model. However, this causes an undesirable reduction in effectiveness on natural (clean) samples, giving rise to a trade-off dilemma between effectiveness and robustness (Tsipras et al. 2019). This is because effectiveness concerns the overall performance under normal
conditions, while adversarial robustness centers on performance under malicious behavior. Several refinements have
been suggested for vanilla adversarial training, to mitigate
the aforementioned trade-off in text and image classification
(Zhang et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2021). However, clear differences exist between classification and ranking scenarios
concerning the trade-off, given that the former relies on a
single sample, whereas the latter involves a ranked list. So
far, the ranking task has not benefited from these advances in
bridging the gap between effectiveness and robustness. This
naturally raises the first question:
What is the trade-off between effectiveness and robustness for ranking problems?
We contribute a theoretical characterization of this question
by decomposing the robust ranking error, i.e., the prediction
error for adversarial examples, into two terms: (i) a natural ranking error, which focuses on the natural effectiveness
of the ranked list predicted by the ranking model on clean
data, and (ii) a boundary ranking error, which indicates the
ranking model’s adversarial robustness against adversarial
examples, measuring the proximity of input features to the
decision boundary. We then introduce the perturbation invariance of a ranking model, which says that any adversarial perturbation to candidate documents does not alter the
resulting document ranking. We prove that the perturbation
invariance is a differentiable upper bound on the boundary

Neural ranking models (NRMs) have shown great success in
information retrieval (IR). But their predictions can easily be
manipulated using adversarial examples, which are crafted by
adding imperceptible perturbations to legitimate documents.
This vulnerability raises significant concerns about their reliability and hinders the widespread deployment of NRMs.
By incorporating adversarial examples into training data, adversarial training has become the de facto defense approach
to adversarial attacks against NRMs. However, this defense
mechanism is subject to a trade-off between effectiveness and
adversarial robustness. In this study, we establish theoretical guarantees regarding the effectiveness-robustness tradeoff in NRMs. We decompose the robust ranking error into
two components, i.e., a natural ranking error for effectiveness evaluation and a boundary ranking error for assessing
adversarial robustness. Then, we define the perturbation invariance of a ranking model and prove it to be a differentiable
upper bound on the boundary ranking error for attainable
computation. Informed by our theoretical analysis, we design
a novel perturbation-invariant adversarial training (PIAT)
method for ranking models to achieve a better effectivenessrobustness trade-off. We design a regularized surrogate loss,
in which one term encourages the effectiveness to be maximized while the regularization term encourages the output to
be smooth, so as to improve adversarial robustness. Experimental results on several ranking models demonstrate the superiority of PITA compared to existing adversarial defenses.

Introduction
Ranking is a fundamental problem in information retrieval
(IR). With advances in deep learning (LeCun, Bengio, and
Hinton 2015), neural ranking models (NRMs) (Guo et al.
2020) have achieved remarkable effectiveness. We have also
witnessed substantial uptake of NRMs in practice (Lin,
Nogueira, and Yates 2022). Recently, it has been demonstrated that NRMs are vulnerable to adversarial examples that are capable of inducing misbehavior with humanimperceptible perturbations (Wu et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2022;
Chen et al. 2023). So far, little attention has been devoted
to combating this issue. A representative and successful
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8832

