The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SGNet: Structure Guided Network via Gradient-Frequency Awareness
for Depth Map Super-resolution
Zhengxue Wang, Zhiqiang Yan* , Jian Yang*
PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
{zxwang,yanzq,csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

6.5

Abstract

6.0

Depth super-resolution (DSR) aims to restore high-resolution
(HR) depth from low-resolution (LR) one, where RGB image is often used to promote this task. Recent image guided
DSR approaches mainly focus on spatial domain to rebuild
depth structure. However, since the structure of LR depth is
usually blurry, only considering spatial domain is not very
sufficient to acquire satisfactory results. In this paper, we propose structure guided network (SGNet), a method that pays
more attention to gradient and frequency domains, both of
which have the inherent ability to capture high-frequency
structure. Specifically, we first introduce the gradient calibration module (GCM), which employs the accurate gradient
prior of RGB to sharpen the LR depth structure. Then we
present the Frequency Awareness Module (FAM) that recursively conducts multiple spectrum differencing blocks (SDB),
each of which propagates the precise high-frequency components of RGB into the LR depth. Extensive experimental results on both real and synthetic datasets demonstrate
the superiority of our SGNet, reaching the state-of-the-art
(see Fig. 1). Codes and pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/yanzq95/SGNet.

5.5

SGNet

SUFT

RSAG

DCTNet

FDSR

DKN

RMSE (cm)

5.0

4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5

2.0

RGB-D-D

Middlebury

Lu

NYU-v2

Figure 1: RMSE comparison between our SGNet and existing state-of-the-art methods on four benchmarks ( ×16 ).
we find that, the spectrum features of RGB and HR reserve
not only low-frequency content (central area) but also highfrequency structure (corner area). In contrast, the spectrum
feature of LR lacks a large number of high-frequency components. These evidences indicate that the gradient and spectrum information can accurately depict the distribution of
high-frequency structure. Consequently, motivated by these
two observations, in this paper we pay more attention to gradient and frequency domains to take advantage of their inherent properties for clear structure recovery.
Gradient domain. We design the gradient calibration
module (GCM) to leverage the powerful structure representation capability of gradient feature. Specifically, RGB
and LR are first mapped into gradient domain (Ma et al.
2020). Then the accurate RGB gradient prior is employed
to calibrate the blurry structure of LR. Besides, we introduce a gradient-aware loss to further sharpen the structure
via narrowing the distance between the intermediate feature
of GCM and that of HR in gradient domain.
Frequency domain. We present the Frequency Awareness Module (FAM), which recursively conducts multiple
spectrum differencing blocks (SDB) to propagate the precise high-frequency components (Yan et al. 2022b) of RGB.
Concretely, SDB first maps RGB and LR into the same
frequency domain. To explicitly compensate for the absent
high-frequency components, i.e., the blank corner area of
Fig. 2(j), SDB next employs subtraction between the spec-

Introduction
Image guided DSR has been widely applied in various fields,
such as 3D reconstruction (Yuan et al. 2023a), virtual reality (Bonetti, Warnaby, and Quinn 2018), and augmented reality (Xiong et al. 2021). However, the blurry structure of
LR depth caused by complex imaging environment still impedes their performance. For example, Fig. 2 (LR) shows
that, the LR depth contain rich low-frequency content but
are severely deficient in clear high-frequency structure. Recently, many DSR approaches (Yuan et al. 2023a; Shi, Ye,
and Du 2022) are proposed to tackle this issue. However,
most of them focus only on the spatial domain for recovery,
which is not very sufficient to obtain desired results.
For one thing, from (c)-(f) of Fig. 2 we discover that, the
gradient features of RGB and HR contain highly discriminative object structure. Besides, although the degraded LR
is terribly blurry, the gradient feature can still delineate its
structure clearly. For another thing, from (h)-(j) of Fig. 2
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5823

