The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

WebVLN: Vision-and-Language Navigation on Websites
Qi Chen* , Dileepa Pitawela* , Chongyang Zhao* , Gengze Zhou, Hsiang-Ting Chen, Qi Wu†
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide
{qi.chen04, dileepa.pitawela, chongyang.zhao, gengze.zhou, tim.chen, qi.wu01}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) task aims to enable AI agents to accurately understand and follow natural
language instructions to navigate through real-world environments, ultimately reaching specific target locations. We
recognise a promising opportunity to extend VLN to a comparable navigation task that holds substantial significance in
our daily lives, albeit within the virtual realm: navigating
websites on the Internet. This paper proposes a new task
named Vision-and-Language Navigation on Websites (WebVLN), where we use question-based instructions to train
an agent, emulating how users naturally browse websites.
Unlike the existing VLN task that only pays attention to
vision and instruction (language), the WebVLN agent further considers underlying web-specific content like HTML,
which could not be seen on the rendered web pages yet contains rich visual and textual information. Toward this goal,
we contribute a dataset, WebVLN-v1, and introduce a novel
approach called Website-aware VLN Network (WebVLNNet), which is built upon the foundation of state-of-the-art
VLN techniques. Experimental results show that WebVLNNet outperforms current VLN and web-related navigation
methods. We believe that the introduction of the new WebVLN task and its dataset will establish a new dimension within the VLN domain and contribute to the broader
vision-and-language research community. Code is available
at: https://github.com/WebVLN/WebVLN.

Figure 1: An example of the WebVLN task. An agent is initiated on the homepage of a website and asked a question
Q with an auxiliary description D. To respond, the agent is
required to intelligently navigate and explore the website,
gather information through observation, and finally provide
an accurate response/answer R in a free-form sentence.

tion embedded within webpage like HTML. With this consideration, we introduce an extended VLN task, denoted as
Vision-and-Language Navigation on Websites (WebVLN).
Figure 1 shows an example of the WebVLN task. In this
scenario, an agent starts its journey from a website’s front
page, presented with a question Q accompanied by an auxiliary description D. The agent emulates genuine user behaviour and navigates through the website. It processes the
current view of the webpage and engages in common web
browsing activities such as reading the images and text, and
clicking on the links to navigate to the next pages. The
agent’s objective is to efficiently traverse the website and
reach a target webpage, which contains the necessary information to answer the question Q and produce an accurate
response R to the question.
The new task poses several new challenges. First, the
choices available to an AI agent navigating a website are
substantially more than those in traditional discrete VLN
scenarios, which are confined to adjacent navigable viewpoints in physical environments. While in WebVLN, the

Introduction
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) (Anderson et al.
2018) aims to seamlessly integrate visual perception and action with language understanding, to enable AI agents to
navigate and interact effectively within real-world environments. Interestingly, the resemblance can be found in the
virtual online environment, where users might rely on AI
agents to assist them in gathering information about certain
products even when they can only offer broad and vague instructions such as “how much does a pair of grey and orange
striped socks cost”. This extends beyond the boundaries of
traditional VLN tasks, including not only vision and instruction (language) but also incorporating the abundant informa* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1165

