The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Cycle-Consistency Learning for Captioning and Grounding
Ning Wang1 , Jiajun Deng2 , Mingbo Jia1
1

Huawei Inc.
University of Adelaide, Australian Institute for Machine Learning
wn6149@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jiajun.deng@adelaide.edu.au, jiamingbo@huawei.com
2

Abstract
CycleConsistency
Loss

We present that visual grounding and image captioning,
which perform as two mutually inverse processes, can be
bridged together for collaborative training by careful designs.
By consolidating this idea, we introduce CyCo, a cyclicconsistent learning framework to ameliorate the independent
training pipelines of visual grounding and image captioning.
The proposed framework (1) allows the semi-weakly supervised training of visual grounding; (2) improves the performance of fully supervised visual grounding; (3) yields a general captioning model that can describe arbitrary image regions. Extensive experiments show that our fully supervised
grounding model achieves state-of-the-art performance, and
the semi-weakly supervised one also exhibits competitive
performance compared to the fully supervised counterparts.
Our image captioning model has the capability to freely describe image regions and meanwhile shows impressive performance on prevalent captioning benchmarks.

Initialization
Box
Predicted
Box

Image
Captioning

Predicted Caption
a woman in a
pink snowsuit

Visual
Grounding

(a) Captioning-to-Grounding Cycle-Consistency Framework
Initialization Caption

CycleConsistency
Loss

right pink and
blue person
a woman in a
pink snowsuit

Predicted Caption

Visual
Grounding

Predicted
Box

Image
Captioning

(b) Grounding-to-Captioning Cycle-Consistency Framework

Figure 1: The proposed framework jointly optimizes image captioning and visual grounding models via cycleconsistency learning. In (a), our method computes the region (box) consistency in the captioning-to-grounding optimization cycle. In (b), our framework measures the caption
consistency in the grounding-to-captioning cyclic process.

Introduction
The recent decades have witnessed the great success in
vision-language (VL) related fields. Based on the primary
target of bridging the modality gap between vision and language, deep neural networks addressing VL tasks generally
share the pre-training objective, model structure, large-scale
training corpus, etc. However, by the time of downstream
fine-tuning, these tasks are typically individually tackled or
simply combined in a multi-task training paradigm.
In this work, we devote our efforts to two VL downstream
tasks including image captioning (Vinyals et al. 2015; Anderson et al. 2018) and visual grounding (Mao et al. 2016;
Yu et al. 2016), and explore their inherent relationships to
enable effective joint training. To match the granularity of
visual parts in visual grounding, we first extend image captioning to a more general scenario, where the model is intended to describe a given region. We define this generalized
task as regional image captioning, which is similar to dense
captioning task (Johnson, Karpathy, and Fei-Fei 2016) but is
free of the requirement of object detection. Particularly, the
conventional task definition of image captioning (Vinyals
et al. 2015) is a special case of regional image captioning

that regards the whole image as a region. For visual grounding, which is also known as referring expression comprehension (Mao et al. 2016; Yu et al. 2016) and phrase localization (Kazemzadeh et al. 2014; Plummer et al. 2015) in the
literature, we maintain the original task target to localize the
corresponding region (generally denoted by a bounding box)
described by a given language expression.
Despite achieving inspiring progress, image captioning
and visual grounding still suffer from several limitations.
For visual grounding, this task simultaneously requires text
descriptions and accurate object bounding boxes for model
optimization. These fine-grained image-text-box triplets are
rather laborious to collect. How to optimize the grounding
model using limited data annotations has received considerable attention (Liu et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021a). As for
image captioning, existing methods typically focus on describing the whole image. The capabilities of modeling region relationships and properly describing them are largely
overlooked in existing algorithms. We argue that a robust
image captioner should be qualified to freely describe the
image, from an arbitrary region to the whole image. Simi-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5535

