The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DVSAI: Diverse View-Shared Anchors Based Incomplete Multi-View Clustering
Shengju Yu1 , Siwei Wang2 * , Pei Zhang1 , Miao Wang2 * , Ziming Wang3 ,
Zhe Liu4 , Liming Fang5 , En Zhu1 , Xinwang Liu1 *
1

School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, 410073, China
2
Intelligent Game and Decision Lab, Beijing, 100071, China
3
China Academy of Aerospace Science and Innovation, Beijing, 100176, China
4
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, 311500, China
5
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, 210016, China
yu-shengju@foxmail.com, {wangsiwei13, mercury.miao, xinwangliu}@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract

web-page data, some webs may include audio, video and hyperlink simultaneously, and yet others may have one or two
types (Zhang et al. 2019; Liang et al. 2023; Fu et al. 2023).
The unpaired sample absence in respective view causes it to
be quite difficult to capture the consensus representation, resulting in serious performance degradation. This induces the
problem of incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC).
For effectively tackling IMVC issues, numerous algorithms have been devised, like (Li, Jiang, and Zhou 2014;
Fang et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2019a; Yang et al. 2021b;
Wen et al. 2021). Li, Jiang, and Zhou (2014) adopt NMF
scheme to handle partial views and seek to build the latent
subspace such that similar samples reside tightly. Wang et al.
(2019a) build up the connection between IMVC and perturbation theory, and learn the consensus characteristics by
minimizing the perturbation risk. These methods receive the
desirable clustering results, however, they usually take cubic time and/or square memory overheads. This causes them
unable to tackle large-size datasets, greatly impeding the
model’s scalability. Recently, anchor strategy (Kang et al.
2020; Qiang et al. 2021; Xia et al. 2022b), a promising technology for decreasing the overheads, has captured increasing
interest. Instead of constructing the relationship between all
samples, it first chooses a small number of landmarks as anchors and then generates the relationship between anchors
and all samples. Accordingly, the graph with size n × n is
reduced to one with m × n where m ≪ n.
IMVC algorithms based on anchors have made extraordinary progress in increasing both the efficiency and the clustering results (Wang et al. 2022b; Li et al. 2022a; Liu et al.
2022b), nevertheless, the view-shared anchors constructed
by existing methods are generally with only one dimension,
which could deteriorate the diversity between views, leading to severe information loss. This is mainly because every view normally has exclusive features and one common
dimension may not be competent to characterize all views.
In addition to this, the constructed view-shared anchors are
typically with a single size, which could be unfavorable for
deeply exploiting heterogeneous representations since only
one size could not adequately reflect the actual distribution
of the whole samples, resulting in less discriminative anchors. The clustering performance is also largely dependent
on the choice of dimension and size of anchors, which to
some extent limits the flexibility of the model.

In numerous real-world applications, it is quite common that
sample information is partially available for some views due
to machine breakdown or sensor failure, causing the problem
of incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC). While several
IMVC approaches using view-shared anchors have successfully achieved pleasing performance improvement, (1) they
generally construct anchors with only one dimension, which
could deteriorate the multi-view diversity, bringing about serious information loss; (2) the constructed anchors are typically with a single size, which could not sufficiently characterize the distribution of the whole samples, leading to limited
clustering performance. For generating view-shared anchors
with multi-dimension and multi-size for IMVC, we design a
novel framework called Diverse View-Shared Anchors based
Incomplete multi-view clustering (DVSAI). Concretely, we
associate each partial view with several potential spaces. In
each space, we enable anchors to communicate among views
and generate the view-shared anchors with space-specific dimension and size. Consequently, spaces with various scales
make the generated view-shared anchors enjoy diverse dimensions and sizes. Subsequently, we devise an integration
scheme with linear computational and memory expenditures
to integrate the outputted multi-scale unified anchor graphs
such that running spectral algorithm generates the spectral
embedding. Afterwards, we theoretically demonstrate that
DVSAI owns linear time and space costs, thus well-suited
for tackling large-size datasets. Finally, comprehensive experiments confirm the effectiveness and advantages of DVSAI.

Introduction
As a technology for effectively grouping multi-view data
without requiring any priori labels, multi-view clustering has
drawn widespread concerns recently (Li et al. 2022b; Wang
et al. 2022a; Yu et al. 2023a). However, their performance
is heavily dependent on the completeness of sample information. In many situations, the sample information could
be missing in some views, bringing about partial multi-view
data (Yang et al. 2021a; Yu et al. 2023b; Xia et al. 2022a).
For example, in medical data, patients typically choose to do
some types of examinations rather than all types of them; In
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16568

