The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Rating-Based Reinforcement Learning
Devin White1 , Mingkang Wu1 , Ellen Novoseller2 , Vernon J. Lawhern2 , Nicholas Waytowich2 ,
Yongcan Cao1
2

1
University of Texas, San Antonio
DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory

Abstract

without directly handcrafting the reward. Existing work
on reward learning includes inverse reinforcement learning
(IRL) (Ziebart et al. 2008), preference-based reinforcement
learning (PbRL) (Christiano et al. 2017), and the combination of demonstrations and relative preferences, e.g. learning
from preferences over demonstrations (Brown et al. 2019).
Existing human-guided reward learning approaches have
demonstrated effective performance in various tasks. However, they suffer from some key limitations. For example,
IRL requires expert demonstrations and hence, cannot be directly applied to tasks that are difficult for humans to demonstrate. PbRL is a practical approach to learning rewards for
RL, since it is straightforward for humans to provide accurate relative preference information. Yet, RL from pairwise
preferences suffers from some key disadvantages. First, each
pairwise preference provides only a single bit of information, which can result in sample inefficiency. In addition, due
to their binary nature, standard preference queries do not indicate how much better or worse one sample is than another.
Furthermore, because preference queries are relative, they
cannot directly provide a global view of each sample’s absolute quality (good vs. bad); for instance, if all choices shown
to the user are of poor quality, the user cannot say, “A is better than B, but they’re both bad!”. Thus, a PbRL algorithm
may be more easily trapped in a local optimum, and cannot
know to what extent its performance approaches the user’s
goal. Finally, PbRL methods often require strict preferences,
such that comparisons between similar-quality or incomparable trajectories cannot be used in reward learning. While
some works use weak preference queries (Bıyık et al. 2020;
Bıyık, Talati, and Sadigh 2022), in which the user can state
that two choices are equally preferable, there is no way to
specify the quality (good vs. poor) of such trajectories; thus,
valuable information remains untapped.
The objective of this paper is to design a new ratingbased RL (RbRL) approach that infers reward functions
via multi-class human ratings. RbRL differs from IRL and
PbRL in that it leverages human ratings on individual samples, whereas IRL uses demonstrations and PbRL uses relative pairwise comparisons. In each query, RbRL displays
one trajectory to a human and requests the human to provide a discrete rating. The number of rating classes can be
as low as two, e.g. “bad” and “good”, and can be as high
as desired. For example, when the number of rating classes

This paper develops a novel rating-based reinforcement learning (RbRL) approach that uses human ratings to obtain human guidance in reinforcement learning. Different from the
existing preference-based and ranking-based reinforcement
learning paradigms, based on human relative preferences over
sample pairs, the proposed rating-based reinforcement learning approach is based on human evaluation of individual trajectories without relative comparisons between sample pairs.
The rating-based reinforcement learning approach builds on
a new prediction model for human ratings and a novel multiclass loss function. We finally conduct several experimental
studies based on synthetic ratings and real human ratings to
evaluate the performance of the new rating-based reinforcement learning approach.

Introduction
With the development of deep neural network theory and
improvements in computing hardware, deep reinforcement
learning (RL) has become capable of handling complex
tasks with large state and/or action spaces (e.g., Go and Atari
games) and yielding human-level or better-than-humanlevel performance (Silver et al. 2016; Mnih et al. 2015).
Numerous approaches, such as DQN (Mnih et al. 2015),
DDPG (Lillicrap et al. 2015), PPO (Schulman et al. 2017),
and SAC (Haarnoja et al. 2018) have been developed to address challenges such as stability, exploration, and convergence for various applications (Li 2019) such as robotic control, autonomous driving, and gaming. Despite the important
and fundamental advances behind these algorithms, one key
obstacle for the wide application of deep RL is the required
knowledge of a reward function, which is often unavailable
in practical applications.
Although human experts could design reward functions
in some domains, the cost is high because human experts
need to understand the relationship between the mission
objective and state-action values and may need to spend
extensive time adjusting reward parameters and trade-offs
not to encounter adverse behaviors such as reward hacking (Amodei et al. 2016). Another approach is to utilize qualitative human inputs indirectly to learn a reward
function, such that humans guide reward function design
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10207

