The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Two-Stage Information Extraction Network for
Incomplete Multi-View Multi-Label Classification
Xin Tan* , Ce Zhao* , Chengliang Liu, Jie Wen† , Zhanyan Tang
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Visual Object Detection and Recognition, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
Kevin1205255113@outlook.com, alcor zhao@outlook.com, liucl1996@163.com, {jiewen pr, lingf5877}@126.com

Abstract

2018; Zhang et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2019). However, in recent
years, many reserchers have observed that in real-world applications, the multi-view multi-label data are often incomplete due to various uncertainties involved in data collection
and manual annotation (Li, Wan, and He 2021; Xu et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2021). The absence of views and labels
has a significant impact on MvMLC (Xu, Tao, and Xu 2015;
Liu et al. 2021). Consequently, the investigation of incomplete multi-view multi-label classification (iMvMLC) is imperative.
For iMvMLC, traditional methods such as iMvWL (Tan
et al. 2018) and NAIML (Li and Chen 2021) have been proposed. iMvWL performs simultaneous mapping of multiview features and multi-label information into a discriminative shared subspace. NAIML effectively leverages the
consensus of multiple views and the structures of multiple labels. Despite achieving certain outcomes, these methods have some drawbacks. For example, the two traditional
methods are all shallow machine learning methods, which
cannot capture the underlying discriminative information of
data and are all computationally inefficient. Moreover, the
methods based on matrix factorization like iMvWL cannot handle the new-coming test samples with the trained
model. More recently, methods based on deep neural networks (DNN), such as LMVCAT (Liu et al. 2023b) and
DICNet (Liu et al. 2023a), have demonstrated remarkable
advantages in this task. Compared to traditional methods
such as matrix factorization, DNN are better at capturing
high-level semantic information and are more suitable for
complex iMvMLC tasks (Wen et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2023a).
Focusing on DNN architectures for iMvMLC, in addition to the widely adopted autoencoder, contrastive learning
is a promising approach to improve the performance (Liu
et al. 2023a). However, existing iMvMLC methods have not
delved into the essence of contrastive learning, specifically
increasing cross-view mutual information (MI) to extract
task-relevant information. This limitation also results in their
models not being able to fully extract useful information. To
overcome this bottleneck, in this paper, we propose an information extraction network for incomplete multi-view multilabel classification from an information-theoretic perspective. Different from the existing works, the proposed model
seeks to integrate the information bottleneck (IB) and mutual information extraction to address the iMvMLC prob-

Recently, multi-view multi-label classification (MvMLC) has
received a significant amount of research interest and many
methods have been proposed based on the assumptions of
view completion and label completion. However, in realworld scenarios, multi-view multi-label data tends to be incomplete due to various uncertainties involved in data collection and manual annotation. As a result, the conventional
MvMLC methods fail. In this paper, we propose a new twostage MvMLC network to solve this incomplete MvMLC issue with partial missing views and missing labels. Different from the existing works, our method attempts to leverage the diverse information from the partially missing data
based on the information theory. Specifically, our method
aims to minimize task-irrelevant information while maximizing task-relevant information through the principles of information bottleneck theory and mutual information extraction. The first stage of our network involves training viewspecific classifiers to concentrate the task-relevant information. Subsequently, in the second stage, the hidden states of
these classifiers serve as input for an alignment model, an
autoencoder-based mutual information extraction framework,
and a weighted fusion classifier to make the final prediction.
Extensive experiments performed on five datasets validate
that our method outperforms other state-of-the-art methods.
Code is available at https://github.com/KevinTan10/TSIEN.

Introduction
An object can be characterized by multiple data from different views, which means these multi-view data may share
some instance information while also potentially possessing unique information (Xu et al. 2022; Jiang et al. 2022).
Moreover, an object or image may contain rich information,
leading to the assignment of multiple labels. For example, a
natural landscape image can be described by various feature
descriptors such as SIFT, Gist, and HSV, and it may be annotated with multiple labels such as sky, tree, bird, etc. In order
to effectively exploit the multi-view multi-label data, multiview multi-label classification emerges and many methods
have been proposed based on the assumption of view completion and label completion in the past years (Zhu et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15249

