The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Delegation-Relegation for Boolean Matrix Factorization
Florent Avellaneda1, 2 , Roger Villemaire1
1

2

Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM), Montréal, Canada
Centre de Recherche de l’Institut Universitaire de Gériatrie de Montréal, Montréal, Canada
avellaneda.florent@uqam.ca, villemaire.roger@uqam.ca

rank k, finding a BMF that is as close as possible to the matrix X. In this paper, we only consider exact solutions in
which no error is allowed. Exact solutions are a key concern
in application areas such as security role mining (Ene et al.
2008) where a spurious authorization would jeopardize a security policy. Moreover, it is well-known that the set basis
and biclique covering problems are equivalent to BMF (Miettinen and Neumann 2020). Therefore, this opens up additional domains that would benefit from exact BMF such
as network nodes’ service that provide functions bundling
(Markopoulou and E. Anagnostou 1998), encryption key
management (Shu, Lee, and Yannakakis 2006), and frameproof codes (Hajiabolhassan and Moazami 2012).
In this setting, our objective is to devise methods to find
exact BMF with minimal or as close to minimal rank as
possible. Since the problem of finding the BMF of minimal rank k is known to be NP-hard (Miettinen et al. 2008),
most existing algorithms in the literature aim to minimize
the rank k without guaranteeing optimality (Asso (Miettinen et al. 2008), GreConD (Belohlavek and Vychodil 2010),
Hyper (Xiang et al. 2011), MEBF (Wan et al. 2020), Nassau
(Karaev, Miettinen, and Vreeken 2015), PaNDa+ (Lucchese,
Orlando, and Perego 2010), Proximus (Koyutürk and Grama
2003), Tiling (Geerts, Goethals, and Mielikäinen 2004)).
However, recent work based on constraint solvers proposed
methods for finding optimal BMF (Kovacs, Gunluk, and
Hauser 2021; Avellaneda and Villemaire 2022). While these
approaches can find optimal factorizations for small matrices only, they can still find low-rank factorization for larger
matrices by using relaxations and approximations. Therefore, these constraint solver-based methods are more computationally demanding than traditional approaches, but they
generally produce smaller rank BMF. A natural question that
arises is: is it possible to simplify the matrices before factorization in order to make the constraint solving algorithms
run more efficiently?
The idea of simplifying the matrices to be factorized before performing the factorization is not new and has been introduced in a particular family of BMF algorithms based on
formal concept analysis (Ganter and Wille 2012). A formal
concept corresponds to a pair of lines and columns (I, J)
such that ∀i ∈ I, j ∈ J, Xi,j = 1. Formal concepts are
partially ordered and give rise to a lattice called the concept
lattice. The BMF problem then coincides with the selection

Abstract
The Boolean Matrix Factorization (BMF) problem aims to
represent a n × m Boolean matrix as the Boolean product of
two matrices of small rank k, where the product is computed
using Boolean algebra operations. However, finding a BMF
of minimum rank is known to be NP-hard, posing challenges
for heuristic algorithms and exact approaches in terms of rank
found and computation time, particularly as matrix size or the
number of entries equal to 1 grows.
In this paper, we present a new approach to simplifying the
matrix to be factorized by reducing the number of 1-entries,
which allows to directly recover a Boolean factorization of
the original matrix from its simplified version. We introduce two types of simplification: one that performs numerous
simplifications without preserving the original rank and another that performs fewer simplifications but guarantees that
an optimal BMF on the simplified matrix yields an optimal
BMF on the original matrix. Furthermore, our experiments
show that our approach outperforms existing exact BMF algorithms.

1

Introduction

The problem of Boolean Matrix Factorization (BMF) is to
represent a n × m matrix X as the Boolean product of an
n × k and k × m matrices A ◦ B. The Boolean semiring
operator, denoted by ◦, represents a matrix multiplication in
which the product is computed using the logical “AND” operator and the addition is computed using the logical “OR”
operator. By searching for matrices A and B of small rank
k, the BMF allows us to represent the initial matrix X in
a concise way. BMF is widely used in various fields such
as data mining (Wicker, Pfahringer, and Kramer 2012), role
mining (Ene et al. 2008), bioinformatics (Liang, Zhu, and
Lu 2020), logic synthesis (Ma, Hashemi, and Reda 2022;
Hashemi, Tann, and Reda 2018), and network analysis (Kocayusufoglu, Hoang, and Singh 2018), and has been the subject of numerous research studies (Miettinen and Neumann
2020).
In the context of BMF, two types of problems arise. The
first problem is, given a matrix X, finding a BMF of minimal rank. The second problem is, given a matrix X and a
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20632

