The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Semantic Lens: Instance-Centric Semantic Alignment for Video Super-resolution
∗

Qi Tang1,2 , Yao Zhao1,2 , Meiqin Liu1,2 , Jian Jin3 , Chao Yao4*
1
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology, Beijing, China
3
Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
{qitang, yzhao, mqliu}@bjtu.edu.cn, jian.jin@ntu.edu.sg, yaochao@ustb.edu.cn
2

Abstract
As a critical clue of video super-resolution (VSR), interframe alignment significantly impacts overall performance.
However, accurate pixel-level alignment is a challenging task
due to the intricate motion interweaving in the video. In response to this issue, we introduce a novel paradigm for VSR
named Semantic Lens, predicated on semantic priors drawn
from degraded videos. Specifically, video is modeled as instances, events, and scenes via a Semantic Extractor. Those
semantics assist the Pixel Enhancer in understanding the recovered contents and generating more realistic visual results.
The distilled global semantics embody the scene information
of each frame, while the instance-specific semantics assemble
the spatial-temporal contexts related to each instance. Furthermore, we devise a Semantics-Powered Attention CrossEmbedding (SPACE) block to bridge the pixel-level features
with semantic knowledge, composed of a Global Perspective
Shifter (GPS) and an Instance-Specific Semantic Embedding
Encoder (ISEE). Concretely, the GPS module generates pairs
of affine transformation parameters for pixel-level feature
modulation conditioned on global semantics. After that, the
ISEE module harnesses the attention mechanism to align the
adjacent frames in the instance-centric semantic space. In addition, we incorporate a simple yet effective pre-alignment
module to alleviate the difficulty of model training. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the superiority of our model over
existing state-of-the-art VSR methods.

𝑇−𝑁

𝑇−𝑛

𝑇

𝑇+𝑛

𝑇+𝑁

Figure 1: Top: Global semantics and instance-specific semantics. Middle: Original frames and event information (indicated by green arrows). Bottom: Patch PSNR heat map
of five frames in a video, super-resolved by a single image
super-resolution model. A clear boundary shows that PSNR
is strongly related to video content.

can provide complementary information for video superresolution. Thus, the effective utilization of temporal information across video frames can yield fine-grained visual
details. In recent years, an increasing number of VSR approaches can be categorized into two paradigms, explicit
and implicit inter-frame alignment. The explicit alignment
attempts to align supporting frames with the reference frame
by using extracted motion information, including optical
flow-based approaches at the image/feature level (Chan et al.
2021), optical flow-guided deformable convolution (Chan
et al. 2022), trajectory-aware attention (Liu et al. 2022a),
etc. The implicit motion estimation and motion compensation seamlessly extract spatio-temporal features from multiple frames like 3D convolution (Liu et al. 2021).
However, in the temporal dimension, accurate pixel-level
alignment still poses a challenging task. On one hand, different contents exhibit varying restoration difficulties (Li
et al. 2023). As illustrated in Figure 1, smooth regions (indicated in light green) are easy to recover, while textured areas (marked in red) are relatively difficult. The sub-optimal
restoration results of texture-rich regions will hinder the accuracy of alignment, and even for easy-to-recover contents,
high-frequency artifacts may be introduced due to misalignment (Zhou et al. 2022). On the other hand, in many real
scenes, the camera’s viewpoint is not fixed, leading to significant changes in the background between adjacent frames.

Introduction
Owing to various constraints, videos captured in real scenes
suffer from degradations such as low resolution, blur, and
noise, etc. Video super-resolution (VSR) aims to recover
high-resolution (HR) video frames from their low-resolution
(LR) counterparts with better visual quality. With the proliferation of high-definition displays and the ever-increasing
demand for superior video contents, VSR has gained
widespread attention. It not only improves the viewer’s visual enjoyment, but also holds potential applications in fields
like film restoration (Wan et al. 2022), medical imaging (Lu
et al. 2023) and satellite imagery (Deudon et al. 2020).
Compared with single image super-resolution (SISR), adjacent frames usually contain highly related contents, which
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5154

