The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Neural Network Approximators for Marginal MAP in Probabilistic Circuits
Shivvrat Arya, Tahrima Rahman, Vibhav Gogate
The University of Texas at Dallas
{shivvrat.arya, tahrima.rahman, vibhav.gogate}@utdallas.edu

probable explanation (MPE) inference1 .
However, none of these expressive PCs can efficiently
solve the marginal maximum-a-posteriori (MMAP) task (Peharz 2015; Vergari et al. 2021), a task that combines MAR
and MPE inference. More specifically, the distinction between MPE and MMAP tasks is that, given observations
over a subset of variables (evidence), the MPE task aims to
find the most likely assignment to all the non-evidence variables. In contrast, in the MMAP task, the goal is to find the
most likely assignment to a subset of non-evidence variables
known as the query variables, while marginalizing out nonevidence variables that are not part of the query. The MMAP
problem has numerous real-world applications, especially
in health care, natural language processing, computer vision, linkage analysis and diagnosis where hidden variables
are present and need to be marginalized out (Bioucas-Dias
and Figueiredo 2016; Kiselev and Poupart 2014; Lee, Marinescu, and Dechter 2014; Ping, Liu, and Ihler 2015).
In terms of computational complexity, both MPE and
MMAP tasks are at least NP-hard in SPNs, a popular class
of PCs (Peharz 2015; Conaty, de Campos, and Mauá 2017).
Moreover, it is also NP-hard to approximate MMAP in SPNs
δ
to 2n for fixed 0 ≤ δ < 1, where n is the input size (Conaty,
de Campos, and Mauá 2017; Mei, Jiang, and Tu 2018). It is
also known that the MMAP task is much harder than the
MPE task and is NP-hard even on models such as cutset networks and AND/OR graphs that admit linear time MPE inference (Park and Darwiche 2004; de Campos 2011).
To date, both exact and approximate methods have been
proposed in literature for solving the MMAP task in PCs.
Notable exact methods include branch-and-bound search
(Mei, Jiang, and Tu 2018), reformulation approaches which
encode the MMAP task as other combinatorial optimization
problems with widely available solvers (Mauá et al. 2020)
and circuit transformation and pruning techniques (Choi,
Friedman, and Van den Broeck 2022). These methods can
be quite slow in practice and are not applicable when fast,
real-time inference is desired. As a result, approximate approaches that require only a few passes over the PC are often used in practice. A popular approximate approach is to

Abstract
Probabilistic circuits (PCs) such as sum-product networks
efficiently represent large multi-variate probability distributions. They are preferred in practice over other probabilistic
representations, such as Bayesian and Markov networks, because PCs can solve marginal inference (MAR) tasks in time
that scales linearly in the size of the network. Unfortunately,
the most probable explanation (MPE) task and its generalization, the marginal maximum-a-posteriori (MMAP) inference task remain NP-hard in these models. Inspired by the
recent work on using neural networks for generating nearoptimal solutions to optimization problems such as integer
linear programming, we propose an approach that uses neural networks to approximate MMAP inference in PCs. The
key idea in our approach is to approximate the cost of an assignment to the query variables using a continuous multilinear function and then use the latter as a loss function. The two
main benefits of our new method are that it is self-supervised,
and after the neural network is learned, it requires only linear time to output a solution. We evaluate our new approach
on several benchmark datasets and show that it outperforms
three competing linear time approximations: max-product inference, max-marginal inference, and sequential estimation,
which are used in practice to solve MMAP tasks in PCs.

Introduction
Probabilistic circuits (PCs) (Choi, Vergari, and Van den
Broeck 2020) such as sum-product networks (SPNs) (Poon
and Domingos 2011), arithmetic circuits (Darwiche 2003),
AND/OR graphs (Dechter and Mateescu 2007), cutset networks (Rahman, Kothalkar, and Gogate 2014), and probabilistic sentential decision diagrams (Kisa et al. 2014) represent a class of tractable probabilistic models which are
often used in practice to compactly encode a large multidimensional joint probability distribution. Even though all
of these models admit linear time computation of marginal
probabilities (MAR task), only some of them (Vergari et al.
2021; Peharz 2015), specifically those without any latent
variables or having specific structural properties, e.g., cutset networks, selective SPNs (Peharz et al. 2016), AND/OR
graphs having small contexts, etc., admit tractable most

1

The MPE inference task is also called full maximum-aposteriori (full MAP) inference in literature. In this paper, we adopt
the convention of calling it MPE.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10918

