The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Maximizing Nash Social Welfare under Two-Sided Preferences
Pallavi Jain1 , Rohit Vaish2
1

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, India
2
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India
pallavi@iitj.ac.in, rvaish@iitd.ac.in

f1

Abstract
The maximum Nash social welfare (NSW)—which maximizes the geometric mean of agents’ utilities—is a fundamental solution concept with remarkable fairness and efficiency guarantees. The computational aspects of NSW have
been extensively studied for one-sided preferences where a
set of agents have preferences over a set of resources. Our
work deviates from this trend and studies NSW maximization for two-sided preferences, wherein a set of workers and
firms, each having a cardinal valuation function, are matched
with each other. We provide a systematic study of the computational complexity of maximizing NSW for many-to-one
matchings under two-sided preferences. Our main negative
result is that maximizing NSW is NP-hard even in a highly restricted setting where each firm has capacity 2, all valuations
are in the range {0, 1, 2}, and each agent positively values
at most three other agents. In search of positive results, we
develop approximation algorithms as well as parameterized
algorithms in terms of natural parameters such as the number
of workers, the number of firms, and the firms’ capacities. We
also provide algorithms for restricted domains such as symmetric binary valuations and bounded degree instances.

f2

3
2
2
3

w1

f1

w2

f2

3
2

0
2

2
3

2
0

w1
w2

Figure 1: One-sided (left) and two-sided (right) instances.
For each edge, the number close to a vertex denotes how
much that agent values the other agent. The Nash welfare
maximizing matchings are highlighted via thick edges.
The area of fair division provides a formal mathematical framework for rigorously analyzing fairness concepts (Brams and Taylor 1996; Moulin 2004). The literature on fair division has focused on one-sided preferences,
wherein a set of agents have preferences over the resources.
A prominent measure of fairness in this context is Nash social welfare, defined as the geometric mean of agents’ utilities (Nash Jr 1950; Kaneko and Nakamura 1979).
Nash welfare provides a “sweet spot” between the purely
welfarist utilitarian objective and the purely egalitarian
Rawlsian objective. It strikes a balance between the oftenconflicting goals of fairness and economic efficiency, and
enjoys a strong axiomatic support (Moulin 2004; Caragiannis et al. 2019). In recent years, the computational aspects of
Nash welfare have gained considerable attention (Cole and
Gkatzelis 2018; Barman, Krishnamurthy, and Vaish 2018a;
Amanatidis et al. 2021; Akrami et al. 2022).
Somewhat surprisingly, Nash welfare has not been studied for two-sided preferences. Our work aims to address this
gap by proposing a systematic examination of the computational complexity of maximizing Nash welfare in the twosided matching problem.

Introduction
The problem of matching two sets of agents, with each
side having preferences over the other, has been extensively studied in economics, computer science, and artificial intelligence (Roth and Sotomayor 1992; Manlove 2013;
Brandt et al. 2016). Such two-sided matching problems have
found several notable real-world applications such as in labor markets (Roth and Peranson 1999), school choice (Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez 2003), and online dating platforms (Hitsch, Hortaçsu, and Ariely 2010).
Despite their extensive practical applicability, commonlyused algorithms for these problems often give rise to
concerns about unfairness. A well-known example is the
deferred-acceptance algorithm, which is known to strongly
favor one side at the expense of the other (Gale and Shapley
1962). Similarly, the matching algorithms used by ridesharing platforms have been found to contribute to the wage gap
between men and women (Cook et al. 2021).

Summary of Contributions
Our model consists of two disjoint sets of agents: workers
and firms. Each worker has a nonnegative valuation for every
firm and can be matched with at most one firm. Each firm
can be matched with multiple workers (up to its capacity)
and has additive valuations over the workers. The goal is to
find a Nash optimal many-to-one matching, i.e., maximize
the geometric mean of workers’ and firms’ utilities.
Before discussing our results, let us illustrate a key difference between one-sided and two-sided preferences through

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9798

