The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Pairwise-Label-Based Deep Incremental Hashing
with Simultaneous Code Expansion
Dayan Wu1 , Qinghang Su1,2 , Bo Li1 * , Weiping Wang1
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{wudayan, suqinghang, libo, wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract
Deep incremental hashing has become a subject of considerable interest due to its capability to learn hash codes in an
incremental manner, eliminating the need to generate codes
for classes that have already been learned. However, accommodating more classes requires longer hash codes, and regenerating database codes becomes inevitable when code expansion is required. In this paper, we present a unified deep
hash framework that can simultaneously learn new classes
and increase hash code capacity. Specifically, we design a
triple-channel asymmetric framework to optimize a new CNN
model with a target code length and a code projection matrix. This enables us to directly generate hash codes for new
images, and efficiently generate expanded hash codes for
original database images from the old ones with the learned
projection matrix. Meanwhile, we propose a pairwise-labelbased incremental similarity-preserving loss to optimize the
new CNN model, which can incrementally preserve new similarities while maintaining the old ones. Additionally, we design a double-end quantization loss to reduce the quantization error from new and original query images. As a result,
our method efficiently embeds both new and original similarities into the expanded hash codes, while keeping the original database codes unchanged. We conduct extensive experiments on three widely-used image retrieval benchmarks,
demonstrating that our method can significantly reduce the
time required to expand existing database codes, while maintaining state-of-the-art retrieval performance.

Figure 1: The framework of the conventional deep hashing
methods for new classes learning and code expansion. When
new classes emerge, conventional methods have to retrain
the models with new hash layers and new training images.
The new database images are required to be fed into the new
models to generate hash codes with target code length again.

visual data. As a result, deep hashing has shown much better retrieval performance than traditional hashing methods.
Recently, a variety of deep hashing methods have been presented, which can be classified into two categories, i.e., symmetric hashing methods (Luo et al. 2019; Zhuang et al. 2016;
Tang et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018; Cui et al. 2019; Jin et al.
2020; Deng et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019; Doan, Yang, and
Li 2022; Cui et al. 2022; Tu et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2021b,
2017; Zhao et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021c, 2020; Liu et al.
2018b) and asymmetric hashing methods (Chen et al. 2019;
Wu et al. 2019; Jiang and Li 2018; Wu et al. 2023; Song et al.
2022; Luo et al. 2018; Gu et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2021a).
The explosive growth of web and sensor images has led to
a large number of new semantic concepts, imposing significant challenges to conventional deep hashing methods. To
accommodate new classes, conventional deep hashing methods require retraining the models and re-indexing the entire database codes, which is time-consuming. To tackle this
problem, deep incremental hashing methods have been proposed (Wu et al. 2019; Mandal and Biswas 2020; Tian, Ng,
and Xu 2023). These methods can incrementally learn hash
codes for training images from new categories while hold-

Introduction
Hashing can encode visual data into compact binary codes
so that visually similar samples are mapped into similar binary codes. Traditional hashing methods using hand-crafted
features, for instance, Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH)
(Gionis, Indyk, and Motwani 1999), Spectral Hashing (SH)
(Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus 2009) and Iterative Quantization (Gong and Lazebnik 2011), perform worse in preserving the semantic similarities between visual samples compared to deep hashing methods, which incorporate deep neural networks into the generation of hash codes for large-scale
visual search. The deep neural networks have powerful representation abilities to maintain the underlying semantics of
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9169

