The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Decentralized Gradient-Free Methods for Stochastic Non-smooth Non-convex
Optimization
Zhenwei Lin1 * , Jingfan Xia1 * , Qi Deng1† , Luo Luo2
1

School of Information Management and Engineering, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
2
School of Data Science, Fudan University
zhenweilin@163.sufe.edu.cn, jf.xia@163.sufe.edu.cn, qideng@sufe.edu.cn, luoluo@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

Tian 2010; Giannakis et al. 2017; Vogels et al. 2021). In
the context of smooth non-convex objective that each f i (x)
has the finite-sum structure, a variety of deterministic methods have been proposed (Zeng and Yin 2018; Hong, Hajinezhad, and Zhao 2017; Sun and Hong 2019; Scutari and
Sun 2019; Xin, Khan, and Kar 2022; Luo and Ye 2022).
Notably, Xin, Khan, and Kar (2022) achieved a network
topology-independent convergence rate in a big-data regime.
Luo and Ye (2022) integrated variance reduction, gradient
tracking, and multi-consensus techniques, yielding an algorithm that meets the tighter communication requirement
and complexity level of first-order oracle algorithms. In the
realm of stochastic decentralized optimization, a significant
body of literature has explored acceleration techniques that
incorporate variance reduction (Pan, Liu, and Wang 2020;
Sun, Lu, and Hong 2020; Xin, Khan, and Kar 2021a,b).
Moreover, a substantial volume of literature exists
regarding resolving non-convex non-smooth optimization (Di Lorenzo and Scutari 2016; Scutari and Sun 2019;
Wang et al. 2021; Xin et al. 2021; Mancino-Ball et al. 2023;
Xiao et al. 2023; Chen, Garcia, and Shahrampour 2021;
Wang et al. 2023). However, most existing research require
the objective to adhere to a specific structure. Predominantly,
studies focus on composite optimization, where the objective sums up a smooth non-convex part and a possibly nonsmooth part. In this vein, Scutari and Sun (2019) introduced
a decentralized algorithmic framework for minimization of
the sum of a smooth non-convex function and a non-smooth
difference-of-convex function over a time-varying directed
graph. Mancino-Ball et al. (2023) introduced a single-loop
algorithm with a small batch size which achieved a network
topology-independent complexity. Conversely, other recent
investigations have focused on the decentralized optimization of non-smooth weakly-convex functions (Chen, Garcia,
and Shahrampour 2021; Wang et al. 2023).
Previous decentralized algorithms still require gradient
computation, while this oracle may be computationally prohibitive (Liu et al. 2020), such as sensor selection (Liu
et al. 2018). Moreover, the gradient-free method has a
promising application in adversarial machine learning, especially in black-box adversarial attacks (Chen, Jordan,
and Wainwright 2020; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. 2017). Recently, some works studied decentralized optimization problem with zeroth-order methods (Tang, Zhang, and Li 2020;

We consider decentralized gradient-free optimization of minimizing Lipschitz continuous functions that satisfy neither
smoothness nor convexity assumption. We propose two novel
gradient-free algorithms, the Decentralized Gradient-Free
Method (DGFM) and its variant, the Decentralized GradientFree Method+ (DGFM+ ). Based on the techniques of randomized smoothing and gradient tracking, DGFM requires
the computation of the zeroth-order oracle of a single sample
in each iteration, making it less demanding in terms of computational resources for individual computing nodes. Theoretically, DGFM achieves a complexity of O(d3/2 δ −1 ε−4 )
for obtaining an (δ, ε)-Goldstein stationary point. DGFM+ ,
an advanced version of DGFM, incorporates variance reduction to further improve the convergence behavior. It samples a mini-batch at each iteration and periodically draws
a larger batch of data, which improves the complexity to
O(d3/2 δ −1 ε−3 ). Moreover, experimental results underscore
the empirical advantages of our proposed algorithms when
applied to real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider decentralized optimization where
the data are distributed among multiple agents, also known
as nodes or entities. For a network with m agents, the optimization problem can be written in the following form:
m
1 X i
f (x),
(1)
min f (x) =
m i=1
x∈Rd
where f i (x) = Eξ [f i (x; ξ)] is a local cost function on the
i-th node and ξ is the index of the random sample. Instead
of having a central sever, each node i makes decisions based
on its local data and information received from its neighbors.
Throughout the paper, we do not require any smoothness or
convexity assumption but only suppose that each f i (·, ξ) is
Lipschitz continuous. Moreover, we focus on the gradientfree methods that exclusively rely on function values, avoiding the access for any first-order information.
Decentralized optimization has found extensive applications in signal processing and machine learning (Ling and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17477

