The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

RoPDA: Robust Prompt-Based Data Augmentation for Low-Resource
Named Entity Recognition
Sihan Song1,2 , Furao Shen1,3 * , Jian Zhao1,4
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
4
School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, China
whalesihan@smail.nju.edu.cn, frshen@nju.edu.cn, jianzhao@nju.edu.cn
Abstract

David has decided to settle in Los Angeles.
𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃
𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿

Data augmentation has been widely used in low-resource
NER tasks to tackle the problem of data sparsity. However, previous data augmentation methods have the disadvantages of disrupted syntactic structures, token-label mismatch, and requirement for external knowledge or manual
effort. To address these issues, we propose Robust Promptbased Data Augmentation (RoPDA) for low-resource NER.
Based on pre-trained language models (PLMs) with continuous prompt, RoPDA performs entity augmentation and
context augmentation through five fundamental augmentation
operations to generate label-flipping and label-preserving examples. To optimize the utilization of the augmented samples, we present two techniques: self-consistency filtering and
mixup. The former effectively eliminates low-quality samples
with a bidirectional mask, while the latter prevents performance degradation arising from the direct utilization of labelflipping samples. Extensive experiments on three popular
benchmarks from different domains demonstrate that RoPDA
significantly improves upon strong baselines, and also outperforms state-of-the-art semi-supervised learning methods
when unlabeled data is included.

Flip Entity Label

David has decided to work for Reuters.
𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃
𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂

Preserve Entity Label

David has decided to apply to Harvard University.
𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃
𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂

Figure 1: Label-flipping and label-preserving operations.

Adel 2020; Zeng et al. 2020) and more recent PLM-based
methods, and the latter have received a lot of attention and
have yielded promising results (Zhou et al. 2022b; Wang
et al. 2022b). Zhou et al. (2022b) leverage a masked language model to randomly mask entities in the sentence and
regenerate them conditioned on labels, thereby enhancing
entity diversity. Wang et al. (2022b) employ Soft Prompt for
seq2seq PLMs and propose a dual-view augmentation approach to generate sentences conditioned on labels and keywords. However, their approaches have the limitation of only
boosting entity diversity but not context diversity, or necessitating external knowledge (i.e., external corpus).
To address these issues, we propose Robust Prompt-based
Data Augmentation (RoPDA) for low-resource NER. With
well-trained continuous prompt (Li and Liang 2021), our
model is capable of automatically generating training samples for low-resource NER tasks, eliminating the need for
external knowledge or human efforts, which is different
from Wang et al. (2022b). To enhance model generalization, we propose five fundamental data augmentation operations. Among these, one operation focuses on context augmentation, aiming to increase context diversity and enrich
our training data. The remaining four operations concentrate
on entity augmentation, designed to generate adversarial examples and promote entity diversity, including label-flipping
and label-preserving operations.
Inspired by Zhou et al. (2022a), a label-flipping operation
means regenerating an entity in the sentence into a different

Introduction
Named Entity Recognition (NER) is a fundamental NLP
task which is dedicated to identifying predefined named
entities (e.g., persons, organizations and locations) from
texts. With the rapid development of deep learning in recent years, fine-tuning pre-trained language models (PLMs)
such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) for NER tasks has yielded
promising results (Zhong and Chen 2021; Chen, Neves, and
Solorio 2022). However, fine-tuning PLMs still necessitates
a substantial amount of human annotations. NER models, in
particular, require each token to be labeled in a sequence,
which is a laborious and time-consuming task in the real
world. Consequently, NER frequently encounters the challenge of data sparsity, making low-resource NER a pressing
priority.
In order to mitigate the issue of data sparsity, various data
augmentation methods for low-resource NER have been proposed, such as traditional word-level manipulation (Dai and
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19017

