The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

KAM-CoT: Knowledge Augmented Multimodal Chain-of-Thoughts Reasoning
Debjyoti Mondal, Suraj Modi, Subhadarshi Panda,
Rituraj Singh, Godawari Sudhakar Rao
Samsung R&D Institute India - Bangalore
{d.mondal, suraj.modi, subha.darshi, rituraj.s, g.sudhakar}@samsung.com

Abstract

Question: What is the direction of this push?
Options:
(A) Toward the stick.
(B) Away from the stick.

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance in natural language processing tasks
by leveraging chain of thought (CoT) that enables step-bystep thinking. Extending LLMs with multimodal capabilities is the recent interest, but incurs computational cost and
requires substantial hardware resources. To address these
challenges, we propose KAM-CoT a framework that integrates CoT reasoning, Knowledge Graphs (KGs), and multiple modalities for a comprehensive understanding of multimodal tasks. KAM-CoT adopts a two-stage training process
with KG grounding to generate effective rationales and answers. By incorporating external knowledge from KGs during reasoning, the model gains a deeper contextual understanding reducing hallucinations and enhancing the quality
of answers. This knowledge-augmented CoT reasoning empowers the model to handle questions requiring external context, providing more informed answers. Experimental findings show KAM-CoT outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. On the ScienceQA dataset, we achieve an average accuracy of 93.87%, surpassing GPT-3.5 (75.17%) by 18% and
GPT-4 (83.99%) by 10%. Remarkably, KAM-CoT achieves
these results with only 280M trainable parameters at a time,
demonstrating its cost-efficiency and effectiveness.

Answer: The answer is (B).
The direction of a push is away
from the object that is pushing.
The girl pushes the pinata away
from the stick.
push
pull

away
toward

(push, relatedto, away)
(push, antonymof, pull)
(pull, relatedto, toward)

Figure 1: An example from ScienceQA dataset (Lu et al.
2022) showing how graphs can aid in multi-modal QA.

Recently, there is a surge to extend LLMs with multimodal capabilities. The fusion of visual and textual information has led to significant advancements in vision-andlanguage tasks, like visual question answering (VQA), image captioning, and image-text retrieval, and has opened
up potential for transformative progress. Authors Liu et al.
(2023a); Gao et al. (2023); Lu et al. (2023a) recognize
and advocate the value of amalgamating visual and linguistic modalities. However, the behemoth scale of these models necessitates substantial computational resources, particularly in terms of hardware infrastructure. Zhang et al.
(2023c) proposes fine-tuning smaller models to adapt to
multimodality and elicit CoT capabilities. Nevertheless,
such an approach tends to result in hallucinations, where
the model generates plausible, but incorrect reasoning and
answers. One possible solution is to integrate Knowledge
Graphs (KGs) for enhancing model comprehension.
KGs serve as valuable structured knowledge sources, capturing information from various domains. For CoT reasoning, KGs can supplement step-by-step reasoning. By incorporating information from KGs, language models can reason more coherently, and leverage contextual relationships
between entities and attributes. Consider the question in Fig-

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs), particularly GPT-3 (Kojima et al. 2022a), ChatGPT (OpenAI 2022) and recently LLaMA, LLaMA2 (Touvron et al. 2023a,b) have
demonstrated exceptional performance in natural language
processing tasks. Additionally, incorporation of chain of
thought (CoT) method in LLMs has revolutionized the way
machines approach reasoning intensive tasks (Zhou et al.
2023). CoT refers to the ability of LLMs to think and reason in a step-by-step manner, mirroring the human cognitive processes (Wei et al. 2022b). Traditional language models (LMs) generate responses without explicit intermediate
steps, which may lead to sub-optimal answers, especially
in complex reasoning scenarios. CoT addresses the limitations by enabling language models to reason by introducing
intermediate steps, thereby enhancing the model’s problemsolving capabilities.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18798

