The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Amalgamating Multi-Task Models with Heterogeneous Architectures
Jidapa Thadajarassiri1 , Walter Gerych2 , Xiangnan Kong2 , Elke Rundensteiner2
1

Srinakharinwirot University,
Worcester Polytechnic Institute,
jidapath@g.swu.ac.th, {wgerych,xkong, rundenst}@wpi.edu
2

Task A: Trafﬁc lights

Abstract

Task B: Direction control

Task C: Pedestrian detection

STOP

Red

Multi-task learning (MTL) is essential for real-world applications that handle multiple tasks simultaneously, such as selfdriving cars. MTL methods improve the performance of all
tasks by utilizing information across tasks to learn a robust
shared representation. However, acquiring sufficient labeled
data tends to be extremely expensive, especially when having to support many tasks. Recently, Knowledge Amalgamation (KA) has emerged as an effective strategy for addressing the lack of labels by instead learning directly from pretrained models (teachers). KA learns one unified multi-task
student that masters all tasks across all teachers. Existing KA
for MTL works are limited to teachers with identical architectures, and thus propose layer-to-layer based approaches.
Unfortunately, in practice, teachers may have heterogeneous
architectures; their layers may not be aligned and their dimensionalities or scales may be incompatible. Amalgamating
multi-task teachers with heterogeneous architectures remains
an open problem. For this, we design Versatile Common Feature Consolidator (VENUS), the first solution to this problem.
VENUS fuses knowledge from the shared representations of
each teacher into one unified generalized representation for
all tasks. Specifically, we design the Feature Consolidator
network that leverages an array of teacher-specific trainable
adaptors. These adaptors enable the student to learn from
multiple teachers, even if they have incompatible learned representations. We demonstrate that VENUS outperforms five
alternative methods on numerous benchmark datasets across
a broad spectrum of experiments.

Yellow Green

Left

Right

Straight

Stop

Pedestrian

No-Pedestrian

Unlabeled Data

Given

Sample 1

Self-driving car

Sample 2

Pre-Trained Multi-Task Models
with Heterogeneous Architectures
Teacher 1

Task A

✔

Task B
Teacher 2

✖
Task B

STOP

Task C

Output

Student

Task A

Task B

Task C

✔
STOP

✔

✖

✔

✔

✔
STOP

✔

✔
✔

✔
STOP

✔
✔

Figure 1: Amalgamating Multi-Task Models with Heterogeneous Architectures (AmalMTH). Given pre-trained multitask models (teachers) and unlabeled data, the task is to train
a student that well performs on the union of teachers’ tasks.

2016; Lu et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2019). However, the existing MTL works (Liu, Johns, and Davison 2019; Kokkinos
2017; Misra et al. 2016; Ruder et al. 2019) have been developed using supervised learning. As the number of tasks
grows, training data and labeling requirements become large
- making this too prohibitively expensive in practice.
Fortunately, several organizations that utilize huge and at
times private data sets and extensive compute power have
released pre-trained multi-task models (Harutyunyan et al.
2019; Mormont, Geurts, and Marée 2020) for other practitioners to reuse. Since these released models are each pretrained separately, they come with different architectures
and tend to handle different, though at times overlapping,
sets of tasks. However, the reuse of any individual model is
limited to their pre-trained tasks; several applications, e.g.,
self-driving cars, may need to solve a much broader task set

Introduction
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) is the learning paradigm that
aims to improve the performance of multiple tasks simultaneously (Ruder 2017). MTL models learn mutually beneficial shared representations between tasks, which tend to be
more robust than the representations learned separately by
single-task models (Caruana 1997). This robustness is required by real-world applications that solve multiple related
tasks concurrently, e.g., self-driving cars (Teichmann et al.
2018), disease detection (Zhou et al. 2011; Wan et al. 2012),
and natural language understanding (Clark et al. 2019).
State-of-the-Art. MTL is an active area of research
(Crawshaw 2020; Nekrasov et al. 2019; Bilen and Vedaldi
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15346

