The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Quilt: Robust Data Segment Selection against Concept Drifts
Minsu Kim, Seong-Hyeon Hwang, Steven Euijong Whang
KAIST
{ms716, sh.hwang, swhang}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

drifted data is either discarded or replaced with trained models and focus on updating the model or taking an ensemble
of previous models to be accurate on the new data. However,
throwing away old data is often unacceptable due to heavy
investments in data labeling. Even if the knowledge of the
data is preserved in the form of models, there are limitations
in how much knowledge they retain for making accurate predictions on the new data.
Instead, we contend that taking a data-centric approach of
selecting data segments to train a model can be a more fundamental solution. We assume that any drift detection technique can be used to identify drift points in the data and
thus divide the data into data segments using these points.
We then formulate the problem of efficiently selecting which
data segments result in the best model accuracy when combined with the current (i.e., newest) data segment.
A key challenge for data-centric approaches is efficiency,
and we utilize a recent line of data subset selection techniques (Killamsetty et al. 2021b,a) where the goal is to select a minimal subset of the training data using a validation
set for training efficiency while obtaining a similar model
accuracy as when training on the entire data. However, these
techniques assume virtual drifts where the posterior distribution P (y|X) (i.e., the decision boundary) does not change.
The assumption makes sense in this problem because any
data can be selected to possibly improve model accuracy,
and it is a matter of which data is more useful. In comparison, a concept drift setup assumes that the decision boundary
may change, which means that some data may negatively affect model accuracy. As a result, we need to solve the more
general problem of performing data segment subset selection while discarding data segments with concept drifts.
We then propose a robust data segment selection framework against concept drifts called Quilt for the purpose of
improving model accuracy on recent data. Quilt iteratively
performs concept drift detection using conventional detection methods and also selects data segments for training the
model if a drift occurs. When selecting data segments, Quilt
discards data segments with concept drifts using a disparity
score and also selects a minimal subset of segments without
concept drifts such that the model performance is not sacrificed using a gain score. Both scores can be computed using
gradient values on the training and validation sets with little
overhead in computation.

Continuous machine learning pipelines are common in industrial settings where models are periodically trained on
data streams. Unfortunately, concept drifts may occur in data
streams where the joint distribution of the data X and label y,
P (X, y), changes over time and possibly degrade model accuracy. Existing concept drift adaptation approaches mostly
focus on updating the model to the new data possibly using ensemble techniques of previous models and tend to discard the drifted historical data. However, we contend that explicitly utilizing the drifted data together leads to much better model accuracy and propose Quilt, a data-centric framework for identifying and selecting data segments that maximize model accuracy. To address the potential downside of
efficiency, Quilt extends existing data subset selection techniques, which can be used to reduce the training data without
compromising model accuracy. These techniques cannot be
used as is because they only assume virtual drifts where the
posterior probabilities P (y|X) are assumed not to change.
In contrast, a key challenge in our setup is to also discard
undesirable data segments with concept drifts. Quilt thus discards drifted data segments and selects data segment subsets
holistically for accurate and efficient model training. The two
operations use gradient-based scores, which have little computation overhead. In our experiments, we show that Quilt
outperforms state-of-the-art drift adaptation and data selection baselines on synthetic and real datasets.

Introduction
Robust AI is becoming important especially in continual
learning, which is common in industrial settings where models need to be periodically trained on data streams. The applications include manufacturing, meteorology, finance, and
more. Here we assume that concept drifts can occur where
the joint distribution of the data X and label y, P (X, y) may
change over time, leading to decision boundary shifts and
model accuracy degradation.
A naive approach of concept drift adaptation is to discard
all the historical data, but we would like to retain previous
data that is still useful for training. There are many drift
adaptation techniques for concept drifts, but most of them
take a model-centric approach where they assume that any
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21249

