The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Quantifying Political Polarization through the Lens of Machine Translation and
Vicarious Offense
Ashiqur R. KhudaBukhsh
Rochester Institute of Technology
1 Lomb Memorial Dr
Rochester, NY 14623 USA
axkvse@rit.edu
My talk will survey three related research contributions
that shed light on the current US political divide:
1. a novel machine-translation-based framework to quantify
political polarization (KhudaBukhsh et al. 2021, 2022);
2. an analysis of disparate media portrayal of US policing
in major cable news outlets (Dutta et al. 2022); and
3. a novel perspective of vicarious offense that examines an
important aspect not examined in web-toxicity literature
heretofore – can A predict how offensive B would find a
given social media post when A and B belong to different
identity groups? (Weerasooriya et al. 2023)
The first part surveys a novel, machine-translation-based
framework that addresses a long-standing NLP challenge
of quantifying political polarization in a multi-issue, largescale social web setting. I assume that two sub-communities
(e.g., Fox viewers commenting on Fox News videos and
CNN viewers commenting on CNN news videos) who are
obviously speaking in English, are in fact speaking in two
different languages (say, Lcnn and Lfox ). Next, I obtain
single-word translations between these two languages using a well-known alignment method. In a world not fraught
with polarization, any word w in Lcnn should translate to
itself in Lfox . However, if a word w1 in one language translates to a different word w2 in another, it indicates w1 and
w2 are used in similar contexts across these two languages
signaling (possible) political misalignment. These disagreed
pairs present a quantifiable measure to compute differences
between large-scale corpora. The greater the number of disagreed pairs, the farther apart the two sub-communities are.
This method has a compelling efficiency argument.
It can automatically detect disagreed pairs such as
⟨solar, fossil⟩ or ⟨mask, muzzle⟩ requiring no human supervision. Furthermore, these pairs can succinctly
shed light on important policy issues such as the ongoing
energy debate or the debate surrounding masks and freedom
of choice, and may indicate the aggregate stance of a subcommunity. This framework has found applications in analyzing the Capitol riot (KhudaBukhsh et al. 2022).
Moving from the audience’s side to the news creators’
side, the survey’s second part asks how do major US news
outlets cover politically salient events such as policing? In
recent work, I analyze the responses of three major US ca-

ble news networks to three seminal policing events in the
US spanning a thirteen-month period – from the murder of
George Floyd by police officer Derek Chauvin to the Capitol
riot and then to Chauvin’s conviction and sentencing (Dutta
et al. 2022).
Our analyses reveal that across cable networks coverage
of politically salient events responds quickly and dramatically to the partisan preferences of their viewership. On the
methods front, I develop a novel active learning sampling
strategy exploiting logical inconsistencies in text entailment.
The final part of this talk introduces the notion of vicarious offense in which we ask a timely and important question: how well do Democratic-leaning users perceive what
content would be deemed as offensive by their Republicanleaning counterparts or vice-versa? Via a substantial annotation study conducted on 2,310 social media posts, our experiments reveal that (1) Republicans are the least understood political group while they also struggle the most to
understand others; (2) independents are the most tolerant in
terms of web censorship; and (3) hot-button issues such as
reproductive rights or gun control/rights can have a profound
effect on annotator disagreement on what is offensive. I conclude the talk with an outlook on how generative AI might
impact this political divide and vice versa.

References
Dutta, S.; Li, B.; Nagin, D. S.; and KhudaBukhsh, A. R.
2022. A Murder and Protests, the Capitol Riot, and the
Chauvin Trial: Estimating Disparate News Media Stance. In
IJCAI 2022, 5059–5065.
KhudaBukhsh, A. R.; Sarkar, R.; Kamlet, M. S.; and
Mitchell, T. M. 2021. We Don’t Speak the Same Language:
Interpreting Polarization through Machine Translation. In
AAAI 2021, 14893–14901.
KhudaBukhsh, A. R.; Sarkar, R.; Kamlet, M. S.; and
Mitchell, T. M. 2022. Fringe News Networks: Dynamics of
US News Viewership following the 2020 Presidential Election. In WebSci ’22, 269–278. ACM.
Weerasooriya, T. C.; Dutta, S.; Ranasinghe, T.; Zamperi, M.;
Homan, C. M.; and KhudaBukhsh, A. R. 2023. Vicarious
Offense and Noise Audit of Offensive Speech Classifiers:
Unifying Human and Machine Disagreement on What is Offensive. In EMNLP 2023, 11648–11668.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22672

