The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Pay to (Not) Play: Monetizing Impatience in Mobile Games
Taylor Lundy1 , Narun Raman1 , Hu Fu2 , Kevin Leyton-Brown1
1

2

University of British Columbia
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research of Computation and Economics
tlundy@cs.ubc.ca, narunram@cs.ubc.ca, fuhu@mail.shufe.edu.cn, kevinlb@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract

account for 40% ($1.08 billion USD) of Activision’s revenue
(Partis 2022; Activision 2022).
A key factor in the rise of mobile games is a shift in pricing models. Over 90% of mobile games are free to download
(“free-to-play”) and monetized by offering optional “microtransactional” payments throughout game-play (Misiuk 2019;
Seufert 2017; Tafradzhiyski 2023). While free-to-play is not
a novel strategy (e.g., many platforms like Spotify offer free
tiers), mobile games monetize a qualitatively different set of
behaviours. For example, mobile games often allow users
to spend money on virtual cosmetic items, extra lives that
enable longer play sessions, or items that make the game easier. We are interested in understanding what player behavior
causes these strategies and, in this paper, we focus on skips.
Games that monetize using skips have a gameplay loop
requiring “grinding”: completing tedious tasks, such as waiting for a timer to tick down. Players are offered the ability
to skip the grind for a price. This style of monetization is so
successful that an entire genre of games consisting solely of
sequential timers and skips generated over $3 billion worldwide in 2021 (Pecorella 2013b; Moloco 2021).
While the success of skip-based monetization may be surprising, it is odder still how skips are priced. It is common
to see talks at game design conferences discussing the perils
of short-sighted monetization strategies (Greer 2013; Nussbaum and Telfer 2015; Krasilnikov 2020; Reilley 2023), or
the importance of ensuring that players feel that purchases
were “worth it” (Levy 2021; Engblom 2017; Reilley 2023).
Successful game designers understand this well; when talking about fixing stagnating revenues in Clash of Clans, the
chief game lead at the time, Eino Joas (2020) said, “retention always trumps monetization”. Despite this, virtual goods
such as skips are typically priced so high in practice that very
few people are willing to buy them. On average, only 3.5%
of players spend any money in-game and the majority of converted players, or ‘minnows,’ spend only $1 to $5 a month
and contribute to less than 15% of the revenue (Brightman
2016; AppsFlyer 2020). The majority of revenue comes from
‘whales,’ who spend more than $25 per month on average and
account for less than 15% of buyers (Shi, Xia, and Huang
2015). Under traditional economic models, high average utilities and prices few buyers can afford are incompatible. It
might, therefore, seem either that designers are failing to
make most players happy or that they truly care more about

Mobile gaming is a rapidly growing and incredibly profitable
sector; having grown seven-fold over the past 10 years, it
now grosses over $100 billion annually. This growth was
due in large part to a shift in monetization strategies: rather
than charging players an upfront cost (“pay-to-play”), games
often request optional microtransactions throughout gameplay (“free-to-play”). We focus on a common scenario in
which games include wait times—gating either items or game
progression—that players can pay to skip. Game designers
typically say that they optimize for player happiness rather
than revenue; however, prices for skips are typically set at
levels that few players are willing to pay, leading to low purchase rates. Under a traditional analysis, it would seem that
game designers fail at their stated goal if few players buy
what they are selling. We argue that an alternate model can
better explain this dynamic: players value tasks more highly
as they are perceived to be more difficult. While skips can
increase players’ utilities by providing instant gratification,
pricing skips too cheaply can lower players’ utilities by decreasing the perceived amount of work needed to complete a
task. We show that high revenue, high player utility, and low
purchase rates can all coexist under this model, particularly
under a realistic distribution of players having few buyers but
a few big-spending “whales.” We also investigate how a game
designer should optimize prices under our model. An appendix
of the paper with proofs, more comprehensive results and visualizations can be found at https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.10205.

Introduction
The gaming industry is larger than Hollywood and the music industry combined; currently valued at $245.10 billion
USD, it is expected to reach $376.08 billion by 2028 (Intelligence 2023). While console and PC games have historically
dominated the gaming category, mobile games have achieved
seven-fold revenue growth since 2012 (Newzoo 2022) and
accounted for a majority of gaming industry revenues in 2023
(Intelligence 2023). Reflecting this shifting marketplace, Microsoft recently announced plans to acquire Activision Blizzard for $68.7 billion USD (Microsoft 2022). Just two months
after release, Diablo Immortal, Blizzard’s franchise mobile
title, surpassed $100 million USD; overall, mobile games
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9856

