The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Referee-Meta-Learning for Fast Adaptation of Locational Fairness
Weiye Chen1 , Yiqun Xie1 * , Xiaowei Jia2 , Erhu He2 , Han Bao3 , Bang An3 , Xun Zhou3
1

University of Maryland
University of Pittsburgh
3
University of Iowa
{weiyec, xie}@umd.edu, {xiaowei, erh108}@pitt.edu, {han-bao, bang-an, xun-zhou}@uiowa.edu
2

Abstract

et al. 2019; Kusner et al. 2017), very few studies have attempted to consider locational fairness. The lack of consideration for locational fairness in machine learning applications may result in unintended consequences (e.g., biased resource distribution). In this study, we exemplify this issue by
examining two important social problems: (1) Agricultural
monitoring: The climate change and the growing population have raised alarms and attention on global food security
(e.g., G20’s GEOGLAM initiative). With the broad deployment of machine learning in satellite-based crop monitoring (e.g., NASA Harvest), it is critical to explicitly consider
locational fairness in mapping results, informing key decisions such as subsidy distribution or farm insurance (Bailey
and Boryan 2010; NASEM 2018). (2) Transportation safety:
Given the complexity of traffic accident risk estimation, machine learning algorithms have been increasingly used to account for heterogeneous information from diverse sources.
However, without the awareness of locational fairness, these
methods can produce biased risk maps, further adding bias
in investments for infrastructure improvements (Kontokosta
and Hong 2021; Bednarek, Boyce, and Sileo 2022).
We aim to create a new meta-learning framework that explicitly models locational fairness and enables rapid adaptation of fairness to new locations within different regions
(e.g., different cities). Unlike traditional fairness formulation using pre-defined groups such as races and genders, locational fairness faces more challenges when being transferred between training and test data. First, in traditional
fairness definitions, the groups considered in fairness evaluation are the same in the training and test datasets. In contrast, locational fairness often deals with entirely different
sets of locations in the training region (e.g., city A) and test
region (e.g., city B). Second, the change of spatial regions
between training and test also introduces distribution shifts
in the data. Third, fields such as agricultural monitoring require labor-intensive field survey, resulting in scarce availability of labeled data. Addressing these challenges requires
the meta-learning model to learn the initial weights that not
only can quickly adapt to the new distribution, but also adapt
to an unknown fairness criterion (i.e., fairness defined on a
new set of locations), from limited amount of labeled data.
Several directions have been explored in related work:
Fair learning: Fairness-aware learning formulations have
been extensively studied and most existing works focus on

When dealing with data from distinct locations, machine
learning algorithms tend to demonstrate an implicit preference of some locations over the others, which constitutes biases that sabotage the spatial fairness of the algorithm. This
unfairness can easily introduce biases in subsequent decisionmaking given broad adoptions of learning-based solutions in
practice. However, locational biases in AI are largely understudied. To mitigate biases over locations, we propose a locational meta-referee (Meta-Ref) to oversee the few-shot metatraining and meta-testing of a deep neural network. Meta-Ref
dynamically adjusts the learning rates for training samples
of given locations to advocate a fair performance across locations, through an explicit consideration of locational biases
and the characteristics of input data. We present a three-phase
training framework to learn both a meta-learning-based predictor and an integrated Meta-Ref that governs the fairness of
the model. Once trained with a distribution of spatial tasks,
Meta-Ref is applied to samples from new spatial tasks (i.e.,
regions outside the training area) to promote fairness during
the fine-tune step. We carried out experiments with two case
studies on crop monitoring and transportation safety, which
show Meta-Ref can improve locational fairness while keeping the overall prediction quality at a similar level.

Introduction
Locational bias has been widely studied in many social sectors and linked with social disparities of various types (Fan
et al. 2020; Kontokosta and Hong 2021), such as the impact of climate change and related disasters (e.g., floods,
food shortage), resource distribution (e.g., subsidies in agriculture), and infrastructure quality and safety. With the increasing of adoptions of machine learning methods in broad
domains (e.g., climate resilience, food security, public resource management), fairness issues associated with these
prediction models have become a major subject, directly
impacting the trust from the public and the sustained use
of the systems in the long-term. While fairness issues related to races or genders have been extensively examined
in machine learning (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016; Dwork
et al. 2012; Zafar et al. 2017; Agarwal et al. 2018; Creager
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21949

