The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Live and Learn: Continual Action Clustering with Incremental Views
Xiaoqiang Yan1 , Yingtao Gan1 , Yiqiao Mao1 , Yangdong Ye1∗ , Hui Yu2
1

School of Computer and Artificial Intelligence, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China
School of Creative Technologies, University of Portsmouth, PO1 2DJ, United Kingdom
iexqyan@zzu.edu.cn, ieytgan@outlook.com, ieyqmao@gs.zzu.edu.cn, ieydye@zzu.edu.cn, hui.yu@port.ac.uk
2

Abstract

mances. For instance, (Jones and Shao 2014) designs a dual assignment k-means to perform two co-occurring action
clustering tasks. (Bhatnagar et al. 2017) proposes a generic unsupervised approach to learn feature representation for
first person action clustering. (Yan, Hu, and Ye 2017) proposes to perform action clustering in a multi-task clustering
setting. (Peng et al. 2020) proposes to improve the performance of action clustering with contextual information of
actions in a recursive constrained framework. (Kumar et al.
2022) performs representation learning and online action
clustering for unsupervised activity segmentation. However,
existing action clustering faces the following issues: 1) Difficulty in action category discovery. Most current approaches
focus on making better use of spatio-temporal information
to describe the actions. However, discovering action categories remains a challenging problem due to camera motions, changes of viewpoints, cluttered background. 2) Ignoring
the correlations between multiple camera views. Due to the
occlusion and deformation of the viewpoints, single-view
action clustering cannot effectively capture the complementary information between multiple views. For example, it is
impossible to recognize applauding solely from the camera
behind a person. Thus, it is natural to perform multi-view
clustering on the task of recognizing human actions.

Multi-view action clustering leverages the complementary
information from different camera views to enhance the
clustering performance. Although existing approaches have
achieved significant progress, they assume all camera views
are available in advance, which is impractical when the camera view is incremental over time. Besides, learning the invariant information among multiple camera views is still a
challenging issue, especially in continual learning scenario.
Aiming at these problems, we propose a novel continual action clustering (CAC) method, which is capable of learning
action categories in a continual learning manner. To be specific, we first devise a category memory library, which captures
and stores the learned categories from historical views. Then,
as a new camera view arrives, we only need to maintain a
consensus partition matrix, which can be updated by leveraging the incoming new camera view rather than keeping all of
them. Finally, a three-step alternate optimization is proposed,
in which the category memory library and consensus partition matrix are optimized. The empirical experimental results
on 6 realistic multi-view action collections demonstrate the
excellent clustering performance and time/space efficiency of
the CAC compared with 15 state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction

Multi-view clustering (MVC) leverages the complementary information from different camera views to enhance the
performance of action clustering (Xia et al. 2022). According to the strategy of complementary information extraction,
existing MVC approaches can be classified into the following types: subspace clustering (Zhang et al. 2019; Mao et al.
2021; Tang et al. 2023; Yan et al. 2023a; Xu et al. 2023;
Zhao, Yang, and Nie 2023; Yan et al. 2023c), consensus
clustering (Wang et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2021; Huang, Wang,
and Lai 2023; Yan et al. 2023b) and multi-kernel clustering (Liu et al. 2016; Guo and Ye 2019; Zhang et al. 2023; Liu 2023). Although existing MVC approaches have achieved
some promising results, they assume that all camera views
are available in advance, which is impractical when the camera view is incremental over time. Besides, learning the invariant information among multiple camera views is a difficult and challenging issue in continual learning scenario due
to the following reasons. First, there is a large divergence
between historical and new coming views usually. Second,
the new coming views are often unknown and unpredictable

Recognizing human actions from videos is a fundamental
and active research topic in various applications. In recent
years, action recognition has achieved significant attentions
and promising progresses due to the explosive growth of action data and the advancement of relevant learning models.
Usually, most existing methods focus on supervised learning scenarios which leverage sufficient data labels to train
learning models. However, labelling large amounts of data
is time-consuming and labor-intensive. In addition, due to
the different backgrounds and prior knowledge of annotators, they cannot assure to uniformly assign action labels to
similar video samples. Thus, it is necessary to resort to unsupervised clustering approaches to automatically learn action
categories.
In last decades, numerous action clustering approaches
have been devised and achieved some satisfactory perfor∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16264

