The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hypergraph-Guided Disentangled Spectrum Transformer Networks for
Near-Infrared Facial Expression Recognition
Bingjun Luo1 , Haowen Wang1 , Jinpeng Wang1 , Junjie Zhu1 , Xibin Zhao1 * , Yue Gao1 *
1

BNRist, KLISS, School of Software, Tsinghua University
luobingjun@gmail.com, {wang-hw21,wjp21,zhujj18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {zxb, gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
With the strong robusticity on illumination variations, nearinfrared (NIR) can be an effective and essential complement
to visible (VIS) facial expression recognition in low lighting
or complete darkness conditions. However, facial expression
recognition (FER) from NIR images presents a more challenging problem than traditional FER due to the limitations
imposed by the data scale and the difficulty of extracting
discriminative features from incomplete visible lighting contents. In this paper, we give the first attempt at deep NIR facial
expression recognition and propose a novel method called
near-infrared facial expression transformer (NFER-Former).
Specifically, to make full use of the abundant label information in the field of VIS, we introduce a Self-Attention Orthogonal Decomposition mechanism that disentangles the expression information and spectrum information from the input
image, so that the expression features can be extracted without the interference of spectrum variation. We also propose a
Hypergraph-Guided Feature Embedding method that models
some key facial behaviors and learns the structure of the complex correlations between them, thereby alleviating the interference of inter-class similarity. Additionally, we construct a
large NIR-VIS Facial Expression dataset that includes 360
subjects to better validate the efficiency of NFER-Former.
Extensive experiments and ablation studies show that NFERFormer significantly improves the performance of NIR FER
and achieves state-of-the-art results on the only two available
NIR FER datasets, Oulu-CASIA and Large-HFE.

Figure 1: Comparison of VIS and NIR expression images
under different lighting conditions. VIS expression images
exhibit richer appearance information when captured in normal lighting conditions. However, in the case of low-light
conditions, NIR expression images demonstrate superior
stability and preservation of visual qualities.

As we know, having as many labeled training data as possible is extremely important for designing a deep FER system. Due to the limitation of training samples, NIR FER
presents more challenging issues that cannot be solved by
simply extending the successful VIS FER method to the
NIR spectrum. To acquire sufficient VIS expression images,
researchers have made tremendous efforts. From the earliest CK dataset, which collected 486 videos, to Multi-PIE,
which collected 755,370 images, both the scale and quality are rapidly improving. In contrast, up until now, there
has been only one available NIR expression dataset, OuluCASIA, which contains 480 valid NIR image sequences.
This is far from sufficient for obtaining a well-performing
NIR FER model.
Since collecting large-scale facial expression images is
expensive and time-consuming, starting from scratch may
not be feasible. A more ideal solution would be to leverage the rich annotation information from the VIS domain
to help alleviate the problem of insufficient data in the NIR
domain. To achieve this goal, there are two main challenges as follows: (1) High intra-class variation raised by
different geometric and textural details between VIS and
NIR images. Since VIS images (380–750 nm) and NIR images (780–1100 nm) are captured through different sensing
modalities, even the same person with the same expression
in these two modalities will show different patterns. VIS

Introduction
FER is an important biometric technology in the field of affective computing, which has been widely used in many areas, including health care and social networks. The goal of
FER is to encode emotional information from facial geometric and texture details. However, under low lighting or complete darkness conditions, VIS light sensors are not suitable
for acquiring high-quality images, which inevitably hinders
the accuracy of subsequent FER. Fortunately, the NIR spectrum has been proven to be more robust to visible light illumination variations, showing great potential to be an effective complement to VIS FER. Hence, how to perform NIR
FER can be a critical problem for real-world systems.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10101

