The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Spiking NeRF: Representing the Real-World Geometry by
a Discontinuous Representation
Zhanfeng Liao, Yan Liu, Qian Zheng* , Gang Pan*
Zhejiang University
{zhanfengliao, qianzheng, rliuyan2, gpan}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

with a threshold (Peng et al. 2021; Pumarola et al. 2021;
Boss et al. 2021)) to extract discontinuous geometric representations from learned continuous fields. However, determining the optimal threshold requires empirical and tedious tuning, and many methods rely on manual selection of
the threshold for different scenarios (Mildenhall et al. 2021;
Pumarola et al. 2021; Boss et al. 2021) (see the left of Fig.
1). Optimal threshold perturbation. NeRF-based methods
optimize the network view by view, resulting in the optimal threshold of the surface to perturbate (see supplementary material for more details). However, existing methods
use the same threshold to filter output values (Mildenhall
et al. 2021; Peng et al. 2021; Pumarola et al. 2021; Boss
et al. 2021), which cannot obtain accurate geometric information because the optimal filtering thresholds under different views vary (see the middle of Fig. 1). Light density scenarios1 . The inconsistency can result in even greater errors
in light density scenarios (see the right of Fig. 1). Because it
is difficult for continuous functions like conventional MLPs
to generate quite different densities (i.e., significantly different outputs) for points close to each other (i.e., similar
inputs), resulting in the disappearance of the object.
Although there are some attempts to address the aforementioned problems, these methods are still based on continuous representation and do not provide a fundamental solution to those problems. For example, some works replace
the density field with other fields to avoid threshold selection
(e.g., (Oechsle, Peng, and Geiger 2021; Wang et al. 2021;
Yariv et al. 2021)). However, these methods cannot use the
filter value to get an accurate geometric representation (see
the left of Fig. 1). Moreover, they fail on light density scenarios (see the right of Fig. 1). Some works modify the input
to improve its frequency or discretization, thereby mitigating the inconsistency between continuous and discontinuous
representations. However, these methods still fail on light
density scenarios (Wang, Skorokhodov, and Wonka 2022,
2023) (see the right of Fig. 1). Some works are designed for
specific scenarios (e.g., (Guo et al. 2022; Levy et al. 2023)).
However, these methods have poorer performance in general

A crucial reason for the success of existing NeRF-based
methods is to build a neural density field for the geometry
representation via multiple perceptron layers (MLPs). MLPs
are continuous functions, however, real geometry or density
field is frequently discontinuous at the interface between the
air and the surface. Such a contrary brings the problem of unfaithful geometry representation. To this end, this paper proposes spiking NeRF, which leverages spiking neurons and
a hybrid Artificial Neural Network (ANN)-Spiking Neural
Network (SNN) framework to build a discontinuous density
field for faithful geometry representation. Specifically, we
first demonstrate the reason why continuous density fields
will bring inaccuracy. Then, we propose to use the spiking neurons to build a discontinuous density field. We conduct a comprehensive analysis for the problem of existing
spiking neuron models and then provide the numerical relationship between the parameter of the spiking neuron and
the theoretical accuracy of geometry. Based on this, we propose a bounded spiking neuron to build the discontinuous
density field. Our method achieves SOTA performance. The
source code and the supplementary material are available at
https://github.com/liaozhanfeng/Spiking-NeRF.

Introduction
3D reconstruction from RGB images is a challenging and
complex task in computer vision (Mildenhall et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2021). Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2021), a recently promising solution for novel
view synthesis in an implicit manner, has also achieved very
competitive results in 3D reconstruction (Wang et al. 2021;
Wang, Skorokhodov, and Wonka 2022, 2023).
One of the reasons for the success of NeRF is its ability
to implicitly represent geometric information using a neural network based on conventional MLPs, which are continuous functions. However, geometric information in the
real world is discontinuous at the interface between the
air and the surface, which is inconsistent with the computational representation in conventional MLPs. This inconsistency poses three problems. Post-processing. Existing
methods require a post-processing approach (i.e., filtering

1

These scenarios contain several rays, along which the density
with non-zero values distribute within a very narrow range (e.g.,
thin objects) or with small values (e.g., semi-transparent objects).
In real life, semi-transparent objects (e.g., windows, glasses) and
thin objects (e.g., branches, axles, nets) can be seen everywhere.

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13790

