The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Can Large Language Models Serve as Rational Players in Game Theory?
A Systematic Analysis
Caoyun Fan* , Jindou Chen* , Yaohui Jin† , Hao He†
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{fcy3649, goldenbean, jinyh, hehao}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
……

Game theory, as an analytical tool, is frequently utilized to
analyze human behavior in social science research. With the
high alignment between the behavior of Large Language
Models (LLMs) and humans, a promising research direction is to employ LLMs as substitutes for humans in game
experiments, enabling social science research. However, despite numerous empirical researches on the combination of
LLMs and game theory, the capability boundaries of LLMs in
game theory remain unclear. In this research, we endeavor to
systematically analyze LLMs in the context of game theory.
Specifically, rationality, as the fundamental principle of game
theory, serves as the metric for evaluating players’ behavior
— building a clear desire, refining belief about uncertainty,
and taking optimal actions. Accordingly, we select three classical games (dictator game, Rock-Paper-Scissors, and ringnetwork game) to analyze to what extent LLMs can achieve
rationality in these three aspects. The experimental results
indicate that even the current state-of-the-art LLM (GPT-4)
exhibits substantial disparities compared to humans in game
theory. For instance, LLMs struggle to build desires based on
uncommon preferences, fail to refine belief from many simple patterns, and may overlook or modify refined belief when
taking actions. Therefore, we consider that introducing LLMs
into game experiments in the field of social science should be
approached with greater caution.

𝑡!"$

𝑡!

𝑡!"#

Opponent

Historical records

Percept
Consequence

Rule
Belief

Action

Desire
Preference

WIN or LOSE

Rational player

Figure 1: Overview of a player’s behavior in game theory.

social science through game experiments (Chen et al. 2023;
Akata et al. 2023; Johnson and Obradovich 2023). However, despite the strong motivation for the combination of
LLMs and game theory (Horton 2023; Guo 2023), the preliminary researches mainly treat LLMs and game theory empirically as analytical tools in social science (Aher, Arriaga,
and Kalai 2022; Park et al. 2022; Akata et al. 2023; Bybee
2023), without systematically analyzing LLMs in the context of game theory. As a result, many fundamental aspects
of LLMs in game theory remain unclear. For example, what
research subjects cannot LLMs play? What types of games
are LLMs not good at playing? What kind of game processes
are LLMs more suitable for? And so on.
We consider it necessary to systematically analyze LLMs
in the context of game theory, because such analysis can
clarify the capability boundaries of LLMs and provide further guidance for the widespread use of LLMs in social science research. Essentially, the role of game theory is to evaluate the behavior of the research subjects (players) (Roughgarden 2010), as shown in Fig. 1, a player needs to take an
action a ∈ A based on preference P and perceived game information I (e.g., game rules and historical records) in order
to win the game. And rationality, as the fundamental principle of game theory, is the metric for evaluating players’ be-

Introduction
Game theory (Roughgarden 2010; Dufwenberg 2011) is a
mathematical theory for evaluating human behavior. Due to
its highly abstract representation of real-life situations (Osborne and Rubinstein 1995), it becomes a standard analytical
tool (Charness and Rabin 2002; Cachon and Netessine 2006)
in the field of social science (e.g., economics, psychology,
sociology, etc.). With the rapid development of Large Language Models (LLMs) (Ouyang et al. 2022; OpenAI 2023),
a significant advancement is the high alignment between the
behavior of LLMs and humans (Bai et al. 2022; Ouyang
et al. 2022; Fan et al. 2024). As a result, many researchers
consider LLMs as human-like research subjects (Dillion
et al. 2023) and analyze LLMs’ professional competence in
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17960

