The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

UniCell: Universal Cell Nucleus Classification via Prompt Learning
Junjia Huang1,2 * , Haofeng Li2 * , Xiang Wan2 , Guanbin Li1,3†
2

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
3
GuangDong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
huangjj77@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {lhaof,wanxiang}@sribd.cn, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
The recognition of multi-class cell nuclei can significantly facilitate the process of histopathological diagnosis. Numerous
pathological datasets are currently available, but their annotations are inconsistent. Most existing methods require individual training on each dataset to deduce the relevant labels
and lack the use of common knowledge across datasets, consequently restricting the quality of recognition. In this paper,
we propose a universal cell nucleus classification framework
(UniCell), which employs a novel prompt learning mechanism to uniformly predict the corresponding categories of
pathological images from different dataset domains. In particular, our framework adopts an end-to-end architecture for
nuclei detection and classification, and utilizes flexible prediction heads for adapting various datasets. Moreover, we develop a Dynamic Prompt Module (DPM) that exploits the
properties of multiple datasets to enhance features. The DPM
first integrates the embeddings of datasets and semantic categories, and then employs the integrated prompts to refine image representations, efficiently harvesting the shared knowledge among the related cell types and data sources. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method effectively achieves the state-of-the-art results on four nucleus detection and classification benchmarks. Code and models are
available at https://github.com/lhaof/UniCell

Epithelial
Neutrophil

Dataset Prompts

Lymphocyte

Plasma

Dataset Source
Category

Figure 1: The illustration of universal multi-dataset cell nucleus classification. The lack of a unified standard for annotating nucleus types hinders the efficient utilization of data
and labels. For example, The Lizard dataset (Blue) has three
overlapping classes (Neu., Epi., Lym.) with the MoNuSAC
dataset (Green). Besides, there exists an inclusion relationship between some categories, such as connective and stromal cells. Our approach utilizes multiple datasets and their
associated labels as prompts for training a unified model.

to the time-consume process of pixel-wise labeling, some
datasets only provide the centroid coordinates of nuclei instead of boundaries. Thus, in this study we concentrate on
locating the centroids and inferring the types of nuclei, by
unifying cross-datasets labels to learn a universal model.
In recent years, numerous pathological datasets (Graham
et al. 2019, 2021; Verma et al. 2021; Ryu et al. 2023) with
nucleus annotations have been proposed for deep learning
based computational pathology (CPath). However, due to
the varying locations of collected organs and the diversity
of diseases, the researchers adopt different annotating protocols for these datasets. As Figure 1 shows, the annotations from different benchmarks may partially overlap but
are not exactly the same. Thus, most existing methods are
limited to be trained and evaluated on each single dataset.
Furthermore, the scale, the diversity and the numbers of
samples in pathology benchmarks vary considerably. The labels of some datasets are insufficient for learning a robust
model. Consequently, most of previous cell recognition approaches (Abousamra et al. 2021; Doan et al. 2022; Huang
et al. 2022; Amgad et al. 2022) fail to adapt to or exploit the

Introduction
Histopathological analysis is widely considered as the gold
standard for the diagnosis and prognosis of human cancers (Wu et al. 2022; Zeiser et al. 2021). Locating and classifying the cells in histopathology images is a preliminary
step in analyzing, diagnosing and grading cancerous cells.
In practical applications, the procedures such as cell counting (Fridman et al. 2012), tumor grading (Fleming et al.
2012) and computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) (Saha, Mukherjee, and Chakraborty 2016) all require to identify nuclei as
a fundamental task. Some studies (Abousamra et al. 2021;
Huang et al. 2023b) aim to identify both the location and
type of cells, while some other works (Stringer et al. 2021;
Lou et al. 2022, 2023b; Ma et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2023) attempt to determine the nucleus boundaries. However, due
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Guanbin Li is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2348

