The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploiting Geometry for Treatment Effect Estimation via Optimal Transport
Yuguang Yan1 , Zeqin Yang1 , Weilin Chen1 , Ruichu Cai1,2 * , Zhifeng Hao3 , Michael Kwok-Po Ng4
1

School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
College of Science, Shantou University, Shantou, China
4
Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China
ygyan@gdut.edu.cn, yangzeqin1999@163.com, {chenweilin.chn,cairuichu}@gmail.com,
haozhifeng@stu.edu.cn, michael-ng@hkbu.edu.hk
Abstract
Estimating treatment effects from observational data suffers
from the issue of confounding bias, which is induced by the
imbalanced confounder distributions between the treated and
control groups. As an effective approach, re-weighting learns
a group of sample weights to balance the confounder distributions. Existing methods of re-weighting highly rely on a
propensity score model or moment alignment. However, for
complex real-world data, it is difficult to obtain an accurate
propensity score prediction. Although moment alignment is
free of learning a propensity score model, accurate estimation for high-order moments is computationally difficult and
still remains an open challenge, and first and second-order
moments are insufficient to align the distributions and easy to
be misled by outliers. In this paper, we exploit geometry to
capture the intrinsic structure involved in data for balancing
the confounder distributions, so that confounding bias can be
reduced even with outliers. To achieve this, we construct a
connection between treatment effect estimation and optimal
transport, a powerful tool to capture geometric information.
After that, we propose an optimal transport model to learn
sample weights by extracting geometry from confounders,
in which geometric information between groups and within
groups is leveraged for better confounder balancing. A projected mirror descent algorithm is employed to solve the derived optimization problem. Experimental studies on both
synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Far Away Outliers

Figure 1: An example with 1-D confounders. First and second moment-based methods are misled by outliers and tend
to assign large weights to them for distribution balancing.

The major issue in the observational study is the confounding bias (Yao et al. 2021), which is induced by the imbalanced confounder distributions between the treated and
control groups due to the fact that the treatment is affected
by the confounder instead of randomly assigned. For example, the decision on medical treatment is usually affected by
age, resulting in different age distributions between different
groups. Re-weighting is an effective approach for overcoming confounding bias, which creates a pseudo-population
with learned sample weights so that confounder distributions
between the treated and control groups are balanced.
As a classic method of re-weighting, propensity scorebased method (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983) heavily depends on the correct model specification on treatment assignment, which is difficult to obtain from complex realworld data. In order to avoid learning a propensity score
model, moment-based methods (Hainmueller 2012) optimize weights directly by minimizing the difference between
the confounder moments of two groups. However, estimation for high-order moments is computationally difficult and
still remains an open challenge. As a result, researchers usually adopt only the first and second moments in practice,
which are insufficient to balance the complex distributions
of real data and are easy to be misled by outliers.
Fig. 1 shows an example where first and second momentbased methods are misled by outliers, whose weights should
be reduced since their unreliable covariates and outcomes
can negatively affect the treatment effect estimation. However, to achieve distribution balancing, the outliers in the

Introduction
Treatment effect estimation aims to predict the effect of a
treatment and has been widely used in real-world applications, such as public health (Glass et al. 2013) and advertisement (Li et al. 2016). The ideal approach for estimating
treatment effect is to perform Randomized Controlled Trials
(RCTs), which means that samples are randomly assigned to
the treated group and the control group, and the treatment effect can be evaluated by comparing the outcomes of the two
groups. Nevertheless, RCTs are usually expensive or even
unethical. Therefore, it is more feasible to estimate the treatment effect from observational data.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16290

