The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Mixed Fair Division: A Survey
Shengxin Liu1 , Xinhang Lu2 , Mashbat Suzuki2 , Toby Walsh2
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
UNSW Sydney, Australia
sxliu@hit.edu.cn, {xinhang.lu, mashbat.suzuki, t.walsh}@unsw.edu.au

Abstract

indivisible goods: in divorce settlement, we usually have divisible goods like money or shares, as well as indivisible
goods like houses, cars, paintings, etc. Alternatively, monetary compensation (a.k.a. subsidies) could help circumvent
unfair allocations of indivisible inheritances.
In this survey, we discuss fair division with mixed types
of resources, capturing the aforementioned real-world applications. We mainly focus on the following three mixed fair
division domains, which has received growing attention in
recent years: Section 3 considers fair division of indivisible goods and chores, in which each agent may have nonnegative or non-positive valuation over each item; Section 4
focuses on fair division of mixed divisible and indivisible
goods (mixed goods); Section 5 focuses on fair division of
indivisible goods with subsidy. Clearly, the first two domains
relax one of the two orthogonal directions mentioned earlier.
For the last two domains, they share some similarity in the
sense that subsidy could be viewed as a divisible good. The
key difference lies in how they approach fairness. In Section 4, both the divisible and indivisible goods are fixed in
advance and we find approximately fair allocations. In Section 5, we allocate indivisible goods but introduce some additional amount of money in order to satisfy exact fairness.
This survey outlines new fairness notions and related theoretical results that are addressed in the above mixed fair
division settings as well as highlights a number of open
questions and interesting directions for future research.1
While we only focus on fair division, the idea of combining
mixed types of resources has been investigated in a collective choice context (Lu et al. 2023), where all agents share a
selected subset of the resources. Extending the idea further
to participatory budgeting (Aziz and Shah 2021; Rey and
Maly 2023) or public decision making (Conitzer, Freeman,
and Shah 2017) is an interesting and practical direction.

The fair allocation of resources to agents is a fundamental
problem in society and has received significant attention and
rapid developments from the game theory and artificial intelligence communities in recent years. The majority of the fair
division literature can be divided along at least two orthogonal directions: goods versus chores, and divisible versus indivisible resources. In this survey, besides describing the state
of the art, we outline a number of interesting open questions
in three mixed fair division settings: (i) indivisible goods and
chores, (ii) divisible and indivisible goods (i.e., mixed goods),
and (iii) fair division of indivisible goods with subsidy.

1

Introduction

Fair division concerns the problem of fairly allocating resources among agents with heterogeneous preferences over
the resources, a fundamental research topic in computational social choice (Rothe 2016; Brandt et al. 2016; Endriss
2017). It has a long, rich history dating back to (Steinhaus
1948), and has attracted ongoing interest from mathematicians, economists, and computer scientists (Brams and Taylor 1996; Robertson and Webb 1998; Moulin 2019; Aziz
2020; Walsh 2020; Suksompong 2021; Amanatidis et al.
2023; Nguyen and Rothe 2023). Moreover, fair division
methods have gradually been deployed in practice and made
publicly available (e.g., Goldman and Procaccia 2015; Budish et al. 2017; Igarashi and Yokoyama 2023).
The vast majority of fair division literature can be divided
along two orthogonal directions according to:
• the (in)divisibility of the resources, and
• agents’ valuations over the resources.
Specifically, in the former case, the resource is either divisible or indivisible, and in the latter case, the resource consists
of either goods (positively valued) or chores (negatively valued). In many real-world scenarios, however, the resource
to be allocated may be a mixture of different types. Our
first example demonstrates a mixture of (indivisible) goods
and chores: when distributing household tasks, some family
member may enjoy cooking while others may find it torturous. The next example touches on a mixture of divisible and

2

Preliminaries

For each k ∈ N, let [k] := {1, 2, . . . , k}. Denote by N = [n]
the set of agents to whom we allocate some resource R,
which may, e.g., consists of indivisible goods and chores
(Section 2.2) or be a mix of divisible and indivisible goods
(Section 2.3). An allocation A = (A1 , A2 , . . . , An ) is a partition of resource R into n bundles such that Ai is the bundle

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

22641

See (Liu et al. 2023) for the full version of this survey.

