The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Tree Search-Based Evolutionary Bandits for Protein Sequence Optimization
Jiahao Qiu* 1 , Hui Yuan* 1 , Jinghong Zhang* 2 , Wentao Chen3 , Huazheng Wang4 , Mengdi Wang1
1

Princeton University
University of California San Diego
3
MLAB Biosciences Inc
4
Oregon State University
jq3984@princeton.edu, huiyuan@princeton.edu, zhangjinghong99@outlook.com, wentao.chen@mlabbiosciences.com,
huazheng.wang@oregonstate.edu, mengdiw@princeton.edu
2

Abstract

to generate high-quality data for probing the full sequencefunction relationships. Recent advances in synthetic DNA
generation and recombinant protein production make the
measurement of protein sequence-function relationships reasonably scalable and high-throughput (Packer and Liu 2015;
Yang, Wu, and Arnold 2019).

While modern biotechnologies allow synthesizing new proteins and function measurements at scale, efficiently exploring
a protein sequence space and engineering it remains a daunting task due to the vast sequence space of any given protein.
Protein engineering is typically conducted through an iterative
process of adding mutations to the wild-type or lead sequences,
recombination of mutations, and running new rounds of screening. To enhance the efficiency of such a process, we propose
a tree search-based bandit learning method, which expands a
tree starting from the initial sequence with the guidance of a
bandit machine learning model. Under simplified assumptions
and a Gaussian Process prior, we provide theoretical analysis
and a Bayesian regret bound, demonstrating that the method
can efficiently discover a near-optimal design. The full algorithm is compatible with a suite of randomized tree search
heuristics, machine learning models, pre-trained embeddings,
and bandit techniques. We test various instances of the algorithm across benchmark protein datasets using simulated
screens. Experiment results demonstrate that the algorithm is
both sample-efficient, diversity-promoting, and able to find
top designs using reasonably small mutation counts.

1

Due to the bottleneck of wet-lab experimentation and the
complex landscape of protein functions, identifying novel
protein designs for maximal fitness remains one of the most
difficult but high-value problems in modern medicine and
biology. This has motivated scientists to apply machine learning approaches, beginning with Fox et al. (2003) and followed by many, with increasing amounts of efforts utilizing
in silico exploration and machine learning beyond experimental approaches (Yang, Wu, and Arnold 2019; Fannjiang
and Listgarten 2020; Doppa 2021; Shin et al. 2021; Freschlin, Fahlberg, and Romero 2022; Wang et al. 2022; Sinai
et al. 2020). More recent advances in large language models open up new opportunities for modeling and predicting
protein functions and generalizing knowledge across protein
domains (Rives et al. 2021; Shuai, Ruffolo, and Gray 2022;
Nijkamp et al. 2022; Hsu et al. 2022; Elnaggar et al. 2020).

Introduction

Advances in biotechnology have demonstrated human’s unprecedented capabilities to engineer proteins. They make it
possible to directly design the amino acid sequences that
encode proteins for desired functions, towards improving
biochemical or enzymatic properties such as stability, binding affinity, or catalytic activity. Directed evolution (DE),
for example, is a method for exploring new protein designs
with properties of interest and maximal utility, by mimicking
the natural evolution process. The development of DE was
honored in 2018 with the awarding of the Nobel Prize in
Chemistry to Frances Arnold for the directed evolution of enzymes, and George Smith and Gregory Winter for the development of phage display (Arnold 1998; Smith and Petrenko
1997; Winter et al. 1994). Traditional DE strategies are inherently screening (greedy search) strategies with limited ability
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14686

The key research challenge with designing the iterative
protein screening strategy is exploration, i.e., how to effectively explore in a large combinatorial space and learn the
sequence-to-function landscape towards finding the optimal.
While many attempts have been proved successful in simulation and sometimes in real experiments (Bryant et al. 2021;
Shin et al. 2021), they often are limited by practical constraints and their performance is very sensitive to domain/distribution shifts. Even with the best and largest pre-trained
protein language models such as ESM-1b (Rives et al. 2019)
and ProGen2 (Nijkamp et al. 2022), one often needs to explore an almost unknown domain and learn a new function
map in order to discover new drugs. This is especially true
with antibody engineering. Antibodies have highly diverse
complementarity-determining region (CDR) sequences that
can be altered, resulting in a huge sequence space to explore
for optimal properties. The binding of antibodies to their targets are extrinsic properties of antibodies and it is difficult to
accurately model the sequence-binding relationships solely
from the sequences alone. Further, most of the exploration

