The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TC-LIF: A Two-Compartment Spiking Neuron Model
for Long-Term Sequential Modelling
Shimin Zhang1 * , Qu Yang2 * , Chenxiang Ma1 , Jibin Wu1† , Haizhou Li3, 2 Kay Chen Tan1
1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), Guangdong, China
shi-min.zhang@connect.polyu.hk, quyang@u.nus.edu, chenxiang.ma@connect.polyu.hk, jibin.wu@polyu.edu.hk,
haizhouli@cuhk.edu.cn, kctan@polyu.edu.hk
Abstract

Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) Model (Abbott and Kepler 2005),
Izhikevich Model (Izhikevich 2003), and Adaptive Exponential Integrate-and-Fire (AdEx) Model (Brette and Gerstner 2005). These single-compartment models abstract the
biological neuron as a single electrical circuit, preserving
the essential neuronal dynamics of biological neurons while
ignoring the complex geometrical structure of dendrites as
well as their interactions with the soma. This degree of abstraction significantly reduces the modeling effort, making
them more feasible to study the behavior of large-scale biological neural networks and perform complex pattern recognition tasks on neuromorphic computing systems (Wu et al.
2021a; Chen et al. 2023; Ma et al. 2022).
While single-compartment spiking neuron models have
demonstrated promising results on pattern recognition tasks
with limited temporal context (Tavanaei et al. 2019; Zhang
et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2021b; Yang et al. 2022; Yao et al.
2022), their ability to solve tasks that require long-term temporal dependencies remains constrained. This issue primarily arises from the difficulty of performing long-term temporal credit assignment (TCA) in SNNs. The TCA involves
the identification of input spikes that contribute to future rewards or penalties, and subsequently strengthen or weaken
their respective connections. Given the discrete and sequential nature of spikes, pinpointing the exact moments or sequences that led to a prediction error becomes challenging.
This issue deteriorates for long sequences, where the influence of early spikes on later predictions is more challenging
to trace. Hence, addressing the TCA problem is crucial for
enhancing the sequential modeling capabilities of SNNs.
Broadly speaking, there are two research directions have
been pursued to address the TCA problem in SNNs. The first
direction draws inspiration from the recent success of attention models within deep learning. These methods integrate
the self-attention mechanism into SNNs to enable the direct
modeling of temporal relationships between different time
steps (Qin et al. 2023; Yao et al. 2021). However, the selfattention mechanism is computationally expensive to operate, and it is unable to operate in real-time. Furthermore,
self-attention is not directly compatible with mainstream
neuromorphic chips, therefore, it cannot take advantage of
the energy efficiency offered by these chips.
The latter research direction primarily centers around

The identification of sensory cues associated with potential
opportunities and dangers is frequently complicated by unrelated events that separate useful cues by long delays. As a
result, it remains a challenging task for state-of-the-art spiking neural networks (SNNs) to establish long-term temporal
dependency between distant cues. To address this challenge,
we propose a novel biologically inspired Two-Compartment
Leaky Integrate-and-Fire spiking neuron model, dubbed TCLIF. The proposed model incorporates carefully designed somatic and dendritic compartments that are tailored to facilitate learning long-term temporal dependencies. Furthermore,
a theoretical analysis is provided to validate the effectiveness of TC-LIF in propagating error gradients over an extended temporal duration. Our experimental results, on a diverse range of temporal classification tasks, demonstrate superior temporal classification capability, rapid training convergence, and high energy efficiency of the proposed TC-LIF
model. Therefore, this work opens up a myriad of opportunities for solving challenging temporal processing tasks on
emerging neuromorphic computing systems. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/ZhangShimin1/TC-LIF.

Introduction
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) have attracted significant
attention recently owing to their biological plausibility and
potential for energy-efficient neural computation (Maass
1997; Pfeiffer and Pfeil 2018). The fundamental computing units of SNNs, known as spiking neurons, aim to emulate the rich neuronal dynamics observed in biological neurons, which facilitate the encoding, processing, and storage
of spatio-temporal patterns (Gerstner et al. 2014). Furthermore, spiking neurons communicate with each other via discrete spikes, and such event-driven operation leads to ultralow-power neural computation (Davies et al. 2018; Pei et al.
2019), achieving efficient learning (Ma, Fang, and Wang
2023; Fang et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2022).
In practice, single-compartment spiking neurons models have been widely adopted for large-scale brain simulations and neuromorphic computing, instances include Leaky
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16838

