The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Scalable Geometric Fracture Assembly via Co-creation Space among Assemblers
Ruiyuan Zhang1 * , Jiaxiang Liu1 * , Zexi Li1 , Hao Dong3 , Jie Fu2 * † , Chao Wu1 †
1
Zhejiang University
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Peking University
{zhangruiyuan,zjljx,zexi.li,chao.wu}@zju.edu.cn, jiefu@ust.hk, hao.dong@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Geometric fracture assembly presents a challenging practical task in archaeology and 3D computer vision. Previous
methods have focused solely on assembling fragments based
on semantic information, which has limited the quantity of
objects that can be effectively assembled. Therefore, there
is a need to develop a scalable framework for geometric
fracture assembly without relying on semantic information.
To improve the effectiveness of assembling geometric fractures without semantic information, we propose a co-creation
space comprising several assemblers capable of gradually and
unambiguously assembling fractures. Additionally, we introduce a novel loss function, i.e., the geometric-based collision loss, to address collision issues during the fracture assembly process and enhance the results. Our framework exhibits better performance on both PartNet and Breaking Bad
datasets compared to existing state-of-the-art frameworks.
Extensive experiments and quantitative comparisons demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed framework, which
features linear computational complexity, enhanced abstraction, and improved generalization. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/Ruiyuan-Zhang/CCS.

Figure 1: Comparison of Transformer-based assembly (left)
and our method (right). Left: Assemblers may become confused when presented with multiple fractures to assemble simultaneously, leading to an inability to assemble any parts.
Right: In our method, assemblers focus on essential fractures
of parts, enabling efficient and effective task completion.

part segmentation and ground-truth annotations (Zhang et al.
2022; Zhan et al. 2020; Narayan, Nagar, and Raman 2022;
Lee, Hu, and Lim 2021; Li et al. 2020). To address part
relationship constraints, (Zhang et al. 2022) introduced a
transformer-based framework, IET, which assigns positions
to parts and uses self-attention for positional interactions.
However, this method’s computational complexity increases
significantly with the number of parts due to the quadratic
scaling of attention mechanisms (Goyal et al. 2021).
In this paper, we introduce the Co-creation Space, a novel
approach that enables assemblers to predict the 6-DoF pose
of geometric parts or fractures. This method, illustrated in
Figure 2, involves assemblers competing for write access to
update a shared workspace, thereby predicting part poses
(Baars 1993; Dehaene, Lau, and Kouider 2021). The task
of geometric fracture assembly is divided into specialized
tasks, such as identifying the core fracture and locating relevant ones. Assemblers collaborate in a shared workspace,
which replaces the pairwise interactions found in traditional
dot-product attention methods. This approach ensures global
coherence and reduces computational complexity to a linear
scale relative to the number of assemblers (Baars 1993). As
depicted in Figure 1, the Co-creation Space also acts as an
information bottleneck, denoted as Rt in Eq 2, limiting the
capacity of information channels between specialists. This
ensures that only essential information is written into the
workspace. Fig.1(a): when the assembler considers multiple parts/fractures simultaneously, it discovers that multiple

Introduction
Fracture assembly aims to reconstruct a broken object by
composing its fractures. Manually assembling these fragments is time-consuming and requires precision. The task
is complicated due to the vast number of potential combinations and the lack of clear instructions. Therefore, geometric
fracture assembly is a practical but challenging task.
Previous studies have focused on tasks like archaeological
fragment matching and 3D furniture assembly, using methods such as generative 3D part assembly with graph neural
networks to understand part relationships (Funkhouser et al.
2011; Toler-Franklin et al. 2010; Zhang et al. 2022; Zhan
et al. 2020; Narayan, Nagar, and Raman 2022; Lee, Hu,
and Lim 2021; Li et al. 2020). However, these approaches
often face limitations in handling shapes with numerous
fragments, also called scalability issue or multi-parts issue.
Futhermore, they rely heavily on semantic information like
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7269

