The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Residual Hyperbolic Graph Convolution Networks
Yangkai Xue1 , Jindou Dai1 , Zhipeng Lu2 * , Yuwei Wu1,2* , Yunde Jia2,1
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of
Technology, China
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Machine Perception and Intelligent Computing, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, China
xue.yangkai@bit.edu.cn, daijindou@foxmail.com, zhipeng.lu@hotmail.com, wuyuwei@bit.edu.cn, jiayunde@smbu.edu.cn

Abstract
Hyperbolic graph convolutional networks (HGCNs) have
demonstrated representational capabilities of modeling
hierarchical-structured graphs. However, as in general GCNs,
over-smoothing may occur as the number of model layers increases, limiting the representation capabilities of most current
HGCN models. In this paper, we propose residual hyperbolic
graph convolutional networks (R-HGCNs) to address the oversmoothing problem. We introduce a hyperbolic residual connection function to overcome the over-smoothing problem,
and also theoretically prove the effectiveness of the hyperbolic residual function. Moreover, we use product manifolds
and HyperDrop to facilitate the R-HGCNs. The distinctive
features of the R-HGCNs are as follows: (1) The hyperbolic
residual connection preserves the initial node information in
each layer and adds a hyperbolic identity mapping to prevent
node features from being indistinguishable. (2) Product manifolds in R-HGCNs have been set up with different origin
points in different components to facilitate the extraction of
feature information from a wider range of perspectives, which
enhances the representing capability of R-HGCNs. (3) HyperDrop adds multiplicative Gaussian noise into hyperbolic
representations, such that perturbations can be added to alleviate the over-fitting problem without deconstructing the
hyperbolic geometry. Experiment results demonstrate the effectiveness of R-HGCNs under various graph convolution
layers and different structures of product manifolds.

Introduction
Hyperbolic graph convolutional networks (HGCNs) have
been an emerging research topic due to its superior representation capabilities of modeling hierarchical graphs [Chami et al.
2019, Dai et al. 2021]. Different from Euclidean spaces with
a polynomial expanding space volume, hyperbolic spaces
increase exponentially growth of space volume with radius,
which is well-suited to the geometry of hierarchical data. Benefiting from this property, great progress has been made by
generalizing Euclidean methods to hyperbolic spaces such as
hyperbolic graph convolutional networks [Chami et al. 2019,
Dai et al. 2021], hyperbolic image embeddings [Khrulkov
et al. 2020], and hyperbolic word embeddings [Nickel and
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16247

Kiela 2017, 2018]. However, the over-smoothing issue impeding the development of deep HGCNs, over-smoothing
means node features becomes indistinguishable after passing
through a large number of graph convolution layers. It proved
that graph convolution is a special form of Laplacian smoothing [Li, Han, and Wu 2018] . Smoothing on nodes can reduce
intra-class differences, while over-smoothing makes model
less discriminative with indistinguishable node features.
In this paper, we propose residual hyperbolic graph convolutional networks (R-HGCNs) to address the over-smoothing
problem. Specifically, we introduce a hyperbolic residual connection function and use product manifolds and HyperDrop
into HGCNs. The details are as follows: (1) The hyperbolic
residual connection transmits the initial node information
to each layer to prevent node features from being indistinguishable, and the hyperbolic identity mapping prevents performance degradation caused by deepening the models. (2)
Product manifolds pick different origin points on different
components, which makes the same input have different embedding results in different components, giving them the
ability to view the graph structure from different perspectives.
This enhances the representational ability of R-HGCNs. (3)
HyperDrop adds multiplicative Gaussian noise on hyperbolic
neurons to alleviate the over-fitting issue, inheriting the insight of training with noise and preserving the hyperbolic
geometry, Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of R-HGCNs under various graph convolution layers
and different structures of product manifolds. The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We propose R-HGCN, a product manifold based deep
hyperbolic graph convolutional network that makes up
for the deficiency of existing HGCNs for capturing longrange relationships in graphs.
• We design hyperbolic residual connection that addresses
the over-smoothing issue while deepening HGCNs and
theoretically prove the effectiveness of the hyperbolic
residual connection.
• We propose to use product manifolds with different origin
points in different components, which enables R-HGCNs
to extract more comprehensive features from the data.
• We develop HyperDrop, a regularization method tailored
for hyperbolic representations. It can improve R-HGCNs’
generalization ability, alleviating the over-fitting issue.

