The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Federated X -armed Bandit
Wenjie Li1 * , Qifan Song1 , Jean Honorio2 , Guang Lin 3
1
Department of Statistics, Purdue University
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
3
Departments of Mathematics and School of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University
li3549@purdue.edu, qfsong@purdue.edu, jhonorio@unimelb.edu.au, guanglin@purdue.edu
2

Abstract

bandit), or the case where the expected reward is a linear
function of the chosen arm (linear contextual bandit). However, for problems such as dynamic pricing (Chen and Gallego 2022) and hyper-parameter optimization (Shang, Kaufmann, and Valko 2019), the available arms are often defined
on a domain X with infinite or even uncountable cardinality, and the reward function is usually non-linear with respect to the metric employed by the domain X . These problems challenge the applications of existing federated bandit
algorithms to more complicated real-world problems. Two
applications (Figure 1) that motivate our study of federated
X -armed bandit are given below.

This work establishes the first framework of federated X armed bandit, where different clients face heterogeneous local objective functions defined on the same domain and are
required to collaboratively figure out the global optimum.
We propose the first federated algorithm for such problems,
named Fed-PNE. By utilizing the topological structure of
the global objective inside the hierarchical partitioning and
the weak smoothness property, our algorithm achieves sublinear cumulative regret with respect to both the number of
clients and the evaluation budget. Meanwhile, it only requires
logarithmic communications between the central server and
clients, protecting the client privacy. Experimental results on
synthetic functions and real datasets validate the advantages
of Fed-PNE over various centralized and federated baseline
algorithms.

• Federated medicine dosage recommendation. For the
dosage recommendation of a newly-invented medicine/vaccine (in terms of volume or weight), the clinical trials could be conducted at multiple hospitals (clients). To
protect patients’ privacy, hospitals cannot directly share
the treatment result of each trial (reward). Moreover, because of the demographic difference among the patient
groups, the best dosage obtained at each hospital (i.e.,
the optimal of local objectives) could be different from
the optimal recommended dosage for entire population
of the state (i.e., the optimal of the global objective). Researchers needs to collaboratively find the global optimal
dosage by exploring and exploiting the local data.

Introduction
Federated bandit is a newly-developed bandit problem
that incorporates federated learning with sequential decision making (McMahan et al. 2017; Shi and Shen 2021a).
Unlike the traditional bandit models where the explorationexploitation tradeoff is the only major concern, federated
bandit problem also takes account of the modern concerns of
data heterogeneity and privacy protection towards trustworthy machine learning. In particular, in the federated learning
paradigm, the data available to each client could be drawn
from non-i.i.d distributions, making collaborations between
the clients necessary to make valid inferences for the aggregated global model. However, due to user privacy concerns and the large communication cost, such collaborations
across the clients must be restricted and avoid direct transmissions of the local data. To make correct decisions in the
future, the clients have to utilize the limited communications
from each other and coordinate exploration and exploitation
correspondingly.
To the best of our knowledge, existing results of federated
bandits, such as Dubey and Pentland (2020); Huang et al.
(2021); Shi and Shen (2021a); Shi, Shen, and Yang (2021b);
Xu, Xie, and Lui (2021); Huang et al. (2023), focus on either
the case where the number of arms is finite (multi-armed

• Federated hyper-parameter optimization. An important application of automating machine learning
workflows with minimal human intervention consists of hyper-parameter optimization for ML models, e.g., learning rate, neural network architecture,
etc. Many modern data are collected by mobile devices (clients). The model performance (reward) of each
hyper-parameter setting could be different for each mobile device (i.e., local objectives) due to user heterogeneity. To fully utilize the whole dataset (i.e., global objective) for hyperparameter optimization such that the obtained auto-ML model can work seamlessly for diverse
scenarios, the central server need to coordinate the local search properly without violating the regulations of
consumer data privacy.

* This work was done before Wenjie joined Amazon.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In the aforementioned examples, the reward objectives are
defined on a domain X , which can often be formatted as

13628

