The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Probabilistic Offline Policy Ranking with Approximate Bayesian Computation
Longchao Da1 , Porter Jenkins2 , Trevor Schwantes2 , Jeffrey Dotson2 , Hua Wei1 *
1

Arizona State University,
Brigham Young University
{longchao,hua.wei}@asu.edu, {pjenkins,jeff dotson}@cs.byu.edu, Schwantes2@gmail.com
2

Abstract
In practice, it is essential to compare and rank candidate policies offline before real-world deployment for safety and reliability. Prior work seeks to solve this offline policy ranking
(OPR) problem through value-based methods, such as Offpolicy evaluation (OPE). However, they fail to analyze special
case performance (e.g., worst or best cases), due to the lack of
holistic characterization of policies’ performance. It is even
more difficult to estimate precise policy values when the reward is not fully accessible under sparse settings. In this paper,
we present Probabilistic Offline Policy Ranking (POPR), a
framework to address OPR problems by leveraging expert
data to characterize the probability of a candidate policy behaving like experts, and approximating its entire performance
posterior distribution to help with ranking. POPR does not rely
on value estimation, and the derived performance posterior can
be used to distinguish candidates in worst-, best-, and averagecases. To estimate the posterior, we propose POPR-EABC,
an Energy-based Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC)
method conducting likelihood-free inference. POPR-EABC reduces the heuristic nature of ABC by a smooth energy function,
and improves the sampling efficiency by a pseudo-likelihood.
We empirically demonstrate that POPR-EABC is adequate
for evaluating policies in both discrete and continuous action
spaces across various experiment environments, and facilitates probabilistic comparisons of candidate policies before
deployment.

Introduction
Policies trained in simulation often encounter performance
drops when deployed in a different simulated environment (Jayawardana et al. 2022; Wei et al. 2022) or the real
world (Hanna and Stone 2017; Da et al. 2023). With a set
of candidate policies, evaluating and ranking prior to real
deployment is critical for real-world applications. Off-policy
evaluation (OPE) allows one to estimate the goodness of a
policy (often referred to as target/candidate policy) using data
collected from another, possibly unrelated policy (referred
to as behavior policy). Such evaluation is important because
testing and implementing a policy in the real world can be
costly in areas like trading (Liu et al. 2020) and physical
retail (Jenkins et al. 2022, 2020), even vital in situations like
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20370

healthcare (Liao et al. 2020) and transportation (Du et al.
2023; Vlachogiannis et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023).
With growing interest in OPE, the research community has
produced a number of estimators, including importance sampling (IS) (Thomas and Brunskill 2016; Farajtabar, Chow,
and Ghavamzadeh 2018; Jiang and Li 2016), direct methods (DM) (Harutyunyan et al. 2016; Li et al. 2010; Le,
Voloshin, and Yue 2019; Kostrikov and Nachum 2020) and
distribution correction estimation (DICE) methods (Dai et al.
2020; Zhang, Liu, and Whiteson 2020; Yang et al. 2022).
Importance-sampling-based methods weight the data collected from the behavior policy according to the probability
of transitioning to each state under the target policy, yet they
assume access to a probability distribution over actions from
the behavior policy. DM and DICE do not require knowing
the output probabilities of the behavior policy, where DM
directly learns an environment or value model from offline
data, and DICE methods learn to estimate the discounted
stationary distribution ratios. Most of these methods compute
the point estimates of the policy’s value (Dudı́k, Langford,
and Li 2011; Jiang and Li 2016; Zhang, Liu, and Whiteson
2020; Yang et al. 2020), some of which additionally estimate
the value with confidence intervals (Thomas, Theocharous,
and Ghavamzadeh 2015; Kuzborskij et al. 2020; Feng et al.
2020; Dai et al. 2020; Kostrikov and Nachum 2020).
While various estimators have been proposed for off-policy
evaluation, in many cases, precise policy value estimation
is not necessary. Instead, practitioners often place greater
emphasis on the correctness of comparison and ranking of
candidate policies. Existing work in Supervised Off-Policy
Ranking (SOPR) (Jin et al. 2021) takes a supervised learning approach to policy ranking, and requires an adequate
training set or policies with explicitly labeled performance.
In practice, this approach is challenging because (1) actual
policy data is typically limited, and (2) access to labeled performance data is a strict assumption. The behavior policy is
usually inaccessible and behavioral data is usually restricted,
such as in healthcare or confidential financial trading domains.
Additionally, when the policies are hard to differentiate from
mean performance, we might care about the performance
under special situations like the worst or best cases (Agarwal
et al. 2021), which none of the above literature could address.
In this paper, we propose the Probabilistic Offline Policy
Ranking (POPR) framework to address the above challenges.

