The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Understanding Distributed Representations of Concepts
in Deep Neural Networks without Supervision
Wonjoon Chang1 * , Dahee Kwon1 * , Jaesik Choi1, 2
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
2
INEEJI
{one jj, daheekwon, jaesik.choi}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

oboe

Understanding intermediate representations of the concepts
learned by deep learning classifiers is indispensable for interpreting general model behaviors. Existing approaches to reveal learned concepts often rely on human supervision, such
as pre-defined concept sets or segmentation processes. In this
paper, we propose a novel unsupervised method for discovering distributed representations of concepts by selecting a
principal subset of neurons. Our empirical findings demonstrate that instances with similar neuron activation states
tend to share coherent concepts. Based on the observations,
the proposed method selects principal neurons that construct
an interpretable region, namely a Relaxed Decision Region
(RDR), encompassing instances with coherent concepts in
the feature space. It can be utilized to identify unlabeled subclasses within data and to detect the causes of misclassifications. Furthermore, the applicability of our method across
various layers discloses distinct distributed representations
over the layers, which provides deeper insights into the internal mechanisms of the deep learning model.

oboe

aircraft carrier

logit
Relaxed
Decision Region

Feature space

Distance
Euclidean
Configuration
Distance
Euclidean

Instances in the
Relaxed Decision Region

Configuration

oboe

oboe

stage

stage

oboe

cocktail shaker

oboe

oboe

stage

oboe

Introduction
Figure 1: Relaxed Decision Region (RDR). Top: Description
of the target sample and its neighbors. Middle: Visualization of the feature space and the RDR. Our RDR framework
groups instances that have similar neuron activation states
in the feature space. Bottom: Instances in the RDR share the
coherent concept of ‘a person with a stick’.

Despite the remarkable performance of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) in learning intricate data relationships (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015), their inherent lack of transparency remains a significant challenge. This opacity makes
it difficult to understand the decision-making process, reducing model reliability and weakening the applicability in risksensitive domains where careful decisions are needed (Gunning et al. 2019; Samek et al. 2019). To gain insights into
the general behaviors of DNNs, it is essential to reveal the
semantic representations that DNNs learn. Our primary goal
is to understand the distributed representations of concepts
embedded within a trained model without external supervision. This approach facilitates the identification of diverse
concepts within the model, including subclass distinctions,
class-agnostic concepts, and even concepts that might contribute to misclassification.
Various eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) methods have been developed to enhance the transparency of
a model. The gradient-based methods reveal which parts

of input significantly contribute to the model’s classification result based on the gradient information (Simonyan,
Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014; Bach et al. 2015; Selvaraju
et al. 2017; Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017; Chattopadhay
et al. 2018). Yet, they focus on individual instances rather
than the representative concepts that the model has learned
in terms of generality. In this context, concept-based explanation methods emerge to provide more nuanced and general explanations (Kim et al. 2018; Ghorbani et al. 2019;
Crabbé and van der Schaar 2022). Despite their perceptually intuitive results, most methods heavily rely on human
supervision. Not only does it take substantial cost to require
a refined concept dataset, but also there is no guarantee that
the pre-defined concepts truly reflect the model behavior.

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11212

