The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Navigating Real-World Partial Label Learning: Unveiling Fine-Grained Images
with Attributes
Haoran Jiang1,2,3 , Zhihao Sun4 , Yingjie Tian2,3,5,6 *
1

School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Research Center on Fictitious Economy and Data Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
School of Economics and Management, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
MOE Social Science Laboratory of Digital Economic Forecasts and Policy Simulation at UCAS
jianghaoran21@mails.ucas.ac.cn, sunzhihao21@mails.ucas.ac.cn, tyj@ucas.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Partial label learning (PLL), a significant research area, addresses the challenge of annotating each sample with a candidate label set containing the true label when obtaining accurate labels is infeasible. However, existing PLL methods often rely on generic datasets like CIFAR, where annotators can
readily differentiate candidate labels and are unlikely to confuse, making it less realistic for real-world partial label applications. In response, our research focuses on a rarely studied
problem, PLL on fine-grained images with attributes. And we
propose a novel framework called Shared to Learn, Distinct
to Disambiguate (SoDisam). Within the candidate label set,
the categories may exhibit numerous shared attribute features,
posing a challenge in accurately distinguishing them. Rather
than perceiving it as an impediment, we capitalize on these
shared attributes as definitive sources of supervision. This
insight guides us to learn attribute space visual representation to focus on the information from these shared attributes.
Moreover, we introduce an attribute attention mechanism tailored to harness the remaining distinct attributes. This mechanism directs the originally holistic feature towards specific regions, capturing corresponding discriminative features. In addition, a dynamic disambiguation module is introduced, continuously adjusting the two aforementioned mechanisms and
achieve the final disambiguation process. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on finegrained partial label datasets. The proposed SoDisam framework not only addresses the challenges associated with finegrained partial label learning but also provides a more realistic representation of real-world partial label scenarios.

Figure 1: Examples of existing PLL and PLL-FG training
samples, with PLL-FG samples closer to real-world scenarios due to more challenging true label annotation.
truth label. In this way, PLL can reduce the money and time
cost and the need of professional expertise when annotating
data. Therefore, PLL has various application scenarios, including but not limited to medical disease diagnosis (Song
et al. 2016), image annotation (Chen, Patel, and Chellappa
2017) and web mining (Luo and Orabona 2010).
Previous methods (Wang et al. 2021; Wu, Wang, and
Zhang 2022; Lv et al. 2020; Xia et al. 2023; Lyu, Wu, and
Feng 2022; Zhang et al. 2021) for deep PLL achieved remarkable performance which even can be comparable to supervised learning under certain experiment settings. However, existing methods based on deep learning mainly focus
on synthetic PLL datasets which are generated from generic
datasets (e.g., CIFAR-10/100) (Tian, Yu, and Fu 2023). The
categories involved in these synthetic PLL datasets include
various objects, such as bird, car, plane and so on. One key
issue is that there is a significant gap between categories,
which does not align with the original intention of PLL,
where annotators are unable to distinguish the true label and
thus annotate a set of candidate labels.
As an example shown in Fig. 1, consider a sample in the

Introduction
Partial label learning (Cour, Sapp, and Taskar 2011; Feng
et al. 2020; Lv et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021; Wen et al.
2021; Wu, Wang, and Zhang 2022; Lv et al. 2023) (PLL), as
one of the spotlights in the field of weakly-supervised learning (Zhou 2018; Hüllermeier and Beringer 2006; Natarajan et al. 2013; Zhu and Goldberg 2009; Yang et al. 2022;
Ishida, Niu, and Sugiyama 2018; Ishida et al. 2017), enables
model to learn from each training instance with only a set of
ambiguous candidate labels containing the unknown ground
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12874

