The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Can LLMs Fix Issues with Reasoning Models?
Towards More Likely Models for AI Planning*
Turgay Caglar1 , Sirine Belhaj2 , Tathagata Chakraborti3 , Michael Katz3 , Sarath Sreedharan1
1

2

Colorado State University
Ecole Polytechnique de Tunisie
3
IBM Research
tcaglar@colostate.edu

Abstract
This is the first work to look at the application of large language models (LLMs) for the purpose of model space edits
in automated planning tasks. To set the stage for this union,
we explore two different flavors of model space problems that
have been studied in the AI planning literature and explore the
effect of an LLM on those tasks. We empirically demonstrate
how the performance of an LLM contrasts with combinatorial
search (CS) – an approach that has been traditionally used to
solve model space tasks in planning, both with the LLM in the
role of a standalone model space reasoner as well as in the role
of a statistical signal in concert with the CS approach as part of
a two-stage process. Our experiments show promising results
suggesting further forays of LLMs into the exciting world of
model space reasoning for planning tasks in the future.

1

Figure 1: Classical planning versus model space problems.

to change through the actions of an agent. In practice, the
deployment of systems that can plan involves a whole gamut
of challenges in authoring, maintaining, and meta-reasoning
about models of planning tasks.

Introduction

AI planning or automated planning (used interchangeably)
is the task of synthesizing the goal-directed behavior of autonomous agents. Traditionally, the AI planning community
has looked at the classical planning problem as one of generating a plan given a model of the world (Ghallab, Nau,
and Traverso 2004). Here, “model” or a “planning problem”
refers to a collection of constraints describing the current
state of the world (initial state), the actions available to the
agent along with the conditions under which the agent can
do those actions and the effect of doing those actions on the
environment, and a target (goal) state for the agent to achieve.
The plan is a sequence of actions that the agent can use to
transform the current state to the desired goal state.
Typically, these models are represented using the planning
domain definition language or PDDL (Haslum et al. 2019;
McDermott et al. 1998) – we will use the same in this paper.
All the information to derive this solution (plan) is contained
in the input model which remains static during the planning
task. But what if the model itself needs to be changed?
This may be because it is incorrect, or incomplete, or
even unsolvable. It may be because it needs to be changed
to support some new behaviors. It may also be because the
model is being used to describe a world that itself needs
*A longer version of the paper with detailed examples of prompts
is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.13720.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20061

Model Space Problems in AI Planning
We begin by enumerating the different flavors of model space
reasoning explored in the AI planning literature. All of them
involve a starting model which has something wrong with it
and the solution is a new model where the problem has been
resolved or the required criterion has been met (Figure 1).
Unsolvability Perhaps the most difficult of model space
problems, especially with humans in the loop, is that of unsolvability. This is because when a model is unsolvable, there
is no artifact (such as an outputted plan) to look at for debugging purposes. While there have been a lot of efforts,
including an ongoing competition (Muise and Lipovetzky
2023), to detect unsolvability of planning tasks up-front to
speed up calls to a planning module (Bäckström, Jonsson,
and Ståhlberg 2013; Moreira and Ralha 2017), and attempts
to compute or even learn heuristics (Hoffmann, Kissmann,
and Torralba 2014; Ståhlberg 2017; Ståhlberg, Francès, and
Seipp 2021) and produce certificates (Eriksson, Röger, and
Helmert 2017, 2018; Eriksson and Helmert 2020) for unsolvable tasks, to make this process as efficient as possible,
these do not help to fix the issues with the model that make it
unsolvable in the first place.
One of the seminal works in this category (Göbelbecker
et al. 2010) framed the problem as “excuse generation” where
the authors envisaged a reformulation of the input planning
task where if only (i.e. an excuse) certain things about the

