The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

UniADS: Universal Architecture-Distiller Search for Distillation Gap
Liming Lu1 * , Zhenghan Chen2 * , Xiaoyu Lu1† , Yihang Rao1 , Lujun Li3 , Shuchao Pang1,4†
1

School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Peking University
3
HKUST
4
School of Computing, Macquarie University
{luliming, xiaoyu.lu, pangshuchao}@njust.edu.cn, 1979282882@pku.edu.cn, lilujunai@gmail.com
Abstract
In this paper, we present UniADS, the first Universal
Architecture-Distiller Search framework for co-optimizing student architecture and distillation policies. Teacher-student distillation gap limits the distillation gains. Previous approaches
seek to discover the ideal student architecture while ignoring
distillation settings. In UniADS, we construct a comprehensive
search space encompassing an architectural search for student
models, knowledge transformations in distillation strategies,
distance functions, loss weights, and other vital settings. To
efficiently explore the search space, we utilize the NSGA-II
genetic algorithm for better crossover and mutation configurations and employ the Successive Halving algorithm for search
space pruning, resulting in improved search efficiency and
promising results. Extensive experiments are performed on
different teacher-student pairs using CIFAR-100 and ImageNet
datasets. The experimental results consistently demonstrate
the superiority of our method over existing approaches. Furthermore, we provide a detailed analysis of the search results,
examining the impact of each variable and extracting valuable insights and practical guidance for distillation design and
implementation.

Figure 1: Brief overview of our UniADS. UniADS co-search
student architecture in depth & width and distillation settings,
including transform, distance, and loss weights to alleviate
distillation gaps.

Introduction
Knowledge distillation (KD) methods (Hinton, Vinyals, and
Dean 2015; Romero et al. 2015) have emerged as powerful
techniques for model compression and transfer learning in
the field of deep learning. These methods aim to transfer
knowledge from a large, well-performing model, known as
the teacher model, to a smaller, more compact model, referred
to as the student model. By distilling the knowledge from the
teacher model, these methods offer a pathway to achieve high
accuracy while reducing the computational complexity and
memory requirements of deep neural networks, making them
more suitable for resource-constrained environments. Despite
the progress made in KD designs, the distillation gap (Huang
et al. 2022; Mirzadeh et al. 2020) between teacher and student models limits the improvement. While KDs have shown
promise in transferring knowledge from large teacher models
to smaller student models, the effectiveness of this process is
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14167

hindered by the inherent disparity between the two models.
Larger and more accurate teacher models often exhibit overconfidence and struggle to improve the performance of the
student models effectively (Zhou et al. 2021). This distillation gap poses a challenge in achieving optimal knowledge
transfer and limits the overall performance gains.
To address this issue, existing methods have explored alternative approaches, such as assistant models (Mirzadeh et al.
2020) and distillation-aware architecture search (Liu et al.
2020). Assistant models attempt to bridge the gap by introducing an additional model into the distillation process. This
model acts as an intermediary between the teacher and student models, helping to facilitate knowledge transfer. However, the use of assistant models often requires additional
training budgets and can result in increased computational
costs. Another approach to mitigate the distillation gap is
architecture search, which focuses on discovering optimal
student architectures specifically for knowledge distillation.
These methods aim to improve the knowledge transfer process and reduce the disparity between teacher and student
models by searching for architectures that are well-suited
for distillation. These approaches often use strategies like
reinforcement learning, evolutionary algorithms, or Bayesian
optimization to search for architectures that maximize the
performance of the student model under the distillation frame-

