The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Expressive Multi-Agent Communication via Identity-Aware Learning
Wei Du1 , Shifei Ding1,2,* , Lili Guo1,2 , Jian Zhang1,2 , Ling Ding3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou 221116, China
Mine Digitization Engineering Research Center of Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China, Xuzhou
221116, China
3
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300350, China
1394471165@qq.com, dingsf@cumt.edu.cn, liliguo@cumt.edu.cn, zhangjian10231209@cumt.edu.cn, dltjdx2022@tju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Information sharing through communication is essential for
tackling complex multi-agent reinforcement learning tasks.
Many existing multi-agent communication protocols can be
viewed as instances of message passing graph neural networks (GNNs). However, due to the significantly limited
expressive ability of the standard GNN method, the agent
feature representations remain similar and indistinguishable
even though the agents have different neighborhood structures. This further results in the homogenization of agent behaviors and reduces the capability to solve tasks effectively.
In this paper, we propose a multi-agent communication protocol via identity-aware learning (IDEAL), which explicitly
enhances the distinguishability of agent feature representations to break the diversity bottleneck. Specifically, IDEAL
extends existing multi-agent communication protocols by inductively considering the agents’ identities during the message passing process. To obtain expressive feature representations for a given agent, IDEAL first extracts the ego network
centered around that agent and then performs multiple rounds
of heterogeneous message passing, where different parameter
sets are applied to the central agent and the other surrounding
agents within the ego network. IDEAL fosters more expressive communication between agents and generates more distinguishable feature representations, which promotes action
diversity and individuality emergence. Experimental results
on various benchmarks demonstrate IDEAL can be flexibly
integrated into various multi-agent communication methods
and enhances the corresponding performance.

A

B

Figure 1: An example on the football game.

2016) and CommNet (Sukhbaatar, Fergus, and et al. 2016),
how to achieve efficient multi-agent communication learning has been a popular research area.
Recently, graph neural network (GNN) has been developed as an efficient representation learning method, which
can process the topological information and attribute information of the graph-structured data to feature representation learning for the final tasks. GNN has been widely employed in constructing multi-agent communication. In this
context, agents are typically represented as nodes within a
graph, where the communication channels between them
are depicted as edges. Many state-of-the-art MARL methods
fall into this GNN-based communication paradigm, including CommNet (Sukhbaatar, Fergus, and et al. 2016), IC3Net
(Singh, Jain, and Sukhbaatar 2019), TarMAC (Das, Gervet,
and Romoff 2019), MAGIC (Niu, Paleja, and Gombolay
2021), DGN (Jiang, Dun, and Huang 2020), LSC (Sheng
et al. 2022), DICG (Li et al. 2021), G2ANet (Liu, Wang,
and Hu 2020). Other MARL methods such as DIAL (Foerster et al. 2016), and SchedNet (Kim et al. 2019) do not fall
within the GNN-based communication paradigm as they utilize a fixed message-passing structure (Morris, Barrett, and
Pretorius 2022).
However, recent studies have demonstrated that the expressive capabilities of these traditional GNNs are upperbounded by the 1-WL test (Morris et al. 2019), further limiting the expressivity of multi-agent communication constructed using them. Specifically, in the context of multiagent communication utilizing current GNNs, a significant
limitation arises where agents with distinct neighborhood

Introduction
Communication is crucial for multi-agent systems as each
individual typically has limited visibility or capabilities of
the environment. Through effective communication, humans
are able to function as a team rather than a mere collection
of individuals. To emulate the human team, multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has investigated to develop
agents that can autonomously learn to coordinate to solve
complex tasks in real-world environments. Multiple agents
must consider the behaviors of other agents, making it vital
to allow agents to share information in MARL. Since the introduction of pioneering works such as DIAL (Foerster et al.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17354

