The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DLCA-Recon: Dynamic Loose Clothing Avatar Reconstruction from
Monocular Videos
Chunjie Luo, Fei Luo∗ , Yuseng Wang, Enxu Zhao, Chunxia Xiao*
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
luochunjie@whu.edu.cn, luofei@whu.edu.cn, wangyusen@whu.edu.cn, zhaoenxu@whu.edu.cn, cxxiao@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Reconstructing a dynamic human with loose clothing is an
important but difficult task. To address this challenge, we propose a method named DLCA-Recon to create human avatars
from monocular videos. The distance from loose clothing to
the underlying body rapidly changes in every frame when the
human freely moves and acts. Previous methods lack effective geometric initialization and constraints for guiding the
optimization of deformation to explain this dramatic change,
resulting in the discontinuous and incomplete reconstruction surface. To model the deformation more accurately, we
propose to initialize an estimated 3D clothed human in the
canonical space, as it is easier for deformation fields to learn
from the clothed human than from SMPL. With both representations of explicit mesh and implicit SDF, we utilize the
physical connection information between consecutive frames
and propose a dynamic deformation field (DDF) to optimize
deformation fields. DDF accounts for contributive forces on
loose clothing to enhance the interpretability of deformations
and effectively capture the free movement of loose clothing.
Moreover, we propagate SMPL skinning weights to each individual and refine pose and skinning weights during the optimization to improve skinning transformation. Based on more
reasonable initialization and DDF, we can simulate real-world
physics more accurately. Extensive experiments on public
and our own datasets validate that our method can produce
superior results for humans with loose clothing compared to
the SOTA methods.

Figure 1: A dynamic loose clothing avatar created by our
DLCA-Recon method from a monocular video.

Compared to close-fitting wear, it is more difficult to
reconstruct dynamic humans with loose clothing, due to
the high freedom of body motions, the appearance diversity, and the deformation randomness of loose clothes. Traditional methods based on explicit mesh are restricted by
fixed topologies and resolutions (Alldieck et al. 2018; Guo
et al. 2021). Recent methods based on the implicit neural representation for monocular human reconstruction have
achieved compelling results (Saito et al. 2019; Huang et al.
2020; He et al. 2020; Gropp et al. 2020; Zheng et al.
2021b; Xiu et al. 2022). These methods can handle arbitrary
topologies, enabling the representation of various clothing.
However, they require high-quality 3D supervision data and
NeRF-based methods usually produce noised geometry.
In addition, there are methods working in a frame-byframe manner, but they fail to recover invisible parts. Directly regressing 3D surfaces from images is an alternative
way (He et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2020; He et al. 2021; Peng
et al. 2021a,b; Weng et al. 2022; Li, Luo, and Xiao 2023;
Luo et al. 2023b). They struggle with out-of-distribution of
poses and shapes and cannot carry out temporally continuous 3D reconstructions. SelfRecon (Jiang et al. 2022a) combines explicit and implicit representation to reconstruct a
temporally consistent 3D clothed human from a video. But
it is restricted to tight clothing and self-rotation movement.
To create a spatio-temporally coherent 3D model for a human with loose clothing and free movement, we propose a
new method DLCA-Recon based on SelfRecon (Jiang et al.

Introduction
Reconstructing full-body 3D human models is an important
research topic in computer graphics. It has many applications in AR/VR (Bao et al. 2022; Cao et al. 2022, 2023),
virtual try-on, and video game industry. Traditionally, highfidelity human reconstruction requires multi-camera systems, controlled studios, and long-term works of talented
artists, making it expensive and highly specialized. Along
with the emergence of new applications like digit human in
the Metaverse, it demands lightweight and convenient reconstruction solutions to create 3D digital avatars for complex
human motions and diverse manners of dressing.
* Fei Luo and Chunxia Xiao are co-corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3963

