The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fully Data-Driven Pseudo Label Estimation for Pointly-Supervised Panoptic
Segmentation
Jing Li1,2,4 , Junsong Fan3 , Yuran Yang5 , Shuqi Mei5 , Jun Xiao1 , Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3,4 *
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS
4
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS)
5
Tencent Maps, Tencent
{lijing2018, junsong.fan}@ia.ac.cn, {yuranyang, shawnmei}@tencent.com, xiaojun@ucas.ac.cn, zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract
The core of pointly-supervised panoptic segmentation is estimating accurate dense pseudo labels from sparse point labels
to train the panoptic head. Previous works generate pseudo
labels mainly based on hand-crafted rules, such as connecting multiple points into polygon masks, or assigning the label information of labeled pixels to unlabeled pixels based
on the artificially defined traversing distance. The accuracy
of pseudo labels is limited by the quality of the hand-crafted
rules (polygon masks are rough at object contour regions, and
the traversing distance error will result in wrong pseudo labels). To overcome the limitation of hand-crafted rules, we
estimate pseudo labels with a fully data-driven pseudo label
branch, which is optimized by point labels end-to-end and
predicts more accurate pseudo labels than previous methods.
We also train an auxiliary semantic branch with point labels,
it assists the training of the pseudo label branch by transferring semantic segmentation knowledge through shared
parameters. Experiments on Pascal VOC and MS COCO
demonstrate that our approach is effective and shows stateof-the-art performance compared with related works. Codes
are available at https://github.com/BraveGroup/FDD.

Figure 1: Pseudo label estimation process comparison with
PanopticFCN(Li et al. 2022a) and PSPS(Fan, Zhang, and
Tan 2022). Both PanopticFCN and PSPS are based on handcrafted rules (connecting points into polygon masks, assigning labeled points to unlabeled pixels based on the artificially defined traversing distance), their pseudo label estimations are not supervised by point labels. Our model is based
on a fully data-driven pseudo label branch, this branch is
optimized by point labels end-to-end, our pseudo label estimations are supervised by point labels.

Introduction
Panoptic segmentation is a computer vision task that partitions an image into non-overlapping masks for both thing
objects and stuff categories (Kirillov et al. 2019b). With the
development of neural network technology (Zhiqiang Chen
2022; Mengya Han 2023; Jianing Han 2023; Jiaqi Li 2023;
Qi Zheng 2023; Guyue Hu 2023; Cheng-Cheng Ma 2023),
deep learning-based panoptic segmentation models have
shown promising performance, but their effectiveness relies
heavily on pixel-wise training labels, and annotating these
labels is time-consuming. The high annotation cost hinders
the widespread use of these methods in practical applications.
To reduce the heavy annotation burden, some works (Li,
Arnab, and Torr 2018; Shen et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022a;
Fan, Zhang, and Tan 2022) propose to train panoptic segmentation models with pixel-wise pseudo labels generated

from image tags, bounding boxes, and point labels. In these
works, image-tag based model (Shen et al. 2021) performs
much worse than those based on point or bounding box
labels and is still far from practical use. Box labels (Li,
Arnab, and Torr 2018) cannot be flexibly applied to uncountable stuff categories whose shapes are complex and various.
Point labels (Li et al. 2022a; Fan, Zhang, and Tan 2022) apply to both thing and stuff categories, and their annotation
cost can be adjusted by changing point numbers in different
datasets and tasks, thus attracting the most attention in recent
studies. In this paper, we focus on boosting the performance
of pointly-supervised panoptic segmentation model.
Since point labels are sparse, which means the size and
shape information of instances are missing, previous methods usually generate dense pseudo labels from point labels

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3127

