The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Mining Gaze for Contrastive Learning toward Computer-Assisted Diagnosis
Zihao Zhao1 * , Sheng Wang1,2,3 * , Qian Wang1,4 , Dinggang Shen1,3,4†
1

School of Biomedical Engineering & State Key Laboratory of Advanced Medical Materials and Devices,
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
Shanghai United Imaging Intelligence Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China
4
Shanghai Clinical Research and Trial Center, Shanghai, China
{zhaozh2022, qianwang, dgshen}@shanghaitech.edu.cn, wsheng@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
Gaze

Obtaining large-scale radiology reports can be difficult for
medical images due to various reasons, limiting the effectiveness of contrastive pre-training in the medical image domain
and underscoring the need for alternative methods. In this paper, we propose eye-tracking as an alternative to text reports,
as it allows for the passive collection of gaze signals without
disturbing radiologist’s routine diagnosis process. By tracking the gaze of radiologists as they read and diagnose medical images, we can understand their visual attention and clinical reasoning. When a radiologist has similar gazes for two
medical images, it may indicate semantic similarity for diagnosis, and these images should be treated as positive pairs
when pre-training a computer-assisted diagnosis (CAD) network through contrastive learning. Accordingly, we introduce
the Medical contrastive Gaze Image Pre-training (McGIP)
as a plug-and-play module for contrastive learning frameworks. McGIP uses radiologist’s gaze to guide contrastive
pre-training. We evaluate our method using two representative types of medical images and two common types of gaze
data. The experimental results demonstrate the practicality of
McGIP, indicating its high potential for various clinical scenarios and applications.

Positive Pair

Pull closer
Augmentation

Latent Space

Positive Pair

Figure 1: For contrastive pre-training, positive pairs are often only constructed between an image and its augmented
version. In our McGIP, the images with similar gaze patterns
when read by a radiologist are also considered as positive
pairs and be pulled closer in the latent space.

et al. 2021). For example, the Gaze Meets ML Workshop,
endorsed by MICCAI, was held in 2022 to explore the application of gaze data in medical image analysis (Organizers 2022). One advantage of eye tracker in clinical medical
imaging settings is that they do not require radiologists to
open additional software programs or tools. Instead, the eye
tracker can be easily attached beneath the monitor, allowing the radiologist to continue working with their existing
tools and software. This can save time and effort compared
to traditional annotation tools like drawing masks, circles,
or boxes, which require radiologists to switch between different programs and interfaces. Moreover, eye tracking can
provide additional data that cannot be captured by traditional
annotation tools, such as insight into the radiologist’s attentional processes and decision-making strategies.
In order to utilize these information in gaze, contrastive
learning is a natural framework to choose since it has already successfully mine information in many cross modality data (Radford et al. 2021). In contrastive pre-training, images sharing similar semantics should be considered positive
pairs, and vice versa. Conventional approaches (Chen et al.
2020) create positive pair by randomly augmenting an image twice as illustrated in Figure 1. 1) One straightforward
improvement to generate better positive pairs is to use radi-

Introduction
Gaze is a rich bio-signal that provides information on where
an individual’s eyes are directed. The collection of gaze
data has significantly advanced in recent years in terms of
ease, cost (typically under 300 USD), and speed (Elfares
et al. 2023; Uppal, Kim, and Singh 2023; Valliappan et al.
2020; Wan et al. 2021). Gaze data has been extensively researched and utilized across multiple fields, such as marketing (Wedel and Pieters 2017), robotics (Aronson and Admoni 2022; Aronson, Almutlak, and Admoni 2021; Palinko
et al. 2016; Biswas et al. 2022; Manzi et al. 2020), virtual
reality (Hu et al. 2019, 2021a; Matthews, Uribe-Quevedo,
and Theodorou 2020; Hu et al. 2021b; Hu 2020). In addition to these fields, eye tracking has also gained attention
in the medical imaging domain as a low-cost and convenient tool (Wang et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2023; Karargyris
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7543

