The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Pseudo-Label Calibration Semi-supervised Multi-Modal Entity Alignment
Luyao Wang, Pengnian Qi, Xigang Bao, Chunlai Zhou, Biao Qin*
School of Information, Renmin University of China
{wangluyao123, pengnianqi, baoxigang, czhou, qinbiao} @ruc.edu.cn

Abstract

richer information and modal-specific noise. For instance,
the entity /m/0r6c4 in FreeBase and the entity Mountain View, California in Dbpedia have similar relation (e.g.
“Time zone” vs. “timeZone”) and attribute (e.g. “population number” vs. “populationTotal”), all of which favor the
alignment of the two entities. But these entities may be incorrectly aligned due to significant visual differences. 2)
The exploration of optimal embedding methods for each
modality is often neglected. For example, “longitude” and
“wgs84 pos#long” represent the full name and abbreviation,
and the bag-of-words method might maximize similarity.
Conversely, embedding by the pre-trained language model
might be better for the case where “birthplace” and “people born here” are different phrases with the same meaning.
In addition, most existing methods exploit embedding-based
approaches relying heavily on human labeling. However, 3)
the design of the training strategy with limited labels has
been overlooked in MMEA. Many methods only use existing labels for supervised learning, neither fully utilizing unlabeled data nor preventing model bias.
Contributions: To address the abovementioned problems, we introduce PCMEA, a Pseudo-label Calibration
based semi-supervised MMEA framework. It has three main
components: PCMEA first utilizes diverse encoders and attention mechanisms to obtain modality-specific representations for each entity. To exploit complementarities across
modalities and filter out model-specific noise, PCMEA
then employs mutual information-enhanced cross-modality
alignment methods, which can enrich intra-modal interaction and avoid the influence of noise. To leverage labeled and
unlabeled data, PCMEA finally develops momentum-based
contrastive learning with pseudo-label calibration, which
can reduce error propagation and help to align entities. Experimental results show that our approach achieves state-ofthe-art performance on two MMEA benchmark datasets.

Multi-modal entity alignment (MMEA) aims to identify
equivalent entities between two multi-modal knowledge
graphs for integration. Unfortunately, prior arts have attempted to improve the interaction and fusion of multimodal information, which have overlooked the influence of
modal-specific noise and the usage of labeled and unlabeled
data in semi-supervised settings. In this work, we introduce
a Pseudo-label Calibration Multi-modal Entity Alignment
(PCMEA) in a semi-supervised way. Specifically, in order to
generate holistic entity representations, we first devise various embedding modules and attention mechanisms to extract
visual, structural, relational, and attribute features. Different
from the prior direct fusion methods, we next propose to exploit mutual information maximization to filter the modalspecific noise and to augment modal-invariant commonality.
Then, we combine pseudo-label calibration with momentumbased contrastive learning to make full use of the labeled and
unlabeled data, which improves the quality of pseudo-label
and pulls aligned entities closer. Finally, extensive experiments on two MMEA datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of our PCMEA, which yields state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
Multi-modal knowledge graphs (MMKGs) have drawn massive attention in various scenarios and motivated numerous
downstream applications (Sun et al. 2020a; Ding et al. 2022;
Shao et al. 2023). In MMKGs, knowledge is often summarized in various forms, such as relation triples, attribute
triples, and images. Generally, MMKGs are constructed for
specific purposes, leading to separate MMKGs with different descriptions for identical concepts. To improve the
completeness of MMKGs, multi-modal entity alignment
(MMEA) is an emerging tasks that link entities referring to
the same real-world concept.
Figure 1 illustrates a toy example in MMEA. Commonly, aligned entities share similarities in attributes, relations, topology, or visual information. Thus, recent works
(Chen et al. 2020; Lin et al. 2022) design interaction
and fusion methods to integrate multi-modal embeddings.
Nevertheless, 1) direct interaction and fusion introduce

Related Work
Entity alignment (EA) and multi-modal entity alignment. With developments in knowledge graph representation learning, embedding-based entity alignment has
emerged. Those embedding-based methods commonly have
two steps: 1)KG embedding module encodes the entities into
vectors according to the semantic or structural information;
2)entity alignment (Sun et al. 2020b) module captures the

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9116

