The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Novel Skip Orthogonal List for Dynamic Optimal Transport Problem
Xiaoyang Xu, Hu Ding*
School of Computer Science and Technology
University of Science and Technology of China
xiaoyangxu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, huding@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

as image registration (Haker et al. 2004), seismic tomography (Métivier et al. 2016), and machine learning (Torres,
Pereira, and Amini 2021). However, most of these applications only consider static scenario where the weights of the
datasets and the cost matrix remain constant. Yet, many realworld applications need to consider the dynamic scenarios:

Optimal transport is a fundamental topic that has attracted a
great amount of attention from the optimization community
in the past decades. In this paper, we consider an interesting discrete dynamic optimal transport problem: can we efficiently update the optimal transport plan when the weights or
the locations of the data points change? This problem is naturally motivated by several applications in machine learning.
For example, we often need to compute the optimal transport cost between two different data sets; if some changes
happen to a few data points, should we re-compute the high
complexity cost function or update the cost by some efficient
dynamic data structure? We are aware that several dynamic
maximum flow algorithms have been proposed before, however, the research on dynamic minimum cost flow problem is
still quite limited, to the best of our knowledge. We propose a
novel 2D Skip Orthogonal List together with some dynamic
tree techniques. Although our algorithm is based on the conventional simplex method, it can efficiently find the variable
to pivot within expected O(1) time, and complete each pivoting operation within expected O(|V |) time where V is the
set of all supply and demand nodes. Since dynamic modifications typically do not introduce significant changes, our
algorithm requires only a few simplex iterations in practice.
So our algorithm is more efficient than re-computing the optimal transport cost that needs at least one traversal over all
|E| = O(|V |2 ) variables, where |E| denotes the number of
edges in the network. Our experiments demonstrate that our
algorithm significantly outperforms existing algorithms in the
dynamic scenarios.

• Dataset Similarity. In data analysis, measuring the similarity between datasets is a crucial task, and optimal
transport has emerged as a powerful tool for this purpose (Alvarez-Melis and Fusi 2020). Real-world datasets
are often dynamic, with data points being replaced,
weights adjusted, or new data points added over time.
Therefore, it is necessary to take these dynamically
changes into account.
• Time Series Analysis. Optimal transport can serve as a
metric in time series analysis (Cheng et al. 2021). The
main intuition lies in the smooth transition of states between time points in a time series. The smoothness implies the potential to iteratively refine a new solution
based on the previous one, circumventing the need for
a complete recomputation.
• Neuroimage analysis (Gramfort, Peyré, and Cuturi
2015; Janati et al. 2019). In the medical imaging applications, we may want to compute the change trend of a patient’s organ (e.g., the MRI images of human brain over
several months), and the differences are measured by the
optimal transport cost. Since the changes are often local
and small, we may hope to apply some efficient method
to quickly update the cost over the period.

Introduction

Denote by V and E the sets of vertices and edges in the
bipartite network, respectively. Existing methods, such as
the Sinkhorn algorithm (Cuturi 2013) and the Network Simplex algorithm (Orlin 1997), are not adequate to handle the
dynamic scenarios. Upon any modification to the cost matrix, the Sinkhorn algorithm requires at least one SinkhornKnopp iteration to regularize the entire the solution matrix,
while the Network Simplex algorithm needs to traverse all
edges at least once. Consequently, the time complexities of
2
these algorithms for the dynamic model are Ω(|V | ) in general cases.
Our algorithm takes a novel data structure that yields an
O(s|V |) time solution for handling evolving datasets, where
s is determined by the magnitude of the modification. In

The discrete optimal transport (OT) problem involves finding the optimal transport plan “X” that minimizes the total cost of transporting one weighted dataset A to another
B, given a cost matrix “C” (Peyré, Cuturi et al. 2019). The
datasets A and B respectively represent the supply and demand node sets, and the problem can be represented as a
minimum cost flow problem by adding the edges between
A and B to create a biclique. The discrete optimal transport problem finds numerous applications in the areas such
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20838

