The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improving Factual Error Correction by Learning to Inject Factual Errors
Xingwei He1 , Qianru Zhang1 , A-Long Jin1 , Jun Ma1 , Yuan Yuan2,3,4 * , Siu Ming Yiu1 *
1

2

The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Software, Development Environment
4
Zhongguancun Laboratory
hexingwei15@gmail.com, qrzhang@cs.hku.hk, ajin@eee.hku.hk,
junma@hku.hk, yuan21@buaa.edu.cn, smyiu@cs.hku.hk
Mask-then-correct

Abstract

Identify
Factual Errors The Second Punic
War ended in # BC.
The Second Punic
Masker
War ended in 301
The Second Punic
BC.
War # in 301 BC.

Corrector

The Second Punic
War ended in 201
BC.
The Second
Punic War ended
in 301 BC.

Corruptor

The Second Punic
War began in 201
BC.
The Second Punic
War ended in 218
BC.

False Claim

Factual error correction (FEC) aims to revise factual errors
in false claims with minimal editing, making them faithful
to the provided evidence. This task is crucial for alleviating the hallucination problem encountered by large language
models. Given the lack of paired data (i.e., false claims and
their corresponding correct claims), existing methods typically adopt the ‘mask-then-correct’ paradigm. This paradigm
relies solely on unpaired false claims and correct claims,
thus being referred to as distantly supervised methods. These
methods require a masker to explicitly identify factual errors
within false claims before revising with a corrector. However,
the absence of paired data to train the masker makes accurately pinpointing factual errors within claims challenging.
To mitigate this, we propose to improve FEC by Learning to
Inject Factual Errors (LIFE), a three-step distantly supervised
method: ‘mask-corrupt-correct’. Specifically, we first train a
corruptor using the ‘mask-then-corrupt’ procedure, allowing
it to deliberately introduce factual errors into correct text. The
corruptor is then applied to correct claims, generating a substantial amount of paired data. After that, we filter out lowquality data, and use the remaining data to train a corrector.
Notably, our corrector does not require a masker, thus circumventing the bottleneck associated with explicit factual error identification. Our experiments on a public dataset verify
the effectiveness of LIFE in two key aspects: Firstly, it outperforms the previous best-performing distantly supervised
method by a notable margin of 10.59 points in SARI Final
(19.3% improvement). Secondly, even compared to ChatGPT
prompted with in-context examples, LIFE achieves a superiority of 7.16 points in SARI Final.

Mask-then-corrupt
The Second Punic
War ended in 201
BC.
Correct Claim

The Second Punic
War # in 201 BC.
Masker
The Second Punic
Create
War ended in # BC.
Masked Text

Figure 1: Comparison between the ‘mask-then-correct’ and
‘mask-then-corrupt’ pipelines during inference. Text in blue
and red denotes the factual errors and correct revision, respectively. # refers to the mask token. We omit evidence retrieval for simplicity.

widespread attention due to its capacity to generate coherent
and contextually appropriate responses across various conversational contexts. However, LLMs are prone to hallucinate unintended text, namely generating unfaithful, nonsensical, or factually incorrect text, a phenomenon referred to as
‘hallucination’ (Maynez et al. 2020; Raunak, Menezes, and
Junczys-Dowmunt 2021). Factual error correction (FEC) is
meant to correct factual errors within the text to make the
output factually consistent with the input. This task is crucial for alleviating the hallucination problem, as FEC models can be employed to post-edit text generated by LLMs,
thereby enhancing their reliability and faithfulness.
The most effective and straightforward approach is to
develop fully supervised FEC models by fine-tuning pretrained models, such as T5 (Raffel et al. 2020) on parallel
data, which consists of false claims and their corresponding correct claims. However, it is very labor-intensive and
time-consuming to create parallel data for FEC with human
annotation, thus limiting the availability of such paired data.
Therefore, previous methods (Shah, Schuster, and Barzilay
2020; Thorne and Vlachos 2021; Chen et al. 2023) have
focused on developing FEC models in a distantly supervised manner, based on the assumption that unpaired false
claims and correct claims are readily available. Distantly supervised models generally adhere to the ‘mask-then-correct’
paradigm. To be concrete, during training, a masker is used

Introduction
As is well known, large language models (LLMs), such as
GPT-3 (Brown et al. 2020), PaLM(Chowdhery et al. 2022),
and LLaMA (Touvron et al. 2023), have revolutionized NLP,
which possess an extensive number of parameters and undergo pre-training on vast amounts of data. Compared with
small language models, LLMs present emergent abilities
(Wei et al. 2022a), including in-context learning and reasoning (Wei et al. 2022b) capabilities. A representative of
LLMs is the recently launched ChatGPT, which has attracted
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18197

