The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Probabilities of Causation with Nonbinary Treatment and Effect
Ang Li1 , Judea Pearl2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Florida State University
Cognitive Systems Laboratory, Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
angli@cs.fsu.edu, judea@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Probabilities of causation are proven to be critical in modern
decision-making. This paper deals with the problem of estimating the probabilities of causation when treatment and effect are
not binary. Pearl defined the binary probabilities of causation,
such as the probability of necessity and sufficiency (PNS), the
probability of sufficiency (PS), and the probability of necessity
(PN). Tian and Pearl then derived sharp bounds for these probabilities of causation using experimental and observational
data. In this paper, we define and provide theoretical bounds
for all types of probabilities of causation with multivalued
treatments and effects. We further discuss examples where our
bounds guide practical decisions and use simulation studies
to evaluate how informative the bounds are for various data
combinations.

Introduction
In many areas of industry, marketing, and health science, the
probabilities of causation are widely used to solve decisionmaking problems. For example, Li and Pearl (Li and Pearl
2019) proposed the “benefit function”, which is the payoff/cost associated with selecting an individual with given
characteristics to identify a set of individuals who are most
likely to exhibit a desired mode of behavior. In Li and Pearl’s
paper, the benefit function is a linear combination of the probabilities of causation with binary treatment and effect. For
another example, Mueller and Pearl (Mueller and Pearl 2022)
demonstrated that the probabilities of causation should be
considered in personalized decision-making.
Consider the following motivating scenario: an elderly patient with cancer is faced with the choice of treatment to
pursue. The options include surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation. The outcomes include ineffective, cured, and death.
Given that the elderly patient has a high risk of death from
cancer surgery, the patient wants to know the probability that
he would be cured if he chose radiation, would die if he chose
surgery, and nothing would change if he chose chemotherapy.
Let X denotes the treatment, where x1 denotes surgery, x2
denotes chemotherapy, and x3 denotes radiation. Let Y denotes the outcome, where y1 denotes ineffective, y2 denotes
cured, and y3 denotes death. The probability that the patient
desires is the probability of causation, P (y3 x1 , y1 x2 , y2 x3 ).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20465

Pearl (Pearl 1999) first defined three binary probabilities
of causation (i.e., PNS, PN, and PS) using structural causal
model (SCM) (Galles and Pearl 1998; Halpern 2000; Pearl
2009). Tian and Pearl (Tian and Pearl 2000) then used observational and experimental data to bound those three probabilities of causation. Li and Pearl (Li and Pearl 2019, 2022b)
provided formal proof of those bounds. Mueller, Li, and Pearl
(Mueller, Li, and Pearl 2022) recently proposed using covariate information and the causal structure to narrow the bounds
of the probability of necessity and sufficiency. Dawid et al.
(Dawid, Musio, and Murtas 2017) also proposed using covariate information to narrow the bounds of the probability
of necessity.
All the above-mentioned studies are restricted to binary
treatment and effect, limiting the application of probabilities
of causation. One can easily extend Tian and Pearl’s bounds
(Tian and Pearl 2000) to a non-binary situation by applying Balke’s linear programming again. However, the vertex
enumeration algorithm within Balke’s linear programming
(Balke 1995), involving an exponential number of variables,
renders the task impractical.
Zhang, Tian, and Bareinboim (Zhang, Tian, and Bareinboim 2022), as well as Li and Pearl (Li and Pearl 2022a),
proposed nonlinear programming-based solutions to compute the bounds of nonbinary probabilities of causation numerically. However, the theoretical foundation of nonbinary
probabilities of causation is still required, not only because
numerical methods are limited by computational power but
also because people are interested in the theoretical foundation due to further development and analysis. In this paper,
we will introduce the theoretical bounds of any probabilities
of causation defined using SCM without restricting them to
binary treatment and effect.

Preliminaries
In this section, we review the definitions for the three aspects
of binary causation, as defined in (Pearl 1999). We use the
language of counterfactuals in SCM, as defined in (Galles
and Pearl 1998; Halpern 2000).
We use Yx = y to denote the counterfactual sentence
“Variable Y would have the value y, had X been x”. For
the remainder of the paper, we use yx to denote the event
Yx = y, yx′ to denote the event Yx′ = y, yx′ to denote the
event Yx = y ′ , and yx′ ′ to denote the event Yx′ = y ′ . We

