The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

StyleSinger: Style Transfer for Out-of-Domain Singing Voice Synthesis
Yu Zhang1 , Rongjie Huang1 , Ruiqi Li1 , JinZheng He1 , Yan Xia1 , Feiyang Chen2 , Xinyu Duan2 ,
Baoxing Huai2 , Zhou Zhao1 *
1

Zhejiang University
2
Huawei Cloud
{yuzhang34,rongjiehuang,ruiqili,jinzhenghe,zhaozhou}@zju.edu.cn, xiayan.zju@gmail.com,
{chenfeiyang2,duanxinyu,huaibaoxing}@huawei.com
Abstract

Acoustic Model

Style transfer for out-of-domain (OOD) singing voice synthesis (SVS) focuses on generating high-quality singing voices
with unseen styles (such as timbre, emotion, pronunciation,
and articulation skills) derived from reference singing voice
samples. However, the endeavor to model the intricate nuances of singing voice styles is an arduous task, as singing
voices possess a remarkable degree of expressiveness. Moreover, existing SVS methods encounter a decline in the quality
of synthesized singing voices in OOD scenarios, as they rest
upon the assumption that the target vocal attributes are discernible during the training phase. To overcome these challenges, we propose StyleSinger, the first singing voice synthesis model for zero-shot style transfer of out-of-domain reference singing voice samples. StyleSinger incorporates two
critical approaches for enhanced effectiveness: 1) the Residual Style Adaptor (RSA) which employs a residual quantization module to capture diverse style characteristics in singing
voices, and 2) the Uncertainty Modeling Layer Normalization (UMLN) to perturb the style attributes within the content
representation during the training phase and thus improve the
model generalization. Our extensive evaluations in zero-shot
style transfer undeniably establish that StyleSinger outperforms baseline models in both audio quality and similarity to
the reference singing voice samples. Access to singing voice
samples can be found at https://stylesinger.github.io/.

Note/Lyric

Vocoder

Pitch/Mel-Spectrogram

Singing Voice

a) Singing Voice Synthesis

b) Tenor

c) Alto

Figure 1: Figure (a) shows the singing voice synthesis overall pipeline. SVS systems use an acoustic model to transform musical notations and lyrics into intermediate features
(like pitch and mel-spectrograms), and then a vocoder synthesizes the target singing voices. In this paper, our method
mainly focuses on the acoustic model. Figures (b) and (c) depict the constituent elements of singing voice styles, namely
pronunciation and articulation skills. Red boxed showcases
pitch transitions and yellow boxes highlight the vibrato skill.

Introduction
Singing voice synthesis (SVS) is dedicated to generating
high-quality singing voices through the utilization of lyrics
and musical notations. This domain has witnessed significant advancements, finding crucial applications in both the
realm of professional music composition and entertainment
short videos. Currently, numerous outstanding SVS techniques demonstrate remarkable efficacy in synthesizing exceptional results (Zhang et al. 2022b; Choi and Nam 2022;
Kim et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2022a, 2021; He et al. 2023).
With the rapid development of SVS methods, there is a
growing demand for out-of-domain (OOD) style transfer in
singing voices, which seeks to generate high-quality singing
voices with unseen styles derived from reference singing
voice samples. To be more specific, styles of singing voices

primarily include timbre, emotion, pronunciation, and articulation skills. Timbre represents the fundamental and distinctive quality of a singer’s voice, while emotion captures
the expressive and emotional delivery conveyed during a
performance. As shown in Figure 1(b) and (c), pronunciation and articulation skills involve various techniques such
as vibrato, pitch transitions, and enunciation skills. However, current SVS systems lack the necessary techniques to
effectively model the intricate styles of singing voices. Consequently, existing SVS methods encounter a decline in the
quality of synthesized samples in OOD scenarios, as they
rest upon the assumption that the target vocal attributes are
discernible during the training phase.
In essence, the challenges of the style transfer for OOD
SVS can be summarized as follows: 1) Modeling the intricate nuances of singing voice styles is an arduous task, as

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19597

