The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TMPNN: High-Order Polynomial Regression Based on Taylor Map Factorization
Andrei Ivanov1 , Stefan Ailuro2
1

Independent Researcher, Toronto, Canada
Independent Researcher, Moscow, Russia
05x.andrey@gmail.com, ailuro.sm@gmail.com
2

Abstract

when extrapolating far enough from training. Tree-based
methods presume the output will be constant values if predictions are made outside the range of the original set. Various techniques, such as kernel-based modified GPR (Wilson and Adams 2013) or regression-enhanced RFR (Zhang,
Nettleton, and Zhu 2019), are introduced to improve the
extrapolation property of these models. The state-of-theart models for regression problem (1) are CatBoost as a
boosting method on decision trees (Dorogush, Ershov, and
Gulin 2018), TabNet for deep NN (Arik and Pfister 2021),
and DNNR for Differential Nearest Neighbors Regression
(Nader, Sixt, and Landgraf 2022).
The paper introduces a new regression model based on
the Taylor map factorization that can be implemented as a
polynomial neural network (PNN) with shared weights. The
earliest and most relevant to our research is the paper of authors (López, Huerta, and Dorronsoro 1993), where the connection between the system of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) and polynomial neural network (PNN) is introduced. Further, the PNN architectures were also widely
highlighted in the literature (Oh, Pedrycz, and Park 2003).
(Zjavka 2011) proposes a polynomial neural architecture approximating differential equations. The Legendre polynomials are chosen as a basis by (Yang, Hou, and Luo 2018).
(Ivanov, Golovkina, and Iben 2020) suggest an algorithm for
translating ODEs to PNN without training. (Wu et al. 2022)
examined the extrapolation ability for PNNs in simple regression and more complicated computer vision problems.
(Fronk and Petzold 2023) applied PNN for learning ODEs.
Following these works, we propose an approach for the
general-purpose multi-target regression problem. In contrast to traditional techniques, where several single-output
models are either used independently or chained together
(Xioufis et al. 2012; Borchani et al. 2015), the proposed
model processes all targets simultaneously without splitting
them into different single-output models. Moreover, we contribute to the overall goal of transparent and safer machine
learning models in the following ways.

The paper presents Taylor Map Polynomial Neural Network (TMPNN), a novel form of very high-order polynomial regression, in which the same coefficients for a lowerto-moderate-order polynomial regression are iteratively reapplied so as to achieve a higher-order model without the number of coefficients to be fit exploding in the usual curse-ofdimensionality way. This method naturally implements multitarget regression and can capture internal relationships between targets. We also introduce an approach for model interpretation in the form of systems of differential equations.
By benchmarking on Feynman regression, UCI, Friedman1, and real-life industrial datasets, we demonstrate that the
proposed method performs comparably to the state-of-the-art
regression methods and outperforms them on specific tasks.

Introduction and Related Works
We consider the regression problem as finding the mapping
f for feature vector X = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) ∈ Rn of n input
real-valued variables to the dependent target vector Y =
(y1 , y2 , . . . , ym ) ∈ Rm of m output real-valued variables:
f : (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) → (y1 , y2 , . . . , ym ).

(1)

The first group of methods to solve this problem is based
on the regular polynomial regression
X
X
yl = w0 +
wi xi +
wij xi xj + . . .
(2)
i

i,j

To fit model (2) efficiently and reduce risk of overfitting,
most authors suggest either optimal strategies for the selection of the nonlinear terms (Davierwalla 1977; Dette
1995; Fan et al. 1997; Lewis 2007; Hofwing, Strömberg,
and Tapankov 2011; Pakdemirli 2016) or different factorization schemes (Rendle 2010; Freudenthaler, SchmidtThieme, and Rendle 2011; Blondel et al. 2016).
The second group of methods is machine learning (ML)
models like Support Vector Regression (SVR), Gaussian
Process Regression (GPR), Random Forest Regression
(RFR), or neural networks (NN). These black-box models
were initially developed for interpolation problems. GPR
with the Gaussian kernel regresses to the mean function

• We propose a new regression model at the intersection of
classical methods and deep PNN.
• The model is theoretically grounded and closely relates
to the theory of ODEs, which opens up the possibility of
model interpretation and analysis.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12726

