The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Self-Prompt Mechanism for Few-Shot Image Recognition
Mingchen Song* , Huiqiang Wang* , Guoqiang Zhong†
College of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China
songmingchen@stu.ouc.edu.cn, wanghuiqiang@stu.ouc.edu.cn, gqzhong@ouc.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-shot learning poses a formidable challenge as it necessitates effective recognition of novel classes based on a
limited set of examples. Recent studies have sought to address the challenge of rare samples by tuning visual features through the utilization of external text prompts. However, the performance of these methods is constrained due
to the inherent modality gap between the prompt text and
image features. Instead of naively utilizing the external semantic information generated from text to guide the training of the image encoder, we propose a novel self-prompt
mechanism (SPM) to adaptively adjust the neural network
according to unseen data. Specifically, SPM involves a systematic selection of intrinsic semantic features generated by
the image encoder across spatial and channel dimensions,
thereby engendering self-prompt information. Subsequently,
upon backpropagation of this self-prompt information to the
deeper layers of the neural network, it effectively steers the
network toward the learning and adaptation of new samples. Meanwhile, we propose a novel parameter-efficient tuning method that exclusively fine-tunes the parameters relevant to self-prompt (prompts are no more than 2% of the
total parameters), and the incorporation of additional learnable parameters as self-prompt ensures the retention of prior
knowledge through frozen encoder weights. Therefore, our
method is highly suited for few-shot recognition tasks that
require both information retention and adaptive adjustment
of network parameters with limited labeling data constraints.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed SPM in both 5-way 1-shot and 5-way 5-shot settings for standard single-domain and cross-domain few-shot
recognition datasets, respectively. Our code is available at
https://github.com/codeshop715/SPM.

Image
Encoder

Input image
bird

Limited by the modality gap

A photo
of a {bird}

Attention map

Text
Encoder

(a) Text semantic prompt guided feature extraction
Self-prompt
Generation

Image
Encod
Encoder
er
bias
Input image

Attention map
(b) Self-prompt guided feature extraction

Figure 1: Semantic prompt and self-prompt mechanism for
few-shot image recognition. (a): The semantic prompt methods require additional text information and text encoder
to generate the external prompts. (b): Our proposed selfprompt mechanism does not necessitate additional information, and only a tiny amount of parameters need to be finetuned to generate prompts derived from the intrinsic semantic information of the image encoder.
intelligence and learning machines by addressing the challenge of learning from a limited amount of labeled training data and generalizing to unseen data. Few-shot image
recognition is indeed an extensive research task in the field
of few-shot learning algorithms. The objective of few-shot
image recognition is to develop models that can effectively
adapt to recognize and classify unseen classes with limited
sample data. This task is particularly challenging as it requires learning discriminative features from a few labeled
data (Zhang et al. 2022; Afrasiyabi et al. 2022).
Due to the scarcity of labeled samples in new classes, a
simple method is to utilize information from other modalities as auxiliary guidance. Recently, with the introduction
of the CLIP model (Radford et al. 2021), a series of text-

Introduction
Despite the significant advancements achieved by deep
learning in computer vision, it typically relies on a vast
number of labeled samples, which deviates from the human learning process. Few-shot learning (Finn, Abbeel, and
Levine 2017; Munkhdalai et al. 2018; Antoniou, Edwards,
and Storkey 2018) aims to bridge the gap between human
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4934

