The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploring Domain Incremental Video Highlights Detection
with the LiveFood Benchmark
Sen Pei1 , Shixiong Xu2 , and Xiaojie Jin1 *
1

ByteDance Inc.
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{peisen, jinxiaojie}@bytedance.com, xushixiong2020@ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Video highlights detection (VHD) is an active research field
in computer vision, aiming to locate the most user-appealing
clips given raw video inputs. However, most VHD methods are based on the closed world assumption, i.e., a fixed
number of highlight categories is defined in advance and all
training data are available beforehand. Consequently, existing methods have poor scalability with respect to increasing highlight domains and training data. To address above issues, we propose a novel video highlights detection method
named Global Prototype Encoding (GPE) to learn incrementally for adapting to new domains via parameterized prototypes. To facilitate this new research direction, we collect
a finely annotated dataset termed LiveFood, including over
5,100 live gourmet videos that consist of four domains: ingredients, cooking, presentation, and eating. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first work to explore video highlights detection in the incremental learning setting, opening
up new land to apply VHD for practical scenarios where both
the concerned highlight domains and training data increase
over time. We demonstrate the effectiveness of GPE through
extensive experiments. Notably, GPE surpasses popular domain incremental learning methods on LiveFood, achieving
significant mAP improvements on all domains. Concerning
the classic datasets, GPE also yields comparable performance
as previous arts. The code is available at: https://github.com/
ForeverPs/IncrementalVHD GPE.

Figure 1: The LiveFood dataset. The row from top to bottom
illustrates examples of vanilla clips, ingredients, and presentation. More samples are attached in Appendix .
as stated in Rebuffi et al. (2017), natural vision systems are
inherently incremental by consistently receiving new data
from different domains or categories. Taking the gourmet
video as an example, in the beginning, one may be attracted
by the clips of eating foods, but lately, he/she may raise new
interests in cooking and want to checkout the detailed cooking steps in the same video. This indicates that the target set
the model needs to handle is flexible in the open world. Under this practical setting, all existing VHD methods suffer
from the scalability issue: they are unable to predict both the
old and the newly added domains, unless they retrain models
on the complete dataset. Since the training cost on videos is
prohibitive, it is thus imperative to develop new methods to
deal with the above incremental learning issues.
Broadly speaking, there exist two major obstacles that
hinder the development of incremental VHD: a high-quality
VHD dataset with domain annotations and strong models
tailored for this task. Recall existing datasets that are widely
used in VHD research, including SumMe (Gygli et al. 2014),
TVSum (Song et al. 2015), Video2GIF (Gygli, Song, and
Cao 2016), PHD (Garcia del Molino and Gygli 2018), and
QVHighlights (Lei, Berg, and Bansal 2021), all of them
suffer from threefold drawbacks: (1) only the feature representations of video frames are accessible instead of the
raw videos, thus restricting the application of more powerful end-to-end models; (2) most datasets only have a limited number of videos with short duration and coarse annotations, which are insufficient for training deep models; (3)
none of them has the video highlight domain or category
labels, thus can not be directly used in incremental learn-

Introduction
The popularization of portable devices with cameras greatly
promotes the creation and broadcasting of online videos.
These sufficient video data serve as essential prerequisites
for relevant researches, e.g., video summarization (Potapov
et al. 2014; Song et al. 2015; Zhang, Grauman, and Sha
2018; Fajtl et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2021), video highlights
detection (VHD) (Yang et al. 2015; Xiong et al. 2019; Lei,
Berg, and Bansal 2021; Bhattacharya et al. 2021), and moment localization (Liu et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2020; Rodriguez et al. 2020), to name a few. Currently, most VHD
methods are developed under the closed world assumption,
which requires both the number of highlight domains and
the size of training data to be fixed in advance. However,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10155

