The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Abstract and Explore: A Novel Behavioral Metric with Cyclic Dynamics in
Reinforcement Learning
Anjie Zhu1 , Peng-Fei Zhang2 , Ruihong Qiu2 , Zetao Zheng1 , Zi Huang2 , Jie Shao1 *
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
2
The University of Queensland, Australia
{anjiezhu,ztzheng}@std.uestc.edu.cn, mima.zpf@gmail.com, r.qiu@uq.edu.au, huang@itee.uq.edu.au, shaojie@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

(UCB) (Lai and Robbins 1985) to more recent advancements
such as novelty (Burda et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2021b) and
uncertainty-oriented exploration (Osband et al. 2019; Moerland, Broekens, and Jonker 2017).
Among the recent methods, the dominant strategy is to
leverage the intrinsic motivation, which draws inspiration
from the innate inclination of humans when making decisions. The agent is motivated to seek out unfamiliar regions or discover new potentially rewarding experiences by
employing techniques. For example, through estimating the
prediction errors of the environmental dynamics (Pathak
et al. 2017), such incorrectly predicted regions are regarded
as unfamiliar ones. By estimating the count of the state visitation (Zhang et al. 2021b), those with a lower count are
qualified for the novel ones. Intrinsic motivation furnishes
qualitative guidance to the agent in their pursuit of exploring the environment autonomously and learning effectively.
While the intrinsic motivation has attracted significant attention from the research community, it becomes notably
intricate when being applied to procedurally-generated environments with stochasticity and uninformative rewards.
In this situation, two notable issues can be identified when
training an RL agent. (1) State representation collapse. Due
to the inherent stochasticity of the environment where every episode is randomly constructed, the agent would easily be confused with environmental variations such as different maze layouts and varying positions of key elements.
Unfortunately, previous methods may inadvertently capture
and emphasize on task-irrelevant (e.g., background objects)
or noisy information. In consequence, the agent is hard to
correctly discriminate the state representations and may perceive functionally distinct states as similar, leading to suboptimal decisions. (2) Insufficient interrelation among dynamics. The dynamics refers to the underlying transitions
between states and actions within the environment. Existing
methods often overlook the dependencies among the dynamics, which only focus on forward or inverse dynamics learning (Pathak et al. 2017). Besides stochasticity, unsuccessful
guidance stemming from almost zero or constant extrinsic
rewards also makes it more difficult to accurately model and
understand the complex relationship between states and actions. Without an accurate perception of the environmental
dynamics, the exploration and decision-making of the agent
may be ineffective.

Intrinsic motivation lies at the heart of the exploration of
reinforcement learning, which is primarily driven by the
agent’s inherent satisfaction rather than external feedback
from the environment. However, in recent more challenging
procedurally-generated environments with high stochasticity
and uninformative extrinsic rewards, we identify two significant issues of applying intrinsic motivation. (1) State representation collapse: In existing methods, the learned representations within intrinsic motivation have a high probability to neglect the distinction among different states and be
distracted by the task-irrelevant information brought by the
stochasticity. (2) Insufficient interrelation among dynamics:
Unsuccessful guidance provided by the uninformative extrinsic reward makes the dynamics learning in intrinsic motivation less effective. In light of the above observations, a novel
Behavioral metric with Cyclic Dynamics (BCD) is proposed,
which considers both cumulative and immediate effects and
facilitates the abstraction and exploration of the agent. For
the behavioral metric, the successor feature is utilized to reveal the expected future rewards and alleviate the heavy reliance of previous methods on extrinsic rewards. Moreover,
the latent variable and vector quantization techniques are employed to enable an accurate measurement of the transition
function in a discrete and interpretable manner. In addition,
cyclic dynamics is established to capture the interrelations between state and action, thereby providing a thorough awareness of environmental dynamics. Extensive experiments conducted on procedurally-generated environments demonstrate
the state-of-the-art performance of our proposed BCD.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a powerful
framework for training intelligent agents to make optimal
decisions in a wide range of real-world scenarios (Levine
et al. 2016; Kendall et al. 2019; Schrittwieser et al. 2020;
Afsar, Crump, and Far 2023). Within the realm of RL, exploration plays a vital role in encouraging the agent to uncover
and comprehend the environment with new experiences to
maximize long-term rewards, in addition to solely exploiting the current mastered knowledge. Researchers have proposed various exploration strategies, ranging from classical methods such as ϵ-greedy and upper confidence bounds
* Corresponding author: Jie Shao.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17150

