The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improving Audio-Visual Segmentation with Bidirectional Generation
Dawei Hao1 * , Yuxin Mao2,3 * , Bowen He4 , Xiaodong Han2 , Yuchao Dai3 , Yiran Zhong2†
1

Bilibili Inc., Shanghai, China
OpenNLPLab, Shanghai AI Lab, Shanghai, China
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Shaanxi, China
4
NIO, Shanghai, China
{howndawei, hannnnnkkf2511, daiyuchao, zhongyiran}@gmail.com,
maoyuxin@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, bowenhey@outlook.com
2

Abstract

In the realm of audio-visual learning, the quest to disentangle auditory entities within videos at the minutiae of pixel
level has given rise to the field of audio-visual segmentation (AVS). The pursuit of this goal has spurred the development of a myriad of techniques, often grounded in the fusion of multi-modal features, where the contribution of each
modality is implicitly or explicitly modeled. However, a notable weakness in current methodologies is the insufficient
attention given to the intricate relationship between various
modes in audio-visual modeling. This lacuna forms the focal
point of this paper.
Drawing inspiration from the remarkable human ability to
conjure auditory perceptions corresponding to visual stimuli
and vice versa, our study delves into a novel paradigm. However, directly replicating this procedure in a network, i.e.,
generating audio from object segmentation masks, is difficult because the network needs to have audio creation capability, which requires a substantial amount of data to earn.
Instead, we propose a bidirectional generation schema in
feature space, meticulously designed to forge robust correlations between the visual attributes of objects and their
corresponding auditory manifestations. Specifically, we utilize a visual-to-audio projection module to reconstruct audio
features from object segmentation masks and minimize reconstruction errors. This schema allows the model to build
a strong correlation between visual and audio signals. Furthermore, we recognize the profound relationship between
sound and motion and introduce an implicit volumetric motion estimation module to address motions that may be difficult to capture using optical flow approaches (Zhong et al.
2019; Wang et al. 2020; Zhong et al. 2022). We construct
a visual correlation pyramid for input video frames, make
use of the inter-frame motion information to smooth the significant angle motion, and get clearer masks for dynamic
objects.
To substantiate the efficacy of our novel framework, we
undertake an extensive series of experiments and rigorous
analyses on the AVSBench benchmark (Zhou et al. 2022).
Our efforts culminate in the establishment of unprecedented
benchmark performance, particularly within the challenging
MS3 subset. In the spirit of scientific transparency and reproducibility, we commit to releasing both the code and the
pre-trained models in the near future.
The key contributions of our work include:

The aim of audio-visual segmentation (AVS) is to precisely
differentiate audible objects within videos down to the pixel
level. Traditional approaches often tackle this challenge by
combining information from various modalities, where the
contribution of each modality is implicitly or explicitly modeled. Nevertheless, the interconnections between different
modalities tend to be overlooked in audio-visual modeling.
In this paper, inspired by the human ability to mentally simulate the sound of an object and its visual appearance, we
introduce a bidirectional generation framework. This framework establishes robust correlations between an object’s visual characteristics and its associated sound, thereby enhancing the performance of AVS. To achieve this, we employ a
visual-to-audio projection component that reconstructs audio
features from object segmentation masks and minimizes reconstruction errors. Moreover, recognizing that many sounds
are linked to object movements, we introduce an implicit volumetric motion estimation module to handle temporal dynamics that may be challenging to capture using conventional optical flow methods. To showcase the effectiveness
of our approach, we conduct comprehensive experiments and
analyses on the widely recognized AVSBench benchmark.
As a result, we establish a new state-of-the-art performance
level in the AVS benchmark, particularly excelling in the
challenging MS3 subset which involves segmenting multiple sound sources. Code is released in: https://github.com/
OpenNLPLab/AVS-bidirectional.

Introduction
The foundation of human perception heavily relies on sight
and hearing, which together absorb a substantial amount of
external information. Integrating audio and visual information in a collaborative manner plays a crucial role in enhancing human scene understanding capabilities. Our daily
experiences demonstrate that both auditory and visual cues
contribute to our understanding of the concepts of objects.
Therefore, audio-visual learning is essential in enabling machines to perceive the world through multi-modal information as humans do.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2067

