The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Union Subgraph Neural Networks
Jiaxing Xu* , Aihu Zhang* , Qingtian Bian, Vijay Prakash Dwivedi, Yiping Ke
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{jiaxing003,zhan0547,bian0027,vijaypra001}@e.ntu.edu.sg, ypke@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

With the ubiquity of graph-structured data emerging from
various modern applications, Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) have gained increasing attention from both researchers and practitioners. GNNs have been applied to
many application domains, including quantum chemistry
(Duvenaud et al. 2015; Dai, Dai, and Song 2016; Masters
et al. 2022), social science (Ying et al. 2018; Fan et al. 2019;
Shiao et al. 2022), transportation (Peng et al. 2020; DerrowPinion et al. 2021) and neuroscience (Ahmedt-Aristizabal
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021), and have attained promising results on graph classification (Ying et al. 2018; Masters

et al. 2022), node classification (Shi et al. 2020) and link
prediction (Zhang and Chen 2018; Suresh et al. 2023) tasks.
Most GNNs are limited in terms of their expressive
power. Xu et al., (Xu et al. 2018) show that GNNs are at
most as powerful as 1-dimentional Weisfeiler-Leman (1WL) test (Weisfeiler and Leman 1968) in distinguishing
non-isomorphic graph structures. This is because a vanilla
GNN essentially operates on a subtree rooted at each node in
its message passing, i.e., it treats every neighbor of the node
equally in its message aggregation. In this regard, it overlooks any discrepancy that may exist in the connectivities
between neighbors. To address this limitation, efforts have
been devoted to incorporating local substructure information to GNNs. Several studies attempt to encode such local
information through induced subgraphs (Zhao et al. 2021),
overlap subgraphs (Wijesinghe and Wang 2021) and spatial
encoding (Bouritsas et al. 2022), to enhance GNNs’ expressiveness. But the local structures they choose are not able
to capture the complete picture of the 1-hop neighborhood
of an edge. Some others incorporate shortest path information to edges in message passing via distance encoding (Li
et al. 2020), adaptive breath/depth functions (Liu et al. 2019)
and affinity matrix (Wan et al. 2021) to control the message from neighbors at different distances. However, the descriptor used to encode the substructure may overlook some
connectivities between neighbors. Furthermore, some of the
above models also suffer from high computational cost due
to the incorporation of certain substructures.
In this paper, we aim to develop a model that overcomes
the above drawbacks and yet is able to empower GNNs’
expressiveness. (1) We define a new type of substructures
named union subgraphs, each capturing the entire closed
neighborhood w.r.t. an edge. (2) We design an effective substructure descriptor that encodes high-order connectivities
and it is easy to incorporate with arbitrary message-passing
neural network (MPNN) or Transformer-based models. (3)
We propose a new model, namely Union Subgraph Neural Network (UnionSNN), which is strictly more expressive
than the vanilla GNNs (1-WL) in theory and also computationally efficient in practice. Our contributions are summarized as follows:

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We investigate different types of connectivities existing
in the local neighborhood and identify the substructure,
named “union subgraph”, that is able to capture the com-

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are widely used for graph
representation learning in many application domains. The
expressiveness of vanilla GNNs is upper-bounded by 1dimensional Weisfeiler-Leman (1-WL) test as they operate on
rooted subtrees through iterative message passing. In this paper, we empower GNNs by injecting neighbor-connectivity
information extracted from a new type of substructure. We
first investigate different kinds of connectivities existing in a
local neighborhood and identify a substructure called union
subgraph, which is able to capture the complete picture of the
1-hop neighborhood of an edge. We then design a shortestpath-based substructure descriptor that possesses three nice
properties and can effectively encode the high-order connectivities in union subgraphs. By infusing the encoded neighbor connectivities, we propose a novel model, namely Union
Subgraph Neural Network (UnionSNN), which is proven to
be strictly more powerful than 1-WL in distinguishing nonisomorphic graphs. Additionally, the local encoding from
union subgraphs can also be injected into arbitrary messagepassing neural networks (MPNNs) and Transformer-based
models as a plugin. Extensive experiments on 18 benchmarks of both graph-level and node-level tasks demonstrate
that UnionSNN outperforms state-of-the-art baseline models, with competitive computational efficiency. The injection
of our local encoding to existing models is able to boost
the performance by up to 11.09%. Our code is available at
https://github.com/AngusMonroe/UnionSNN.

1

Introduction

16173

