The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Impartial Adversarial Distillation: Addressing Biased Data-Free Knowledge
Distillation via Adaptive Constrained Optimization
Donping Liao1 * , Xitong Gao2 * , Chengzhong Xu1†
1

State Key Lab of IoTSC, Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, Macau SAR, China
2
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
yb97428@um.edu.mo, xt.gao@siat.ac.cn, czxu@um.edu.mo

Abstract

Fenu, and Starner 2017; Micaelli and Storkey 2019; Chen
et al. 2019; Fang et al. 2019) has emerged as an effective
tool to transfer knowledge without raw training data. An influx of new methods was proposed to address diversity (Fang
et al. 2021b; Han et al. 2021), fidelity (Yin et al. 2020)
and efficiency (Fang et al. 2022), among which adversarial
DFKD (Micaelli and Storkey 2019; Choi et al. 2020; Fang
et al. 2021b) has attracted particular interest. This approach
can not only enhance the performance of student by generating boundary-aware samples (Micaelli and Storkey 2019),
but it also improves the distillation efficiency compared with
class-wise data synthesis methods (Luo et al. 2020).
Nevertheless, existing works generally rely on a strong
assumption that the teacher is learned from a deliberately
or artificially balanced dataset. This assumption may be
very limited and unrealistic, as pretraining data in realistic
scenarios may have unknown marginal probabilities among
classes. For instance, a practical consideration is that largescale real-world data is likely imbalanced due to the difficulty to cover rare species, scarce scenarios and uncommon
events (He and Garcia 2009). Models learned on such data
are potentially biased, even with the help of re-balancing
techniques (Cui et al. 2019). Therefore, a pressing and practical problem that has been largely overlooked arises: How
can we transfer knowledge from a biased teacher without
access to the original training data?
In this paper, we push the frontier of DFKD by extending its applicability to this interesting but challenging setting. This problem presents an opportunity to harness the
power of DFKD in class-imbalanced learning, which has recently gained a surge of research interest (Zhang et al. 2021).
Yet from the optimization perspective, our work reveals that
dataset bias can have an unexpected and detrimental impact on DFKD. As evinced by our empirical and theoretical studies, due to the interplay between a biased teacher
and an adversarially-optimized generator, there can be a significant performance disparity among different classes for
the distilled student. Moreover, the goal of privacy protection in DFKD means that the original data distribution is not
available and may expose sensitive information about data
creators. Therefore, previous techniques used for data rebalancing that depend on such information are not directly
applicable.
To overcome these challenges, we propose impartial

Data-Free Knowledge Distillation (DFKD) enables knowledge transfer from a pretrained teacher to a light-weighted
student without original training data. Existing works are limited by a strong assumption that samples used to pretrain the
teacher model are balanced, which is, however, unrealistic for
many real-world tasks. In this work, we investigated a pragmatic yet under-explored problem: how to perform DFKD
from a teacher model pretrained from imbalanced data. We
observe a seemingly counter-intuitive phenomenon, i.e., adversarial DFKD algorithms favour minority classes, while
causing a disastrous impact on majority classes. We theoretically prove that a biased teacher could cause severe disparity on different groups of synthetic data in adversarial
distillation, which further exacerbates the mode collapse of
a generator and consequently degenerates the overall accuracy of a distilled student model. To tackle this problem,
we propose a class-adaptive regularization method, aiming
to encourage impartial representation learning of a generator
among different classes under a constrained learning formulation. We devise a primal-dual algorithm to solve the target optimization problem. Through extensive experiments,
we show that our method mitigates the biased learning of
majority classes in DFKD and improves the overall performance compared with baselines. Code will be available at
https://github.com/ldpbuaa/ipad.

Introduction
Large pretrained neural networks achieve unprecedented
success in many modern deep learning applications (He
et al. 2016; Kenton and Toutanova 2019). Despite the
ground-breaking performance, their over-parameterized and
compute-intensive nature hinder the application on resourceconstrained devices. This prompts the rapid advancement
of research on compressing a large-sized teacher to an efficient student (Hinton et al. 2015; Zhao et al. 2019; Gao
et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019). However, in many scenarios,
granting access to original training data is usually infeasible
due to privacy concerns (Taigman et al. 2014) or intellectual property protection (Wu et al. 2016). To address this
limitation, data-free knowledge distillation (DFKD) (Lopes,
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3342

