The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Defying Imbalanced Forgetting in Class Incremental Learning
Shixiong Xu1,2 , Gaofeng Meng1,2,3 * , Xing Nie1,2 , Bolin Ni1,2 , Bin Fan4 , Shiming Xiang1,2
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HK Institute of Science & Innovation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology, Beijing
{xushixiong2020, niexing2019, nibolin2019}@ia.ac.cn, bin.fan@ieee.org, {gfmeng, smxiang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Accuracy…of…each…class…(%)

1

Abstract
We observe a high level of imbalance in the accuracy of different classes in the same old task for the first time. This intriguing phenomenon, discovered in replay-based Class Incremental Learning (CIL), highlights the imbalanced forgetting of learned classes, as their accuracy is similar before the
occurrence of catastrophic forgetting. This discovery remains
previously unidentified due to the reliance on average incremental accuracy as the measurement for CIL, which assumes
that the accuracy of classes within the same task is similar.
However, this assumption is invalid in the face of catastrophic
forgetting. Further empirical studies indicate that this imbalanced forgetting is caused by conflicts in representation between semantically similar old and new classes. These conflicts are rooted in the data imbalance present in replay-based
CIL methods. Building on these insights, we propose CLassAware Disentanglement (CLAD) to predict the old classes
that are more likely to be forgotten and enhance their accuracy. Importantly, CLAD can be seamlessly integrated into
existing CIL methods. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that CLAD consistently improves current replay-based methods, resulting in performance gains of up to 2.56%.

JOINT
LUCIR
80

60

40

20

0

0

10

20

30

Sorted…classes

40

50

Figure 1: Demonstration of imbalanced forgetting. Visualization of the accuracy of each class in the first task obtained by joint training and LUCIR (Hou et al. 2019). The
class indexes are sorted according to the result from LUCIR
for better visualization.More illustrations of the above phenomenon with other methods can be found in the supplementary material.

buffer. During the training of subsequent tasks, these exemplars are reused in various ways to help preserve the learned
knowledge, such as joint training (Robins 1995; Riemer
et al. 2018), knowledge distillation (Hou et al. 2019; Rebuffi et al. 2017), gradient projection (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato 2017; Saha, Garg, and Roy 2021; Deng et al. 2021),
and bias correction (Hou et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2019; Zhao
et al. 2020; Prabhu, Torr, and Dokania 2020). It is important
to note that all these efforts primarily focus on tackling the
accuracy imbalance between old and new classes. However,
we argue that these efforts alone are insufficient to meet the
expectations of a classification model.
For the first time, we observed that the accuracy between
classes of the same old task is also highly imbalanced. It is
evident that imbalanced forgetting occurs during the learning of a new task, as their accuracy is similar just after
learning (as shown in Fig. 1 JOINT). This phenomenon remains undiscovered because the average incremental accuracy used for measuring CIL approaches assumes that the
accuracy of the classes within the same task is uniform.
Fig. 1 provides an example where the model is trained using a CIL setting that splits CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky et al.
2009) into six tasks, with 50 classes in the first task and

Introduction
In typical image recognition tasks, the data is assumed to
follow the independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.)
assumption. A good classification model is expected to have
similar and high accuracy across different classes. But in the
real world, the data is non-stationary. To address this issue,
Class Incremental Learning allows the model to continually
learn new classes without forgetting the previously learned
ones (Van de Ven and Tolias 2019). However, when sequential fine-tuning is performed on new classes without the presence of old data, there is a dramatic drop in accuracy for the
learned tasks, known as catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey
and Cohen 1989).
As the accuracy between the old and new classes is highly
imbalanced in CIL, numerous approaches have been proposed. Among them, exemplar replay has been proven to be
a simple yet effective strategy (Robins 1995; Rebuffi et al.
2017; Riemer et al. 2018; Buzzega et al. 2020). In exemplar replay, a subset of each class is selected and stored in a
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16211

