The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Semantic-Aware Autoregressive Image Modeling
for Visual Representation Learning
Kaiyou Song * , Shan Zhang, Tong Wang
Megvii Technology
{songkaiyou, zhangshan, wangtong}@megvii.com

Abstract

ratio on images to reduce spatial redundancy. MIM achieves a
better performance of self-supervised learning (SSL) in many
downstream tasks (Russakovsky et al. 2015; Lin et al. 2014;
Zhou et al. 2017) compared with other alternatives (He et al.
2020; Chen et al. 2020b; Chen, Xie, and He 2021; Caron et al.
2021). By contrast, the development of autoregressive image
modeling (AIM) lags behind MIM in computer vision due to
the significant difference between language and vision.
As discussed in (He et al. 2022), languages are humangenerated signals with high-level semantics and dense
information. They are sequential signals and provide a
natural order for applying autoregressive modeling. For
example, the "left-to-right" ALM used in GPT (Radford et al.
2018, 2019; Brown et al. 2020) shows a strong language
generation and understanding ability. On the contrary, images
are natural signals with heavy spatial redundancy. They are
not sequential signals and lack a natural order for applying
autoregressive modeling. Therefore, autoregressive image
modeling is not an effortless way compared to masked image
modeling. Several studies (Chen et al. 2020a; Hua et al.
2022; Qi et al. 2022) attempt to conduct autoregressive image
modeling for self-supervised learning. They propose to use
raster order image pixels (Chen et al. 2020a) and stochastic
order image patches (Hua et al. 2022; Qi et al. 2022) for
autoregressive modeling. However, we argue that raster
and stochastic orders are not ideal for visual representation
learning since they are inconsistent with the human visual
mechanisms of grasping an image. According to the attention
mechanism of the human visual system, human beings always
selectively attend to the most informative parts of visual
stimuli (Eriksen and Hoffman 1972; Koch et al. 2006).
Specifically, they first focus on the main object or the object
they are interested in, then focus on other contents in images,
such as the background and other objects. This attention
mechanism makes human beings grasp an image quickly.
Can we apply autoregressive image modeling by mimicking human visual mechanisms of grasping an image
(i.e., focusing on the main object first). In this study, we
design a semantic-aware autoregressive image modeling
(SemAIM) method to answer this question. The core concept
of SemAIM is to model images from the semantic patches
to the less semantic patches autoregressively. To achieve this
goal, we first calculate a semantic-aware order of patches
according to their feature similarities and then perform

The development of autoregressive modeling (AM) in computer vision lags behind natural language processing (NLP)
in self-supervised pre-training. This is mainly caused by the
challenge that images are not sequential signals and lack a
natural order when applying autoregressive modeling. In this
study, inspired by human beings’ way of grasping an image,
i.e., focusing on the main object first, we present a semanticaware autoregressive image modeling (SemAIM) method
to tackle this challenge. The key insight of SemAIM is to
autoregressive model images from the semantic patches to the
less semantic patches. To this end, we first calculate a semanticaware permutation of patches according to their feature similarities and then perform the autoregression procedure based
on the permutation. In addition, considering that the raw pixels
of patches are low-level signals and are not ideal prediction
targets for learning high-level semantic representation, we
also explore utilizing the patch features as the prediction
targets. Extensive experiments are conducted on a broad range
of downstream tasks, including image classification, object
detection, and instance/semantic segmentation, to evaluate the
performance of SemAIM. The results demonstrate SemAIM
achieves state-of-the-art performance compared with other
self-supervised methods. Specifically, with ViT-B, SemAIM
achieves 84.1% top-1 accuracy for fine-tuning on ImageNet,
51.3% AP and 45.4% AP for object detection and instance
segmentation on COCO, which outperforms the vanilla MAE
by 0.5%, 1.0%, and 0.5%, respectively. Code is available at
https://github.com/skyoux/SemAIM.

Introduction
With the rapid development of masked language modeling
(MLM) (e.g., BERT (Devlin et al. 2018)) and autoregressive
language modeling (ALM) (e.g., GPT (Radford et al. 2018,
2019; Brown et al. 2020)), self-supervised pre-training has
achieved impressive performance in learning extensible
representations in the field of natural language processing
(NLP). Recently, inspired by the masking mechanism in
MLM, masked image modeling (MIM) (Bao, Dong, and Wei
2022; He et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2022; Xie et al. 2022) has
been proposed and rapidly improved in the computer vision
community. The key to applying MIM is to use a high mask
* Corresponding author (songkaiyou@foxmail.com).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4925

