The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards the Disappearing Truth: Fine-Grained Joint Causal Influences
Learning with Hidden Variable-Driven Causal Hypergraphs in Time Series
Kun Zhu, Chunhui Zhao*

College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{kunzhu, chhzhao}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2023; Cheng et al. 2023) have recognized the shortcoming of linear assumption in traditional Granger causality methods. Accordingly, they have introduced deep neural
networks to extend traditional Granger causality methods
into nonlinear scenarios to encourage promising results.

Causal discovery under Granger causality framework has
yielded widespread concerns in time series analysis task.
Nevertheless, most previous methods are unaware of the
underlying causality disappearing problem, that is, certain
weak causalities are less focusable and may be lost during
the modeling process, thus leading to biased causal conclusions. Therefore, we propose to introduce joint causal influences (i.e., causal influences from the union of multiple variables) as additional causal indication information to help
identify weak causalities. Further, to break the limitation of
existing methods that implicitly and coarsely model joint
causal influences, we propose a novel hidden variabledriven causal hypergraph neural network to meticulously
explore the locality and diversity of joint causal influences,
and realize its explicit and fine-grained modeling. Specifically, we introduce hidden variables to construct a causal
hypergraph for explicitly characterizing various fine-grained
joint causal influences. Then, we customize a dual causal information transfer mechanism (encompassing a multi-level
causal path and an information aggregation path) to realize
the free diffusion and meticulous aggregation of joint causal
influences and facilitate its adaptive learning. Finally, we
design a multi-view collaborative optimization constraint
toguarantee the characterization diversity of causal hypergraph and capture remarkable forecasting relationships (i.e.,
causalities). Experiments are conducted to demonstrate the
superiority of the proposed model.

Figure 1: An example of pair-wise causalities and joint
causal influences. (a) causality disappearing problem. (b)
joint causal influences from variables A, B, and C. (c) locality and diversity of joint causal influences.
In these studies, a popular paradigm is to regard the
weights of neural networks as causalities and design some
sparsity penalties to gradually shrink unimportant weights
(non-causalities) to zeros during training iterations, thereby
finding remarkable causalities. However, in real scenarios,
causalities between variables may be strong or weak.
When the sparsity penalty is too strong or the number of
training iterations is overmuch, the weights for certain
weak causalities (relatively small) may be reduced to zeros
along with non-causalities, thereby inducing the causality
disappearing problem, i.e., certain weak causalities are
harder to focus on and may even be omitted in the modeling process. For example, genes, nutrition, and sleep time
can all affect a person's height. Among them, genes may
have a greater impact on height, while the impacts of other
causes (i.e., nutrition and sleep time) are relatively weak,
less prominent, and easier to be overlooked.
A general example of causality disappearing problem is
shown in Figure 1(a), we assume that A, B, C are three

Introduction
Causal discovery on time series aims to interpret the causal
structure from the observed data, which is help to gain insight into the underlying mechanisms of certain systems
(Sugihara et al. 2012; Wang et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2019).
Among various causal discovery methods, Granger causality (Granger 1969) is a popular and widely accepted
paradigm (Appiah 2018; Charakopoulos et al. 2018; Chen
and Zhao 2022), which has a high interpretability because
it explains causalities as remarkable forecasting relationships. At present, some studies (Schwab et al. 2019; Song
*Corresponding author: chhzhao@zju.edu.cn
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17167

