The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FRED: Towards a Full Rotation-Equivariance in Aerial Image Object Detection
Chanho Lee1 , Jinsu Son1 , Hyounguk Shon1 , Yunho Jeon2 , Junmo Kim1
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, South Korea
2
Hanbat National University, South Korea
{yiwan99, sonjs, hyounguk.shon}@kaist.ac.kr, yhjeon@hanbat.ac.kr, junmo.kim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

"Plane"

Rotation-equivariance is an essential yet challenging property in oriented object detection. While general object detectors naturally leverage robustness to spatial shifts due to the
translation-equivariance of the conventional CNNs, achieving
rotation-equivariance remains an elusive goal. Current detectors deploy various alignment techniques to derive rotationinvariant features, but still rely on high capacity models
and heavy data augmentation with all possible rotations. In
this paper, we introduce a Fully Rotation-Equivariant Oriented Object Detector (FRED), whose entire process from
the image to the bounding box prediction is strictly equivariant. Specifically, we decouple the invariant task (object
classification) and the equivariant task (object localization)
to achieve end-to-end equivariance. We represent the bounding box as a set of rotation-equivariant vectors to implement
rotation-equivariant localization. Moreover, we utilized these
rotation-equivariant vectors as offsets in the deformable convolution, thereby enhancing the existing advantages of spatial
adaptation. Leveraging full rotation-equivariance, our FRED
demonstrates higher robustness to image-level rotation compared to existing methods. Furthermore, we show that FRED
is one step closer to non-axis aligned learning through our
experiments. Compared to state-of-the-art methods, our proposed method delivers comparable performance on DOTAv1.0 and outperforms by 1.5 mAP on DOTA-v1.5, all while
significantly reducing the model parameters to 16%.

"Plane"

Figure 1: Overview of the fully rotation-equivariant object
detector (FRED). FRED consists of a rotation-equivariant
backbone which predicts a point set followed by two prediction branches – (1) a rotation-equivariant box regression head and (2) a rotation-invariant classification head. We
achieve end-to-end equivariance for object detection.

ods rely on the assumption of accurate orientation estimation
and focus on making features invariant to rotation. A representative approach to achieve this is the RoI Transformer
(Ding et al. 2019), which leverages rotation-sensitive regionof-interest (RoI) pooling on a rotated RoI (RRoI) to acquire
instance-level rotation-invariance. Such orientation-specific
feature refinement has demonstrated its efficiency across
one-stage object detectors (Han et al. 2021a) and anchor-free
detectors (Pan et al. 2020). Another strategy is using point
set representation which implicitly represents the oriented
bounding box as a set of adaptively learned points (Guo
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022). These approaches have managed
to separate out the prediction of orientation itself, naturally
leads to non-axis aligned feature learning. Yet, these aforementioned methods rely heavily on data augmentation using random rotations and remain distant from achieving true
rotation-equivariance.
Recently, Han et al. (2021b) proposed ReDet, a rotationequivariant detector firstly employing rotation-equivariant
CNNs (Weiler and Cesa 2019). Their Rotation-invariant
ROI Align (RiRoI Align) leverages the characteristics of
rotation-equivariant features, enabling the extraction of
rotation-invariant features dependent on the rotated RoI.
However, it is worth noting that even though their RiRoI
Align operates based on a rotation-equivariant theory, the
orientation of the predicted RRoI itself is not equivariant.
Due to the ambiguity and angular discontinuity of OBB rep-

Introduction
Aerial object detection is an emerging field in the domain
of computer vision. Since aerial images capture objects with
arbitrary orientations and are often densely packed, oriented
bounding box (OBB) can provide a tighter representation
in such cases. One distinguishing feature of aerial images
is the non-axis aligned nature, absence of any top-bottom or
left-right bias. The ideal aerial object detector should consistently deliver predictions irrespective of object orientation.
If the image undergoes rotation, the predicted OBB should
also rotate concurrently. Hence, for an oriented object detector to be reliable, it must exhibit rotation-equivariance.
However, achieving rotation-equivariance on oriented object detection is challenging, since most researches are extended from horizontal object detection models. Most methCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2883

