The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robust Visual Recognition with Class-Imbalanced Open-World Noisy Data
Na Zhao1 * , Gim Hee Lee2
1

Singapore University of Technology and Design
2
National University of Singapore

Abstract
Learning from open-world noisy data, where both closed-set
and open-set noise co-exist in the dataset, is a realistic but
underexplored setting. Only recently, several efforts have been
initialized to tackle this problem. However, these works assume the classes are balanced when dealing with open-world
noisy data. This assumption often violates the nature of realworld large-scale datasets, where the label distributions are
generally long-tailed, i.e. class-imbalanced. In this paper, we
study the problem of robust visual recognition with classimbalanced open-world noisy data. We propose a probabilistic
graphical model-based approach: iMRF to achieve label noise
correction that is robust to class imbalance via an efficient
iterative inference of a Markov Random Field (MRF) in each
training mini-batch. Furthermore, we design an agreementbased thresholding strategy to adaptively collect clean samples
from all classes that includes corrected closed-set noisy samples while rejecting open-set noisy samples. We also introduce
a noise-aware balanced cross-entropy loss to explicitly eliminate the bias caused by class-imbalanced data. Extensive experiments on several benchmark datasets including synthetic
and real-world noisy datasets demonstrate the superior performance robustness of our method over existing methods. Our
code is available at https://github.com/Na-Z/LIOND.

1

Introduction

The success of modern deep neural networks for visual recognition heavily rely on the availability of large-scale wellannotated datasets such as ImageNet. Unfortunately, the extreme cost and difficulty in annotating extensive data severely
limits the construction of more large-scale datasets with precise annotations. This limitation impedes the development of
deep models for fine-grained visual recognition. In contrast,
tremendous data with noisy labels can be easily accessed
from the online search engines. Hence, designing robust visual recognition approaches that are unbiased to the noise
data is appealing. This is commonly known as learning with
noisy labels in the literature (Song et al. 2022).
Many studies on learning from noisy data (Han et al. 2018;
Jiang et al. 2018; Li, Socher, and Hoi 2020; Li et al. 2019;
Liu et al. 2020b; Patrini et al. 2017; Wei et al. 2020; Zhang
* Corresponding author: na zhao@sutd.edu.sg.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16989

and Sabuncu 2018) generally follow the closed-set assumption, i.e. the real labels of the noisy samples (samples with
incorrect labels) are within the same label space as the clean
samples. An example of closed-set (a.k.a. in-distribution)
noisy data is shown in Fig. 1(a), where one image of ‘cat’
is mislabeled as ‘dog’ while two images of ‘dog’ are mislabeled as ‘cat’ and ‘horse’, respectively. Although these prior
works have achieved impressive progress, their closed-set
assumption is unrealistic in many real applications. This is
because the training label space is usually a subset of the
labels in real-world, and thus it is inevitable to take samples
that are not belonging to the training label space when we
collect data from the open world. This kind of samples is
usually known as open-set (a.k.a. out-of-distribution) noisy
data (Wang et al. 2018; Wei et al. 2021). The prevalent coexistence of closed-set and open-set noise in the training data,
which is also referred as the open-world noisy data as illustrated in Fig. 1(b), is a practical problem. However, it has not
been studied until very recently (Li, Xiong, and Hoi 2021;
Sachdeva et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2021; Yao et al. 2021).
Despite the relatively realistic open-world setting compared to the naive closed-set assumption, existing approaches
under this setting still suffer from an unrealistic class balance
assumption that hypothesizes a uniform density of the label
distribution. This balance assumption violates the real-world
large-scale datasets (Li et al. 2017; Van Horn et al. 2018) that
generally follow long-tailed distributions (Reed 2001) with
severe class imbalance between the head and tail classes. To
carry out robust visual recognition using real-world largescale datasets, it is imperative to train a robust deep neural
network that can effectively learn from the class-imbalanced
open-world noisy data, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (c).
This paper is the first to explicitly study this unexplored
yet pragmatic direction. The challenges lie in the difficulty of
correctly identifying clean samples, closed-set noisy samples,
and scarce samples from the tail classes. Prior works that use
either temporally averaged model (Yao et al. 2021) or smooth
neighbors (Li, Xiong, and Hoi 2021) for open-world noisy
label correction face challenges with class imbalance. JoSRC (Yao et al. 2021) may lead to overfitting on noisy labels,
favoring head classes, while ProtoMix(Li, Xiong, and Hoi
2021) may struggle to form meaningful neighborhoods due
to imbalanced class distributions. In contrast, NGC (Wu et al.
2021) that constructs a global graph with all training samples

