The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Frequency Spectrum Is More Effective for Multimodal Representation and
Fusion: A Multimodal Spectrum Rumor Detector
An Lao1 , Qi Zhang2,4 , Chongyang Shi1 * , Longbing Cao3 , Kun Yi1 , Liang Hu2,4 , Duoqian Miao2
1

Beijing Institute of Technology
2
Tongji University
3
Macquarie University
4
DeepBlue Academy of Sciences
{an.lao, cy shi,yikun}@bit.edu.cn, {zhangqi cs, lianghu, dqmiao}@tongji.edu.cn, longbing.cao@mq.edu.au
Abstract

ensure compliance with social media norms and guidelines
(Allcott and Gentzkow 2017; Zhang et al. 2023).
Recent studies of multimodal rumor detection primarily
focus on two key aspects: learning spatial and sequential dependencies in uni-modality and fusing evidence of rumor veracity across different modalities (Chen et al. 2022; Zheng
et al. 2022; Singhal et al. 2022). 1) To obtain informative
uni-modal representation, researchers have employed various neural models, such as Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), and Transformers to perform token mixing over spatial locations of
images or sequential positions of text. However, these methods suffer from less discriminative unimodal representation,
hindering subsequent fine-grained cross-modal fusion. 2)
Existing approaches often apply contrastive learning (Ying
et al. 2023) or co-attention mechanisms (Qian et al. 2021)
to achieve multimodal alignment or fusion for detecting rumor across modalities. However, they may either overlook
the interpretable fine-grained fusion or encounter intricate
location dependencies in fusing spatial and sequential tokens. Moreover, current approaches for fine-grained fusion,
such as co-attention mechanisms, often exhibit quadratic
time complexity (Rao et al. 2021). These issues collectively
undermine the accuracy and efficiency of multimodal rumor
detection models, highlighting the need for further advancements in this field.
To address the issues, we make the first attempt from
a new paradigm and architecture in this work: multimodal
spectrum rumor detection. We contend that the frequency
spectrum offers a more effective means of representing and
fusing multimodal data. Inspired by signal processing theories (Mateos et al. 2019), we can utilize Fourier transforms
to transform sequential (text) or spatial (images) data to the
frequency domain. The Fourier transform often generates
a sparse frequency spectrum with a significant portion of
frequency components approaching zero (shown in Figure
1). This characteristic facilitates obtaining discriminative
uni-modal representation and emphasizing (suppressing)
veracity-relevant (irrelevant) features for detection. In addition, the frequency spectrum provides a global view (Rao
et al. 2021), allowing each spectrum component to attend
to all features in the spatial domain. Unlike the positionbased alignment in co-attention mechanisms (Zheng et al.

Multimodal content, such as mixing text with images,
presents significant challenges to rumor detection in social
media. Existing multimodal rumor detection has focused on
mixing tokens among spatial and sequential locations for unimodal representation or fusing clues of rumor veracity across
modalities. However, they suffer from less discriminative unimodal representation and are vulnerable to intricate location
dependencies in the time-consuming fusion of spatial and sequential tokens. This work makes the first attempt at multimodal rumor detection in the frequency domain, which efficiently transforms spatial features into the frequency spectrum and obtains highly discriminative spectrum features for
multimodal representation and fusion. A novel Frequency
Spectrum Representation and fUsion network (FSRU) with
dual contrastive learning reveals the frequency spectrum is
more effective for multimodal representation and fusion, extracting the informative components for rumor detection.
FSRU involves three novel mechanisms: utilizing the Fourier
transform to convert features in the spatial domain to the frequency domain, the unimodal spectrum compression, and the
cross-modal spectrum co-selection module in the frequency
domain. Substantial experiments show that FSRU achieves
satisfactory multimodal rumor detection performance.

Introduction
With the rapid development of social media in various aspects of our lives, the prevalence of content from multiple
sources and in diverse formats has significantly increased. A
prime example is the combination of text of varying lengths
accompanied by images. However, along with this proliferation of multimodal media, a more sophisticated and concerning issue has arisen: multimodal rumors. Multimodal
rumors refer to disseminating misinformation or false information through social media platforms, incorporating multiple modes of communication such as text and images. These
rumors often defy logical reasoning and lack credibility. Research reveals that rumors are shared more extensively on
Facebook than on mainstream news (Willmore 2016). As a
result, it has become imperative to detect and mitigate multimodal rumors to effectively manage the associated risks and
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18426

