The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Recurrent Graph Neural Networks
and Their Connections to Bisimulation and Logic
Maximilian Pflueger1 , David Tena Cucala1 , Egor V. Kostylev2
1

University of Oxford, United Kingdom
2
University of Oslo, Norway
maximilian.pflueger@cs.ox.ac.uk, david.tena.cucala@cs.ox.ac.uk, egork@ifi.uio.no

Abstract

which has been recently addressed by the AI community.
One of the central topics being investigated is the discriminative (or non-uniform expressive) power of GNNs, which
determines what kinds of graph patterns a GNN can distinguish. A seminal result shows that GNN variants that
fall into a standard aggregate-combine scheme with fixed
number of layers—that is, message-passing iterations—
including popular in practice GCNs (Kipf and Welling
2017), GraphSAGE (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017),
and GINs (Xu et al. 2019), can not discriminate between
two nodes if the Weisfeiler-Lehman graph-isomorphism test
assigns them the same colour (Weisfeiler and Leman 1968;
Morris et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2019). This result has motivated
new variants of GNNs with greater discriminative power,
such as GNNs with message passing between sets of nodes
(Morris et al. 2019), and GNNs with unique or random initialisation of the node labels (Loukas 2020; Abboud et al.
2021; Sato, Yamada, and Kashima 2021).

The success of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) in practice
has motivated extensive research on their theoretical properties. This includes recent results that characterise node classifiers expressible by GNNs in terms of first order logic.
Most of the analysis, however, has been focused on GNNs
with fixed number of message-passing iterations (i.e., layers), which cannot realise many simple classifiers such as
reachability of a node with a given label. In this paper, we
start to fill this gap and study the foundations of GNNs that
can perform more than a fixed number of message-passing
iterations. We first formalise two generalisations of the basic
GNNs: recurrent GNNs (RecGNNs), which repeatedly apply
message-passing iterations until the node classifications become stable, and graph-size GNNs (GSGNNs), which exploit
a built-in function of the input graph size to decide the number of message-passings. We then formally prove that GNN
classifiers are strictly less expressive than RecGNN ones, and
RecGNN classifiers are strictly less expressive than GSGNN
ones. To get this result, we identify novel semantic characterisations of the three formalisms in terms of suitable variants
of bisimulation, which we believe have their own value for
our understanding of GNNs. Finally, we prove syntactic logical characterisations of RecGNNs and GSGNNs analogous to
the logical characterisation of plain GNNs, where we connect
the two formalisms to monadic monotone fixpoint logic—a
generalisation of first-order logic that supports recursion.

A related line of research focuses on the (uniform) expressive power of GNNs, which studies the classes of functions
that GNN variants can realise. It was initiated by drawing
connections between several GNN variants and logic (Barceló et al. 2019). This connection is based on the observation
that GNNs and logical formulas, though being very different formalisms, operate on essentially the same structures.
Indeed, labelled graphs, which (trained) GNNs take as input, can be seen as relational structures, on which logical
formulas are evaluated; furthermore both formalisms can realise Boolean node classifiers—that is, select subsets of the
nodes in graphs: for a (trained) GNN, the selected subset is
determined by the assignment of Boolean labels (obtained
by, for example, thresholding final numeric labels), while
for a (unary) formula, by logical entailment. The seminal result by Barceló et al. (2019) shows that the node classifiers
realisable by both aggregate-combine GNNs and first-order
logic (FOL) are precisely those that can be expressed by formulas of graded modal logic (de Rijke 1996) (or, equivalently, the description logic ALCQ (Baader 2003)). They
also obtained similar results for a more expressive GNN
variant, aggregate-combine-readout GNNs, and connected it
to the logic C2 (Cai, Fürer, and Immerman 1992). Further
(uniform) expressibility results for GNN variants have followed, including their relations to the query language Datalog (Tena Cucala et al. 2022; Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Scarselli et al. 2008; Liu
and Zhou 2020; Hamilton 2021) are a popular family of machine learning formalisms, which operate directly on graphstructured data. Systems based on GNNs have achieved remarkable success in applications to areas as diverse as biology (Fout et al. 2017), chemistry (Reiser et al. 2022),
recommender systems (Ying et al. 2018), and data management (Schlichtkrull et al. 2018; Pflueger, Tena Cucala,
and Kostylev 2022). Despite these successes, it is now wellunderstood that GNNs have limitations, and seemingly insignificant differences between GNN variants may lead to
dramatic changes in performance on various tasks.
These successes and limitations have motivated an increasing interest in the theoretical properties of GNNs,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14608

