The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Temporal-Distributed Backdoor Attack against Video Based Action Recognition
Xi Li* , Songhe Wang* , Ruiquan Huang, Mahanth Gowda, George Kesidis
The Pennsylvania State University
{xzl45, sxw5765, rzh5514, mkg31, gik2}@psu.edu

Abstract

the target class. Moreover, the attacked model still maintains
high accuracy on users’ (backdoor-free) validation sets, rendering the attack stealthy. The typical backdoor attack is implemented by poisoning the training set for the victim DNN
using a few instances embedded with the trigger, while intentionally mislabeling them to the target class.
Video recognition systems are increasingly integrated into
various domains, such as surveillance systems (Elharrouss
et al. 2021), autonomous vehicles (Saleh, Hossny, and Nahavandi 2019), and video-based sign language recognition (Li
et al. 2020). The threat posed by backdoor attacks on video
recognition systems can be significant and multifaceted. A
compromised surveillance system could allow undetected
crimes by mis-identifying malicious events or villains. Similarly, a backdoored autonomous vehicle may misread moving pedestrians, risking fatal accidents. Moreover, a tampered sign language system might dangerously misinterpret
an emergency sign such as confusing “help” for “fine”.
Considering the widespread application of video recognition systems, it is crucial to study their robustness under
potential threats. However, there is a noticeable gap in the
literature addressing this. In this work, we aim to investigate the robustness of video recognition systems by probing their vulnerability to backdoor attacks. Current studies
such as Hammoud et al. (2023); Zhao et al. (2020) directly
extend backdoor attacks against images to videos by embedding identical triggers into every frame. These attacks
demonstrate efficacy, as the repeated embedding reinforces
the model’s training on the backdoor mapping. However,
they present two primary challenges: (1) Some of the triggers are perceptible to humans; (2) More importantly, the
triggers are independently embedded in each frame, therefore, can be caught by existing backdoor defenses originally
proposed for image data.
In this paper, we leverage the temporal dimension of
videos and plant an imperceptible temporal-distributed
trigger within videos to address the two challenges. The proposed attack is simple yet effective. The trigger is embedded
by appropriately altering certain components of a representation of a video, thus the trigger is imperceptible to human
observers in the video space. Also, by carefully choosing
the basis of the transformed space, this backdoor trigger is
distributed across the whole video. Hence, the proposed attack could circumvent the existing backdoor defenses which

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved tremendous
success in various applications including video action recognition, yet remain vulnerable to backdoor attacks (Trojans).
The backdoor-compromised model will mis-classify to the
target class chosen by the attacker when a test instance (from
a non-target class) is embedded with a specific trigger, while
maintaining high accuracy on attack-free instances. Although
there are extensive studies on backdoor attacks against image data, the susceptibility of video-based systems under
backdoor attacks remains largely unexplored. Current studies are direct extensions of approaches proposed for image
data, e.g., the triggers are independently embedded within
the frames, which tend to be detectable by existing defenses.
In this paper, we introduce a simple yet effective backdoor
attack against video data. Our proposed attack, adding perturbations in a transformed domain, plants an imperceptible,
temporally distributed trigger across the video frames, and
is shown to be resilient to existing defensive strategies. The
effectiveness of the proposed attack is demonstrated by extensive experiments with various well-known models on two
video recognition benchmarks, UCF101 and HMDB51, and a
sign language recognition benchmark, Greek Sign Language
(GSL) dataset. We delve into the impact of several influential factors on our proposed attack and identify an intriguing
effect termed “collateral damage” through extensive studies.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown impressive performance in various applications, yet remain susceptible to
adversarial attacks. Recently, backdoor (Trojan) attacks on
DNNs have garnered attention in multiple domains, including image classification (Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2017;
Chen et al. 2017; Nguyen and Tran 2021; Saha, Subramanya, and Pirsiavash 2020; Li et al. 2021a), speech recognition (Liu et al. 2018), text classification (Dai, Chen, and
Li 2019), point cloud classification (Xiang et al. 2021), and
even deep regression (Li et al. 2021b). The attacker plants
a backdoor in the victim model, which is fundamentally a
mapping from a specific trigger to the attacker-chosen target
class. During inference, the compromised model will misclassify a test instance embedded with the same trigger to
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3199

