The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Contrastive Tuning: A Little Help to Make Masked Autoencoders Forget
Johannes Lehner * 1 , Benedikt Alkin * 1 , Andreas Fürst 1 , Elisabeth Rumetshofer 1 ,
Lukas Miklautz 2, 3 , Sepp Hochreiter 1, 4
1

ELLIS Unit Linz and LIT AI Lab, Institute for Machine Learning Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria
2
Faculty of Computer Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
3
UniVie Doctoral School Computer Science, University of Vienna
4
Institute of Advanced Research in Artificial Intelligence (IARAI)
lehner@ml.jku.at, alkin@ml.jku.at, lukas.miklautz@univie.ac.at
Abstract

the views created from the same image. To avoid the trivial solution of mapping all images to a constant representation, methods either use a contrastive loss term (He et al.
2020; Chen et al. 2020), a regularization term (Zbontar et al.
2021) or perform self-distillation (Grill et al. 2020; Caron
et al. 2021). When a contrastive loss term is used, the ID
task can be viewed as a classification task where each image
is its own class. MIM methods, like Masked Autoencoders
(MAE) (He et al. 2022) and others (Bao et al. 2022; Xie et al.
2022; Baevski et al. 2022) first mask out areas of the input
and then reconstruct the missing parts as pre-train task.

Masked Image Modeling (MIM) methods, like Masked Autoencoders (MAE), efficiently learn a rich representation of
the input. However, for adapting to downstream tasks, they
require a sufficient amount of labeled data since their rich
features code not only objects but also less relevant image
background. In contrast, Instance Discrimination (ID) methods focus on objects. In this work, we study how to combine the efficiency and scalability of MIM with the ability
of ID to perform downstream classification in the absence
of large amounts of labeled data. To this end, we introduce
Masked Autoencoder Contrastive Tuning (MAE-CT), a sequential approach that utilizes the implicit clustering of the
Nearest Neighbor Contrastive Learning (NNCLR) objective
to induce abstraction in the topmost layers of a pre-trained
MAE. MAE-CT tunes the rich features such that they form
semantic clusters of objects without using any labels. Notably, MAE-CT does not rely on hand-crafted augmentations
and frequently achieves its best performances while using
only minimal augmentations (crop & flip). Further, MAE-CT
is compute efficient as it requires at most 10% overhead compared to MAE pre-training. Applied to large and huge Vision
Transformer (ViT) models, MAE–CT excels over previous
self-supervised methods trained on ImageNet in linear probing, k-NN and low-shot classification accuracy as well as in
unsupervised clustering accuracy. With ViT-H/16 MAE–CT
achieves a new state-of-the-art in linear probing of 82.2%.
Project page: github.com/ml-jku/MAE-CT.

The respective pre-training tasks, classification and reconstruction, of ID and MIM result in distinct advantages and
disadvantages. MAE provides a computationally efficient
way to exploit sparse pre-training of Vision Transformers
(ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) by masking large parts of
the image (75%) and not processing the masked areas. This
computational efficiency, coupled with the data efficiency of
a generative reconstruction task (Xie et al. 2023; El-Nouby
et al. 2021), enabled beneficial scaling to larger architectures
on datasets of limited size. However, to perform well on
downstream tasks, MIM methods rely on fine-tuning with
a large amount of labeled data as the representation of MIM
methods lack abstraction after pre-training. In contrast, ID
methods learn an object-focused representation (Caron et al.
2021) that typically results in object-specific clusters which
is especially useful when few labels are available, as decision boundaries can be drawn much easier between well separated clusters. Furthermore, ID methods notoriously rely on
augmentations based on expert knowledge (Tian et al. 2020)
to alleviate the problem of shortcut learning (Geirhos et al.
2020), which refers to the phenomenon of overfitting to spurious features. MIM suffers less from this issue as all masked
parts have to be reconstructed, leaving little room for shortcut solutions. In fact, MAE achieves its best performance
when only minimal augmentations (crop & flip) are used.

Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) leverages a pre-training task
on unlabeled data to construct rich representations of the input without explicit supervision from costly annotated labels. This pre-trained representation can then be used to
solve downstream tasks, like image classification, better
than supervised training only. Therefore, SSL is currently
one of the most effective machine learning concepts.
Two of the most prominent SSL pre-training tasks in computer vision are Instance Discrimination (ID) and Masked
Image Modeling (MIM). ID uses augmentations to create
multiple views of an image. The objective is then to align

Given the benefits and downsides of both approaches,
an open question remains: What is the best combination of
MIM and ID methods to exploit their respective strengths?
Namely, use the unlabeled data and compute efficiency of
MIM methods to benefit from larger models while also benefiting from the label efficiency of ID methods for good lowshot performance via a meaningful semantic representation.

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2965

