The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

P REFER: Prompt Ensemble Learning via Feedback-Reflect-Refine
†

Chenrui Zhang1* , Lin Liu2 , Chuyuan Wang1 ,
Xiao Sun1 , Hongyu Wang1 , Jinpeng Wang1 , Mingchen Cai1
1

2

Meituan Inc., Beijing, China
School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
chenrui.zhang@pku.edu.cn, linliu@bjtu.edu.cn, {wangchuyuan,
sunxiao10,wanghongyu15,wangjinpeng04,caimingchen}@meituan.com
Abstract

5

6

Refine

How to solve issues
according to the situation?

As an effective tool for eliciting the power of Large Language Models (LLMs), prompting has recently demonstrated
unprecedented abilities across a variety of complex tasks. To
further improve the performance, prompt ensemble has attracted substantial interest for tackling the hallucination and
instability of LLMs. However, existing methods usually adopt
a two-stage paradigm, which requires a pre-prepared set of
prompts with substantial manual effort, and is unable to perform directed optimization for different weak learners. In this
paper, we propose a simple, universal, and automatic method
named P REFER (PRompt Ensemble learning via FeedbackREflect-Refine) to address the stated limitations. Specifically,
given the fact that weak learners are supposed to focus on
hard examples during boosting, P REFER builds a feedback
mechanism for reflecting on the inadequacies of existing
weak learners. Based on this, the LLM is required to automatically synthesize new prompts for iterative refinement. Moreover, to enhance stability of the prompt effect evaluation, we
propose a novel prompt bagging method involving forward
and backward thinking, which is superior to majority voting
and is beneficial for both feedback and weight calculation in
boosting. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our P RE FER achieves state-of-the-art performance in multiple types
of tasks by a significant margin. We have made our code publicly available.

7

Different strokes for
different folks.

Answer Ground Truth

Input
4

Reflect

{

,

}

{

,

}

{

,

}

Sick

How to solve?
Bug

1

3
Rainstorm

2

LLM

Feedback

How to solve the rest?

Hard Examples

Figure 1: High-level overview of feedback-reflect-refine
paradigm. pt denotes the prompt at the t-th iteration.

this end, as a simple and effective paradigm, prompt engineering explores a fundamentally new way of invoking intrinsic knowledge and reasoning ability of LLMs based on a
pretrain-prompt-predict manner (Liu et al. 2023).
Though promising, the naı̈ve prompting approaches are
afflicted by several limitations. As generative language models, LLMs’ output commonly has a large variance. For instance, the reasoning logic and predicted results could be
contradictory in multiple runs, although the input prompts
are fixed. In addition, LLMs suffer from the notoriously hallucination issue (Ji et al. 2023), leading to results that are
plausible-sounding but factually incorrect or irrelevant to the
inputs. Furthermore, the quality of LLMs’ output is susceptible to the given prompts, which entails substantial manual
effort and domain expertise to find out the reliable prompts.
As a promising solution to these issues, prompt ensemble learning has attracted substantial interest in the community very recently, demonstrating significant improvements
in both effectiveness and stability across various tasks. As
a representative work, PromptBoosting (Hou et al. 2023)
applies the traditional A DA B OOST (Freund and Schapire
1997) algorithm over a set of pre-defined prompts for text
classification. BPE (Pitis et al. 2023) focuses on Chain-of-

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently flourished
across a variety of fields, demonstrating unprecedented abilities in myriad of complex tasks (Zhao et al. 2023b; Ouyang
et al. 2022). Trained with large-scale web data on massive
parameters, LLMs show emergent abilities beyond the original linguistic competence (Wei et al. 2022a), which perform
tremendous versatility in both academia and industry. To
elicit the power of pretrained LLMs directly or adapt LLMs
to specific domains, various paradigms are proposed, including prompt engineering (Qiao et al. 2022), p-tuning (Liu
et al. 2021), and LoRA finetuning (Hu et al. 2021), etc. Due
to the immense scale of the model parameters, finetuning on
all or even part of LLMs is costly and time-consuming. To
* Corresponding Author
†

This work was done during the internship at Meituan.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19525

