The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

C OOPER: Coordinating Specialized Agents towards a Complex Dialogue Goal
Yi Cheng1 , Wenge Liu2 , Jian Wang1 , Chak Tou Leong1 ,
Yi Ouyang3 , Wenjie Li1 , Xian Wu3 , Yefeng Zheng3
1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
3
Jarvis Research Center, Tencent YouTu Lab
{alyssa.cheng, jian-dylan.wang, chak-tou.leong}@connect.polyu.hk, kzllwg@gmail.com,
{yiouyang, kevinxwu, yefengzheng}@tencent.com, cswjli@comp.polyu.edu.hk
Abstract

fail to accomplish a complex dialogue goal through multiturn interactions strategically (Zhao et al. 2023a). Moreover,
another major challenge lies in the difficulty of objectively
measuring the achievement of such complex dialogue goals
in a quantifiable and reliable way. Consequently, most existing research stays overly focused on how to fit the groundtruth data, without explicit consideration of how each utterance could contribute to the final objective (Zhou et al.
2019a; Joshi et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2023). In the few works
that attempt to model these dialogue goals explicitly, it remains highly challenging to optimize the dialogue procedure towards them directly due to their inherent intangibility
(Cheng et al. 2022; Sanders et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2023).
In this work, we highlight the multifaceted nature of complex dialogue goals, which typically encompass multiple
interdependent aspects that must be collectively promoted
to approach the final objective. For instance, psychological guidelines suggest that Emotional Support Conversations
(ESC) should include three key aspects:1 exploration (identify the support-seeker’s problem), comforting (comfort the
seeker’s emotion through expressing empathy), and action
(help the seeker solve the problem) (Hill 2009; Liu et al.
2021b). These aspects are interdependent. For example, exploring the seeker’s situation lays the foundation for conveying appropriate empathy, while comforting the user to be in
a better emotional state makes them more willing to share
details about their experiences and feelings.
Compared with directly optimizing towards the complex
dialogue goal, it is more feasible to accomplish it by comprehensively considering and jointly promoting its different
aspects. Nonetheless, due to the interdependence among different aspects, the interlocutor still needs to address the challenge of how to strategically coordinate their priority during the conversation. To achieve this, they must dynamically
track the states of all the aspects and analyze their progression, that is, how much progress has been achieved so far
and where the state of each aspect is heading. As in ESC, a
seasoned supporter would continuously record information
about the seeker’s situation and keep estimating the under-

In recent years, there has been a growing interest in exploring
dialogues with more complex goals, such as negotiation, persuasion, and emotional support, which go beyond traditional
service-focused dialogue systems. Apart from the requirement for much more sophisticated strategic reasoning and
communication skills, a significant challenge of these tasks
lies in the difficulty of objectively measuring the achievement
of their goals in a quantifiable way, making it difficult for
existing research to directly optimize the dialogue procedure
towards them. In our work, we emphasize the multifaceted
nature of complex dialogue goals and argue that it is more
feasible to accomplish them by comprehensively considering and jointly promoting their different aspects. To this end,
we propose a novel dialogue framework, C OOPER, which
coordinates multiple specialized agents, each dedicated to
a specific dialogue goal aspect separately, to approach the
complex objective. Through this divide-and-conquer manner, we make complex dialogue goals more approachable
and elicit greater intelligence via the collaboration of individual agents. Experiments on persuasion and emotional support dialogues demonstrate the superiority of our method over
a set of competitive baselines. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/YiCheng98/Cooper.

Introduction
The use of human language is intentional and purposeful
(Austin 1975; Grice 1975). In daily communication, we use
language deliberately to achieve various goals, ranging from
simple inquiries about a product’s pricing to complex objectives like resolving conflicts. Developing goal-oriented dialogue systems has also been a prominent research topic.
In the past few years, there has been growing research
interest in dialogue tasks with more complex objectives,
such as persuasion (Wang et al. 2019), negotiation (He et al.
2018), and emotional support (Liu et al. 2021b). Compared
to traditional service-focused goal-oriented dialogue systems (Rieser and Moore 2005; Boyer et al. 2011; Wen et al.
2016; Liu et al. 2022), these tasks require much more sophisticated strategic reasoning and communication skills. Recent studies show that even state-of-the-art Large Language
Models (LLMs) struggle with these tasks, where they exhibit weak awareness of the overall dialogue progression and

1

Some works may refer to the “aspects” here as “stages”, but
they also emphasize that these “stages” are closely interwoven in
practice rather than sequential (Liu et al. 2021b). Given that, we
choose to call them as “aspects” uniformly in our work to avoid
misunderstanding about their sequential nature.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17853

