The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TCI-Former: Thermal Conduction-Inspired Transformer for Infrared Small
Target Detection
Tianxiang Chen1,2,3 * , Zhentao Tan1,2,3 , Qi Chu1,3† , Yue Wu2 , Bin Liu1,3 , Nenghai Yu1,3
1

School of Cyber Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Alibaba Group
3
Key Laboratory of Electromagnetic Space Information, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{txchen,tzt}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, matthew.wy@alibaba-inc.com, {qchu, flowice, ynh}@ustc.edu.cn
Image Field
Feature Map Evolution
from coarse to fine

Abstract
Infrared small target detection (ISTD) is critical to national
security and has been extensively applied in military areas.
ISTD aims to segment small target pixels from background.
Most ISTD networks focus on designing feature extraction
blocks or feature fusion modules, but rarely describe the
ISTD process from the feature map evolution perspective.
In the ISTD process, the network attention gradually shifts
towards target areas. We abstract this process as the directional movement of feature map pixels to target areas through
convolution, pooling and interactions with surrounding pixels, which can be analogous to the movement of thermal
particles constrained by surrounding variables and particles.
In light of this analogy, we propose Thermal ConductionInspired Transformer (TCI-Former) based on the theoretical principles of thermal conduction. According to thermal
conduction differential equation in heat dynamics, we derive the pixel movement differential equation (PMDE) in the
image domain and further develop two modules: Thermal
Conduction-Inspired Attention (TCIA) and Thermal Conduction Boundary Module (TCBM). TCIA incorporates finite
difference method with PMDE to reach a numerical approximation so that target body features can be extracted. To further remove errors in boundary areas, TCBM is designed and
supervised by boundary masks to refine target body features
with fine boundary details. Experiments on IRSTD-1k and
NUAA-SIRST demonstrate the superiority of our method.

𝑦

…

𝑑𝑃𝑥

Thermal Field
Thermal Conduction Direction

𝑑𝑧
𝑑𝑦

Cold Surface

𝑑𝑥

𝑑𝑃𝑥+𝑑𝑥
𝑥

𝑧

𝑑𝑄𝑥
Warm Surface

𝑑𝑦

𝑑𝑥

𝑑𝑄𝑥+𝑑𝑥
𝑥

𝑦

Figure 1: Conversion process between the image field and
the thermal field.The feature map evolution process in the
image field can be analogous to the thermal conduction process in the thermal field. The upper part depicts the image
field and presents the from-coarse-to-fine feature map evolution in the ISTD process. The upper right corner shows
the change of pixel value in a 2-D image micro-element.
The lower part shows the thermal conduction process of a 3D micro-element in the thermal field, where thermal energy
is conducted spontaneously from high-temperature areas to
low-temperature areas.

2019). However, these methods relying so much on prior
knowledge and handcraft features that inevitably suffer very
limited performances on images with characteristics inconsistent with the model assumptions.
Recent years have witnessed the research focus of ISTD
shifting to deep-learning-based methods. Deep-learningbased methods improve the ISTD performance by a large
margin and can be further classidied into CNN-based methods (Chen et al. 2023c; Dai et al. 2021b,a; Zhang et al.
2021; Wang, Zhou, and Wang 2019; Li et al. 2022a; Zhang
et al. 2021, 2022d; Zhu et al. 2023; Weng et al. 2023; Du,
Wang, and Cao 2023) and hybrid methods (methods combining ViT and CNN) (Wang et al. 2022a; Qi et al. 2022;
Chen et al. 2023b; Liu et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022a; Chen
et al. 2023a). However, despite different module designs,
these methods rarely explore a new perspective to look at
ISTD, which helps constructing an explainable ISTD network and proposing a potential future research direction. To
this end, we propose to understand the feature map evolution
process of ISTD from the perspective of thermal conduction.

Introduction
Infrared small target detection (ISTD) is challenging because targets are so small that may easily get ignored by
generic segmentation networks. Besides, infrared images are
of low contrast and low quality, which also bring challenges
to this task. Since generic segmentation networks fail to perform well on this task, we hope to explore a new perspective
and design a precise and explainable method for ISTD.
ISTD methods are generally categorized into traditional
methods and deep-learning-based methods. In early stages,
for lack of public ISTD dataset, researchers are limited to
traditional methods (Sun, Yang, and An 2020; Marvasti,
Mosavi, and Nasiri 2018; Zhang and Peng 2019; Han et al.
* Work done during an internship at Alibaba Group.
†

Qi Chu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1201

