The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Task-Free Continual Generation and Representation Learning via
Dynamic Expansionable Memory Cluster
Fei Ye1,2 , Adrian G. Bors1,2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of York, York YO10 5GH, UK
Machine Learning Department, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
fy689@york.ac.uk, adrian.bors@york.ac.uk

Abstract

these models suffer a significant performance degradation
when tested on past tasks, and such a performance loss is
called catastrophic forgetting (Parisi et al. 2019; Ye and Bors
2020). A simple and natural way to mitigate forgetting is
to use deep generative models such as GANs and VAEs to
remember and generate past knowledge that is then incorporated together with new data, and used for retraining the
model (Seff et al. 2017). However, the performance of such
an approach is highly dependent on the quality of the generative replay samples, and this degrades significantly after
learning several different data domains (Ye and Bors 2023a).
Another approach proposes using the dynamic expansion
mechanism to gradually add new parameters to learn new
tasks, while freezing all previously learned parameters to
preserve past knowledge (Varshney et al. 2021; Zhai et al.
2020). However, these approaches require access to the explicit task boundaries, which is impossible in real scenarios
(Aljundi, Kelchtermans, and Tuytelaars 2019).

Human brains can continually acquire and learn new skills
and knowledge over time from a dynamically changing environment without forgetting previously learnt information.
Such a capacity can selectively transfer some important and
recently seen information to the persistent knowledge regions
of the brain. Inspired by this intuition, we propose a new
memory-based approach for image reconstruction and generation in continual learning, consisting of a temporary and
evolving memory, with two different storage strategies, corresponding to the temporary and permanent memorisation. The
temporary memory aims to preserve up-to-date information
while the evolving memory can dynamically increase its capacity in order to preserve permanent knowledge information.
This is achieved by the proposed memory expansion mechanism that selectively transfers those data samples deemed as
important from the temporary memory to new clusters defined within the evolved memory according to an information
novelty criterion. Such a mechanism promotes the knowledge
diversity among clusters in the evolved memory, resulting in
capturing more diverse information by using a compact memory capacity. Furthermore, we propose a two-step optimization strategy for training a Variational Autoencoder (VAE)
to implement generation and representation learning tasks,
which updates the generator and inference models separately
using two optimisation paths. This approach leads to a better trade-off between generation and reconstruction performance. We show empirically and theoretically that the proposed approach can learn meaningful latent representations
while generating diverse images from different domains. The
source code and supplementary material (SM) are available
at https://github.com/dtuzi123/DEMC.

In this paper, we study a new and more realistic learning
scenario called the Task-Free Continual Learning (TFCL)
(Aljundi, Kelchtermans, and Tuytelaars 2019), in which
a model is trained on a data stream without explicit
task boundaries. Storing diverse samples in a memory
buffer was shown to relieve forgetting in TFCL (Aljundi,
Kelchtermans, and Tuytelaars 2019). However, most existing memory-based methods can only be applied to supervised learning (Aljundi, Kelchtermans, and Tuytelaars 2019;
Jin et al. 2021), while unsupervised representation learning and generation in TFCL has not been studied before.
Here we aim to learn a generative model capable of generating diverse images while also capturing meaningful latent
representation across different data domains without forgetting. Biological studies show that the human brain can store
short- and long-term information in different regions (Berns
et al. 2013), where the short-term information can be persistent when necessary. Inspired by this intuition, we propose
a new memory system consisting of temporary and evolved
memory buffers, each with different storage strategies. The
first type of memory aims to temporarily preserve the upto-date information about a data stream, while the second
type permanently preserves necessary samples from the temporary memory during the training. The evolved memory
can dynamically build a sequence of memory clusters, each
having a fixed size, expected to capture different informa-

Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al. 2014a) and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma
and Welling 2013) represent two of the most popular
deep generative models used in many applications, including image synthesis (Karras et al. 2020), video generation
(Tulyakov et al. 2018) and image-to-image translation (Isola
et al. 2017). However, despite their impressive performance,
most generative models can only be applied to static data
distributions. When trained in a continual learning fashion,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16451

