The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Goal Alignment: Re-analyzing Value Alignment Problems Using Human-Aware AI
Malek Mechergui, Sarath Sreedharan
Colorado State University
{Malek.Mechergui, Sarath.Sreedharan}@colostate.edu

Abstract
While the question of misspecified objectives has gotten
much attention in recent years, most works in this area primarily focus on the challenges related to the complexity of
the objective specification mechanism (for example, the use
of reward functions). However, the complexity of the objective specification mechanism is just one of many reasons why
the user may have misspecified their objective. A foundational cause for misspecification that is being overlooked by
these works is the inherent asymmetry in human expectations
about the agent’s behavior and the behavior generated by the
agent for the specified objective. To address this, we propose a novel formulation for the objective misspecification
problem that builds on the human-aware planning literature,
which was originally introduced to support explanation and
explicable behavioral generation. Additionally, we propose a
first-of-its-kind interactive algorithm that is capable of using
information generated under incorrect beliefs about the agent
to determine the true underlying goal of the user.

Figure 1: An overview of the objective specification process
as contextualized in a generalized Human-aware AI framework. Humans ascribe a domain model and initial state to
the agent, which may differ from the true model. Now the
human identifies a goal specification whose inclusion in the
agent’s model they believe will result in plans they would
prefer. Note that the human is generating the model updates
based on a potentially incorrect understanding of the system’s model and using possibly faulty reasoning. The resulting outcomes from pursuing that goal using the robot model
could differ greatly from what the human expected.

Introduction
Value alignment, as presented in (Hadfield-Menell et al.
2016), is the problem of ensuring that an AI agent’s pursuit of its specified objectives will maximize or satisfy the
true underlying objective of its human user. Usually studied in the context of scenarios, where such misalignments
could have catastrophic consequences, the problem has been
widely argued to be one of the most important problems
related to AI safety (Christian 2020; Russell 2019). While
there is a general consensus that the primary cause of the
value misalignment problem is the user’s failure to correctly
anticipate the outcomes of their specification, current works
tend to focus on addressing only some aspects of the problem. In particular, most works within value alignment tend
to focus on decision-theoretic settings, where the objectives
are specified as reward functions and try to address problems closely connected to the nature of this representation
scheme (cf. (Hadfield-Menell et al. 2016; Leike et al. 2018;
Hadfield-Menell et al. 2017)).
We argue that, the extant literature on value alignment
overlooks the fundamental problem that any information
user provides to the system is going to be skewed by their

beliefs about the agent model, which may be different from
the agent’s own model. Which in turn means that the user’s
expectation about the behavior the agent would exhibit in response to a particular goal specification could be drastically
different from what might actually be followed. Arguably,
this asymmetry between the user’s expectations about agent
behavior and the agent’s true behavior is one of the main
factors that gives rise to the misalignment in the first place.
As such, for a system to correctly use any information provided by the user it must try to re-interpret it in the light of
this inherent difference between the user and the agent.
Thus in this paper, we will present a new formalization of
the value alignment problem that accounts for this asymmetry between the user and the AI agent. We will do so by first
removing many of the extraneous parts of the problem that
are artifacts of the setting rather than the true nature of the
value misalignment problem. In fact, we will focus on one of
the most basic sequential decision-making setting, namely

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10110

