The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On Computing Makespan-Optimal Solutions for Generalized Sliding-Tile Puzzles
Marcus Gozon1 , Jingjin Yu2
1

University of Michigan
2
Rutgers University
mgozon@umich.edu, jingjin.yu@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
In the 15-puzzle game, 15 labeled square tiles are reconfigured on a 4 × 4 board through an escort, wherein each
(time) step, a single tile neighboring it may slide into it, leaving the space previously occupied by the tile as the new escort. We study a generalized sliding-tile puzzle (GSTP) in
which (1) there are 1+ escorts and (2) multiple tiles can move
synchronously in a single time step. Compared with popular discrete multi-agent/robot motion models, GSTP provides
a more accurate model for a broad array of high-utility applications, including warehouse automation and autonomous
garage parking, but is less studied due to the more involved
tile interactions. In this work, we analyze optimal GSTP
solution structures, establishing that computing makespanoptimal solutions for GSTP is NP-complete and developing
polynomial time algorithms yielding makespans approximating the minimum with expected/high probability constant factors, assuming randomized start and goal configurations.

11 10 14

6

1

2

3

4

9

3

2

5

6

7

8

7

1

4

8

9

10 11 12

15 12

5

13

13 14 15

Figure 1: Start and goal configurations of a 15-puzzle instance. In GSTP, there can be 1+ escorts and multiple tiles
may move synchronously, e.g., tile 3 and 9 may move to the
right in a single step in the left configuration.
ond tile moves in a perpendicular direction, a collision occurs, which we call the corner following constraint or CFC.
Consideration of CFC renders GSTP different from popular multi-agent/robot pathfinding (MAPF) problems (Stern
et al. 2019) in which a classical formulation allows the second tile to move in a direction perpendicular to the moving
direction of the first tile. Ignoring CFC significantly reduces
the steps required to solve a tile reconfiguration problem,
making computing optimal solutions less challenging, but is
less accurate in modeling many real-world applications.
Given the strong connections between GSTP and today’s
grid-based multi-robot applications seeking ever more optimal solutions, we must have a firm grasp on the fundamental optimality structure of GSTP. Towards achieving such
an understanding, this work studies the induced optimality structure in computing makespan-optimal solutions for
GSTP, and brings forth the following main contributions:

Introduction
The 15-puzzle (Loyd 1959) is a sliding-tile puzzle in which
fifteen interlocked square tiles, labeled 1-15, and an empty
escort square are located on a 4 × 4 square game board (see
Fig. 1). In each time step, a tile neighboring the escort may
slide into it, leaving an empty square that becomes the new
escort. The game’s goal is to reconfigure the tiles to realize
a row-major ordering of the labeled tiles. We study a natural
generalization of the 15-puzzle, in which the game board
is an arbitrarily large rectangular grid with 1+ escorts. In
addition, tiles can move synchronously in a given time step
assuming no collision under uniform movement. We call this
problem the generalized sliding-tile puzzle or GSTP.
GSTP provides a high-fidelity discretized model for
multi-robot applications operating in grid-like environments, including the efficient coordination of a large number of robots in warehouses for order fulfillment (Wurman,
D’Andrea, and Mountz 2008; Mason 2019), motion planning in autonomous parking garages (Guo and Yu 2023),
and so on. A particularly important feature of GSTP is that,
given two neighboring tiles sharing a side, one tile may
only move in the direction toward the second tile if the second tile moves in the same direction. Otherwise, if the sec-

• We establish that computing makespan-optimal solutions
for GSTP is NP-complete with or without an enclosing
grid. The problem remains NP-complete when there are
⌊|G|ϵ ⌋ escorts, where |G| is the grid size (i.e., the total
number of grid cells) and 0 < ϵ < 1 is a constant.
• We establish tighter makespan lower bounds for GSTP
for all possible numbers of escorts. On an m1 × m2
grid with k escorts, in expectation, solving GSTP requires Ω( m1km2 ) steps for 1 ≤ k < min(m1 , m2 ) and
Ω(m1 + m2 ) steps for k ≥ min(m1 , m2 ).
• We establish tighter makespan upper bounds for GSTP
for all possible numbers of escorts that match the corresponding makespan lower bounds, asymptotically, thus
closing the makespan optimality gap for GSTP. This

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10288

