The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

HuTuMotion: Human-Tuned Navigation of Latent Motion Diffusion Models with
Minimal Feedback
Gaoge Han1 , Shaoli Huang2 * , Mingming Gong3,4 , Jinglei Tang 1 *
1

College of Information Engineering, Northwest A&F University
2
Tencent AI Lab
3
School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Melbourne
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, United Arab Emirates
hangaoge@nwafu.edu.cn, sshaol.huang@gmail.com, mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au, tangjinglei@nwsuaf.edu.cn
Abstract

ture the specific nuance of “old”. This limitation has hindered the advancement of more sophisticated applications,
such as personalized and editable motion generation, which
call for a deeper grasp of the underlying data distribution
and effective incorporation of human feedback.
In light of these challenges, we propose HuTuMotion, a
novel approach that seeks to improve the quality of motion generation by leveraging latent diffusion models and
incorporating few-shot human feedback. The central idea of
HuTuMotion is to adjust the prior distribution p(z) based on
human feedback rather than existing approaches of drawing from a standard normal prior distribution. This adjustment allows the latent space to capture the characteristics
of the data better, thereby improving the quality and realism of the generated motions. Our method does not solely
rely on an arbitrary sampling of the latent space. Instead, we
carefully optimize the selection of regions in the latent space
that yield more realistic and semantically meaningful human
motions. To achieve this, we first strategically identify representative and diverse motion descriptions. We then utilize
a unique feedback mechanism that incorporates a few-shot
learning approach. In this paradigm, minimal yet effective
human feedback guides the optimization process, refining
the link between the descriptions and their corresponding
latent distributions. Furthermore, to ensure semantic alignment between the input text and output motion, we employ
a text similarity measure. During testing, this measure assesses the similarity between the input text and the representative motion descriptions. The most similar representative prior distribution is then used to sample a latent, which
ultimately generates the corresponding human motion.
In addition to enhancing the general text-driven motion
generation, HuTuMotion also introduces a new capability
to support personalized and style-aware motion generation.
This functionality allows the users to provide their specific
motion style preferences, which are then incorporated into
the motion generation process. Through this mechanism,
our method can generate unique, individualized motions that
better reflect the users’ intentions and preferences, thereby
opening up new possibilities for applications in areas such
as interactive gaming and personalized animation. In our
quantitative experiments on both the HumanML3D and
KIT datasets, HuTuMotion significantly outperforms exist-

We introduce HuTuMotion, an innovative approach for generating natural human motions that navigates latent motion
diffusion models by leveraging few-shot human feedback.
Unlike existing approaches that sample latent variables from
a standard normal prior distribution, our method adapts the
prior distribution to better suit the characteristics of the data,
as indicated by human feedback, thus enhancing the quality
of motion generation. Furthermore, our findings reveal that
utilizing few-shot feedback can yield performance levels on
par with those attained through extensive human feedback.
This discovery emphasizes the potential and efficiency of incorporating few-shot human-guided optimization within latent diffusion models for personalized and style-aware human motion generation applications. The experimental results
show the significantly superior performance of our method
over existing state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction
Human motion generation, a rapidly growing area of research (Li et al. 2022; Raab et al. 2022; Guo et al. 2020;
Ling et al. 2020; Petrovich, Black, and Varol 2021; Guo et al.
2022a,c,b; Zhang et al. 2022a; Tevet et al. 2022) in computer vision and artificial intelligence, has gained significant
attention due to its wide-ranging applications in animation,
gaming, and robotics. Recent techniques typically encompass the process of sampling latent variables z from a standard normal prior distribution p(z), followed by generating
data x using the generative probability distribution p(x|z).
These approaches, often based on deep generative models
like Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Chen et al. 2023) or
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Lee et al. 2019),
have made significant strides in motion synthesis. However,
they often fall short of capturing the real data characteristics
and generating human motions that accurately reflect the input semantics. For instance, consider generating a motion
from a textual input like “an old person walking at an average pace forward.” Existing methods (Chen et al. 2023;
Tevet et al. 2022; Guo et al. 2022a) may generate a generic
“walking at an average pace forward” motion but fail to cap* Corresponding author: Shaoli Huang, Jinglei Tang.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2031

