The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Norm Tweaking: High-Performance Low-Bit Quantization of Large Language
Models
Liang Li, Qingyuan Li, Bo Zhang, Xiangxiang Chu
Meituan
{liliang58,liqingyuan02,zhangbo97,chuxiangxiang}@meituan.com

Abstract

0.03

As the size of large language models (LLMs) continues to
grow, model compression without sacrificing accuracy has
become a crucial challenge for deployment. While some
quantization methods, such as GPTQ, have made progress in
achieving acceptable 4-bit weight-only quantization, attempts
at lower-bit quantization often result in severe performance
degradation. In this paper, we introduce a technique called
norm tweaking, which can be used as a plugin in current PTQ
methods to achieve high precision while being cost-efficient.
Our approach is inspired by the observation that rectifying the
quantized activation distribution to match its float counterpart
can readily restore accuracy for LLMs. To achieve this, we
carefully design a tweaking strategy that includes calibration
data generation and channel-wise distance constraint to update the weights of normalization layers for better generalization. We conduct extensive experiments on various datasets
using several open-sourced LLMs. Our method demonstrates
significant improvements in both weight-only quantization
and joint quantization of weights and activations, surpassing existing PTQ methods. On GLM-130B and OPT-66B,
our method even achieves the same level of accuracy at 2bit quantization as their float ones. Our simple and effective
approach makes it more practical for real-world applications.

GPTQ
Norm Tweaking

0.02

0.01

0.00
0

5

10

15
Layer

20

25

30

Figure 1: Activation distribution of norm tweaking is closer
to its float counterpart compared with GPTQ. A batch size
of 128 is used to compute the mean difference ∆µ .

ing used in applications such as chatbots, language understanding, and speech recognition systems.
Nevertheless, due to the large scale (normally tens of billions or even trillions of parameters) of large language models, it causes large resource consumption even for deployment. Taking GPT-3 as an example, it has 175 billion parameters and uses FP16 for inference, occupying approximately
350 GB of GPU memory, which means at least 8 NVIDIA
A100 GPUs are needed to support the deployment of a single model. Therefore, it is more than necessary to reduce the
cost.
Model quantization, as a classic method of model compression, can effectively reduce the memory consumption of
LLMs. For example, when using 4-bit quantization, GPT-3
can be deployed on 2 A100 GPUs due to one-fourth of memory reduction. GPTQ (Frantar et al. 2022) is currently the
most prominent low-bit weight-only quantization method,
which can compress some LLMs to 4-bit while maintaining acceptable precision degradation. Smoothquant (Xiao
et al. 2023) could achieve 8-bit quantization for both weights
and activations, by equivalently transferring the multiplication factors in weights and activations. However, these
methods suffer from significant accuracy loss when applied
to lower-bit quantization, such as 2-bit weight-only quantization using GPTQ or W4A8(4-bit for weights and 8-bit

Introduction
Recently, OpenAI’s ChatGPT (OpenAI 2023b) has demonstrated outstanding performance on text generation, sparking a research frenzy in large language models (LLMs).
Some of the most famous LLMs include GPT series like
GPT-3 (Brown et al. 2020), GPT-4 (OpenAI 2023a), and
PaLM (Chowdhery et al. 2022), Ernie (Zhang et al. 2019).
Open-sourced ones like GLM (Du et al. 2021), BLOOM
(Laurençon et al. 2022), OPT (Zhang et al. 2022) and
LLaMa series (Touvron et al. 2023) have remarkably accelerated the development of the community. In essence, LLMs
are generative models that are trained on excessively large
amounts of text data that mimics how humans use language,
and they exhibit superior zero-shot performance in a large
range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks, including language translation, sentiment analysis, text classification, and question answering, etc. They are increasingly beCopyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18536

