The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

QAGait: Revisit Gait Recognition from a Quality Perspective
Zengbin Wang1 * , Saihui Hou2,3∗ , Man Zhang1† , Xu Liu3 ,
Chunshui Cao3 , Yongzhen Huang2,3 , Peipei Li1 , Shibiao Xu1
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Beijing Normal University
3
Watrix AI
{wzb1, zhangman, lipeipei, shibiaoxu}@bupt.edu.cn,
{housaihui, huangyongzhen}@bnu.edu.cn, {xu.liu, chunshui.cao}@watrix.ai
Abstract
Gait recognition is a promising biometric method that aims
to identify pedestrians from their unique walking patterns.
Silhouette modality, renowned for its easy acquisition, simple structure, sparse representation, and convenient modeling,
has been widely employed in controlled in-the-lab research.
However, as gait recognition rapidly advances from in-thelab to in-the-wild scenarios, various conditions raise significant challenges for silhouette modality, including 1) unidentifiable low-quality silhouettes (abnormal segmentation, severe
occlusion, or even non-human shape), and 2) identifiable but
challenging silhouettes (background noise, non-standard posture, slight occlusion). To address these challenges, we revisit
gait recognition pipeline and approach gait recognition from a
quality perspective, namely QAGait. Specifically, we propose
a series of cost-effective quality assessment strategies, including Maxmial Connect Area and Template Match to eliminate
background noises and unidentifiable silhouettes, Alignment
strategy to handle non-standard postures. We also propose
two quality-aware loss functions to integrate silhouette quality into optimization within the embedding space. Extensive
experiments demonstrate our QAGait can guarantee both gait
reliability and performance enhancement. Furthermore, our
quality assessment strategies can seamlessly integrate with
existing gait datasets, showcasing our superiority. Code is
available at https://github.com/wzb-bupt/QAGait.

1

Figure 1: The quality difference when advanced from in-thelab to in-the-wild gait datasets, including: 1) more extremely
low-quality silhouettes that are unidentifiable; and 2) higher
quality variances due to various and complex environments.

et al. 2023a), is its common use of binary silhouette as input.
This preference stems from its simple structure and sparse
representation, which allows researchers to focus on extracting essential motion patterns and action variations, rather
than being distracted by background, color, or texture details from RGB images. Moreover, this simplified input enables efficient and practical processing. Extensive in-the-lab
experiments with shallow models have achieved impressive
performance, i.e., 95.9% on CASIA-B dataset (Hsu et al.
2022) and 92.1% on OU-MVLP dataset (Dou et al. 2023).
In most cases, the immense success of in-the-lab gait
datasets can be attributed to their high-quality segmentation, controlled viewpoint of standard posture, minimal occlusion, etc. Under these controlled settings, a simple data
preprocessing approach (Chao et al. 2019; Fan et al. 2023)
can easily ensure that pedestrians are uniformly processed,
thus facilitating subsequent feature extraction and analysis.
However, as in Figure 1, when gait recognition advances
from controlled in-the-lab to in-the-wild scenarios (e.g.,
Gait3D (Zheng et al. 2022) and GREW (Zhu et al. 2021)), it
encounters various challenges such as complex background,
arbitrary camera position, and crowded environment. These
uncontrolled conditions lead to two key issues:

Introduction

Gait recognition has attracted widespread interest in computer vision and biometrics community due to its potential to
identify individuals from a distance. Unlike other biometric
characteristics such as face, fingerprint, and iris, gait is difficult to disguise and can be non-intrusively acquired without any cooperation (Sepas-Moghaddam and Etemad 2022).
These inherent characteristics contribute to gait recognition a promising solution for wide applications, including
surveillance, suspect tracking, motion monitoring, and identification (Wan, Wang, and Phoha 2018; Shen et al. 2022).
One notable advantage of gait recognition, as highlighted
in previous research (Fan et al. 2023; Ma et al. 2023; Wang
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
†

Corresponding author (zhangman@bupt.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Unidentifiable with low quality: The traditional data preprocessing approach mentioned above is insufficient to

5785

