The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Neural Reasoning about Agents’ Goals, Preferences, and Actions
Matteo Bortoletto, Lei Shi, Andreas Bulling
University of Stuttgart, Germany
{matteo.bortoletto, lei.shi, andreas.bulling}@vis.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract

more general ability of AI systems to reason about unexpected events or situations (Riochet et al. 2020; Gandhi et al.
2021; Dasgupta et al. 2021; Shu et al. 2021; Piloto et al.
2022; Weihs et al. 2022). Most of them focus on intuitive
physics (Yi et al. 2020; Smith et al. 2019; Ates et al. 2022;
Riochet et al. 2020; Dasgupta et al. 2021; Piloto et al. 2022;
Weihs et al. 2022; Piloto et al. 2018) in which computational
models have to reason about properties and interactions of
physical macroscopic objects. In contrast, comparably little
advances have been achieved in methods for intuitive psychology, i.e. common-sense reasoning about other agents’
mental states from their observed behaviour (Gandhi et al.
2021; Shu et al. 2021).
Similar to studies in developmental cognitive science,
evaluation of common-sense reasoning abilities in these
benchmarks uses a violation of expectation paradigm (Baillargeon 1987, VoE). In a set of familiarisation trials, an observer model has to form an expectation about a particular
agent behaviour. In a subsequent test trial, given the context
extracted from the familiarisation trials, the observer has to
judge how expected the behaviour of the agent is. Expectedness is defined as the observer’s prediction error with respect
to a ground truth (e.g. agent’s next action). The core idea behind the VoE paradigm is to pair test trials that may not differ
much in traditional error metrics but differ in terms of human
reasoning. As such, VoE allows probing AI capabilities by
comparing scenarios that humans can differentiate based on
those capabilities.
Inspired by behavioural experiments with infants, Gandhi
et al. have recently introduced the Baby Intuitions Benchmark (Gandhi et al. 2021, BIB) – a set of tasks that require
an observer model to reason about agents’ goals, preferences, and actions by observing their behaviour in a gridworld environment. The BIB poses two key challenges.
First, despite being performed in the same grid-world environment, training and evaluation tasks differ in their number
and setting. Moreover, test trials in the training set present
only expected outcomes, requiring observer models to generalise to unseen situations by combining different pieces
of knowledge gained during training. Second, the benchmark not only challenges models’ ability to predict future
actions but also to use them to quantify the expectedness
of novel situations. As such, the BIB can be seen as posing
a meta-learning problem (Rabinowitz et al. 2018) in which

We propose the Intuitive Reasoning Network (IRENE) –
a novel neural model for intuitive psychological reasoning about agents’ goals, preferences, and actions that can
generalise previous experiences to new situations. IRENE
combines a graph neural network for learning agent and
world state representations with a transformer to encode the
task context. When evaluated on the challenging Baby Intuitions Benchmark, IRENE achieves new state-of-the-art performance on three out of its five tasks – with up to 48.9 %
improvement. In contrast to existing methods, IRENE is able
to bind preferences to specific agents, to better distinguish
between rational and irrational agents, and to better understand the role of blocking obstacles. We also investigate, for
the first time, the influence of the training tasks on test performance. Our analyses demonstrate the effectiveness of IRENE
in combining prior knowledge gained during training for unseen evaluation tasks.

Introduction
Common-sense reasoning refers to a broad class of abilities that enable agents to understand basic facts about
events, objects, beliefs, or desires (McCarthy 1989). Studies in developmental cognitive science have demonstrated
that even young infants have these abilities (Needham and
Baillargeon 1993; Gergely et al. 1995; Aguiar and Baillargeon 1999) while their absence can be linked to developmental disorders, such as autism (Baron-Cohen 1997).
Given its fundamental importance for human social cognition and behaviour, it is imperative that artificial intelligent (AI) agents possess similar capabilities to effectively
be understood by humans and in turn, understand them.
This is crucial for a wide variety of applications, such as
robotics (Mota and Sridharan 2019) or human-machine collaboration (Conti, Varde, and Wang 2022). Previous research
in machine common-sense reasoning has mainly focused on
evaluating language processing (Bhagavatula et al. 2020;
Huang et al. 2019; Zellers et al. 2019; Bisk et al. 2020;
Sap et al. 2019; Sakaguchi et al. 2021) or visual scene understanding (Yi et al. 2020; Smith et al. 2019; Ates et al.
2022) in a task-specific manner. More recently, several new
benchmarks have been introduced that allow to assess the
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

456

