The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Attention Disturbance and Dual-Path Constraint Network
for Occluded Person Re-identification
Jiaer Xia1 * , Lei Tan1 * , Pingyang Dai1† , Mingbo Zhao2 , Yongjian Wu3 , Liujuan Cao1
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China
2
Donghua University, Shanghai, China
3
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
{xiajiaer, tanlei}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, pydai@xmu.edu.cn,
mzhao4@dhu.edu.cn, littlekenwu@tencent.com, caoliujuan@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

Train on
Vanilla occlusion

Occluded person re-identification (Re-ID) aims to address
the potential occlusion problem when matching occluded or
holistic pedestrians from different camera views. Many methods use the background as artificial occlusion and rely on
attention networks to exclude noisy interference. However,
the significant discrepancy between simple background occlusion and realistic occlusion can negatively impact the generalization of the network. To address this issue, we propose
a novel transformer-based Attention Disturbance and DualPath Constraint Network (ADP) to enhance the generalization of attention networks. Firstly, to imitate real-world obstacles, we introduce an Attention Disturbance Mask (ADM)
module that generates an offensive noise, which can distract
attention like a realistic occluder, as a more complex form of
occlusion. Secondly, to fully exploit these complex occluded
images, we develop a Dual-Path Constraint Module (DPC)
that can obtain preferable supervision information from holistic images through dual-path interaction. With our proposed
method, the network can effectively circumvent a wide variety of occlusions using the basic ViT baseline. Comprehensive experimental evaluations conducted on person re-ID
benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of ADP over stateof-the-art methods.

Test on
Real occlusion

Train on
ADM occlusion

Test on
Vanilla occlusion

Test on
Real occlusion

Significant
discrepancy

(a) Baseline

(b) ADP
Functional
Similar

Figure 1: Visualization of attention to baseline and proposed
ADP. (a) The baseline trained with the assistance of background occlusion failed to avoid the realistic occlusion in
the testing set. (b) The ADP trained by the proposed realitysimilar occlusion ADM performs well on both artificial and
real occlusion.

Introduction

narios. Consequently, these methods significantly degrade
when dealing with occluded images. While recent endeavors have facilitated person Re-ID under occlusion conditions (Yan et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022b; Tan et al. 2022; Li
et al. 2021; Shi et al. 2022; Jia et al. 2022), two main problems associated with occlusions still need to be addressed.
Firstly, the presence of obstacles will vanish some parts of
the human body, missing and misaligned extracted features.
Traditional Re-ID methods cannot perform valid retrievals
when some discriminative parts are obscured. Secondly, occlusions introduce noise into extracted features, polluting
the final feature representation of each image. When dealing
with these polluted features, different identities may have
high similarities due to the same obstacle, resulting in incorrect matches. To address the aforementioned problems,
some methods (Wang et al. 2020; Gao et al. 2020; Miao
et al. 2019; Miao, Wu, and Yang 2022) use additional trained
networks, such as human parsing and keypoint estimation,

Person re-identification (Re-ID) refers to the process of
matching pedestrian images captured by non-overlapping
cameras. This technique has gained popularity in recent
years as surveillance systems have become more advanced
and widespread. With the rapid development of deep learning technology (He et al. 2016; Vaswani et al. 2017; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021), Re-ID has also achieved remarkable performance (Luo et al. 2019; Zhai et al. 2020; Zheng et al.
2015; Eom and Ham 2019; Chen et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2016)
by meriting from its powerful feature extraction capabilities.
However, most existing methods assume that the pedestrians in retrieved images are unobstructed, ignoring the possible occlusion problems that can occur in real-world sce* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6198

