The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

New Classes of the Greedy-Applicable Arm Feature Distributions in the Sparse
Linear Bandit Problem
Koji Ichikawa1 2 , Shinji Ito1 2 3 , Daisuke Hatano3 , Hanna Sumita4 ,
Takuro Fukunaga5 , Naonori Kakimura6 , Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi7 8
1
NEC Corporation
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
3
RIKEN AIP
4
Tokyo Institute of Technology
5
Chuo University
6
Keio University
7
National Institute of Informatics
8
The University of Tokyo
{k ichikawa0, i-shinji}@nec.com, daisuke.hatano@riken.jp, sumita@c.titech.ac.jp, fukunaga.07s@chuo-u.ac.jp,
kakimura@math.keio.ac.jp, k keniti@nii.ac.jp
2

Abstract

arm selection criteria (Auer 2002; Dani, Hayes, and Kakade
2008; Li et al. 2010; Rusmevichientong and Tsitsiklis 2010;
Chu et al. 2011; Abbasi-Yadkori, Pál, and Szepesvári 2011),
but they usually allow the unknown parameters to be dense.
In the sparse linear bandits, introduced by AbbasiYadkori, Pál, and Szepesvári (2012) and Carpentier and
Munos (2012), we consider the situations where the arm
features are high-dimensional, but the unknown parameters are sparse. If we are given the sparsity of the unknown parameters in advance, the sparse linear bandits admit sublinear-regret algorithms (Abbasi-Yadkori, Pál, and
Szepesvári 2012; Carpentier and Munos 2012; Bastani and
Bayati 2020; Wang, Wei, and Yao 2018; Kim and Paik
2019), which outperform the linear bandit algorithms for the
dense setting by exploiting the sparsity. On the other hand,
for the estimation of the unknown parameters, the arm features chosen by the algorithms must be sufficiently diverse.
In particular, recent algorithms (Bastani and Bayati 2020;
Wang, Wei, and Yao 2018; Kim and Paik 2019) adopt the
forced-sampling or uniform sampling step to guarantee the
diversity of the chosen arm features. We need to know the
sparsity in advance to ensure an optimal ratio between the
forced or uniform sampling step and the other strategic arm
selection step.
Oh, Iyengar, and Zeevi (2021) and Ariu, Abe, and
Proutière (2022) recently proposed algorithms for the sparse
linear bandits that work without knowing the sparsity in advance. Such sparsity-agnostic algorithms are based on the
greedy arm selection policy. They showed that the greedy
arm selection automatically guarantees the sample diversity under certain assumptions on the arm feature distribution. However, the existing analysis of sparsity-agnostic algorithms is of limited applicability in practice due to their
strong assumption on the arm feature distribution. One of
their typical assumptions is relaxed symmetry, which requires the arm feature distribution to be almost symmetric
around the origin. Thus the current analysis is not applicable to the problem where arm features take only positive val-

We consider the sparse contextual bandit problem where arm
feature affects reward through the inner product of sparse
parameters. Recent studies have developed sparsity-agnostic
algorithms based on the greedy arm selection policy. However, the analysis of these algorithms requires strong assumptions on the arm feature distribution to ensure that the greedily selected samples are sufficiently diverse; One of the most
common assumptions, relaxed symmetry, imposes approximate origin-symmetry on the distribution, which cannot allow distributions that has origin-asymmetric support. In this
paper, we show that the greedy algorithm is applicable to
a wider range of the arm feature distributions from two aspects. Firstly, we show that a mixture distribution that has a
greedy-applicable component is also greedy-applicable. Second, we propose new distribution classes, related to Gaussian
mixture, discrete, and radial distribution, for which the sample diversity is guaranteed. The proposed classes can describe
distributions with origin-asymmetric support and, in conjunction with the first claim, provide theoretical guarantees of the
greedy policy for a very wide range of the arm feature distributions.

1

Introduction

The contextual bandit problems are extensively investigated
in various settings (Lattimore and Szepesvári 2020), with
practical applications to recommendations (Li et al. 2010),
clinical trials (Durand et al. 2018; Bastani and Bayati 2020),
and many others (Bouneffouf and Rish 2019). The problems
are sequential decision making problems where, in each
round, a learner observes a set of arms with context, chooses
one of them, and receives a corresponding reward. In this paper, we assume that arm features (context) for each arm are
stochastically generated and that the reward is affected by
the inner product of the selected arm features and unknown
parameters. The problem is known to admit sublinear-regret
algorithms that utilize the upper confidence bound for the
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12708

