The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PoetryDiffusion: Towards Joint Semantic and Metrical Manipulation
in Poetry Generation
Zhiyuan Hu1 * , Chumin Liu2 , Yue Feng3 , Anh Tuan Luu2 , Bryan Hooi1
1
2

National University of Singapore (NUS), Singapore
Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore
3
University College London (UCL), UK

Abstract

Sonnet

Controllable text generation is a challenging and meaningful
field in natural language generation (NLG). Especially, poetry
generation is a typical one with well-defined and strict conditions for text generation which is an ideal playground for
the assessment of current methodologies. While prior works
succeeded in controlling either semantic or metrical aspects
of poetry generation, simultaneously addressing both remains
a challenge. In this paper, we pioneer the use of the Diffusion
model for generating sonnets and Chinese SongCi poetry to
tackle such challenges. In terms of semantics, our PoetryDiffusion model, built upon the Diffusion model, generates entire sentences or poetry by comprehensively considering the
entirety of sentence information. This approach enhances semantic expression, distinguishing it from autoregressive and
large language models (LLMs). For metrical control, its constraint control module which can be trained individually enables us to flexibly incorporate a novel metrical controller to
manipulate and evaluate metrics (format and rhythm). The
denoising process in PoetryDiffusion allows for the gradual enhancement of semantics and flexible integration of the
metrical controller which can calculate and impose penalties
on states that stray significantly from the target control distribution. Experimental results on two datasets demonstrate
that our model outperforms existing models in terms of automatic evaluation of semantic, metrical, and overall performance as well as human evaluation. Codes are released to
https://github.com/ChorlingLau/PoetryDiffusion/.

Time, the old humourist, has a trick to day
Of moving landmarks and of levelling down
Till into town the suburbs edge their way
And in the suburbs you may scent the town

A
B
A
B

With mount St. thus approaching muswell hill
And clapham common marching with the mile
You get a hammersmith that fills the bill
A hampstead with a serious sense of style

C
D
C
D

*Metrical Features:
· Selected excerpts from a Sonnet with 14 lines originally.
· Words marked in red with the same letter notation rhyme.

SongCi
上林春慢 (CiPai)
Word 帽落宫花，衣惹御香，凤辇晚来初过(Guo)。
Tone - − + + 0 + − − + 0 - - - + + 0
The hat adorned with palace flowers. The clothes infused with
imperial fragrance. The phoenix carriage arrives late, just passing by.
Word 鹤降诏飞，龙擎烛戏，端门万枝灯火(Huo)。
Tone - − - + 0 + + + - 0 + + - + + 0
Cranes descend as decrees fly. Dragons lift torches and play.
Countless lanterns and lights at every palace gate.
Word
Tone

满城车马，对明月有谁闲坐(Zuo)。

- + + - 0 - + - - + + 0
Carriages and horses fill the city. Who sits
leisurely in the face of the bright moon?
*Metrical Features:
· Format is decided by punctuations “，” or”。”.
· Words marked in red are positioned for rhyme, and their
corresponding Mandarin Pinyin is provided in parentheses.
· Each word has its own tone, categorized as "+", "-", or "0".

Introduction
Deep learning has greatly influenced natural language generation (NLG). Models like Seq2Seq (Sutskever, Vinyals,
and Le 2014), GAN (Goodfellow et al. 2020), VAE (Kingma
and Welling 2013), pre-trained language models, and LLMs
have led NLG advancements. Among these, controllable text
generation (CTG) is an emerging area within NLG and it
is important and practical to consider specific constraints.
Poetry generation stands out as a distinct domain with its
unique characteristics, demanding not just coherent semantics but also strict adherence to metrical rules tied to format and pronunciation. These intricate requirements present
the dual challenge of mastering semantics and metrics in

Figure 1: Examples of Sonnet and SongCi
tandem. In comparison to other coarse-grained CTG tasks
like attribute-based generation (involving topics, emotions,
and keywords), dialogue generation, and storytelling, poetry
generation holds a unique position. Particularly evident in
forms like sonnets and Songci, it necessitates adherence to
well-defined and demanding metrics. Such specificity makes
metrical poetry an ideal testing ground to validate the potency of the latest methodologies. Moreover, the available
poetry data resource is of unparalleled quality in NLP, providing a strong foundation for our future work.
Sonnet and SongCi are two classical and famous forms
of poetry, which share two major characteristics: (1) The

* Corresponding to Zhiyuan Hu: zhiyuan hu@u.nus.edu
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18279

