The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DDAE: Towards Deep Dynamic Vision BERT Pretraining
Honghao Chen1,2 * , Xiangwen Kong3 , Xiangyu Zhang3 , Xin Zhao1,2 , Kaiqi Huang1,2,4†
1
CRISE, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
MEGVII Technology
4
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
chenhonghao2021@ia.ac.cn, {kongxiangwen, zhangxiangyu}@megvii.com, {xzhao, kaiqi.huang}@nlpr.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Recently, masked image modeling (MIM) has demonstrated
promising prospects in self-supervised representation learning. However, existing MIM frameworks recover all masked
patches equivalently, ignoring that the reconstruction difficulty of different patches can vary sharply due to their diverse distance from visible patches. In this paper, we propose
a novel deep dynamic supervision to enable MIM methods to
dynamically reconstruct patches with different degrees of difficulty at different pretraining phases and depths of the model.
Our deep dynamic supervision helps to provide more locality
inductive bias for ViTs especially in deep layers, which inherently makes up for the absence of local prior for self-attention
mechanism. Built upon the deep dynamic supervision, we
propose Deep Dynamic AutoEncoder (DDAE), a simple yet
effective MIM framework that utilizes dynamic mechanisms
for pixel regression and feature self-distillation simultaneously. Extensive experiments across a variety of vision tasks
including ImageNet classification, semantic segmentation on
ADE20K and object detection on COCO demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

(a) 50%

(b) 75%

(c) 90%

Figure 1: Distance map under different mask ratios. We normalize the Euclidean distance from masked patch to the
nearest visible patch. Darker color means larger distance
from visible patches. High mask ratio leads to diverse distance for masked patches.

However, success comes with remaining obstacles. At
present, all MIM frameworks recover all patches equivalently, ignoring the fact that the reconstruction difficulty of
different patches can vary sharply, and the semantic reasoning and local perception ability required for patches are not
the same. Generally, recovering patches with more visible
patches around will be simpler, as long as the model has
sufficient local perception ability. In contrast, reconstruction with few visible patches around requires the model to
have strong semantic reasoning ability, given that there is
little access to neighboring information. Treating all pixels equally will neglect this demand for different properties
of the model, inevitably limiting its representation ability.
Therefore, we ask if there is a way to focus on objectives
with diverse characteristics as training progresses so that
better representations can be learned overall.
Motivated by this observation and answering the question above, we propose a novel deep dynamic supervision to
re-weight patches conditioned on their difficulty. Our deep
dynamic supervision consists of two designs: i) Dynamic.
We first define the reconstruction difficulty according to the
distance between masked patches and visible ones, generating a distance map as shown in Fig 1. Then, we calculate
loss mask conditioned on the distance map through learnable parameters β. With the update of β, the model dynamically focuses on different regions as the training progresses;
ii) Deep. Since different layers naturally learn features with

Introduction
Aided by the rapid gains in hardware, deep learning has ushered in the era of big models and big data. Along with the
ever-growing model capacity, the demand for data can easily
reach hundreds of millions (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020), which
is not publicly accessible for labeled data. Self-Supervised
Learning(SSL) frameworks, such as DINO (Caron et al.
2021), MoCo(Chen, Xie, and He 2021), BEiT (Bao, Dong,
and Wei 2021), etc., have grown in concern in vision model
pretraining without the need for labels. In particular, the
recently proposed Masked Image Modeling (MIM) methods (He et al. 2022; Xie et al. 2022; Dong et al. 2021; Chen
et al. 2022a,b) have shown remarkably impressive performance. Inspired by BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) in NLP, MIM
pretrains the encoder by reconstructing the masked image
patches from visible patches. MIM methods enable Vision
Transformers (ViTs) to learn rich visual representations and
exhibit great potential in various downstream tasks.
* Work done partly during internship at MEGVII Technology.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1037

