The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Multi-Scale Video-Text Correspondence for Weakly Supervised
Temporal Article Grounding
Wenjia Geng1 , Yong Liu1 , Lei Chen3 * , Sujia Wang1 , Jie Zhou2 , Yansong Tang1
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
3
University of Science and Technology Beijing
{gengwj22@, liuyong23@, wsj22@}mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, chenlei2022@ustb.edu.cn,
{jzhou@, tang.yansong@sz.}tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

sentence individually ignores rich contextual and semantic
information within the sentences. As a remedy to these limitations, the concept of multi-sentence grounding (Huang
et al. 2021; Bao, Zheng, and Mu 2021; Wang et al. 2021)
has been introduced, which requires jointly localizing multiple sentences. Chen et al (Chen et al. 2022) identifies certain
unrealistic assumptions prevalent in existing multi-sentence
grounding methods: all query sentences can be grounded
in the video, and query sentences are at the same semantic scales. Illustrated in Figure 1, the wiki article consists
of high-level summaries, e.g, sentence (1) and corresponding low-level details, e.g, sentence [1.1]. Besides, some sentences, e.g., sentence [1.3] has no corresponding video segments in the whole video. To address these two unrealistic
assumptions, they introduce a more realistic and challenging grounding task: Temporal Article Grounding. To further alleviate the need for extensive manual annotations of
the large-scale training set, they consider a more meaningful setting: Weakly-Supervised Temporal Article Grounding
(WSAG), in which there are no temporal annotations for
each sentence in the training data. As shown in Figure 1,
given a multi-scale article and a relevant video, WSAG aims
to localize corresponding video segments for all “groundable” sentences.
In addressing WSAG, Chen et al (Chen et al. 2022)
introduce DualMIL, a method that extends multiple instance learning into a two-level framework encompassing
“sentence-level” and “segment-level” representations. However, it overlooks the inherent hierarchical structures in the
visual and text modalities and their complex correspondence, resulting in a loss of useful prior knowlege for precise grounding. As demonstrated in Figure 1, if we find that
sentence (2) has a high similarity score with video segment
[5τ − 9τ ], it is highly likely that sentence (2) also semantically related to sub video segment within it, e.g., [5τ − 6τ ].
To be more general, a primary challenge inherent in
WSAG is that the richness of video content and the variety of
textual granularity lead to complex hierarchies of grounded
video segments, which is intuitively illustrated in Figure 1.
On the single-sentence level, the sentence may semantically
correspond to multi-scale video segments, for instance, the
broader temporal scope [5τ − 9τ ] encompasses multiple
ground truth proposals related to sentence (2), while a nar-

Weakly Supervised temporal Article Grounding (WSAG) is a
challenging and practical task in video understanding. Specifically, given a video and a relevant article, whose sentences
are at different semantic scales, WSAG aims to localize corresponding video segments for all “groundable” sentences.
Compared to other grounding tasks, e.g., localizing one target
segment with respect to a given sentence query, WSAG confronts an essential obstacle rooted in the intricate multi-scale
information inherent within both textual and visual modalities. Existing methods overlook the modeling and alignment
of such structured information present in multi-scale video
segments and hierarchical textual content. To this end, we
propose a Multi-Scale Video-Text Correspondence Learning
(MVTCL) framework, which enhances the grounding performance in complex scenes by modeling multi-scale semantic
correspondence both within and between modalities. Specifically, MVTCL initially aggregates video content spanning
distinct temporal scales and leverages hierarchical textual relationships in both temporal and semantic dimensions via
a semantic calibration module. Then multi-scale contrastive
learning module is introduced to generate more discriminative representations by selecting typical contexts and performing inter-video contrastive learning. Through the multiscale semantic calibration architecture and supervision design, our method achieves new state-of-the-art performance
on existing WSAG benchmarks.

Introduction
Video Grounding (Anne Hendricks et al. 2017; Gao et al.
2017; Chen et al. 2020) aims to localize target segments
from an untrimmed video with respect to the given language query, which is fundamental to various multi-modal
tasks, such as video question answering (Le et al. 2020; Zhu
et al. 2017), video context retrieval (Gabeur et al. 2020), and
video storytelling (Li et al. 2019).
Early works in Video Grounding mainly focus on single
sentence grounding (Ma et al. 2020; Song et al. 2020), which
aims to localize the most relevant video segment with a single sentence query. However, the majority of real-world languages consist of multiple sentences, and simply grounding
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1896

