The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Out of Thin Air: Exploring Data-Free Adversarial Robustness Distillation
Yuzheng Wang1 * , Zhaoyu Chen1∗ , Dingkang Yang1 , Pinxue Guo1
Kaixun Jiang1 , Wenqiang Zhang1,2 , Lizhe Qi1†
1

2

Shanghai Engineering Research Center of AI & Robotics, Academy for Engineering & Technology, Fudan University
Engineering Research Center of AI & Robotics, Ministry of Education, Academy for Engineering & Technology, Fudan
University
{yzwang20, zhaoyuchen20}@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

Various defensive strategies have been proposed (Madry
et al. 2017; Jia et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2022b; Wang et al.
2023a) for adversarial robustness. Among them, Adversarial
Training (AT) has been considered the most effective approach (Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018; Croce and Hein
2020). By generating adversarial examples, the models can
learn robustness knowledge to deal with various adversarial
attacks. Therefore, it can significantly improve the robustness
of large-capacity models. However, the robustness performance is struggling for small models only relying on AT due
to the limited model capacity. Based on this, guided by the
pre-trained robust teacher with insights, the robustness of
small models is improved. This process is called Adversarial
Robustness Distillation (ARD) (Goldblum et al. 2020).

Adversarial Robustness Distillation (ARD) is a promising task
to solve the issue of limited adversarial robustness of small capacity models while optimizing the expensive computational
costs of Adversarial Training (AT). Despite the good robust
performance, the existing ARD methods are still impractical
to deploy in natural high-security scenes due to these methods
rely entirely on original or publicly available data with a similar distribution. In fact, these data are almost always private,
specific, and distinctive for scenes that require high robustness.
To tackle these issues, we propose a challenging but significant task called Data-Free Adversarial Robustness Distillation
(DFARD), which aims to train small, easily deployable, robust models without relying on data. We demonstrate that the
challenge lies in the lower upper bound of knowledge transfer information, making it crucial to mining and transferring
knowledge more efficiently. Inspired by human education, we
design a plug-and-play Interactive Temperature Adjustment
(ITA) strategy to improve the efficiency of knowledge transfer
and propose an Adaptive Generator Balance (AGB) module
to retain more data information. Our method uses adaptive
hyperparameters to avoid a large number of parameter tuning,
which significantly outperforms the combination of existing
techniques. Meanwhile, our method achieves stable and reliable performance on multiple benchmarks.

Despite improving the robustness of small models, existing ARD methods are still hard to apply in real-world scenes
due to impractical settings. The original training data is of
primary concern. Firstly, all existing ARD methods assume
that the original training data is available throughout the distillation process (Goldblum et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2022). In
practical application, for scenes with high robustness requirements, the original data is usually private and unavailable
(e.g., face data for face recognition system, disease data for
medical diagnosis, and financial data for quantitative investment). Secondly, some technologies avoid relying on original
private data by using open-world or out-of-domain (OOD)
unlabeled data (Fang et al. 2021a). However, these methods
rely on a necessary assumption that private data can always
be obtained simply from open datasets. Although some methods claim to use OOD data, the performance of these methods degrades drastically when the discrepancy between the
unavailable original data and unlabeled data increases. Therefore, good performance extremely depends on broadly similar
image patterns between the data domains instead of OOD
(Yang et al. 2021). Based on these, existing technologies are
still challenging to deploy in high-security robustness scenes.
One question is whether we can efficiently train small,
easily deployable, robust models to improve robustness
without original private data and specific data with similar patterns. To explore this question, we propose a novel
task called Data-Free Adversarial Robustness Distillation
(DFARD). The diagrams are shown in Figure 1. Compared
with the existing KD (a) and ARD (b) tasks, our DFARD only
uses generated data, which is more general and practical.

Introduction
Deep learning has achieved great success in many fields
(Devlin et al. 2018; Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Yang et al.
2023c,a,b,d; Liu et al. 2023b,c,a; Wang et al. 2023c,b). Along
with this process, deep learning models are increasingly expected to be deployed in established and emerging artificial
intelligence fields. However, high-performance models’ large
scale and high computational costs (Ramesh et al. 2022) prevent this technology from being applied to mobile devices,
driverless cars, and tiny robots. More importantly, many studies have shown that well-trained deep learning models are
vulnerable to adversarial examples containing only minor
changes (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Chen et al.
2022a, 2023). Therefore, training robust small-capacity models has become the key to breaking the bottleneck.
* Equal contributions
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5776

