The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MERGE: Fast Private Text Generation
Zi Liang, Pinghui Wang* , Ruofei Zhang,
Nuo Xu, Shuo Zhang, Lifeng Xing, Haitao Bai, Ziyang Zhou
MOE KLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, P. R. China
{liangzid, zs412082986, xlf20200926, haitao.bai, dakandao}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,
phwang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, rfzhang@gmail.com, nxu@sei.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The drastic increase in language models’ parameters has led to
a new trend of deploying models in cloud servers, raising growing concerns about private inference for Transformer-based
models. Existing two-party privacy-preserving techniques,
however, only take into account natural language understanding (NLU) scenarios. Private inference in natural language
generation (NLG), crucial for applications like translation and
code completion, remains underexplored. In addition, previous
privacy-preserving techniques suffer from convergence issues
during model training and exhibit poor inference speed when
used with NLG models due to the neglect of time-consuming
operations in auto-regressive generations. To address these
issues, we propose a fast private text generation framework
for Transformer-based language models, namely MERGE.
MERGE reuses the output hidden state as the word embedding to bypass the embedding computation and reorganize
the linear operations in the Transformer module to accelerate the forward procedure. Extensive experiments show that
MERGE achieves a 26.5x speedup to the vanilla encrypted
model under the sequence length 512, and reduces 80% communication cost, with an up to 10x speedup to state-of-the-art
approximated models.

Introduction
Recently, from pre-trained language models (PLMs) to large
language models (LLMs), Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017)
based models have attracted significant attention because of
their exceptional performance in downstream tasks. Due to
the high demand for computing power, this growth of model
parameters also has caused the trend of hosting models to
cloud service providers, which raises wide concerns about
privacy inference and training. For example, existing natural
language processing (NLP) services like Copilot1 and ChatGPT require users to submit their queries in plain text, which
may contain confidential information such as source code,
medical information, and personal preferences.
To alleviate the privacy problem, recent works (Hao et al.
2022; Chen et al. 2022) have developed two-party secure
inference services for PLMs by secure Multi-Party Computation (MPC). MPC ensures the privacy of user data and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/features/copilot

19884

model weights, and shares them secretly. However, PLMs
inference under MPC is considerably slow compared to the
plain-text version, which limits its application in real-world
services. To address this issue, several works have attempted
to simplify the bottleneck operations such as activation functions and softmax in the Transformer model. For instance,
(Mishra et al. 2020) uses Neural Architecture Search (NAS)
to replace the activation functions with linear layers, and
(Li et al. 2022) approximates the exponential operation with
polynomial functions.
Though designed for Transformer, existing works (Hao
et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022) solely explore
the scenario of natural language understanding (NLU) (e.g.,
on the GLUE (Wang et al. 2019) benchmark). Unfortunately,
we observe that they have no significant improvements in
natural language generation (NLG) tasks (cf., Fig. 1). By
illustrating the bottleneck of NLU and NLG inference procedures, we find that auto-regressive generation used in PLMs
suffers from extra time cost in embedding table query and
token sampling (i.e., GenTime), which slows down the whole
inference procedure heavily.
In this paper, we explore accelerating the generation procedure of language models. Different from existing works that
merely approximate the nonlinear operations, we consider
the optimization at the architecture level and attempt to reorganize and simplify the whole generation procedure as well
as Transformer modules. To this end, we propose MERGE
(short for MPC-based Embedding Resending GEneration),
a fast and easy-to-adopt framework for private text generation. MERGE is compatible with previous MPC-based works
(e.g., MPCformer, THE-X, and IRON) and mainstream PLMs
(e.g., GPT-2 (Radford et al. 2019), T5 (Raffel et al. 2020), and
Bart (Lewis et al. 2020)). In concrete, MERGE can simplify
the time-consuming operations in NLG such as embedding
query and token sampling. To achieve that, we first put forward a strategy called embedding resending, which directly
uses the output hidden state as the new input token embedding. Embedding resending helps to bypass the embedding
table query operation and decouple the computation between
forward representation learning and next token sampling.
Besides, following the recent research (Hassid et al. 2022)
in attention mechanism, we approximate self-attention with
constant attention matrices and merge tensor computations
in the Transformer module before inference. Nevertheless,

