The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DHGCN: Dynamic Hop Graph Convolution Network for
Self-Supervised Point Cloud Learning
Jincen Jiang1 * , Lizhi Zhao1 * , Xuequan Lu2† , Wei Hu3 , Imran Razzak4 , Meili Wang1†
1

Northwest A&F University,
2
La Trobe University,
3
Peking University,
4
University of New South Wales
{jinec, zhaolizhi, wml}@nwsuaf.edu.cn, b.lu@latrobe.edu.au, forhuwei@pku.edu.cn, imran.razzak@unsw.edu.au
Abstract
Recent works attempt to extend Graph Convolution Networks
(GCNs) to point clouds for classification and segmentation
tasks. These works tend to sample and group points to create smaller point sets locally and mainly focus on extracting local features through GCNs, while ignoring the relationship between point sets. In this paper, we propose the Dynamic Hop Graph Convolution Network (DHGCN) for explicitly learning the contextual relationships between the voxelized point parts, which are treated as graph nodes. Motivated by the intuition that the contextual information between point parts lies in the pairwise adjacent relationship,
which can be depicted by the hop distance of the graph quantitatively, we devise a novel self-supervised part-level hop
distance reconstruction task and design a novel loss function accordingly to facilitate training. In addition, we propose
the Hop Graph Attention (HGA), which takes the learned
hop distance as input for producing attention weights to allow edge features to contribute distinctively in aggregation.
Eventually, the proposed DHGCN is a plug-and-play module that is compatible with point-based backbone networks.
Comprehensive experiments on different backbones and tasks
demonstrate that our self-supervised method achieves stateof-the-art performance. Our source code is available at:
https://github.com/Jinec98/DHGCN.

Figure 1: First row: Constructing the ground truth graph
for our self-supervised hop distance reconstruction task. (a):
Voxelizing the point cloud into parts, taking each part as a
graph node. (b): The topology of the ground truth graph.
Two nodes are adjacent if their scaled bounding boxes are
intersected. (c): The shortest path between a node (enlarged
red point) and other nodes. The number on each node denotes the hop distance which motivates our self-supervised
task. Second row: Sampling and grouping based strategy
(Wang et al. 2019b,a). (d): Sampling center points and
grouping local point sets. (e): Constructing a local graph
for each point set. We explore the contextual relationships
between parts, while previous strategies focus on extracting
local features of point sets.

Introduction
A point cloud is an unordered collection of scattered points
representing geometric information in the 3D space. Point
cloud processing and understanding are crucial in many areas, such as autonomous driving, virtual reality, etc. Unlike
regular 2D pixels on the images, point clouds typically have
irregular point distributions, making it difficult to directly
apply traditional Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) to
point clouds for extracting features (Shi and Rajkumar 2020;
de Silva Edirimuni et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2020).
In addition, the complex geometric structures of the point
cloud can be well-structured with graphs by encoding the
representations of pairwise relationships of points (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Chung 1997).

Therefore, researchers have made efforts to generalize
Graph Convolution Networks (GCNs) to point clouds for
classification and segmentation, achieving encouraging results (Qi et al. 2017c; Landrieu and Simonovsky 2018; Bi
et al. 2019; Yi et al. 2023). DGCNN (Wang et al. 2019b)
constructs a k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN) graph for each center point, and captures graph structure by propagating and
aggregating the offset relationships between a center point
and its neighbors. Wang et al. (2019a) assigns attention
weights to different neighboring points and feature channels.
These works tend to sample and group points to create point
sets locally, and construct a graph for each set (Figure 1 (d)(e)). They usually focus on extracting graph representations
for local point sets through GCNs, while ignoring the ex-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12883

