The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Beyond Entities: A Large-Scale Multi-Modal Knowledge Graph with Triplet Fact
Grounding
Jingping Liu1 * † , Mingchuan Zhang2 * , Weichen Li2 * , Chao Wang3 , Shuang Li2 , Haiyun Jiang4 ,
Sihang Jiang2 , Yanghua Xiao2 , Yunwen Chen5
1

School of Information Science and Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China
2
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
3
School of Future Technology, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
4
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
5
DataGrand Inc., Shanghai, China
jingpingliu@ecust.edu.cn, {mczhang18, wcli18, lishuang18, shawyh}@fudan.edu.cn
cwang@shu.edu.cn, haiyunjiang@tencent.com, tedsihangjiang@gmail.com, chenyunwen@datagrand.com

Abstract

Entity Grounding

Much effort has been devoted to building multi-modal knowledge graphs by visualizing entities on images, but ignoring
the multi-modal information of the relation between entities.
Hence, in this paper, we aim to construct a new large-scale
multi-modal knowledge graph with triplet facts grounded on
images that reflect not only entities but also their relations.
To achieve this purpose, we propose a novel pipeline method,
including triplet fact filtering, image retrieving, entity-based
image filtering, relation-based image filtering, and image clustering. In this way, a multi-modal knowledge graph named
ImgFact is constructed, which contains 247,732 triplet facts
and 3,730,805 images. In experiments, the manual and automatic evaluations prove the reliable quality of our ImgFact.
We further use the obtained images to enhance model performance on two tasks. In particular, the model optimized
by our ImgFact achieves an impressive 8.38% and 9.87%
improvement over the solutions enhanced by an existing multimodal knowledge graph and VisualChatGPT on F1 of relation classification. We release ImgFact and its instructions at
https://github.com/kleinercubs/ImgFact.

Triplet Fact Grounding

WEDDING
David_Beckham Victoria_Beckham

PREGNANT

FAMILY
PORTRAIT

(David_Beckham, Spouse, Victoria_Beckham)

Figure 1: The difference between entity grounding and triplet
fact grounding. The former aims at visualizing entities to
images and most existing MMKGs are built under this task.
The latter is to ground triplet facts to images and our ImgFact
is constructed under this task.

Introduction
Multi-modal knowledge graphs (MMKGs) are important
resources for a wide range of NLP and multimodal tasks.
Diverging from the symbol-based knowledge graph (KG),
MMKGs primarily link structured KG information with visual content, thereby establishing connections between textual and image-based knowledge representations.
However, the current focus of MMKG-related work mainly
focuses on grounding entities to images (Wu et al. 2023b),
without considering the visual semantics of relations, thus
limiting their effectiveness in downstream tasks. As illustrated in Figure 1, the goal of entity grounding, taking the
example of David Beckham (Victoria Beckham), is
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18653

to identify images that accurately represent the entity. Obviously, it is insufficient to consider entities alone without
their relations for two reasons. (1) From a cognitive perspective, grounding symbolic relations enhances machine
comprehension of abstract relations by providing them with
multi-modal experiences (Zhu et al. 2022). Figure 1 illustrates
that visualizing Spouse in (David Beckham, Spouse,
Victoria Beckham) enables machines to grasp the implicit intimate relationships between the couple, such as wedding, pregnant, and family portrait. (2) From an application
perspective, a variety of real-world tasks (e.g., link prediction
and relation classification) would benefit if we can ground
symbolic relations to images (see Section “Experiments”).
The benefit comes from image information not explicitly mentioned in symbolic knowledge. Thus, it is crucial to ground
both entities and their relation on other modalities at once.
Hence, in this paper, we aim to construct a new largescale MMKG by grounding triplet facts in an existing symbolic KG on images. These images not only represent entities but also their relations. For example, given a triplet
fact (David Beckham, Spouse, Victoria Beckham),
we expect to find intimate images of David Beckham and
Victoria Beckham, as shown in Figure 1.

