The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Combining Deep Learning and Street View Imagery to Map Smallholder Crop
Types
Jordi Laguarta Soler1 , Thomas Friedel2 , Sherrie Wang1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
2
PEAT GmbH, Berlin, Germany
{laguarta, sherwang}@mit.edu, thomas@plantix.net

Abstract
Accurate crop type maps are an essential source of information for monitoring yield progress at scale, projecting global
crop production, and planning effective policies. To date,
however, crop type maps remain challenging to create in lowand middle-income countries due to a lack of ground truth labels for training machine learning models. Field surveys are
the gold standard in terms of accuracy but require an oftenprohibitively large amount of time, money, and statistical capacity. In recent years, street-level imagery, such as Google
Street View, KartaView, and Mapillary, has become available
around the world. Such imagery contains rich information
about crop types grown at particular locations and times. In
this work, we develop an automated system to generate crop
type ground references using deep learning and Google Street
View imagery. The method efficiently curates a set of streetview images containing crop fields, trains a model to predict
crop types using either weakly-labeled images from disparate
out-of-domain sources or zero-shot labeled street view images with GPT-4V, and combines the predicted labels with
remote sensing time series to create a wall-to-wall crop type
map. We show that, in Thailand, the resulting country-wide
map of rice, cassava, maize, and sugarcane achieves an accuracy of 93%. We publicly release the first-ever crop type
map for all of Thailand 2022 at 10m-resolution with no gaps.
To our knowledge, this is the first time a 10m-resolution,
multi-crop map has been created for any smallholder country.
As the availability of roadside imagery expands, our pipeline
provides a way to map crop types at scale around the globe,
especially in underserved smallholder regions.

1

Figure 1: Top: Street-view images of roadside occlusions
present between the car-mounted camera and fields. Bottom:
Street-view images after the automated filtering process for
the four major crop types in Thailand.

2014). Meanwhile, regions with smallholder farms, which
provide a living for two-thirds of the world’s rural population of 3 billion (Lowder, Skoet, and Raney 2016) and produce 80% of the world’s food (Economic et al. 2014), continue to lack such maps. The majority of smallholder farms
are located in middle- and low-income countries, where expensive ground data on crop types remains scarce (Tseng
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2022).
To address the high cost of acquiring ground reference
labels, the remote sensing and machine learning communities have started to explore non-traditional sources of crop
type data. One such source is roadside images through services like Google Street View (GSV), Bing Maps StreetSide,
Mapillary, KartaView, Tencent Street View, and Baidu Total
View. The images are captured by dash cams or panoramic
cameras mounted on cars; depending on the service, they are
crowdsourced or collected by dedicated fleets. Today, they
are low-cost to access, available in almost every country, and
updated every few years.
Recent works have used roadside imagery in applications
ranging from urban morphology to real estate to air quality prediction (Biljecki and Ito 2021). Most relevant to our
work, Paliyam et al. (2021) deployed cameras mounted on

Introduction & Background

Ensuring global food security is one of the major challenges we will face this century, especially in the face of a
changing climate and a growing population (Becker-Reshef
et al. 2023; Rezaei et al. 2021). Accurate crop type maps
are an essential source of information for monitoring yield
progress (Becker-Reshef et al. 2023), projecting global crop
production (Lobell and Gourdji 2012), and planning effective policies (Haasnoot et al. 2013). However, only a handful
of countries—mostly high-income—have had the budget to
collect large-scale ground data and develop crop type maps
(Han et al. 2012; Fisette et al. 2013; Cantelaube and Carles
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22202

