The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generator Assisted Mixture of Experts For Feature Acquisition in Batch
Vedang Asgaonkar, Aditya Jain, Abir De
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
{vedang, adityajainjhs, abir}@cse.iitb.ac.in

Abstract

Melville, and Provost 2009; Huang et al. 2018; Gong et al.
2019; Ma et al. 2018), which optimize measures based on
variance, uncertainty or information gain. To improve their
performance, a recent line of work explicitly optimizes the
prediction accuracy (Shim, Hwang, and Yang 2018; Li and
Oliva 2020, 2021; Janisch, Pevnỳ, and Lisỳ 2019, 2020a;
Dulac-Arnold et al. 2012; Liyanage, Zois, and Chelmis
2021a,b; Hu et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2016), predominantly using reinforcement learning (RL).
The above methods are tailored for sequential feature acquisition. In such scenarios, it is feasible to observe the value
of a newly acquired feature immediately after its acquisition,
allowing the use of its true value to inform the acquisition
of additional features. However, certain situations involve
a substantial delay between querying one feature and observing its value. In these cases, it may be more practical to
batch-query a subset of features instead of acquiring them
one by one in an online fashion. For instance, in healthcare,
the analysis of pathological samples can introduce significant delays after collection. Thus, doctors may need to obtain results from multiple tests at once for rapid diagnosis.

Given a set of observations, feature acquisition is about finding the subset of unobserved features which would enhance
accuracy. Such problems have been explored in a sequential
setting in prior work. Here, the model receives feedback from
every new feature acquired and chooses to explore more features or to predict. However, sequential acquisition is not feasible in some settings where time is of the essence. We consider the problem of feature acquisition in batch, where the
subset of features to be queried in batch is chosen based on
the currently observed features, and then acquired as a batch,
followed by prediction. We solve this problem using several
technical innovations. First, we use a feature generator to
draw a subset of the synthetic features for some examples,
which reduces the cost of oracle queries. Second, to make the
feature acquisition problem tractable for the large heterogeneous observed features, we partition the data into buckets,
by borrowing tools from locality sensitive hashing and then
train a mixture of experts model. Third, we design a tractable
lower bound of the original objective. We use a greedy algorithm combined with model training to solve the underlying
problem. Experiments with four datasets show that our approach outperforms these methods in terms of trade-off between accuracy and feature acquisition cost.

Our Contributions

Introduction

Responding to the above challenge, we propose G EN E X,
a novel feature acquisition method to acquire features in
batch. Specifically, we make the following contributions.
Using feature generator to reduce oracle queries Feature
generators are commonly used in feature acquisition tasks
to guide feature selection policies (Li and Oliva 2021; Ma
et al. 2018). However, these generated features typically are
not utilized for final label prediction. In our work, instead of
querying all features from an oracle, we draw a feature subset from the generator and directly employ them for classification, reducing the number of oracle queries with only a
marginal loss in accuracy.
Mixture of experts on heterogeneous feature space The
observed features O can vary significantly across instances.
This leads to a diverse set of acquired features and, consequently, a range of heterogeneous data domains. Generalizing across such heterogeneity using a single model is challenging. To address this, we partition the dataset into clusters
or domains using a random hyperplane-based approximate
nearest neighbor technique (Indyk and Motwani 1999). We

Supervised learning algorithms often assume access to a
complete set of features x ∈ Rd to model the underlying classifier Pr(y | x). However, in applications like healthcare, information retrieval, etc., a key goal is feature acquisition (Babu and Vijayan 2016; Geng et al. 2007), where the
learner may observe only a subset of features O ⊂ {1, .., d}
and the goal is to query for a new subset U from the unobserved set of features: U ⊂ {1, ..., d}\O. For example,
when a patient visits a doctor with a new health issue, the
doctor can observe only few symptoms. If the symptoms are
not informative enough to diagnose a disease with high confidence, the doctor may ask for additional medical tests.

Prior Work and Their Limitations
Driven by these motivations, feature acquisition is widely
studied in literature. Earlier works used tools from active
learning techniques (Melville et al. 2004; Saar-Tsechansky,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10927

