The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

IOFM: Using the Interpolation Technique on the Over-Fitted Models
to Identify Clean-Annotated Samples
Dongha Kim1 * , Yongchan Choi2 * , Kunwoong Kim3 , Ilsang Ohn4 , Yongdai Kim3
1

Department of Statistics, Sungshin Women’s University
2
Toss bank
3
Department of Statistics, Seoul National University
4
Department of Statistics, Inha University
dongha0718@sungshin.ac.kr, {pminer32, kwkim.online, ydkim0903}@gmail.com, ilsang.ohn@inha.ac.kr
Abstract
Most recent state-of-the-art algorithms for handling noisy label problems are based on the memorization effect, which is
a phenomenon that deep neural networks (DNNs) memorize
clean data before noisy ones. While the memorization effect
can be a powerful tool, there are several cases where memorization effect does not occur. Examples are imbalanced class
distributions and heavy contamination on labels. To address
this limitation, we introduce a whole new approach called
the interpolation with the over-fitted model (IOFM), which
leverages over-fitted deep neural networks. The IOFM utilizes a new finding of over-fitted DNNs: for a given training
sample, its neighborhoods chosen from the feature space are
distributed differently on the original input space depending on
the cleanness of the target sample. The IOFM has notable features in two aspects: 1) it yields superior results even when the
training data are imbalanced or heavily noisy, 2) since we utilize over-fitted deep neural networks, a fine-tuning procedure
to select the optimal training epoch, which is an essential yet
sensitive factor for the success of the memorization effect, is
not required, and thus, the IOFM can be used for non-experts.
Through extensive experiments, we show that our method can
serve as a promising alternative to existing solutions dealing with noisy labels, offering improved performance even in
challenging and realistic situations.

Figure 1: Histograms of the per-sample cross-entropy loss
distributions over an imbalanced CIFAR10 dataset with noisy
labels at the 1st and 10th epochs. We denote the ground-truth
and observed labels by y gt and y, respectively.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive
successes in many AI tasks but have suffered from collecting
massive clean-annotated samples such as ImageNet (Deng
et al. 2009) and MS-COCO (Lin et al. 2014). Since annotating
procedures are usually done manually by human experts, it is
expensive and time-consuming to get extensive clean labeled
data, which prevents DNNs from being trained successfully.
On the other hand, it is possible to collect large data easily
through internet search engines or hashtags (Fergus et al.
2010; Schroff, Criminisi, and Zisserman 2010; Xiao et al.
2015; Krause et al. 2016). However, the labels are often
inaccurate for such data. This has led to increased interest
in utilizing datasets with corrupted labels for constructing
accurate classifiers, known as the noisy label problem.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13104

Memorization Effect A well-known approach for identifying clean labeled data in the presence of noisy ones is to
utilize the memorization effect (ME), an interesting characteristic of DNNs. The ME refers to the phenomenon where
DNNs tend to memorize clean labeled samples before noisy
ones during training (Arpit et al. 2017; Jiang et al. 2018).
With the ME, we can distinguish clean data from contaminated training data by noisy labels (Han et al. 2018). Its simplicity but good performance has inspired numerous followup studies, which have achieved great success (Huang et al.
2019; Wu et al. 2020; Mirzasoleiman, Cao, and Leskovec
2020; Pleiss et al. 2020; Cheng et al. 2021; Kim et al. 2021).
To the best of our knowledge, there are not many alternatives
that can substitute the ME.
Limitation of the Memorization Effect A problem with
the ME is that there exist several situations where the strength
of the ME diminishes. This occurs, for example, when dealing
with imbalanced or heavily contaminated ground-truth label
distributions. In such cases, we found that the ME may not
appear clearly, leading to suboptimal performance of the
follow-up methods in identifying clean labeled data. This is
because, in these situations, memorizing clean labeled data
first might not be a favorable direction to reducing the overall
loss function at early updates.
We provide a simple scenario where the ME does not occur.
From CIFAR10, we sample two classes, 7 and 9, and regard
the first and second ones as the majority and minority classes,
respectively. We gather all images in the first class and only

