The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Bregman Proximal Stochastic Gradient Method with Extrapolation for
Nonconvex Nonsmooth Problems
Qingsong Wang1 , Zehui Liu2 , Chunfeng Cui2 * , Deren Han2
1

School of Mathematics and Computational Science, Xiangtan University, China
2
LMIB, School of Mathematical Sciences, Beihang University, China
nothing2wang@hotmail.com, {liuzehui, chunfengcui, handr}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

optimization problem (1), such as matrix and tensor factorization (Comon et al. 2008; Kolda and Bader 2009; Che and
Wei 2020), supervised neural network model (Hasannasab
et al. 2020), and Poisson deconvolution/inverse problems
(Bolte et al. 2018).
Deterministic Bregman type methods. The Bregman
proximal gradient (BPG) algorithm (Bolte et al. 2018) is
a state-of-the-art method for addressing optimization problems characterized by the absence of global Lipschitz continuous gradients. It is simple and far-reaching, which substitutes the customary upper quadratic approximation of
a smooth function with a more comprehensive proximity
measure (Bauschke, Bolte, and Teboulle 2017). Zhang et
al. (Zhang et al. 2019) proposed an extrapolation version
of the BPG algorithm, denoted by BPGE, under the assumption that h(x) is convex. Recently, Mukkamala et al.
(Mukkamala et al. 2020) introduced an inertial variant of
the BPG method, referred to as the CoCaIn BPG algorithm,
which tunes the inertial parameter by convex-concave backtracking. Compared with the original BPG method (Bolte
et al. 2018), the CoCaIn BPG algorithm exhibits superior
numerical performance. Moreover, the BPG framework facilitates the discovery of novel techniques tailored to specific problem domains. For instance, Teboulle and Vaisbourd
(Teboulle and Vaisbourd 2020) explored new decomposition settings of the nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF)
problem with sparsity constraints. Additionally, an alternative perspective is to consider the BPG-type algorithm by the
splitting method. Ahookhos et al. (Ahookhosh, Themelis,
and Patrinos 2021) proposed a Bregman forward-backward
splitting line search method, which demonstrates locally superlinear convergence to nonisolated local minima by leveraging the Bregman forward-backward envelope (Bauschke,
Dao, and Lindstrom 2018; Laude, Ochs, and Cremers 2020).
Furthermore, Wang et al. (Wang et al. 2022) investigated
a Bregman and inertial extension of the forward-reflectedbackward algorithm (Malitsky and Tam 2020) under relative smoothness conditions. Numerous other works have explored the Bregman gradient method framework to tackle
the absence of global Lipschitz continuous gradients, including (Reem, Reich, and Pierro 2019; Zhao et al. 2022; Zhu
et al. 2021; Dragomir et al. 2022).
Stochastic Bregman type methods. For large-scale
datasets, the cost associated with computing the full gradi-

In this paper, we explore a specific optimization problem
that involves the combination of a differentiable nonconvex
function and a nondifferentiable function. The differentiable
component lacks a global Lipschitz continuous gradient, posing challenges for optimization. To address this issue and
accelerate the convergence, we propose a Bregman proximal stochastic gradient method with extrapolation (BPSGE),
which only requires smooth adaptivity of the differentiable
part. Under the variance reduction framework, we not only
analyze the subsequential and global convergence of the proposed algorithm under certain conditions, but also analyze the
sublinear convergence rate of the subsequence, and the complexity of the algorithm, revealing that the BPSGE algorithm
requires at most O(epsilonˆ (-2)) iterations in expectation to
attain an epsilon-stationary point. To validate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm, we conduct numerical experiments on three real-world applications: graph regularized
nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF), matrix factorization
with weakly-convex regularization, and NMF with nonconvex sparsity constraints. These experiments demonstrate that
BPSGE is faster than the baselines without extrapolation.
The code is available at: https://github.com/nothing2wang/
BPSGE-Algorithm.

Introduction
In this paper, we consider the following nonsmooth nonconvex optimization problem
min

Φ(x) := f (x) + h(x),

(1)

x∈C

where C denotes the closure of C, which is a nonempty,
convex, and open set in Rd , f is a continuously differentiable (mayP
be nonconvex) function which can be written as
n
f (x) = n1 i=1 fi (x), and h is an extended valued function (maybe nonconvex), which is a regularizer promoting
low-complexity structures such as sparsity (Donoho 1995;
Fan and Li 2001; Zhang 2010) or non-negativity (Lee and
Seung 1999; He et al. 2011) in the solution. Throughout this
paper, the usual restrictive requirement of global Lipschitz
continuity of the gradient of f is not needed (Lan 2020;
Gillis 2020). Many applications can be categorized in the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15580

