The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Domain Generalizable Person Search Using Unreal Dataset
Minyoung Oh* , Duhyun Kim* , and Jae-Young Sim†
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, UNIST, Republic of Korea
{mmyy2513, duhyunkim, jysim}@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
Collecting and labeling real datasets to train the person search
networks not only requires a lot of time and effort, but also
accompanies privacy issues. The weakly-supervised and unsupervised domain adaptation methods have been proposed to
alleviate the labeling burden for target datasets, however, their
generalization capability is limited. We introduce a novel person search method based on the domain generalization framework, that uses an automatically labeled unreal dataset only
for training but is applicable to arbitrary unseen real datasets.
To alleviate the domain gaps when transferring the knowledge from the unreal source dataset to the real target datasets,
we estimate the fidelity of person instances which is then used
to train the end-to-end network adaptively. Moreover, we devise a domain-invariant feature learning scheme to encourage
the network to suppress the domain-related features. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method provides
the competitive performance to existing person search methods even though it is applicable to arbitrary unseen datasets
without any prior knowledge and re-training burdens.

Figure 1: The proposed domain generalization concept com-

pared to the weakly supervised and unsupervised domain
adaptation methods. The upper and lower figures represent
the training datasets and the test datasets, respectively.

Introduction
Person search is a technique to detect the person instances
from the scene images first, and then find a query person
among the detected instances. Recently, it has been drawing a lot of attention in various computer vision applications such as surveillance and life logging. In general, large
datasets of labeled scene images, captured under diverse environments, are required to train the person search networks.
However, collecting such datasets is a time-consuming task,
and furthermore, it usually requires a great deal of effort to
obtain the ground truth labels by human annotation such
as the bounding boxes and identities of persons. In addition, real datasets including personal information often suffer from the privacy issues.
To reduce the burden of data labeling, attempts have been
made such as weakly supervised learning (Han, Ko, and Sim
2021a; Han et al. 2021; Yan et al. 2022) and unsupervised
domain adaptation (DA) (Li et al. 2022), whose concepts are
compared in Figure 1. The weakly supervised methods assume that only the bounding box labels are given without the

ID labels in the training dataset. On the other hand, the unsupervised DA method considers source and target datasets,
respectively, where the source dataset has the labels of both
the bounding boxes and identities, but the target dataset has
no labels at all. It uses the labeled source dataset and the
unlabeled target dataset together for training. However, both
approaches are not fully generalizable to be directly applied
to arbitrary unseen datasets without additional training burdens, since they still require partial labels and/or need to retrain the networks for a given target dataset.
We propose a fully generalizable person search framework based on domain generalization (DG) from unreal
dataset to arbitrary real datasets. In practice, we employ the
unreal dataset of JTA (Joint Track Auto) (Fabbri et al. 2018),
where the detailed labels were automatically annotated, as
the only source dataset used for training. Then we test the
trained network on arbitrary unseen target datasets captured
in real environment. By using the unreal dataset, we are free
from the time-consuming and labor-intensive labeling burdens as well as the privacy issues of real datasets. However,
the knowledge transfer from an unreal dataset to the real

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4361

