The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Conditional Variational Autoencoder for Sign Language Translation with
Cross-Modal Alignment
Rui Zhao1,2 * , Liang Zhang1,2 * , Biao Fu1,2 , Cong Hu1,2 , Jinsong Su1,2 , Yidong Chen1,2†
1

2

School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
Key Laboratory of Digital Protection and Intelligent Processing of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Fujian and Taiwan
(Xiamen University), Ministry of Culture and Tourism, China
{zhsqzr, lzhang}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, ydchen@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract

Sign language translation (SLT) aims to convert continuous
sign language videos into textual sentences. As a typical
multi-modal task, there exists an inherent modality gap between sign language videos and spoken language text, which
makes the cross-modal alignment between visual and textual modalities crucial. However, previous studies tend to rely
on an intermediate sign gloss representation to help alleviate the cross-modal problem thereby neglecting the alignment across modalities that may lead to compromised results.
To address this issue, we propose a novel framework based
on Conditional Variational autoencoder for SLT (CV-SLT)
that facilitates direct and sufficient cross-modal alignment between sign language videos and spoken language text. Specifically, our CV-SLT consists of two paths with two KullbackLeibler (KL) divergences to regularize the outputs of the encoder and decoder, respectively. In the prior path, the model
solely relies on visual information to predict the target text;
whereas in the posterior path, it simultaneously encodes visual information and textual knowledge to reconstruct the target text. The first KL divergence optimizes the conditional
variational autoencoder and regularizes the encoder outputs,
while the second KL divergence performs a self-distillation
from the posterior path to the prior path, ensuring the consistency of decoder outputs. We further enhance the integration of textual information to the posterior path by employing
a shared Attention Residual Gaussian Distribution (ARGD),
which considers the textual information in the posterior path
as a residual component relative to the prior path. Extensive
experiments conducted on public datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework, achieving new state-of-the-art
results while significantly alleviating the cross-modal representation discrepancy. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/rzhao-zhsq/CV-SLT.

Figure 1: The PHOENIX14T Dev set is divided into 5 subsets of equal size according to the L2 distance of sentencelevel representation between sign language and text embedding generated by previous state-of-the-art method MMTLB
(Chen et al. 2022a). The histogram represents the L2 distance of each subset. Red triangle represents the BLEU-4
scores. With the reduction of modality gap, a distinct upward trend in BLEU score is observed.

barriers for hearing individuals to understand and communicate with deaf people. Sign language translation (SLT),
which aims to translate sign language videos into spoken
language text, has gained increasing attention as a means
to bridge the communication gap between hearing-impaired
and unimpaired individuals (Camgoz et al. 2018, 2020b; Yin
et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022a,b; Fu et al. 2023; Yu et al.
2023).
Existing SLT methods adopt the neural machine translation (NMT) paradigm, treating SLT as a sequence-tosequence task. However, unlike NMT where both the source
and the targets are in textual modality, SLT involves sign
language videos as the source and requires translation into
textual sentences, thereby creating a tough challenge due to
the inherent modality gap. Therefore, some conventional approaches (Camgoz et al. 2018; Yin and Read 2020; Zhou
et al. 2021) adopt a sequential pipeline framework known as
Sign2Gloss2Text, which first employs a Sign2Gloss module

Intruduction
Sign language serves as the primary mode of communication within the deaf community. It possesses a unique grammatical structure and lexicon that conveys semantic meanings through coordinated movements of the torso, head,
hands, and other body parts. This characteristic distinguishes
sign language from spoken language and poses significant
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19643

