The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Temporal Fairness in Multiwinner Voting
Edith Elkind1,2 , Svetlana Obraztsova3 , Nicholas Teh1
1

University of Oxford, United Kingdom
Alan Turing Institute, United Kingdom
3
Carleton University, Canada
elkind@cs.ox.ac.uk, svetlanaobraztsova@cunet.carleton.ca, nicholas.teh@cs.ox.ac.uk
2

Abstract

members elected in the previous rounds. Also, given that the
council is renewed regularly, perhaps a group of voters that
is too small to be assured permanent representation on the
council can be guaranteed a spot every few rounds?
In a somewhat different spirit, consider proof-of-stake
blockchain protocols where a primary concern is the “rich
gets richer effect” (Fanti et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2021). In
such scenarios, lotteries for a single-shot interaction provide
a form of fairness, as the probability of winning is proportional to the invested effort (Orda and Rottenstreich 2019;
Pan et al. 2022). However, such mechanisms may fail to
maintain fairness over time when lotteries are held repeatedly over multiple rounds (Fanti et al. 2019; Grossi 2022).
Formalizing fairness concepts and successfully designing
mechanisms for achieving these in the repeated-interaction
setting is therefore highly relevant to blockchain systems.
There are further examples of real-world elections where
temporal considerations play an important role, and many
authors explored multiwinner voting with temporal elements. However, this body of work does not yet offer a
systematic exploration of issues associated with voting over
time, with each strand of research considering a slightly different model and a different set of applications. Against this
background, we propose a unified framework to facilitate a
principled study of temporal fairness in multiwinner voting,
highlighting several key challenges, consolidating existing
bodies of work, and identifying gaps in the literature. We
aim to set the groundwork for a more coherent, targeted approach to tackling conceptual and algorithmic challenges in
temporal multiwinner voting.
Several elements of our framework originate from a larger
body of work within the social choice literature and beyond. This includes, in particular, works on perpetual voting (Lackner 2020; Lackner and Maly 2023)—and, more
broadly, perpetual participatory budgeting (Lackner, Maly,
and Rey 2021)— which consider multiple rounds of singlewinner voting. Lackner (2020) and Lackner and Maly
(2023) conduct an axiomatic analysis of perpetual voting
rules (temporal extensions of traditional voting rules) with
respect to fairness across time. Relatedly, Harrenstein, Lackner, and Lackner (2022) argue that several common sequential election mechanisms may be detrimental to welfare. Another relevant strand of work is that on conference scheduling (Patro et al. 2022), slot assignment (Elkind, Kraiczy,

Multiwinner voting captures a wide variety of settings, from
parliamentary elections in democratic systems to product
placement in online shopping platforms. There is a large body
of work dealing with axiomatic characterizations, computational complexity, and algorithmic analysis of multiwinner
voting rules. Although many challenges remain, significant
progress has been made in showing existence of fair and representative outcomes as well as efficient algorithmic solutions for many commonly studied settings. However, much
of this work focuses on single-shot elections, even though in
numerous real-world settings elections are held periodically
and repeatedly. Hence, it is imperative to extend the study of
multiwinner voting to temporal settings. Recently, there have
been several efforts to address this challenge. However, these
works are difficult to compare, as they model multi-period
voting in very different ways. We propose a unified framework for studying temporal fairness in this domain, drawing
connections with various existing bodies of work, and consolidating them within a general framework. We also identify
gaps in existing literature, outline multiple opportunities for
future work, and put forward a vision for the future of multiwinner voting in temporal settings.

Introduction
Elections for the AAAI Executive Council take place annually, with one-third of the positions being up for election each time. Artificial Intelligence research encompasses
a broad variety of topics, and it is important that the council
has representatives from all major subfields. Moreover, the
community is very international, and the council should represent the interests of members around the world, so there
is a desire for proportionate representation in terms of geographical regions. Diversity in terms of gender and academic
seniority is another key desideratum.
There are several multiwinner voting rules that provide
fair representation guarantees (Aziz et al. 2017; Peters and
Skowron 2020). However, standard notions of fairness for
multiwinner voting do not fully capture the complexity of
our setting: it may be the case that a voter is not represented
by any of the candidates elected in the current round, yet
she is satisfied with the overall composition of the council because she is well-represented by some of the council
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22633

