The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Every Node is Different: Dynamically Fusing Self-Supervised Tasks
for Attributed Graph Clustering
Pengfei Zhu, Qian Wang, Yu Wang* , Jialu Li, Qinghua Hu
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{zhupengfei, wang qian0806, wang.yu, jialuli, huqinghua}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

Despite showing effectiveness, the advantage of using a single SSL task is limited due to ignoring helpful information
from other tasks (Jin et al. 2022).
To address the problem, several methods are proposed to
simultaneously learn multiple graph SSL tasks and show
promising results. (Jin et al. 2022) proposed an AUTOSSL
model that automatically searches the weights of SSL tasks
in a multi-task learning framework by maximizing the designed pseudo-homophily to learn node embeddings. (Ju
et al. 2023) designed a PARETOGNN model that minimizes
the potential conflicts between different SSL tasks to learn
better node representations.
Although these methods can automatically learn the
weights of various SSL tasks, they are globally shared in the
whole graph. This leads to a quite straightforward concern:
Is a fixed strategy of fusing different SSL tasks appropriate
for learning good representations of all the graph nodes?
We empirically explore and analyze the question on the
Cora dataset. Fig. 1(a) displays a subgraph of Cora, in which
nodes of the same classes are annotated in the same color.
We visualize the similarity matrix of nodes obtained by different SSL tasks, i.e., node attributes clustering (CLU) and
graph partition (PAR) SSL tasks (You et al. 2020), respectively, in Figs. 1(b) and (c). CLU encourages the encoder to
extract attribute information of nodes to assist the AGC task.
In contrast, PAR emphasizes the learning of local topology
information by the encoder. In Fig. 1, we observe that node
representations learned from different SSL tasks show different similarity relationships between nodes, and both of
them can not reflect the true clustering structure and lead to
unsatisfactory clustering results.
Furthermore, we use AUTOSSL to learn the node embeddings by automatically searching the weights of PAR and
CLU tasks. The visualization of its corresponding similarity matrix is shown in Fig.1(d). To learn proper weights for
most nodes, AUTOSSL prefers to use the topology information extracted from the PAR task, making the distribution of
the similarity matrix roughly the same as the similarity matrix obtained by the PAR task. Due to all nodes sharing a set
of SSL task weights, AUTOSSL can not learn the intrinsic
clustering structure.
Intuitively, to obtain better clustering results, Nodes #2-#5
should use more attribute information, while Nodes #0-#1
should use more topology information. Therefore, we ob-

Attributed graph clustering is an unsupervised task that partitions nodes into different groups. Self-supervised learning
(SSL) shows great potential in handling this task, and some
recent studies simultaneously learn multiple SSL tasks to further boost performance. Currently, different SSL tasks are
assigned the same set of weights for all graph nodes. However, we observe that some graph nodes whose neighbors
are in different groups require significantly different emphases on SSL tasks. In this paper, we propose to dynamically learn the weights of SSL tasks for different nodes and
fuse the embeddings learned from different SSL tasks to
boost performance. We design an innovative graph clustering approach, namely Dynamically Fusing Self-Supervised
Learning (DyFSS). Specifically, DyFSS fuses features extracted from diverse SSL tasks using distinct weights derived
from a gating network. To effectively learn the gating network, we design a dual-level self-supervised strategy that incorporates pseudo labels and the graph structure. Extensive
experiments on five datasets show that DyFSS outperforms
the state-of-the-art multi-task SSL methods by up to 8.66%
on the accuracy metric. The code of DyFSS is available at:
https://github.com/q086/DyFSS.

Introduction
Attributed Graph Clustering (AGC) aims to partition the
graph nodes into several groups without explicit supervision. A key challenge of AGC is the lack of proper supervision (Zhu et al. 2022; Mrabah et al. 2023). Self-supervised
learning (SSL) finds supervision from the data and has
been shown to be greatly helpful for obtaining good performance (Wu et al. 2023).
Many studies on designing SSL methods in AGC have
been proposed. Generative learning-based methods (Pan
et al. 2018; Hou et al. 2022) aim to reconstruct graph
structure or masked node features to learn node representations. Contrastive learning-based methods assist clustering by maximizing the mutual information of positive
samples (Velickovic et al. 2019). Predictive learning-based
methods construct pretext tasks by exploiting natural supervision provided by the graph data itself (You et al. 2020).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17184

