The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Efficient Conditional Diffusion Model with Probability Flow Sampling for Image
Super-resolution
Yutao Yuan, Chun Yuan
Tsinghua University
yuanyt21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

nature by learning the distribution of HR images conditioned
on LR images, allowing for the generation of multiple diverse results from a single input image and avoiding the
problem of blurry images.
Recently, the use of diffusion probabilistic models (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song et al. 2021), a trending
class of generative models, have grown popular in image
super-resolution. SR3 (Saharia et al. 2021) and SRDiff (Li
et al. 2021) adapts Diffusion Denoising Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) for image superresolution. They define a Markovian forward process that
gradually adds Gaussian noise into image data, and use denoiser neural networks conditioned on LR images to learn its
reverse process and generate new images from noise. They
are able to generate diverse and realistic HR images with
fine details.
However, there are still challenging aspects that remain
to be improved for diffusion-based super-resolution. Diffusion models typically generate new images iteratively using
a Markov chain, which necessitates many neural network
evaluations and makes the super-resolution process timeconsuming. Additionally, they are prone to problems like
color shifting, making the quality and consistency of generated images less than ideal and reducing their performance
on super-resolution.
To tackle the challenges, we propose Efficient Conditional
Diffusion Model with Probability Flow Sampling (ECDP)
for image super-resolution. It gradually corrupts HR images
using stochastic differential equations (SDEs), and learns to
restore the original images with a denoiser network conditioned on LR images. We generate super-resolution images using probability flow sampling, which can be performed with low time consumption using ordinary differential equation (ODE) solvers. Additionally, to improve the
consistency of generated images with LR input, we use a hybrid parametrization in the denoiser network. It uses the x0 parametrization that predicts the clean data directly in addition to the commonly used ϵ-parametrization, and smoothly
interpolates between them for different noise scales. Moreover, we introduce an image quality loss as a complement to
the score matching loss of diffusion models. It measures the
feature-space distance of generated HR images and groundtruth images in the dataset, further improving the consistency and quality of super-resolution. Extensive experiments

Image super-resolution is a fundamentally ill-posed problem because multiple valid high-resolution images exist for
one low-resolution image. Super-resolution methods based
on diffusion probabilistic models can deal with the ill-posed
nature by learning the distribution of high-resolution images
conditioned on low-resolution images, avoiding the problem
of blurry images in PSNR-oriented methods. However, existing diffusion-based super-resolution methods have high time
consumption with the use of iterative sampling, while the
quality and consistency of generated images are less than
ideal due to problems like color shifting. In this paper, we
propose Efficient Conditional Diffusion Model with Probability Flow Sampling (ECDP) for image super-resolution.
To reduce the time consumption, we design a continuoustime conditional diffusion model for image super-resolution,
which enables the use of probability flow sampling for efficient generation. Additionally, to improve the consistency
of generated images, we propose a hybrid parametrization for the denoiser network, which interpolates between
the data-predicting parametrization and the noise-predicting
parametrization for different noise scales. Moreover, we design an image quality loss as a complement to the score
matching loss of diffusion models, further improving the consistency and quality of super-resolution. Extensive experiments on DIV2K, ImageNet, and CelebA demonstrate that
our method achieves higher super-resolution quality than existing diffusion-based image super-resolution methods while
having lower time consumption. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Yuan-Yutao/ECDP.

Introduction
Image super-resolution, the task of recovering highresolution (HR) images from low-resolution (LR) images,
is fundamentally an ill-posed problem. Given an LR image, there are more than one HR images consistent with
the input. Existing PSNR-oriented super-resolution methods (Dong et al. 2014; Lim et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2018b)
that learn deterministic mappings from LR images to HR
images using pixel losses are effectively predicting the mean
of all plausible HR images, and tend to generate blurry HR
images with unsatisfactory visual quality. Super-resolution
methods based on generative models deal with the ill-posed
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6862

