The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SPD-DDPM: Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models in the
Symmetric Positive Definite Space
Yunchen Li1 * , Zhou Yu1,2 * , Gaoqi He1 ,
Yunhang Shen3 , Ke Li3 , Xing Sun3 , Shaohui Lin1,2†
2

1
East China Normal University
Key Laboratory of Advanced Theory and Application in Statistics and Data Science, Ministry of Education, China
3
Youtu Lab, Tencent, Shanghai, China
52284404001@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, zyu@stat.ecnu.edu.cn, gqhe@cs.ecnu.edu.cn,
{shenyunhang01, tristanli.sh, winfred.sun, shaohuilin007}@gmail.com

Abstract

matrices as inputs to predict the classes of matrices. They often involve transforming SPD matrices into Euclidean space
vectors via a Log mapping and then employ SPDNet accompanied by convolution with activation (Higham 2008) and
batch normalization (Brooks et al. 2019) for classification.
Recently, several works have been proposed to modify SPD
Net via multi-scale features, UNet structure, and local convolution (Chen et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2022; Zhang et al.
2020). The second one aims to estimate the SPD matrix as
the predicted variable X. Previous methods often use traditional statistical modeling frameworks as discriminative
models by estimating E(X|y) given the conditional variables y. For example, they define an additive model in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space using kernel functions (Lin,
Müller, and Park 2023) or define a regression model in a
metric space upon Fréchet mean (Petersen and Müller 2019;
Qiu, Yu, and Zhu 2022). However, these models often face
challenges when dealing with high-dimensional SPD matrices or predictor y. In addition, these methods primarily focus on predicting E(X|y) and currently lack approaches for
estimating the probability density in the SPD space. This
motivates the construction of generative models for the SPD
space. Such models not only benefit from predicting p(X)
but also utilize maximum likelihood estimation to make predictions for X given conditional variables y.
Denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020) is one of the most popular and effective generative models. Several researchers have extended
DDPM to Riemannian manifolds, including SO(3) (Leach
et al. 2022), SE(3) (Yim et al. 2023), spheres (Huang et al.
2022), and more (De Bortoli et al. 2022). These extensions
have proven to be of practical value in fields such as protein
generation (Corso et al. 2022), molecular docking (Corso
et al. 2022), and others. However, few works have discussed
and studied the SPD space. Meanwhile, the classical DDPM
has poor performance when estimating probability distribution in the SPD space. When real data resides on a lowdimensional manifold, estimating in a high-dimensional Euclidean space is inefficient, and the distribution on the manifold may not exhibit favorable characteristics in the Euclidean space where it is embedded.
To address the SPD space distribution estimation prob-

Symmetric positive definite (SPD) matrices have shown important value and applications in statistics and machine learning, such as FMRI analysis and traffic prediction. Previous
works on SPD matrices mostly focus on discriminative models, where predictions are made directly on E(X|y), where y
is a vector and X is an SPD matrix. However, these methods
are challenging to handle for large-scale data. In this paper,
inspired by denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM),
we propose a novel generative model, termed SPD-DDPM,
by introducing Gaussian distribution in the SPD space to estimate E(X|y). Moreover, our model can estimate p(X) unconditionally and flexibly without giving y. On the one hand,
the model conditionally learns p(X|y) and utilizes the mean
of samples to obtain E(X|y) as a prediction. On the other
hand, the model unconditionally learns the probability distribution of the data p(X) and generates samples that conform
to this distribution. Furthermore, we propose a new SPD net
which is much deeper than the previous networks and allows
for the inclusion of conditional factors. Experiment results
on toy data and real taxi data demonstrate that our models
effectively fit the data distribution both unconditionally and
conditionally.

Introduction
Symmetric positive definite (SPD) matrices hold significant importance within the domains of machine learning
and multivariate statistical analysis. They play a pervasive
role across a diverse range of applications, including FMRI
analysis (Petersen and Müller 2019), hand gesture recognition (Nguyen et al. 2019), facial recognition (Otberdout et al. 2019), traffic prediction (Tucker, Wu, and Müller
2023), brain-computer interfaces (Barachant et al. 2013),
video classification (Wang et al. 2023a; Huang and Van Gool
2017; Wang et al. 2022), interaction recognition (Nguyen
2021), and many more.
There are two main tasks for SPD matrices: classification
and SPD matrix estimation. The first one involves using SPD
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13709

