The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Forecasting Bimanual Object Manipulation Sequences
from Unimanual Observations
Haziq Razali, Yiannis Demiris*
Personal Robotics Lab, Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Imperial College London
{h.bin-razali20,y.demiris}@imperial.ac.uk

Input

Abstract
−t0

Learning to forecast bimanual object manipulation sequences
from unimanual observations has broad applications in assistive robots and augmented reality. This challenging task
requires us to first infer motion from the missing arm and
the object it would have been manipulating were the person
bimanual, then forecast the human and object motion while
maintaining hand-object contact during manipulation. Previous attempts model the hand-object interactions only implicitly, and thus tend to produce unrealistic motion where the
objects float in air. We address this with a novel neural network that (i) identifies and forecasts the pose for only the
objects undergoing motion through an object motion module
and (ii) refines human pose predictions by encouraging handobject contact during manipulation through an ensemble of
human pose predictors. The components are also designed to
be generic enough for use in both unimanual and bimanual
contexts. Our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art pose
forecasting methods on bimanual manipulation datasets.

Reconstruct
−t0

Forecast
t1

t2

Figure 1: Given a unimanual input, we reconstruct and forecast the sequence as if it were performed bimanually.

before forecasting (Figure 1). Previous research has focused
on developing more sophisticated Graph Recurrent Neural
Networks (GRNNs) to tackle reconstruction (Cui and Sun
2021) or forecasting (Corona et al. 2020; Razali and Demiris
2023). While these efforts have led to lower errors, they do
not account for the semantics of bimanual object manipulation, in that the hand remains in contact with the object
during manipulation and only objects undergoing either direct or indirect manipulation can have non-zero velocities.
One major reason why these semantics are not captured is
that the human or object pose is predicted directly after the
output of the GRNN with an MLP. As such, although the
features are extracted jointly through a graph, the prediction
of each node is ultimately weakly or implicitly conditioned
on all others. The result of this is unrealistic hand-object motion where the objects drift and float in air. This also leads to
an issue where objects that are supposed to be stationary are
inadvertently predicted a non-zero velocity due to the MLP’s
inability to output exact zeros for the object pose velocities,
resulting in objects that drift.
In this paper, we demonstrate the importance of explicitly incorporating these semantics in the prediction process
through the incorporation of two key components. First, we
introduce an object motion module that outputs the motion
and binary probability of each object undergoing motion.
These probabilities enable the model to effectively zero-out
velocities for objects not undergoing manipulation, eliminating object drift. Second, we introduce a human pose ensemble module that refines the predicted human pose, explicitly
conditioned on the object each hand is in contact with. This
refinement encourages hand-object contact during manipu-

Introduction
Forecasting bimanual object manipulation has broad applications in extended reality (Garcı́a et al. 2022) and humanrobot interaction (Koppula and Saxena 2013). While forecasting human motion has been heavily studied in the literature, very few include the object motion in its prediction
(Corona et al. 2020; Razali and Demiris 2023). Being able
to forecast the movement of both hands as one reaches a fork
and another a spoon is useful as it opens up additional use
cases such as occlusion handling or vision-based rehabilitative robots (Lum et al. 2002). For instance, a fixed UR10
robot can help perform daily tasks in the kitchen by acting
as the second arm for a patient who is suffering from single
arm paralysis or a temporary injury to their upper limb.
We thus investigate in this paper the forecasting of bimanual object manipulation sequences from unimanual observations, where we receive motion data that has been appropriately processed to make it appear as if the person is
one-handed, and reconstruct the most likely configuration
* Yiannis Demiris is supported by a Royal Academy of Engineering Chair in Emerging Technologies.
Code at www.imperial.ac.uk/personal-robotics/software
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4659

