The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Transformer-Based Video-Structure Multi-Instance Learning for Whole Slide
Image Classification
Yingfan Ma1 2 , Xiaoyuan Luo1 2 , Kexue Fu3 , Manning Wang1 2 *
2

1
Digital Medical Research Center, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Medical Imaging Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention, Shanghai 200032, China
3
Key Laboratory of Computing Power Network and Information Security, Ministry of Education, Shandong Computer
Science Center (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan), Jinan, China
22211010089@m.fudan.edu.cn, {19111010030, mnwang}@fudan.edu.cn, fukx@sdas.org

Abstract
Pathological images play a vital role in clinical cancer diagnosis. Computer-aided diagnosis utilized on digital Whole
Slide Images (WSIs) has been widely studied. The major
challenge of using deep learning models for WSI analysis
is the huge size of WSI images and existing methods struggle between end-to-end learning and proper modeling of contextual information. Most state-of-the-art methods utilize a
two-stage strategy, in which they use a pre-trained model to
extract features of small patches cut from a WSI and then
input these features into a classification model. These methods can not perform end-to-end learning and consider contextual information at the same time. To solve this problem,
we propose a framework that models a WSI as a pathologist’s observing video and utilizes Transformer to process
video clips with a divide-and-conquer strategy, which helps
achieve both context-awareness and end-to-end learning. Extensive experiments on three public WSI datasets show that
our proposed method outperforms existing SOTA methods in
both WSI classification and positive region detection.

Shuffle

Graph

(a) Classical MIL Methods

(b) Graph-based Methods

MHSA

Video

……

……

(c) Transformer-based Methods

(d) Video-based Methods

Figure 1: Motivation of our method. (a) Classical MIL Methods. Two-stage methods include encoding unordered instances into features and aggregating features. (b) Graphbased Methods. GNN models feature as nodes and establish
edges between neighboring nodes to leverage graph convolution. (c) Transformer-based Methods. Calculate the relativity between features, retaining the spatial and morphological information of WSI. (d) Video-based Method. Construct
a series of synthetic video clips from a WSI.

Introduction
The primary challenge in analyzing Whole Slide Images
(WSIs) using deep learning techniques is their huge size.
Due to the memory constraint, neural networks cannot directly take the whole original WSI as input. To address this
challenge, WSIs are usually tiled into small patches as network input (Lu et al. 2021a; Mahmood et al. 2019; Lu et al.
2022). However, in WSI classification tasks, labels are often only available for each slide instead of each individual
patch, which makes fully supervised methods on the patch
level infeasible. The lack of patch-level labels is due to the
fact that a single slide can consist of hundreds to thousands
of patches, and patch-level labeling is very costly and timeconsuming. WSI classification is often solved as a weaklysupervised multiple instance learning (MIL) problem (Rony
et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020a; Lu et al. 2019, 2021b; Yuan
et al. 2022), in which WSI is noted as ’bag’ with the patches
cut from it as ’instances’, and only has slide-level label.
Due to the large number of patches in a WSI, directly inputting all patches of a bag into deep neural networks would

lead to memory overload, making end-to-end learning on the
slide-level difficult. Some researchers randomly sample a
few patches from a slide as model input and train the model
with slide labels. However, this approach may introduce a
noise label issue, where for example an all-negative subset may be sampled from a positive slide (Chikontwe et al.
2020). As a result, mainstream MIL methods consist of two
stages: 1) Extracting patch features using unsupervised pretrained models and then inputting all the patch features of
a slide into the classification model. 2) Performing global
aggregation operations on the input unordered instance features for slide classification (Ilse, Tomczak, and Welling
2018; Li, Li, and Eliceiri 2021; Hashimoto et al. 2020; Lu
et al. 2021c; Rymarczyk et al. 2022), as depicted in Figure 1
(a). These methods operate under the assumption that all instances within a bag are independently distributed, overlooking the inter-instance correlations present in the diagnostic
process (Shao et al. 2021). However, pathologists often consider contextual information between different regions when

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14263

