The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Double Buffers CEM-TD3: More Efficient Evolution and Richer Exploration
Sheng Zhu1,2 , Chun Shen1,2,3 , Shuai Lü1,2,3,∗ , Junhong Wu1,2 , Daolong An1,3
1

Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering (Jilin University), Ministry of Education, China
2
College of Software, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
{lus, shenchun}@jlu.edu.cn, {zhusheng20, chwu22, andl22}@mails.jlu.edu.cn

Abstract

it more difficult for DRL to search for the optimal parameters. In addition, deep neural network is sensitive to hyperparameters (Henderson et al. 2018) and the training process
is usually highly unstable (Fujimoto, van Hoof, and Meger
2018), which may cause learning policy to fluctuate or even
not converge during the optimization process.
Evolutionary method (Salimans et al. 2017; Fogel 2006;
Aulig and Olhofer 2016) seeks the optimal parameter settings by simulating the evolution process in nature. As an
extensible alternative to reinforcement learning, evolutionary method is simple to implement and can be used for parallel searching. Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning (ERL)
(Khadka and Tumer 2018) combines Evolutionary Algorithm (EA) with Reinforcement Learning (RL). Specifically,
during RL agent training, EA provides diverse experiences.
In the evolutionary stage, RL agents provide individuals
with gradient information to EA. ERL combines the advantages of EA and RL, and its performance is better than EA
and RL. Collaborative Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning (CERL) (Khadka et al. 2019) introduces a set of actors
based on policy gradient learning, which exchange information with the population to enhance policy search capabilities. Proximal Distilled Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning (PDERL) (Bodnar, Day, and Li 2020) indicates that ERL
does not fully solve the scalability problem of EA, and optimizes the crossover and mutation operators in ERL, further improving the performance of evolutionary reinforcement learning algorithms. However, whether it is ERL or
PDERL, the combination scheme cannot improve the search
efficiency of EA.
CEM-TD3 combines the simple cross-entropy method
(CEM) (Duan et al. 2016) and Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic policy gradient (TD3) (Fujimoto, van Hoof, and
Meger 2018), and it achieves a satisfactory trade-off between performance and sample efficiency. However, we find
that there is room for further optimization in CEM-TD3. On
the one hand, CEM only uses half of the actors to evolve, and
the other half of the actors are eliminated, which will lead to
a waste of a large number of actors and low evolutionary
efficiency. On the other hand, half of the actors generated
by CEM are trained based on the same critic in TD3. Although this will provide policy gradient information to the
population, it leads to similar behaviors among these actors,
thereby reducing population diversity. This paper optimizes

CEM-TD3 is a combination scheme using the simple crossentropy method (CEM) and Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic policy gradient (TD3), and it achieves a satisfactory tradeoff between performance and sample efficiency. However, we
find that CEM-TD3 cannot fully address the low efficiency
of policy search caused by CEM, and the policy gradient
learning introduced by TD3 will weaken the diversity of individuals in the population. In this paper, we propose Double
Buffers CEM-TD3 (DBCEM-TD3) that optimizes both CEM
and TD3. For CEM, DBCEM-TD3 maintains an actor buffer
to store the population required for evolution. In each iteration, it only needs to generate a small number of actors to
replace the poor actors in the actor buffer to achieve more efficient evolution. The fitness of individuals in the actor buffer
decreases exponentially with time, which can avoid premature convergence of the mean actor. For TD3, DBCEM-TD3
maintains a critic buffer with the same number of critics as
the number of actors generated in each iteration, and each
critic is trained independently by sampling from the shared
replay buffer. In each iteration, each newly generated actor
uses different critics to guide learning. This ensures more
diverse behaviors among the learned actors, enabling richer
experiences to be collected during the evaluation phase. We
conduct experimental evaluations on five continuous control
tasks provided by OpenAI Gym. DBCEM-TD3 outperforms
CEM-TD3, TD3, and other classic off-policy reinforcement
learning algorithms in terms of performance and sample efficiency.

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) (Silver et al. 2014;
Schulman et al. 2017; Haarnoja et al. 2018; Fujimoto, van
Hoof, and Meger 2018) is the combination of deep neural
network and reinforcement learning. DRL uses deep neural network as non-linear function approximator, which has
stronger representation capability and is widely used in control tasks (Mnih et al. 2015, 2016; Lillicrap et al. 2016)
. The goal of DRL is to find the optimal parameter settings from the family of functions that can maximize the
expected cumulative reward. Although deep neural network
can solve complex tasks, the large parameter space makes
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17193

