The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Beyond Expected Return: Accounting for Policy Reproducibility When Evaluating
Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
Manon Flageat* , Bryan Lim* , Antoine Cully
Adaptive and Intelligent Robotics Lab, Imperial College London, UK
manon.flageat18@imperial.ac.uk, bryan.lim16@imperial.ac.uk, a.cully@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

Policy B

Many applications in Reinforcement Learning (RL) usually
have noise or stochasticity present in the environment. Beyond
their impact on learning, these uncertainties lead the exact
same policy to perform differently, i.e. yield different return,
from one roll-out to another. Common evaluation procedures
in RL summarise the consequent return distributions using
solely the expected return, which does not account for the
spread of the distribution. Our work defines this spread as the
policy reproducibility: the ability of a policy to obtain similar
performance when rolled out many times, a crucial property
in some real-world applications. We highlight that existing
procedures that only use the expected return are limited on two
fronts: first an infinite number of return distributions with a
wide range of performance-reproducibility trade-offs can have
the same expected return, limiting its effectiveness when used
for comparing policies; second, the expected return metric
does not leave any room for practitioners to choose the best
trade-off value for considered applications. In this work, we
address these limitations by recommending the use of Lower
Confidence Bound, a metric taken from Bayesian optimisation that provides the user with a preference parameter to
choose a desired performance-reproducibility trade-off. We
also formalise and quantify policy reproducibility, and demonstrate the benefit of our metrics using extensive experiments
of popular RL algorithms on common uncertain RL tasks.

1

Policy A
85%

100%

15%
Expected Return
for Policy A & B
Policy B

Policy A

Return
Figure 1: Illustration of the trade-off between policy reproducibility and performance. Policy A (blue) cooks the
best-breakfast-ever-made 85% of the time, but burns all the
eggs the remaining 15%, while Policy B (green) consistently
cooks a lower-quality breakfast. On the distribution of returns
(bottom), Policy A and B have the same expected return,
highlighting the limitations of this commonly-used metric.

Introduction

As Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms become increasingly competitive, attention is being shifted from toy and
benchmark environments towards realistic everyday problems. However, real-world applications are never fully observable, resulting in various sources of uncertainty: imperfect actuators and sensors, miscalibration, user mental state,
system wear and tear, etc. These uncertainties directly impact the policies as they cause stochasticity in the dynamics,
rewards, actions as well as observations (Cassandra 1998;
Dulac-Arnold et al. 2020). In this work, we highlight that
when considering commonly-used uncertain settings, the final policy of a standard RL algorithm may have large variations in its performance, i.e. low reproducibility. We argue
* Equal Contribution
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12024

that evaluating and accounting for policy reproducibility is a
critical and understudied issue in RL.
As a motivating example, let’s take the hypothetical example of a breakfast-cooking robot, trained using RL to cook
the best expected breakfast every morning (see Figure 1). A
learnt robot Policy A might get a really high expected return
by cooking the best-breakfast-ever-made 85% of the time, but
burn all the eggs the remaining 15% (blue Policy in Figure 1).
This would result in finding burned eggs in the user’s plates
approximately one day a week. In this example, it is likely
that the user would prefer a slightly lower-quality breakfast
but consistently every day of the week, such as proposed by
Policy B (green Policy in Figure 1). In other words, the user
would likely prefer a more reproducible policy. However,
Policy A and Policy B both have the same expected return.

