The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Efficient Constrained K-center Clustering with Background Knowledge
Longkun Guo1, 2 * , Chaoqi Jia2 * , Kewen Liao3 * , Zhigang Lu4 * , Minhui Xue5 *
1

School of Mathematics and Statistics, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350116, China
Key Laboratory of Computing Power Network and Information Security, Ministry of Education, Shandong Computer
Science Center, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences), Jinan 250316, China
3
HilstLab, Peter Faber Business School, Australian Catholic University, North Sydney 2060, Australia
4
College of Science and Engineering, James Cook University, Townsville 4810, Australia
5
CSIRO’s Data61, Sydney 2015, Australia
{longkun.guo, chaoqi1.jia}@gmail.com, kewen.liao@acu.edu.au, zhigang.lu@jcu.edu.au, jason.xue@data61.csiro.au

2

devising k-center based applications and their associated
optimization models, including but not limited to capacitated k-center (Khuller and Sussmann 2000), k-center
with outliers (Charikar et al. 2001), minimum coverage kcenter (Lim et al. 2005), connected k-center (Ester et al.
2006), fault-tolerant k-center (Khuller, Pless, and Sussmann
2000), and recently fair k-center (Chierichetti et al. 2017;
Kleindessner, Awasthi, and Morgenstern 2019; Bera et al.
2022) and distributed k-center (Huang et al. 2023).
In various machine learning applications (Zhang et al.
2013; Liu, Li, and Li 2017), there is often an abundance of
unlabeled data and limited labeled data due to the cost of
labeling. Even worse, the ground truth information can be
completely missing or hidden (Basu, Banerjee, and Mooney
2004), while we may obtain some background knowledge
among the data points to be clustered, that is, whether pairs
of data points should belong to the same cluster or not. Unsurprisingly, utilizing such background knowledge achieves
improved results on center-based clustering (Basu, Davidson, and Wagstaff 2008). However, this requires more complex clustering models with instance-level must-link (ML)
and cannot-link (CL) constraints to encode the auxiliary input background knowledge. Clustering with instance-level
constraints was first introduced in (Wagstaff and Cardie
2000), where pairwise ML and CL constraints between data
instances were considered. Instances of data points with an
ML constraint must belong to the same cluster, while with a
CL constraint must be placed into different clusters.

Abstract
Center-based clustering has attracted significant research interest from both theory and practice. In many practical applications, input data often contain background knowledge
that can be used to improve clustering results. In this work,
we build on widely adopted k-center clustering and model its
input background knowledge as must-link (ML) and cannotlink (CL) constraint sets. However, most clustering problems
including k-center are inherently NP-hard, while the more
complex constrained variants are known to suffer severer approximation and computation barriers that significantly limit
their applicability. By employing a suite of techniques including reverse dominating sets, linear programming (LP) integral
polyhedron, and LP duality, we arrive at the first efficient approximation algorithm for constrained k-center with the best
possible ratio of 2. We also construct competitive baseline
algorithms and empirically evaluate our approximation algorithm against them on a variety of real datasets. The results
validate our theoretical findings and demonstrate the great advantages of our algorithm in terms of clustering cost, clustering quality, and running time.

Introduction
Center-based clustering is a fundamental unsupervised task
in machine learning that aims to group similar data points
into subsets or clusters based on different distance metrics. Classical clustering problems such as k-means (Lloyd
1982), k-center (Gonzalez 1985; Hochbaum and Shmoys
1985), and k-median (Charikar et al. 1999) are all N Phard. Among those, the k-center formulation stands out in
the perspectives of robustness to outliers, guaranteed low
approximation ratio, and computational efficiency and scalability. In addition, unlike k-means, k-center produces deterministic clustering results and seeks distance-balanced
clusters. Its objective is to minimize the maximum distance between any data point and its closest cluster center, or equivalently, minimize the maximum covering radius of the clusters. Extended from this basic k-center
objective, there has been significant research interest in

Problem Formulation
Formally, given an input dataset P = {p1 , . . . , pn } in the
metric space, k-center aims to locate a cluster center set
C ⊆ P such that the maximum distance between points
in P and their assigned cluster centers in C is minimized.
Furthermore, if we denote the distance function between
any two data points as d(·, ·), then the distance between
a point p ∈ P and a center set C can be defined as
d(p, C) = minc∈C d(p, c). Hence, the objective of k-center
is to seek an optimal C ∗ with min-max radius or solution
cost of r∗ = maxp∈P d(p, C ∗ ), i.e., to seek
C ∗ = arg min max d(p, C).

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

C⊆P

20709

p∈P

