The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Social-Aware Group Display Configuration in VR Conference
Bay-Yuan Hsu,1 Chih-Ya Shen,2 Hao Shan Yuan,3
Wang-Chien Lee,4 De-Nian Yang5,6
1

Department of Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management, National Tsing Hua University
2
Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University
3
Institute of Information Systems and Applications, National Tsing Hua University
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, USA
5
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica
6
Research Center of Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica
byhsu@ie.nthu.edu.tw, chihya@cs.nthu.edu.tw, hsy110065507@gapp.nthu.edu.tw,
wlee@cse.psu.edu, dnyang@iis.sinica.edu.tw
Abstract

highlighting important nearby users in Head-Mounted Displays (HMDs), especially in crowded conference environments.
Current VR social apps lack personalization, which displays all users uniformly in the virtual environment and neglects the potential benefits of customization. This curbs the
social interactions in VR conferences and diminishes user
satisfaction due to three drawbacks. D1) Obstructed View.
In crowded virtual spaces, users often struggle to find friends
or individuals of interest because nearby strangers obstruct
their views. D2) Lack of Customization. The presence of
undesirable strangers in proximity to a target user may lead
to undesirable interactions. D3) Overload. In large-scale
VR exhibitions/conferences, individuals may become overwhelmed by the abundance of participants for interactions
or, conversely, become disinterested due to the lack of social connections. These three disadvantages, in combination,
lead to VR-induced Social Isolation, where users may struggle to connect with individuals they are interested in or socially close to, resulting in reduced interactions and satisfaction. An effective solution to this issue is Personalized
Display, which allows users to selectively enable or disable
the rendering of other users.
In VR environments, different users are not required to
view the same set of individuals. Prior studies demonstrate
that tailoring user displays in VR enhances social experiences (Pluto 2018). However, existing VR customization research mainly revolves around analyzing factory safety measures in computer vision and data mining, aiming to recommend items to users (Lacko 2020; Ko et al. 2020). These
research overlook personalization factors among users. A
personalized display enables the VR-based social metaverse
with the following advantages. A1) Social Relationships.
Enabling two users to see each other in the metaverse can
enhance their satisfaction, fostering a feeling of shared presence (Bulu 2012). Thus, displaying a group of sociallyclose friends on an individual’s VR screen could be advantageous (Pluto 2018). A2) Personal Preferences. Personalized displays, aligning with users’ preferences, enhance
satisfaction; for example, some users prefer seeing prominent scholars or conference organizers at AAAI, while others anticipate connecting with colleagues sharing their re-

Virtual Reality (VR) has emerged due to advancements in
hardware and computer graphics. During the pandemic, conferences and exhibitions leveraging VR have gained attention. However, large-scale VR conferences, face a significant problem not yet studied in the literature – displaying
too many irrelevant users on the screen which may negatively
impact the user experience. To address this issue, we formulate a new research problem, Social-Aware VR Conference
Group Display Configuration (SVGD). Accordingly, we design the Social Utility-Aware VR Conference Group Formation (SVC) algorithm, which is a 2-approximation algorithm
to SVGD. SVC iteratively selects either the P-Configuration
or S-Configuration based on their effective ratios. This ensures that in each iteration, SVC identifies and chooses the
solution with the highest current effectiveness. Experiments
on real metaverse datasets show that the proposed SVC outperforms 11 baselines by 75% in terms of solution quality.

Introduction
Virtual Reality (VR) has experienced a surge in adoption
as industries increasingly utilize it to promote products and
enhance services (Mileva 2022; Ning et al. 2021). During
the COVID-19 pandemic, VR conferences and exhibitions
gained popularity as in-person events are constrained by
travel restrictions and social distancing policies. To support
virtual gatherings, various metaverse platforms have been
exploited. For instance, the ACM SIGKDD 2020 conference used vFair’s 3D platform for a virtual conference. Meta
Horizon Workrooms offers advanced features like persistent
whiteboards and mixed-reality pass-through functions, enabling users to collaborate in a virtual space (Meta 2023).
Spatial allows users to customize their 3D virtual space for
immersive galleries or exhibitions (Spatial 2023). Mozilla
Hubs provides spatial audio and media-sharing functions
for socializing with custom avatars in a virtual space (Hubs
2023). Engage replicates face-to-face interactions, accommodating up to 5,000 live virtual reality users for events,
training, and education (ENGAGE 2023). However, these
platforms lack the support for personalized display, e.g.,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8517

