The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ViTree: Single-Path Neural Tree for Step-Wise
Interpretable Fine-Grained Visual Categorization
Danning Lao, Qi Liu†, Jiazi Bu†, Junchi Yan, Wei Shen*
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{laodanning, purewhite, bujiazi001, yanjunchi, wei.shen}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
As computer vision continues to advance and finds
widespread applications across various domains, the need for
interpretability in deep learning models becomes paramount.
Existing methods often resort to post-hoc techniques or prototypes to explain the decision-making process, which can be
indirect and lack intrinsic illustration. In this research, we introduce ViTree, a novel approach for fine-grained visual categorization that combines the popular vision transformer as
a feature extraction backbone with neural decision trees. By
traversing the tree paths, ViTree effectively selects patches
from transformer-processed features to highlight informative
local regions, thereby refining representations in a step-wise
manner. Unlike previous tree-based models that rely on soft
distributions or ensembles of paths, ViTree selects a single tree path, offering a clearer and simpler decision-making
process. This patch and path selectivity enhances model interpretability of ViTree, enabling better insights into the
model’s inner workings. Remarkably, extensive experimentation validates that this streamlined approach surpasses various strong competitors and achieves state-of-the-art performance while maintaining exceptional interpretability which
is proved by multi-perspective methods. Code can be found
at https://github.com/SJTU-DeepVisionLab/ViTree.

Figure 1: A comparative analysis of human and model focus
in avian classification. Left: Visualization of human attention distribution during bird classification. Right: Decision
path of ViTree with highlighted patches, reflecting localized
regions of interest. Conjunction of human focus and model
patches are marked with checkmark, demonstrating consistency of cognitive approach between human and model.

neural decision trees (NDTs) for fine-grained visual categorization (FGVC) have constraints (Li et al. 2022). One category, data-driven hierarchies, partitions data from coarse to
fine, but induces training limitations. Moreover, prototypical approaches like ProtoTree (Nauta, van Bree, and Seifert
2020) and ViTNet (Kim, Nam, and Ko 2022) also face drawbacks. They lack step-wise reasoning, compromise interpretability with latent space projections, and forfeit interpretability by using soft trees with probabilities, nullifying
single-path clarity.
In this study, we introduce ViTree, a single-path neural
tree approach based on the vision transformer architecture,
which utilize hard patches to achieve genuine step-wise representation learning while keeping state-of-the-art performance in fine-grained image classification tasks.
Firstly, we introduce hard patches, serving as the humanunderstandable focuses of the model on critical local regions. These patches are selected at each decision tree node
through a learnable process, representing locally significant features as perceived by the model. Subsequently, the
model employs these patches to enhance image representation, constituting a round of representation learning when
message passing between nodes. Importantly, these patches
can be directly associated with the original image, enhancing
intuitive and human-comprehensible inference compared to
conventional soft methods reliant on prototypes.

Introduction
The vision transformer (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) is a significant advancement in computer vision, employing selfattention mechanisms to excel in various visual tasks (Yu
et al. 2021; Chou, Kao, and Lin 2023). However, their lack
of interpretability hinders fairness, transparency, and accountability in AI systems (Akhtar 2023). In computer vision, post-hoc techniques interpret models after training to
comprehend their decisions and underlying influences. Analyzing relevance scores, saliency maps, and attention mechanisms offers retrospective insights. Yet, limited integration
into the learning process confines their explanatory power,
yielding partial insights into internal workings.
For direct model reasoning, decision trees integrate with
neural networks, capitalizing on transparency. However,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
† marks co-second authors.
* marks corresponding author.

2866

