The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multiple-Source Localization from a Single-Snapshot Observation Using
Graph Bayesian Optimization
Zonghan Zhang, Zijian Zhang, Zhiqian Chen
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Mississippi State University
zz239@msstate.edu, zz242@msstate.edu, zchen@cse.msstate.edu

Abstract

Source 1, t=0

Observation 1

Not Infected
Infected

Due to the significance of its various applications, source localization has garnered considerable attention as one of the
most important means to confront diffusion hazards. Multisource localization from a single-snapshot observation is especially relevant due to its prevalence. However, the inherent
complexities of this problem, such as limited information, interactions among sources, and dependence on diffusion models, pose challenges to resolution. Current methods typically
utilize heuristics and greedy selection, and they are usually
bonded with one diffusion model. Consequently, their effectiveness is constrained. To address these limitations, we propose a simulation-based method termed BOSouL. Bayesian
optimization (BO) is adopted to approximate the results for
its sample efficiency. A surrogate function models uncertainty
from the limited information. It takes sets of nodes as the input instead of individual nodes. BOSouL can incorporate any
diffusion model in the data acquisition process through simulations. Empirical studies demonstrate that its performance is
robust across graph structures and diffusion models. The code
is available at https://github.com/XGraph-Team/BOSouL.

True Sources
SL Results

Observation 2

Source 2, t=0

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: The challenges faced by heuristic methods: (a)
Sources and spreads have many-to-many relationships. (b)
Greedy algorithms result in sub-optimal solutions (top). (c)
Different diffusion models (SI at the top and SIR at the bottom) affect source localization results.
didate spread from the opponent’s campaign office is less
credible than one from a neutral third-party press.
The SL problems can be divided into three classes based
on network observation types: complete observation, monitor observation, and snapshot observation (Shelke and Attar 2019). Among them, complete observation is rarely possible, given the massive scale of the real-world networks.
Monitor observation, where part of the nodes are monitored
for whether and when they are infected, is also not always
available, especially for sudden outbreaks of unwanted propagation. Therefore, the most common scenario is singlesnapshot observation, where only information about the network at a specific time is available (i.e., which nodes are
infected at the snapshot). Early approach of single-snapshot
source localization (Prakash, Vreeken, and Faloutsos 2012)
identified single sources of infectious diseases. Later, multisource methods were proposed (Wang et al. 2017; Zhu,
Chen, and Ying 2017; Dong et al. 2019) to handle the wide
existence of multiple diffusion sources in reality.
Although simulation-based methods seem to be legitimate
to solve the SL problem, evaluating all node sets is infeasible due to the problem’s combinatorial nature and the #P hardness of evaluating each set (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003). Therefore, heuristic methods dominate the problem of multi-source localization from a single network snapshot (Shah and Zaman 2010; Prakash, Vreeken, and Faloutsos 2012; Zang et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2017; Zhu, Chen, and

Introduction
In recent decades, the world has become more interconnected thanks to the emergence of various networks. Consequently, we have become more vulnerable to network diffusion risks such as the spread of rumors, influenza-like
viruses, and smart grid failures (Chowdhury, Srinivasan, and
Getoor 2020; Ozili and Arun 2020; Amin and Schewe 2007).
Source localization (SL), the reverse problem of information
diffusion, has attracted significant attention from researchers
as a necessary component of the confrontation against diffusion hazards (Prakash, Vreeken, and Faloutsos 2012; Zang
et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2017; Zhu, Chen, and Ying 2017;
Dong et al. 2019). It holds importance across various application domains such as medicine, security, large interconnected networks, social networks, and more(Shelke and
Attar 2019; Li, Sun, and Chen 2007). Source localization
can be leveraged to block negative influence (rumors and
viruses), maintain infrastructure (power grid), determine accountability (propagators of rumors), and verify information
reliability. For instance, negative news about an election canCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22538

