The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Attention Guided CAM:
Visual Explanations of Vision Transformer Guided by Self-Attention
Saebom Leem1,2 , Hyunseok Seo1 *
1

Korea Institute of Science and Technology
2
Sogang University
toqha1215@sogang.ac.kr, seo@kist.kr

Abstract

high robustness against occlusions and perturbations in the
input (Naseer et al. 2021). Exploiting these benefits, ViT and
its derived models have achieved remarkable performance in
numerous vision tasks such as classification (Chen, Fan, and
Panda 2021; Li et al. 2021; Touvron et al. 2021), object detection (Liu et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021), and semantic segmentation (Ranftl, Bochkovskiy, and Koltun 2021; Zheng
et al. 2021). Demonstrating its high versatility and decent
performance, especially in large-scale image data, it is now
considered as a practical alternative to Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) (He et al. 2016; LeCun et al. 1989; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Szegedy et al. 2015) which
has dominated the computer vision field for the past decade.
Despite the notable success of ViT in computer vision, it
still lacks explainability. The proper methods to provide a
visual explanation of the model are vital to ensure the reliability of the given model. For CNN, for example, numerous
methods have been developed to provide a faithful explanation of the model by gradient analysis (Draelos and Carin
2020; Selvaraju et al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2016). In addition,
many of the gradient-based methods have been actively utilized in weakly-supervised localization (Chattopadhay et al.
2018; Qin, Kim, and Gedeon 2021; Yang et al. 2020). In contrast, the unique structure of ViT, such as the use of [class]
token and the self-attention mechanism, makes it complicated to provide the proper explanation of the model. Therefore, compared to CNN, there have been fewer explainability methods developed, including Attention rollout (Abnar
and Zuidema 2020) and Layer-wise Relevance Propagation
(LRP)-based method (Chefer, Gur, and Wolf 2021).
Attention Rollout is a method developed for ViT and aims
to provide a concise aggregation of the overall attention by
using the resulting matrix of self-attention operation. Although it considers the core component of ViT architecture, it assumes a linear combination of attention and overlooks the influence of the MLP head, resulting in a rough
and non-class-specific explanation of the classification decision. On the other hand, the LRP-based method applied to
ViT provides a class-specific analysis and takes the whole
model into consideration. It focuses on decomposing the
model back into the level of image patches and calculates
the relevancy score of each patch based on the conservation
property. Since both methods take the self-attention operation into account, they are prone to the peak intensity re-

Vision Transformer(ViT) is one of the most widely used
models in the computer vision field with its great performance on various tasks. In order to fully utilize the ViTbased architecture in various applications, proper visualization methods with a decent localization performance are necessary, but these methods employed in CNN-based models
are still not available in ViT due to its unique structure. In this
work, we propose an attention-guided visualization method
applied to ViT that provides a high-level semantic explanation for its decision. Our method selectively aggregates the
gradients directly propagated from the classification output
to each self-attention, collecting the contribution of image
features extracted from each location of the input image.
These gradients are additionally guided by the normalized
self-attention scores, which are the pairwise patch correlation scores. They are used to supplement the gradients on
the patch-level context information efficiently detected by the
self-attention mechanism. This approach of our method provides elaborate high-level semantic explanations with great
localization performance only with the class labels. As a result, our method outperforms the previous leading explainability methods of ViT in the weakly-supervised localization
task and presents great capability in capturing the full instances of the target class object. Meanwhile, our method provides a visualization that faithfully explains the model, which
is demonstrated in the perturbation comparison test.

Introduction
Transformer-based models (Vaswani et al. 2017; Devlin
et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019; Radford et al. 2018) is a widely
used architecture in various NLP tasks due to its superior
performance. Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al.
2020) is a modified Transformer that adopts the architecture
of BERT (Devlin et al. 2018), but is applicable to images by
replacing its basic unit of operation with image patches. As
a Transformer-based model, ViT applies the self-attention
mechanism as its primary operation, sharing the advantages
of the Transformer over other models: it significantly reduces the required computational load and supports better
parallelization. Furthermore, recent studies propose that ViT
is better at shape recognition (Tuli et al. 2021) and shows
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2956

