The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dual-Level Curriculum Meta-Learning for Noisy Few-Shot Learning Tasks
Xiaofan Que, Qi Yu
Rochester Institute of Technology
{xq5054, qi.yu}@rit.edu

Abstract
Few-shot learning (FSL) is essential in many practical applications. However, the limited training examples make the
models more vulnerable to label noise, which can lead to poor
generalization capability. To address this critical challenge,
we propose a curriculum meta-learning model that employs a
novel dual-level class-example sampling strategy to create a
robust curriculum for adaptive task distribution formulation
and robust model training. The dual-level framework proposes
a heuristic class sampling criterion that measures pairwise
class boundary complexity to form a class curriculum; it uses
effective example sampling through an under-trained proxy
model to form an example curriculum. By utilizing both classlevel and example-level information, our approach is more
robust to handle limited training data and noisy labels that
commonly occur in few-shot learning tasks. The model has
efficient convergence behavior, which is verified through rigorous convergence analysis. Additionally, we establish a novel
error bound through a hierarchical PAC-Bayesian analysis for
curriculum meta-learning under noise. We conduct extensive
experiments that demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework in outperforming existing noisy few-shot learning methods under various few-shot classification benchmarks. Our
code is available at https://github.com/ritmininglab/DCML.

Introduction
Meta-learning is a technique that involves training a model on
multiple tasks to generalize to new, unseen tasks using only
a few training examples (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017).
While few-shot learning (FSL) methods have achieved success on benchmark tasks, it has been shown that these methods are highly susceptible to label noise, and even a single
noisy data point can significantly impact the model’s overall
accuracy (Liang et al. 2022; Lu et al. 2020; Mazumder, Singh,
and Namboodiri 2021). Traditional techniques for incorporating noise in supervised learning involving large amounts
of training data (Ren et al. 2018; Shu et al. 2019; Han et al.
2018; Yu et al. 2019) may not be applicable in FSL settings
due to two main reasons. First, FSL only has access to limited
labeled data, which is insufficient to support traditional techniques that require large amounts of training data. Second,
FSL methods typically rely on learning from the differences
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14740

between tasks, instead of directly learning from individual
data points. As a result, techniques that depend on individual
data points may not be as effective in FSL settings.
Prior works on noisy few-shot learning (NFSL) attempt to address this issue using techniques such as
feature aggregation (Liang et al. 2022), data augmentation (Mazumder, Singh, and Namboodiri 2021), and example
re-weighting (Killamsetty et al. 2020). They have achieved
moderate performance in noisy few-shot learning, but are
fundamentally limited from two key aspects. (i) Granularity:
these approaches only consider the example-level granularity,
where the model learns to distinguish between individual
examples within a few-shot task. However, episodic metalearning methods learn to generalize at both the class-level
and example-level, which can lead to more robust and accurate few-shot learning. (ii) Scope: these approaches either
assume that the meta-training data to be clean and only consider noisy labels in the support set during meta-testing, or
the other way around, which is a limited and less realistic
scenario. In practice, both can significantly affect the fewshot learning performance. Therefore, robust FSL methods
should consider the prevalence of noisy labels in both the
meta-training and meta-test datasets.
To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel duallevel curriculum meta learning (i.e., DCML) model that can
generalize at both the class-level and example-level, while
also considering noisy labels in both the meta-training and
meta-test datasets. It performs dual-level sampling to dynamically form a task curriculum: (i) Class-level sampling
continuously samples a subset of classes that are suitable for
meta-training at the current stage and the selected classes
forms a subject in the overall curriculum; (ii) Example-level
sampling further chooses a subset of clean examples from currently chosen classes to construct the support and query sets.
A central ingredient to formulate a robust curriculum is the
criteria to accurately determine the easiness of a class/example over the course of meta-learning. However, directly using
the average loss of examples may not be accurate (Kumar,
Packer, and Koller 2010; Bengio et al. 2009). This is because
the network’s behavior changes over time, with the network
initially being under-fitted and later potentially overfitting
to noisy or hard examples (Huang et al. 2019; Toneva et al.
2019). Additionally, collecting historical statistics for each
task in a meta-learning context is infeasible, making methods

