The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Accelerating the Global Aggregation of Local Explanations
Alon Mor, Yonatan Belinkov, Benny Kimelfeld
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
almr16@campus.technion.ac.il, belinkov@technion.ac.il, bennyk@cs.technion.ac.il

My daughter got
this for christmas
and loves it!

Abstract
Local explanation methods highlight the input tokens that have
a considerable impact on the outcome of classifying the document at hand. For example, the Anchor algorithm applies a
statistical analysis of the sensitivity of the classifier to changes
in the tokens. Aggregating local explanations over a dataset
provides a global explanation of the model. Such aggregation
aims to detect words with the most impact, giving valuable
insights about the model, like what it has learned in training
and which adversarial examples expose its weaknesses. However, standard aggregation methods bear a high computational
cost: a naı̈ve implementation applies a costly algorithm to
each token of each document, and hence, it is infeasible for a
simple user running in the scope of a short analysis session.
We devise techniques for accelerating the global aggregation
of the Anchor algorithm. Specifically, our goal is to compute
a set of top-k words with the highest global impact according
to different aggregation functions. Some of our techniques are
lossless and some are lossy. We show that for a very mild loss
of quality, we are able to accelerate the computation by up
to 30×, reducing the computation from hours to minutes. We
also devise and study a probabilistic model that accounts for
noise in the Anchor algorithm and diminishes the bias toward
words that are frequent yet low in impact.

..
.

Top-10 terms: ◦ great ◦ love
◦ game ◦ fun ◦ christmas
◦ friends ◦ grandson
◦ family ◦ favorite ◦ enjoy

Great service and
shipping. Thank you.
Because of you I
had less stress for
christmas
Document collection:
spam detection over
Amazon toy reviews

Quality as a function of time (sec)
for sum (—), avg (—), our (—)

Figure 1: Left: local explanations in a collection of documents for a spam detection task. Top-right: top-10 terms
resulting from the global aggregation of (local) anchors.
Bottom-right: global aggregation quality; our approach leads
to higher quality at a fraction of the computation time.

Introduction
A particular paradigm for local explanations consists of algorithms that compute a numeric estimate of each token’s contribution to the decision of the model, also known as input attribution (Danilevsky et al. 2020a). Many of the common techniques are computationally intensive. For instance, the score
that Anchor (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2018) assigns to a
token is the probability that the model keeps its decision intact when the document undergoes random perturbations, as
long as the token remains unchanged. LIME (Ribeiro, Singh,
and Guestrin 2016) derives a linear bag-of-words predictor
of the model’s outcome in a small area around the document
and scores each token by its learned coefficient. The SHAP
score (Lundberg and Lee 2017) views the tokens as players
in the cooperative game of forming the model’s decision, and
applies the well-known Shapley value to attribute a portion
of the profit to each player. As a running illustration, Figure 1
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18807

shows documents from a spam-detection task of Amazon
reviews on toys and games, with words marked as anchors,
meaning that their score by Anchor exceeds a threshold.
In turn, an approach to global explanation is the aggregation of the attribution scores computed by methods as the
aforementioned, intended to quantify the impact of each term
on the model (Arras et al. 2016). More precisely, we begin
with a set of instances to classify (e.g., the training set or the
test set of a learning setup), compute a score for each token,
and then estimate the impact of every word by aggregating
the scores that it obtained in its occurrence in documents.
Figure 1 shows top-10 impactful words based on the anchors;
to illustrate an insight, “Christmas” is one of the most impactful terms that encourage the model (Bert, Devlin et al. 2018)
to classify a document as spam. Like any form of a global
explanation, we would like it to be used effectively by users
of varying skills to gain valuable insights on the model: what
it learned in training, which biases it has towards specific
phrases, which adversarial examples can shed light on possible weaknesses, and so on. For instantiation, we would like
to present the top-k impactful terms in online analysis frameworks such as the FIND system (Lertvittayakumjorn, Specia,
and Toni 2020) that provides attribution-based insights.

