The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

VVS: Video-to-Video Retrieval with Irrelevant Frame Suppression
Won Jo1 , Geuntaek Lim1 , Gwangjin Lee1 , Hyunwoo Kim1 , Byungsoo Ko2 , Yukyung Choi1
1

Sejong University
2
NAVER Vision
{jwon, gtlim, gjlee, hwkim}@rcv.sejong.ac.kr, kobiso62@gmail.com, ykchoi@rcv.sejong.ac.kr

Abstract
In content-based video retrieval (CBVR), dealing with largescale collections, efficiency is as important as accuracy; thus,
several video-level feature-based studies have actively been
conducted. Nevertheless, owing to the severe difficulty of embedding a lengthy and untrimmed video into a single feature, these studies have been insufficient for accurate retrieval
compared to frame-level feature-based studies. In this paper,
we show that appropriate suppression of irrelevant frames
can provide insight into the current obstacles of the videolevel approaches. Furthermore, we propose a Video-to-Video
Suppression network (VVS) as a solution. VVS is an endto-end framework that consists of an easy distractor elimination stage to identify which frames to remove and a suppression weight generation stage to determine the extent to
suppress the remaining frames. This structure is intended to
effectively describe an untrimmed video with varying content and meaningless information. Its efficacy is proved via
extensive experiments, and we show that our approach is not
only state-of-the-art in video-level approaches but also has
a fast inference time despite possessing retrieval capabilities
close to those of frame-level approaches. Code is available at
https://github.com/sejong-rcv/VVS

Figure 1: Q: Should the red boxes be suppressed? The red
boxes in both videos should be excluded because they are
unrelated to the topic in the video, although they are included for a specific purpose or reason. In this work, we
demonstrate that the suppression of these red boxes enhances the distinctiveness of features when describing the
entire video at once.

feature-based approach. The former aggregates similarities
between frame-level features in two videos to calculate a
video-to-video similarity. Conversely, the latter describes
each video as a single feature and computes a video-to-video
similarity based on it. These two streams are in a tradeoff relationship because the key foundation for determining
similarity differs. The frame-level approach compares each
frame directly; it is less dependent on factors such as video
duration and whether or not it is trimmed. As a result, relatively accurate searches are possible, but processing speed
and memory are expensive due to the necessity of numerous
similarity computations and a considerable amount of feature storage space. In comparison, the video-level approach
requires only one similarity calculation between a single pair
of features, which is more efficient in terms of processing
speed and memory. However, it is difficult to compress many
frames of a video into a single feature, making approaches
of this type generally inaccurate and sensitive to factors such
as duration and trimness.
Ideally, if a video-level approach could be as distinct as a
frame-level approach, it may be the best option in real-world
scenarios. However, there are some problems that must be
considered. First is that distractors in a video interfere with

Introduction
Information retrieval is defined as finding the most relevant
information in a large collection. It has evolved from finding text within a document (Griffiths, Luckhurst, and Willett
1986; Strzalkowski 1995; Bellot and El-Bèze 1999; Liu and
Croft 2004) to finding images within an image set (Arandjelovic et al. 2016; Tolias, Sicre, and Jégou 2016; Jun et al.
2019; Ko et al. 2019; Ko and Gu 2020; Gu and Ko 2020). In
recent years, with the fast growing trend of the video streaming market, several studies (Kordopatis-Zilos et al. 2017b,
2019b; Shao et al. 2021; Jo et al. 2022; Ng, Lim, and Lee
2022) have actively been conducted in content-based video
retrieval (CBVR) to find desired videos from a set of videos.
The core of CBVR technology is to measure similarities
between videos of different lengths, including untrimmed
videos. This is divided into two streams according to the basic unit for measuring the similarity between two videos:
a frame-level feature-based approach and a video-level
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2679

