The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Unified Environmental Network for Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction
Yuchao Su1 , Yuanman Li1* , Wei Wang2 , Jiantao Zhou3 , Xia Li1
1

Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, College of Electronics and Information Engineering,
Shenzhen University
2
Department of Engineering, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University
3
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
yuchaosu@126.com, {yuanmanli, lixia}@szu.edu.cn, ehomewang@ieee.org, jtzhou@um.edu.mo
Abstract

Accurately predicting pedestrian movements in complex environments is challenging due to social interactions, scene
constraints, and pedestrians’ multimodal behaviors. Sequential models like long short-term memory fail to effectively integrate scene features to make predicted trajectories comply
with scene constraints due to disparate feature modalities of
scene and trajectory. Though existing convolution neural network (CNN) models can extract scene features, they are ineffective in mapping these features into scene constraints for
pedestrians and struggle to model pedestrian interactions due
to the loss of target pedestrian information. To address these
issues, we propose a unified environmental network based
on CNN for pedestrian trajectory prediction. We introduce a
polar-based method to reflect the distance and direction relationship between any position in the environment and the target pedestrian. This enables us to simultaneously model scene
constraints and pedestrian social interactions in the form of
feature maps. Additionally, we capture essential local features in the feature map, characterizing potential multimodal
movements of pedestrians at each time step to prevent redundant predicted trajectories. We verify the performance of our
proposed model on four trajectory prediction datasets, encompassing both short-term and long-term predictions. The
experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our approach over existing methods.

Figure 1: The shortcoming of CNN in trajectory prediction.
It is difficult to characterize impacts from scene elements
and other pedestrians to the target pedestrian, because CNN
doesn’t always learn the target pedestrian’s position.

2019; Yuan et al. 2021) have separately characterized scene
impacts by CNN models and social interactions by sequential models, and then both scene and interaction features are
flattened into a vector to show environmental impacts. These
methods suffer from two inherent limitations: First, due to
modality differences, scene constraints and social interactions are separately modeled. However, scene elements can
affect social interactions. For instance, when two pedestrians
are very close with a wall between them, modeling their social interactions without considering scene elements fails to
accurately reflect their interactions. Second, CNN-extracted
scene features describe compact global semantic information. However, most of the scene constraints imposed on
pedestrians are local, primarily related to the scene around
pedestrians. Directly interacting the compact global semantic scene features with trajectory features is challenging due
to the absence of spatial correspondences, making it difficult
to reflect the impacts of the local scene on pedestrians.
Recently, the work (Mangalam et al. 2021) employs a
CNN model to extract both trajectory and scene features for
trajectory prediction. However, the model cannot present social interactions between pedestrians, and struggles to map
scene features into scene constraints, as shown in Fig. 1. In

Introduction
Understanding the motion behaviors of pedestrians plays an
important role in many applications. However, accurately
predicting the trajectories of pedestrians is rather challenging due to environmental impacts and diverse motions of
pedestrians. First, a pedestrian’s motion is impacted by surrounding scene elements and pedestrians. Second, the motion shows high multimodal properties, i.e., a past trajectory
can correspond to multiple paths leading to a destination.
Motions of pedestrians are always impacted by the surrounding environment, and environmental impacts can be
classified as static and dynamic impacts. Static impacts are
presented by scene constraints, which are unchanged for a
long-term period. Dynamic impacts refer to social interactions between pedestrians. Some methods (Sadeghian et al.
*

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4970

