The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Automated RISC-V Microarchitecture Design with
Reinforcement Learning
Chen Bai1 , Jianwang Zhai2† , Yuzhe Ma3 , Bei Yu1† , Martin D.F. Wong4
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
4
Hong Kong Baptist University
{cbai, byu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, zhaijw@bupt.edu.cn, yuzhema@hkust-gz.edu.cn, mdfwong@hkbu.edu.hk
2

Abstract
Microarchitecture determines the implementation of a microprocessor. Designing a microarchitecture to achieve better
performance, power, and area (PPA) trade-off has been increasingly difficult. Previous data-driven methodologies hold
inappropriate assumptions and lack more tightly coupling
with expert knowledge. This paper proposes a novel reinforcement learning-based (RL) solution that addresses these
limitations. With the integration of microarchitecture scaling graph, PPA preference space embedding, and proposed
lightweight environment in RL, experiments using commercial electronic design automation (EDA) tools show that our
method achieves an average PPA trade-off improvement of
16.03% than previous state-of-the-art approaches with 4.07×
higher efficiency. The solution qualities outperform human
implementations by at most 2.03× in the PPA trade-off.

Branch
Predictor

I-cache

Front-end

Fetch
buffer

L2 cache
Memory
subsystem

Decode

ROB

Schedule

Dispatch/Issue

FP
RF
INT
RF

SoC/
Interconnect

D-cache
ALU
LD/ST

Front-end

ALU
Branch

Back-end

ALU
ALU
ALU

Memory
subsystem

Figure 1: Instructions fetched from I-cache are sent to functional units (e.g., ALU, LD/ST, etc.) for execution. Register files (RF) save temporary data. Reorder buffer (ROB)
achieves precise interrupts (Smith and Pleszkun 1988).
Components are highlighted with diverse colors, and the
same color denotes a similar function.

Introduction

Previous methodologies have been proposed. In industry,
architects’ expert knowledge is a heuristic to guide the DSE.
However, it is a concern that personal bias can lead to suboptimal solutions. In academia, both analytical and datadriven methods have been proposed. The analytical methods conduct interpretable equations to describe relations between microarchitectures and PPA values for various workloads. Karkhanis and Smith (2007) adopted interval analysis to construct such equations. However, the analytical
model requires much expert knowledge, and is unscalable
for newly-emerged microprocessors. Data-driven methods
are utilized accordingly when we lack accesses to experts.
The microarchitecture is viewed as a black box. Chen et al.
(2014) employed a ranking model. Li et al. (2016) applied
statistical sampling and AdaBoost learning. Bai et al. (2021;
2023b) proposed a Bayesian optimization-based framework.
Such data-driven methods generally outperform analytical
methods owing to many advanced machine-learning techniques (Li et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2023). However, they are
not free of criticism. Blindly exploring microarchitectures
(purely driven by the algorithm rather than tightly coupled
with expertise) can be naive since architects already know
the characteristics of most designs (Bai et al. 2023a).
In this paper, we follow the approach of previous datadriven methods but with key distinctions: our method removes prior unrealistic assumptions, and our solution is
deeply integrated with expert knowledge. Previous data-

The instruction set architecture (ISA) is the interface between software and hardware. RISC-V, an open standard
ISA, has garnered significant attention from both academia
and industry nowadays. The microarchitecture determines
how a particular microprocessor is implemented given an
ISA. It sets the cornerstone for a microprocessor’s overarching design points: performance, power, and area (PPA).
Nevertheless, it is challenging to design a microarchitecture efficiently to achieve pre-determined PPA design goals
for target workloads (computation-bound or memory-bound
programs) with manual efforts. Computer architects often
rely on design space exploration (DSE) to find appropriate
solutions. Those solutions can maximize performance and
minimize power and area for target workloads. DSE is an iterative, trial-and-error, and non-trivial procedure due to two
factors. First, the design space is enormous and complicated.
It comes from the high complexity of a microarchitecture,
such as shown in Figure 1, which includes different components responsible for implementing specific functions (Chen
et al. 2020; Grayson et al. 2020). Second, evaluating the PPA
values of a single microarchitecture design requires an extremely high runtime. Thus, it is a fond dream for architects
to iterate the design space and retrieve optimal solutions.
†

Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12

