The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exact ASP Counting with Compact Encodings*
Mohimenul Kabir1 , Supratik Chakraborty2 , Kuldeep S Meel3
1

2

National University of Singapore
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
3
University of Toronto

Abstract

count answer sets of such programs, while scaling much beyond state-of-the-art exact answer set counters.
In general, given a set of constraints in a theory, model
counting seeks to determine the number of models (or solutions) to the set of constraints. From a computational complexity perspective, this can be significantly harder than deciding whether there exists any solution to the set of constraints, i.e. the satisfiability problem. Yet, in the context
of propositional reasoning, compelling applications have fuelled significant practical advances in propositional model
counting, also referred to as #SAT (Thurley 2006), over the
past decade. This, in turn, has ushered in new applications
in quantified information flow (Biondi et al. 2018), neural
network verification (Baluta et al. 2019), computational biology, and the like. The success of practical propositional
model counting in diverse application domains have naturally led researchers to ask if practically efficient counting
algorithms can be devised for constraints beyond propositional logic. In particular, there has been growing interest
in answer set counting, motivated by applications in probabilistic reasoning and network reliability (Kabir and Meel
2023; Aziz et al. 2015).
Early efforts to build answer set counters sought to work
by enumerating answer sets of a given ASP program (Fichte
et al. 2017; Gebser et al. 2007). While this works extremely
well for answer set counts upto a certain threshold, enumeration doesn’t scale well for problem instances with too many
answer sets. Therefore, subsequent approaches to answer set
counting sought to leverage the significant progress made in
#SAT techniques. Specifically, Aziz et al. (Aziz et al. 2015)
integrated a component-caching based propositional model
counting technique with unfounded set detection to yield
an answer set counter, called ASProblog. In another line of
work, dynamic programming on a tree decomposition of the
input problem instance has been proposed to achieve scalability for ASP instances with low treewidth (Fichte et al.
2017; Fichte and Hecher 2019). Yet another approach has
been to translate a given normal logic program P into a
propositional formula F , such that there is a one-to-one
correspondence between answer sets of P and models of
F (Janhunen and Niemelä 2011; Bomanson 2017; Janhunen
2006). Answer sets of P can then be counted by invoking
an off-the-shelf propositional model counter (Sharma et al.
2019) on F . Though promising in principle, a naive appli-

Answer Set Programming (ASP) has emerged as a promising
paradigm in knowledge representation and automated reasoning owing to its ability to model hard combinatorial problems
from diverse domains in a natural way. Building on advances
in propositional SAT solving, the past two decades have witnessed the emergence of well-engineered systems for solving
the answer set satisfiability problem, i.e., finding models or
answer sets for a given answer set program. In recent years,
there has been growing interest in problems beyond satisfiability, such as model counting, in the context of ASP. Akin
to the early days of propositional model counting, state-ofthe-art exact answer set counters do not scale well beyond
small instances. Exact ASP counters struggle with handling
larger input formulas. The primary contribution of this paper
is a new ASP counting framework, called sharpASP, which
counts answer sets avoiding larger input formulas. This relies on an alternative way of defining answer sets that allows for the lifting of key techniques developed in the context of propositional model counting. Our extensive empirical analysis over 1470 benchmarks demonstrates significant
performance gain over current state-of-the-art exact answer
set counters. Specifically, by using sharpASP, we were able
to solve 1062 benchmarks with PAR2 score of 3082 whereas
using prior state-of-the-art, we could only solve 895 benchmarks with a PAR2 score of 4205, all other experimental conditions being the same.

1

Introduction

Answer Set Programming (ASP) (Marek and Truszczyński
1999) is a declarative problem-solving approach with a wide
variety of applications ranging from planning, diagnosis,
scheduling, and product configuration checking (Nouman
et al. 2016; Brik and Remmel 2015; Tiihonen et al. 2003).
An ASP program consists of a set of rules defined over
propositional atoms, where each rule logically expresses
an implication relation. An assignment to the propositional
atoms satisfying the ASP semantic is called an answer set.
In this paper, we focus on an important class of ASP programs called normal logic programs that have been used in
diverse applications (see for example (Dodaro and Maratea
2017; Brooks et al. 2007)), and present a new technique to
* The arXiv version: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.11936
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10571

