The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generating Diagnostic and Actionable Explanations for Fair Graph Neural
Networks
Zhenzhong Wang1 , Qingyuan Zeng2,3 , Wanyu Lin1 * , Min Jiang 2,3 , Kay Chen Tan 1
1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
School of Informatics, Key Laboratory of Digital Protection and Intelligent Processing of Intangible Cultural Heritage of
Fujian and Taiwan, Ministry of Culture and Tourism, Xiamen University
3
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen
University
zhenzhong16.wang@connect.polyu.hk, 36920221153145@stu.xmu.edu.cn, wan-yu.lin@polyu.edu.hk, minjiang@xmu.edu.cn,
kctan@polyu.edu.hk
2

Abstract
A plethora of fair graph neural networks (GNNs) have been
proposed to promote algorithmic fairness for high-stake reallife contexts. Meanwhile, explainability is generally proposed
to help machine learning practitioners debug models by providing human-understandable explanations. However, seldom
work on explainability is made to generate explanations for
fairness diagnosis in GNNs. From the explainability perspective, this paper explores the problem of what subgraph patterns
cause the biased behavior of GNNs, and what actions could
practitioners take to rectify the bias? By answering the two
questions, this paper aims to produce compact, diagnostic, and
actionable explanations that are responsible for discriminatory
behavior. Specifically, we formulate the problem of generating
diagnostic and actionable explanations as a multi-objective
combinatorial optimization problem. To solve the problem, a
dedicated multi-objective evolutionary algorithm is presented
to ensure GNNs’ explainability and fairness in one go. In particular, an influenced nodes-based gradient approximation is
developed to boost the computation efficiency of the evolutionary algorithm. We provide a theoretical analysis to illustrate
the effectiveness of the proposed framework. Extensive experiments have been conducted to demonstrate the superiority of
the proposed method in terms of classification performance,
fairness, and interpretability.

Introduction
To facilitate algorithmic fairness of machine learning in highstakes applications, fair learning algorithms have recently
attracted significant attention (Mehrabi et al. 2021; Wan et al.
2023; Jiang et al. 2022). Recently, several studies have been
proposed towards fair graph neural networks (GNNs) due to
their superior predictive performance on high-stakes applications (Jin et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022a; Dai and Wang
2022; Wang et al. 2023a). On the other hand, explainability, a
well-known principle to gain insights into the models, could
help system developers and machine learning practitioners
to debug the model to ensure algorithmic fairness by identifying data biases in training data (Ma et al. 2022a; Ge et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21690

2022; Fu et al. 2020; Lin, Lan, and Li 2021). For example,
Gopher (Pradhan et al. 2022) identifies the root of bias in
the context of tabular data by identifying samples of biased
patterns. BIND (Dong et al. 2023) quantifies the node’s influences on the unfairness of GNNs based on the probabilistic
distribution disparity. REFEREE (Dong et al. 2022) attempts
to provide instance-level explanations for the bias of a certain
node.
A primary issue of fair machine learning is that biases
are usually introduced during the data collection. In particular, the topological structure of graph data might magnify
the bias through the message-passing mechanisms (Dai and
Wang 2022; Rouzrokh et al. 2022). However, existing explainable works are not specifically for model-level fairness
diagnosis of GNNs to identify such topological structures and
could not answer the following questions: What subgraph
patterns of the graph cause the biased behavior of GNNs,
and what actions could machine learning practitioners take
toward a fairer GNN? To complement prior explainable approaches, this paper attempts to produce compact, diagnostic,
and actionable subgraph patterns that are responsible for the
model’s biased behavior. Taking crime forecasting systems as
an example, individuals within the same race often reside in
dense communities, where edges denote social connections
(shown in Fig. 1 (a)). Certain connection patterns may exacerbate algorithmic bias toward one specific race. Diagnostic
explanations are desirable for machine learning practitioners
to track the root of bias. Once the root of bias is identified,
actionable explanations are provided for modifying the connection patterns, thus reducing the data bias and rectifying
biased behaviors.
Intuitively, identifying a subset of edges and nodes from
the entire graph to constitute subgraph patterns as explanations can be formulated as a combinatorial optimization
problem. Nevertheless, it is challenging to solve the problem
for the following three reasons: 1) Large-scale search space:
The combinations of edges and nodes for an explanation
are exponential, and the explicit expressions of the gradients
are difficult to obtain. It is, therefore, non-trivial to search
from a large-scale space without the gradient information. 2)
Multi-objective optimization: Three objectives need to be

