The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Data Adaptive Traceback for Vision-Language Foundation Models in Image
Classification
Wenshuo Peng1 , Kaipeng Zhang1 * , Yue Yang1,2 , Hao Zhang1, 3 , Yu Qiao1
1

OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
gin2pws@gmail.com, zhangkaipeng@pjlab.org.cn, yang-yue@sjtu.edu.cn, zhanghao520@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,
qiaoyu@pjlab.org.cn
Abstract

However, large-scale clean pre-training datasets are difficult and expensive to produce. The pre-training datasets
used by many foundation models such as YFCC100M, and
LAION400M contain a lot of weak-paired samples. For example, as shown in Figure 1 (a), the text description is “
what a beautiful day, lets go for a walk in park” and the
paired image is a dog playing on the grass. The text description lacks the key information dog and thus the foundation
model’s attention to the dog is significantly reduced. Limited by these weak-paired samples, we believe the model has
not mined all the information from the pre-training data during pre-training phase. Therefore, the performance of downstream tasks is limited by directly transferring the knowledge learned by the foundation model. The existing “pretraining + adaptation” framework do not consider the incomplete knowledge and we believe it will be an important reason why the model is limited in performance in downstream
tasks. To remedy this shortcoming, we propose to reuse pretraining data in the adaptation process to learn the neglected
downstream-related knowledge in the pre-training phase.
Naturally, semi-supervised learning arises as a solution to
reuse pre-training images in the adaptation process. Nevertheless, several points ought to be considered. (1) How to
reduce the computational cost of reusing the pre-training
data during adapatation? (2) How to overcome the class mismatch and data distribution shift between the pre-training
data and the downstream labeled data, and extract useful
features for the classification task? (3) How to leverage the
captions and the pre-trained text encoders associated with
the pre-trained images to enhance the adaptation process?
To address these challenges, we propose a novel method,
Data Adaptive Traceback (DAT), which maximizes the exploitation of large-scale pre-training image-text data during
the adaptation stage for foundation models. DAT comprises
three modules, namely, a data sampling module, a semisupervised module, and a semi-unified contrastive module
(see Figure 1, (b)). The data sampling module selects a subset of pre-training data that have a small distribution shift
to the downstream data using a zero-shot method based on
the class and distribution of downstream datasets. Unlike
the conventional way of selecting datasets based on image
classes, our method also treats each downstream image as
a separate category, thus solving the two major problems:
class mismatch and distribution gap. The semi-supervised

Vision-language foundation models have been incredibly successful in a wide range of downstream computer vision tasks
using adaptation methods. However, due to the high cost of
obtaining pre-training datasets, pairs with weak image-text
correlation in the data exist in large numbers. We call them
weak-paired samples. Due to the limitations of these weakpaired samples, the pre-trianing model are unable to mine all
the knowledge from pre-training data. The existing adaptation methods do not consider the missing knowledge, which
may lead to crucial task-related knowledge for the downstream tasks being ignored. To address this issue, we propose
a new adaptation framework called Data Adaptive Traceback
(DAT). Specifically, we utilize a zero-shot-based method to
extract the most downstream task-related subset of the pretraining data to enable the downstream tasks. Furthermore,
we adopt a pseudo-label-based semi-supervised technique
to reuse the pre-training images and a vision-language contrastive learning method to address the confirmation bias issue in semi-supervised learning. We conduct extensive experiments that show our proposed DAT approach meaningfully
improves various benchmark datasets’ performance over traditional adaptation methods by simply.

Introduction
Vision-language “foundation models” (hereinafter referred
to as “foundation models”), such as CLIP (Radford et al.
2021), ALIGN (Jia et al. 2021), and Florence (Yuan et al.
2021), have attracted substantial research interest in recent years, demonstrating inspiring outcomes across different computer vision tasks, e.g. , image classification (Zhang
et al. 2021), object detection (Liu et al. 2022), and semantic
segmentation (Rao et al. 2022). Foundation models are typically pre-trained using large amounts of image-text pairs
(usually in millions or billions), such as CC12M (Changpinyo et al. 2021), YFCC 100M (Thomee et al. 2016), and
LAION-400M (Schuhmann et al. 2021). The pre-training
enables foundation models to obtain high accuracy on downstream tasks using little or even no downstream training data
with simple adaptation methods. In this paper, we focus on
downstream image classification for convenience.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4506

