The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Structural Information Enhanced Graph Representation for Link Prediction
Lei Shi* 1 , Bin Hu* 1 , Deng Zhao* 1 , Jianshan He2 , Zhiqiang Zhang1 , Jun Zhou1
1

Machine Intelligence Department, Ant Group,
Consumer Finance Technology Department, Ant Group
{sl316606, axel.hb, zhaodeng.zd, yebai.hjs}@antgroup.com, {lingyao.zzq, jun.zhoujun}@antfin.com
2

Abstract

central node through the Message Passing (MP) (Gilmer
et al. 2017), which are good at learning node representations.
When applied to link prediction, the typical practice is to
use the Autoencoder framework on Graph (GAE (Kipf and
Welling 2016b)). This involves encoding individual node
representations with GNNs, aggregating representations of
the target nodes, and decoding them into link probability.
However, such an approach may miss some important features for link prediction. A simple example is illustrated in
Fig. 1-(a), where nodes h1 and h2 are isomorphic. Without
node features, GNN learns the same node representation, resulting in the same link representation of pair (h1 , t) and pair
(h2 , t). In fact, the results should not be the same. Node h2
and t share a common neighbor, indicating a higher probability of a link. We believe that GAEs fail fundamentally
because they focus on capturing neighbor information centered on nodes during the encoding stage, without perceiving
the structural relationships of target node pairs.
Recently, some works have attempted to address this issue by node labeling tricks. For example, ID-GNN (You
et al. 2021) colors target nodes to distinguish them from
neighbor nodes, and SEAL (Zhang and Chen 2018; Zhang
et al. 2021) calculates DRNL (Double-Radius Node Labeling) of all nodes in an enclosing subgraph. However, these
approaches only help perceive path depth, while lacking perception of path ’width’, such as node degree or the number of paths. Moreover, they are still limited by the MP
paradigm of GNNs, leading to shortcomings in terms of information perception and transmission for link prediction.
On one hand, the way of neighbor node labeling converging
to target nodes and then aggregating into relationship representations is implicit and convoluted, potentially risking
information loss. On the other hand, the receptive field of
GNNs may not be sufficient enough for link prediction.
GNNs are node-centric models, whose receptive field is
the neighborhood of a central node. However, some target
nodes in link prediction may be far apart, and GNNs struggle to capture the long-range information between them. The
right part of Fig. 1 shows a simple example, where neither
ID-GNN nor SEAL with the most commonly used 3-layer
GNNs can distinguish between the two link structures shown
in (b) and (c). When computing the representation of the
head nodes h using GNNs, the computational graphs (including nodes’ DRNL) in both structures are the same, as

Link prediction is a fundamental task of graph machine learning, and Graph Neural Network (GNN) based methods have
become the mainstream approach due to their good performance. However, the typical practice learns node representations through neighborhood aggregation, lacking awareness
of the structural relationships between target nodes. Recently,
some methods have attempted to address this issue by node
labeling tricks. However, they still rely on the node-centric
neighborhood message passing of GNNs, which we believe
involves two limitations in terms of information perception
and transmission for link prediction. First, it cannot perceive
long-range structural information due to the restricted receptive fields. Second, there may be information loss of nodecentric model on link-centric task. In addition, we empirically find that the neighbor node features could introduce
noise for link prediction. To address these issues, we propose a structural information enhanced link prediction framework, which involves removing the neighbor node features
while fitting neighborhood graph structures more focused
through GNN. Furthermore, we introduce Binary Structural
Transformer (BST) to encode the structural relationships between target nodes, complementing the deficiency of GNN.
Our approach achieves remarkable results on multiple popular benchmarks, including ranking first on ogbl-ppa, ogblcitation2 and Pubmed.

Introduction
Link prediction is the task of predicting missing or potential
edges according to existing nodes and edges in a graph, the
typical applications of which include knowledge completion, recommendation, and more. For example, it can complete missing colleague relationships, and city of birth for
a person, or can predict users’ interest in certain products
in a recommendation system. There are various methods for
link prediction, among which Graph Neural Network (GNN)
based methods have become the mainstream ones due to
their good performance and efficiency.
GNNs (Kipf and Welling 2016a; Hamilton, Ying, and
Leskovec 2017; Velikovi et al. 2017) have achieved great
results in a lot of fields. They are centered on a certain node,
and aggregate features of neighbor nodes and edges to the
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14964

