The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Barely Supervised Learning for Graph-Based Fraud Detection
Hang Yu* , Zhengyang Liu* , Xiangfeng Luo†
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
{yuhang, zhengyangliu, luoxf}@shu.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, graph-based fraud detection methods have
garnered increasing attention for their superior ability to
tackle the issue of camouflage in fraudulent scenarios. However, these methods often rely on a substantial proportion
of samples as the training set, disregarding the reality of
scarce annotated samples in real-life scenarios. As a theoretical framework within semi-supervised learning, the principle of consistency regularization posits that unlabeled samples should be classified into the same category as their own
perturbations. Inspired by this principle, this study incorporates unlabeled samples as an auxiliary during model training, designing a novel barely supervised learning method to
address the challenge of limited annotated samples in fraud
detection. Specifically, to tackle the issue of camouflage in
fraudulent scenarios, we employ disentangled representation
learning based on edge information for a small subset of annotated nodes. This approach partitions node features into
three distinct components representing different connected
edges, providing a foundation for the subsequent augmentation of unlabeled samples. For the unlabeled nodes used in
auxiliary training, we apply both strong and weak augmentation and design regularization losses to enhance the detection
performance of the model in the context of extremely limited
labeled samples. Across five publicly available datasets, the
proposed model showcases its superior detection capability
over baseline models.

Figure 1: An example to explain the gap in identifying camouflage. Conventional methods rely on certain proportions
of labeled neighbors that provide an opportunity to approximately exhibit the typical camouflage, as shown in the middle subplot. On the contrary, it is difficult to identify camouflage with few labeled neighbors in the reality, as shown
in the right subplot. The black question mark means it is
difficult to indicate the concerned node’s class with little information on neighbors’ labels, while blue, red, and white
nodes indicate normal users, fraudsters, and unlabeled accounts, respectively.

anced node classification, whereby the objective is to discern
whether a given node is fraudulent or legitimate.
Given the effective expressive capacity of graph neural networks (GNN) (Kipf and Welling 2016; Ren et al.
2023) for graph-structured data, there has been an increasing
amount of research on employing GNN for fraud detection
(Ma et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2018, 2019; Liang et al. 2019;
Liu et al. 2020; Li et al. 2023), which has shown certain levels of success. These studies typically focus on addressing
the issue of camouflage in fraud detection. That is to say,
the fraudsters disguise themselves by engaging in interactions with normal users, making their characteristics similar to those of normal users. As a result, detection models
tend to lean towards predicting the normal class. The camouflage problem challenges the consistency assumption of
GNN (Zhu et al. 2020), which posits that neighboring nodes
have similar feature representations and belong to the same
class as the central node. To tackle this problem, several efforts, such as utilizing attention mechanisms to aggregate
neighbors of different types (Wang et al. 2019a) and designing a strategy of sampling neighbors for aggregation (Liu
et al. 2021), have been made from different perspectives.
However, annotating samples in the graph-structured data

Introduction
Fraud detection is a pivotal task that serves to mitigate societal losses. Early fraud detection (Phua et al. 2010; Maes
et al. 2002; Hooi et al. 2016) depended on shallow machine
learning methods such as decision trees and support vector
machines, but most of them are fit to process multidimensional tabular data, and the relation between users is ignored.
Actually, scenarios such as fraudulent product reviews, illicit
Bitcoin transactions, and account laundering can be modeled as graph-structured data, where the entities involved are
represented as nodes and their interactions as edges. Consequently, fraud detection can be transformed into unbal* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author is Xiangfeng Luo.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16548

