The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Participation Incentives in Approval-Based Committee Elections
Martin Bullinger1 * , Chris Dong2 , Patrick Lederer2 , Clara Mehler2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
School of Computation, Information and Technology, Technical University of Munich
martin.bullinger@cs.ox.ac.uk, chris.dong@tum.de, ledererp@in.tum.de, mehler@in.tum.de
2

Abstract

interest of the voters: for example, for many single-winner
voting rules, there are situations where voters prefer the outcome chosen when abstaining to the outcome chosen when
voting (e.g., Moulin 1988; Pérez 2001; Brandl et al. 2019).
This undesirable phenomenon, which is known as the noshow paradox, entails that voting can be disadvantageous
for a voter and hence disincentivizes participation. We are
thus interested in voting rules that avoid this paradox, which
are then said to satisfy participation. Note that while related
concepts have been analyzed (e.g., Sánchez-Fernández and
Fisteus 2019; Lackner and Skowron 2023, Prop. A.3), participation has not been studied for ABC voting rules and we
thus initiate the study of this axiom for ABC elections.

In approval-based committee (ABC) voting, the goal is to
choose a subset of predefined size of the candidates based on
the voters’ approval preferences over the candidates. While
this problem has attracted significant attention in recent years,
the incentives for voters to participate in an election for a
given ABC voting rule have been neglected so far. This paper
is thus the first to explicitly study this property, typically called
participation, for ABC voting rules. In particular, we show
that all ABC scoring rules even satisfy group participation,
whereas most sequential rules severely fail participation. We
furthermore explore several escape routes to the impossibility
for sequential ABC voting rules: we prove for many sequential
rules that (i) they satisfy participation on laminar profiles, (ii)
voters who approve none of the elected candidates cannot
benefit by abstaining, and (iii) it is NP-hard for a voter to
decide whether she benefits from abstaining.

1

Our contribution. In this paper, we study the participation
incentives of ABC voting rules. In more detail, we first investigate which ABC voting rules satisfy participation and prove
that all ABC scoring rules (including all Thiele rules) even
satisfy group participation. This generalizes the observation
that scoring rules satisfy participation for single-winner elections and gives a strong argument in favor of Thiele rules. By
contrast, we prove a general impossibility theorem, which
shows that most ABC voting rules that sequentially compute
the winning committees fail participation. In particular, our
result implies that all sequential Thiele rules (except for approval voting) as well as the sequential variant of Phragmén’s
rule and the method of equal shares severely fail participation:
there are situations where a voter only approves one of the
elected candidates when she votes but all except one of the
elected candidates when she abstains. These theorems also
subsume results by Sánchez-Fernández and Fisteus (2019)
and Lackner and Skowron (2023) who study a monotonicity
axiom that constitutes a special case of participation.
We furthermore analyze several approaches to circumvent
this negative result for sequential rules. Firstly, motivated
by the notion of strategyproofness for unrepresented voters
by Delemazure et al. (2023), we show that many sequential
ABC voting rules ensure that voters who do not approve
any of the elected candidates cannot benefit by abstaining
(Proposition 1). This result complements our impossibility
theorem, which shows that voters can significantly benefit
from abstaining when they approve at least one candidate and,
moreover, demonstrates that many sequential rules satisfy at
least a minimal degree of participation. Next, we prove that

Introduction

Many questions in multi-agent systems reduce to the problem of selecting a subset of the available candidates based
on the preferences of a group of agents over these candidates.
Maybe the most apparent example for this are elections of
parliaments or city councils, but there are also numerous applications beyond classical voting. For instance, this model
can also be used to describe automated recommender systems
(Gawron and Faliszewski 2022) or the selection of validators
in a block chain (Cevallos and Stewart 2021). In the field
of computational social choice, such elections are known as
approval-based committee (ABC) elections and they have recently attracted significant attention (Faliszewski et al. 2017;
Lackner and Skowron 2023). In more detail, this research
studies approval-based committee (ABC) voting rules, which
choose a fixed-size subset of the candidates, typically called
a committee, based on the voters’ approval ballots (i.e., voters express their preference about every candidate by either
approving or disapproving her).
One of the basic premises of ABC voting rules (and, more
generally, of all types of elections) is that voters will participate in the election. However, this is not necessarily in the
* Most of this research was done when Martin Bullinger was a
PhD student at the Technical University of Munich.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9546

