The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

HR-Pro: Point-Supervised Temporal Action Localization
via Hierarchical Reliability Propagation
Huaxin Zhang1 , Xiang Wang1 , Xiaohao Xu2 , Zhiwu Qing1 , Changxin Gao1 , Nong Sang1 *
1

Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{zhanghuaxin, wxiang, qzw, cgao, nsang}@hust.edu.cn, {xiaohaox}@umich.edu

…

Point-supervised Temporal Action Localization (PSTAL) is
an emerging research direction for label-efficient learning.
However, current methods mainly focus on optimizing the
network either at the snippet-level or the instance-level, neglecting the inherent reliability of point annotations at both
levels. In this paper, we propose a Hierarchical Reliability
Propagation (HR-Pro) framework, which consists of two
reliability-aware stages: Snippet-level Discrimination Learning and Instance-level Completeness Learning, both stages
explore the efficient propagation of high-confidence cues in
point annotations. For snippet-level learning, we introduce
an online-updated memory to store reliable snippet prototypes for each class. We then employ a Reliability-aware
Attention Block to capture both intra-video and inter-video
dependencies of snippets, resulting in more discriminative
and robust snippet representation. For instance-level learning,
we propose a point-based proposal generation approach as a
means of connecting snippets and instances, which produces
high-confidence proposals for further optimization at the instance level. Through multi-level reliability-aware learning,
we obtain more reliable confidence scores and more accurate temporal boundaries of predicted proposals. Our HRPro achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple challenging benchmarks, including an impressive average mAP
of 60.3% on THUMOS14. Notably, our HR-Pro largely surpasses all previous point-supervised methods, and even outperforms several competitive fully-supervised methods. Code
will be available at https://github.com/pipixin321/HR-Pro.

Reliability

…

Reliability

Abstract

Snippet-level

T

T

Reliable Snippets
…

Reliable Proposals
…

reliable prototype
construction

reliability
propagation

GT (for reference)

Instance-level

point annotations

Figure 1: Motivation illustration. Given the point-level annotation (in purple), we consider the action reliability prior
both at the snippet level and instance proposal level to enable
reliability-aware action representation learning. In specific,
our insight is to propagate reliable prototypes to produce
more discriminative snippet-level scores and more reliable
and complete instance-level scores. Darker color (greener or
more orange) indicates higher reliability. Here, a case with
one action class is shown for brevity.
2017; Shou et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2021b) start to pay attention to weakly-supervised temporal action localization
(WSTAL) where only video-level labels are available. Although significant progress in WSTAL has been made, the
lack of action boundary information imposes a great challenge for models to distinguish actions and backgrounds,
resulting in unsatisfactory performance compared to fullysupervised methods.
Under the WSTAL setting, to balance labeling cost and
detection performance, Ma et al. (Ma et al. 2020) introduce
the point-supervised temporal action localization (PSTAL)
task which provides only a timestamp label for each action instance. Their pioneering research indicates that pointlevel annotations consume almost comparable labor costs
as video-level annotations while providing richer guidance
information. Subsequently, many works start to follow this
setting and propose various customized solutions. Typically,
LACP (Lee and Byun 2021) proposes to learn completeness of action instances by searching the optimal pseudo sequence with a greedy algorithm. Ju et al. (Ju et al. 2021)
proposes a seed frame detector to generate proposals and

Introduction
Temporal action localization is a fundamental task in video
understanding field, which attempts to temporally localize
and classify action instances in the untrimmed video, and
has attracted increasing attention due to its potential application in various fields (Lee, Ghosh, and Grauman 2012; Vishwakarma and Agrawal 2013). However, traditional fullysupervised methods (Lin et al. 2018, 2019; Xu et al. 2020;
Qing et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022b,a; Nag et al. 2022) require accurate temporal annotations, which are extremely
time-consuming and labor-demanding, hindering the practical applications. Therefore, many researchers (Wang et al.
* indicates corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7115

