The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Auditable Algorithms for Approximate Model Counting* †
Kuldeep S. Meel1 r
⃝ Supratik Chakraborty2 r
⃝ S. Akshay2
1

2

University of Toronto, Canada
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, India

Abstract

consider a software implementing an algorithm for which
we already have a rigorous proof of correctness. Even when
the software is implemented by trusted and expert programmers, one cannot be sure that the implementation will never
produce an erroneous result. Insidious bugs may go undetected for several reasons: for example, the implementation
may be too complex to have been tested comprehensively, or
it may use code from untrusted libraries that have bugs, or
the programmer may have inadvertently introduced a bug. In
such a scenario, we wish to ask: How can we provide assurance that an untrusted implementation of an algorithm has
produced a correct result for a given problem instance?
One way to answer the above question is to formally
model the semantics of every instruction in the implementation in a theorem proving system and then prove that the
composition of these instructions always produces the correct result. This is a challenging and skill-intensive exercise
for anything but the simplest of software, but once completed, it gives very high assurance about the correctness of
results produced by the implementation for all instances of
the problem being solved. A relatively less daunting alternative is to have the algorithm (and its implementation) output for each problem instance, not only the result but also a
certificate of correctness of the result. The certificate must
be independently checkable by an auditor, and a successful
audit must yield a proof of correctness of the computed result for the given problem instance. We call such algorithms
auditable algorithms. Note that a successful audit for one
problem instance does not prove bug-freeness of the implementation; it only shows that the result computed for this
specific problem instance is correct. A key requirement for
effective use of auditable algorithms is access to an independent trusted certificate auditor. Fortunately, a certificate
auditor is usually much simpler to design, and its implementation far easier to prove correct than the implementation of
the original algorithm. Therefore, auditable algorithms provide a pragmatic solution to the problem of assuring correctness for untrusted implementations of algorithms. Not
surprisingly, auditable algorithms have been studied earlier
in the context of different problems (McConnell et al. 2011;
Heule, Hunt, and Wetzler 2013; Wetzler, Heule, and Hunt
2014; Gocht et al. 2022; Ekici et al. 2017; Barthe et al.

Model counting, or counting the satisfying assignments of a
Boolean formula, is a fundamental problem with diverse applications. Given #P -hardness of the problem, developing
algorithms for approximate counting is an important research
area. Building on the practical success of SAT-solvers, the
focus has recently shifted from theory to practical implementations of approximate counting algorithms. This has brought
to focus new challenges, such as the design of auditable approximate counters that not only provide an approximation
of the model count, but also a certificate that a verifier with
limited computational power can use to check if the count is
indeed within the promised bounds of approximation.
Towards generating certificates, we start by examining the
best-known deterministic approximate counting algorithm
due to Stockmeyer that uses polynomially many calls to a
P
ΣP
2 oracle. We show that this can be audited via a Σ2 oracle
with the query constructed over n2 log2 n variables, where
the original formula has n variables. Since n is often large, we
ask if the count of variables in the certificate can be reduced
– a crucial question for potential implementation. We show
that this is indeed possible with a tradeoff in the counting
algorithm’s complexity. Specifically, we develop new deterministic approximate counting algorithms that invoke a ΣP
3
oracle, but can be certified using a ΣP
2 oracle using certificates on far fewer variables: our final algorithm uses only
n log n variables. Our study demonstrates that one can simplify auditing significantly if we allow the counting algorithm
to access a slightly more powerful oracle. This shows for the
first time how audit complexity can be traded for complexity
of approximate counting.

1

Introduction

Trust in computation done by third-party software is increasingly becoming a concern in today’s world. As an example,
* The authors decided to forgo the old convention of alphabetical

ordering of authors in favor of a randomized ordering, denoted by
r
⃝. The publicly verifiable record of the randomization is available
at https://www.aeaweb.org/journals/policies/random-author-order/
search
†
The full version of the paper is available at https://arxiv.org/
abs/2312.12362
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10654

