The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Quantum-Inspired Neural Network with Runge-Kutta Method
Zipeng Fan* , Jing Zhang* , Peng Zhang† , Qianxi Lin, Hui Gao
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{2018218026, pzhang}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

QINN based on
unitary transformation

In recent years, researchers have developed novel QuantumInspired Neural Network (QINN) frameworks for the Natural
Language Processing (NLP) tasks, inspired by the theoretical
investigations of quantum cognition. However, we have found
that the training efficiency of QINNs is significantly lower
than that of classical networks. We analyze the unitary transformation modules of existing QINNs based on the time displacement symmetry of quantum mechanics and discover that
they are resembling a mathematical form similar to the firstorder Euler method. The high truncation error associated with
Euler method affects the training efficiency of QINNs. In order to enhance the training efficiency of QINNs, we generalize QINNs’ unitary transformation modules to the Quantumlike high-order Runge-Kutta methods (QRKs). Moreover, we
present the results of experiments on conversation emotion
recognition and text classification tasks to validate the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

The problom

Low training efficiency

The analysis method

Time displacement symmetry
in quantum mechanics

The reason

The resolution

The Euler method has
high truncation error

A quantum-like RK method
with low truncation error

Our proposed module

QINN with RK method

Introduction
In recent years, researchers have discovered quantum-like
phenomena in language understanding (Bruza, Kitto, and
McEvoy 2008), leading to the proposal of Quantum-Inspired
Neural Networks (QINNs) (Mönning 2019; Shi et al. 2021;
Li, Wang, and Melucci 2019; Gkoumas et al. 2021; Chen,
Pan, and Dong 2021; Li et al. 2021b) based on quantum
probability theory. Through theoretical analysis, researchers
have demonstrated the rationality of integrating quantum
theory with neural network frameworks (Zhang et al. 2018b,
2019). QINNs are primarily applied to Natural Language
Processing (NLP) tasks. When modeling dynamic evolution
processes of semantic information, such as dynamic emotional states in a conversation, QINNs utilize unitary transformation of quantum states to track this process (Li et al.
2021b). This approach is similar to the evolution of quantum states over time.
However, when the QINNs based on unitary transformation is applied to downstream prediction tasks, the training efficiency is significantly lower than that of classical

Figure 1: This is our research idea. The specific details are
elaborated in Section Methodology.

networks. For example, when both the DialogueRNN (Majumder et al. 2019) and QINNs are used for prediction tasks,
after the initial training periods (approximately two epochs),
DialogueRNN’s accuracy in predicting labels starts to improve, while QINN requires at least several times the training periods of DialogueRNN before the QINN’s prediction
accuracy improves. This signifies the evident inadequacy of
QINN’s training efficiency. In the experimental section, we
provide detailed experimental results.
In order to explore the reasons behind this phenomenon,
we conducted an analysis of the QINN’s unitary transformation module. Our research idea is shown in Fig. 1. Based on
theory of differential equations and the symmetry principle
of time displacement in quantum mechanics (Jinyan 2000),
we derived that the unitary transformation module in QINN
is a numerical solving process similar to the Euler method.
However, lower-order Runge-Kutta method (RK), including
the Euler method, exhibit higher truncation errors compared

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Peng Zhang (pzhang@tju.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17977

