The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Generalized Segmentation for Foggy-Scenes by
Bi-directional Wavelet Guidance
Qi Bi, Shaodi You, Theo Gevers
Computer Vision Research Group, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
{q.bi, s.you, th.gevers}@uva.nl

(a) Foggy Images

Abstract
Learning scene semantics that can be well generalized to
foggy conditions is important for safety-crucial applications
such as autonomous driving. Existing methods need both annotated clear images and foggy images to train a curriculum domain adaptation model. Unfortunately, these methods can only generalize to the target foggy domain that has
seen in the training stage, but the foggy domains vary a
lot in both urban-scene styles and fog styles. In this paper, we propose to learn scene segmentation well generalized to foggy-scenes under the domain generalization setting, which does not involve any foggy images in the training stage and can generalize to any arbitrary unseen foggy
scenes. We argue that an ideal segmentation model that can
be well generalized to foggy-scenes need to simultaneously
enhance the content, de-correlate the urban-scene style and
de-correlate the fog style. As the content (e.g., scene semantic) rests more in low-frequency features while the style of
urban-scene and fog rests more in high-frequency features,
we propose a novel bi-directional wavelet guidance (BWG)
mechanism to realize the above three objectives in a divideand-conquer manner. With the aid of Haar wavelet transformation, the low frequency component is concentrated on the
content enhancement self-attention, while the high frequency
component is shifted to the style and fog self-attention for
de-correlation purpose. It is integrated into existing masklevel Transformer segmentation pipelines in a learnable fashion. Large-scale experiments are conducted on four foggyscene segmentation datasets under a variety of interesting
settings. The proposed method significantly outperforms existing directly-supervised, curriculum domain adaptation and
domain generalization segmentation methods. Source code is
available at https://github.com/BiQiWHU/BWG.

(b) CuDA-Net

(c) SAW

(d) Ours

Figure 1: Foggy image (a) segmentation results by: (b) existing curriculum domain adaptation paradigm (e.g. CuDANet (Ma et al. 2022)); (c) generic domain generalization
paradigm (e.g., SAW (Peng et al. 2022)); (d) our proposed
generalization for foggy-scene method BWG.

to foggy scenes within the target domain, which impose a
significant limitation on practical road applications. In realworld scenarios, the need for generalizing to a wide array of
unforeseen foggy scenes is important.
In this paper, we shift the focus to the domain generalization setting, which does not involve any foggy target domain
in the training stage. Ideally, such scene-segmentation model
is able to generalize to any unseen foggy target domains.
Predicting reliable scene-segmentation under domain generalization setting is plausible, given the effectiveness demonstrated by various domain-generalized segmentation methods in recent years. These methods usually assume that the
content is stable while the urban style changes greatly (Choi
et al. 2021; Peng et al. 2022; Bi, You, and Gevers 2023a).
However, the challenge becomes more intricate when attempting to generalize to foggy scenes due to the complex
nature of image conditions. This complexity can pose difficulties for existing domain-generalized scene segmentation
methods (Fig. 1c). Specifically, not only the urban-scene
styles but also the foggy styles vary greatly (Ma et al. 2022).
Besides, the existence of fog occludes to the scene objects
and negatively impairs the content representation (Dai et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2023).
We focus on three key objectives to learn a scene segmentation that can be well generalized to foggy scenes (Ma et al.
2022): 1) decouple the urban-style variation, 2) decouple the
foggy style variation, and 3) enhance the content representation caused by fog occlusion. Addressing each of these

Introduction
Existing foggy-scene semantic segmentation methods usually follow the curriculum domain adaptation paradigm,
where both well-annotated clear images and foggy images
are involved in the training stage (Truong et al. 2021; Guo
et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021), so that the scene representation can be progressively adapted to the target foggy domain
that has been seen in the training stage (Tsai et al. 2018).
Nonetheless, these techniques are solely tailored to adapt
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

801

