The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Granularity Causal Structure Learning
Jiaxuan Liang1, 2 , Jun Wang2 , Guoxian Yu1, 2, * , Shuyin Xia3, 4 , Guoyin Wang3, 4
1
School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
SDU-NTU Joint Centre for AI Research, Shandong University, Jinan, China
3
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence, Chongqing Uni. of Posts and Telecom., Chongqing, China
4
MOE Key Laboratory of Big Data Intelligent Computing, Chongqing Uni. of Posts and Telecom., Chongqing, China
jxliang@mail.sdu.edu.cn, {kingjun, gxyu}@sdu.edu.cn, {xiasy, wanggy}@cqupt.edu.cn
2

Abstract

graphs that satisfy the conditional independence (CI) inherent in the data. Nevertheless, the faithfulness assumption
can be refuted, and a substantial number of CI tests are
needed. Score-based algorithms (Chickering 2002; Hauser
and Bühlmann 2012; Ramsey et al. 2017) define a structure scoring function in conjunction with search strategies
to explore the DAG that best fits the limited data. However, these algorithms cannot differentiate DAGs that belong to the same Markov equivalence class (MEC). By
virtue of additional assumptions on data distribution and
functional classes, functional causal model-based methods
(Hoyer et al. 2008; Zhang and Hyvärinen 2009) can distinguish DAGs within the same MEC, but the exhaustive and
heuristic search of DAGs encounters the challenge of combinatorial explosion with the increasing number of variables.
NOTEARS (Zheng et al. 2018) formulates the acyclicity
constraint as a differentiable equation and applies efficient
numerical solvers to search DAG. Subsequent efforts focus
on nonlinear extension (Lachapelle et al. 2020; Zheng et al.
2020), optimization technique (Wang et al. 2021; Yang et al.
2023), robustness (He et al. 2021) and semi-structured data
(Liang et al. 2023b).

Unveiling, modeling, and comprehending the causal mechanisms underpinning natural phenomena stand as fundamental endeavors across myriad scientific disciplines. Meanwhile,
new knowledge emerges when discovering causal relationships from data. Existing causal learning algorithms predominantly focus on the isolated effects of variables, overlook
the intricate interplay of multiple variables and their collective behavioral patterns. Furthermore, the ubiquity of highdimensional data exacts a substantial temporal cost for causal
algorithms. In this paper, we develop a novel method called
MgCSL (Multi-granularity Causal Structure Learning), which
first leverages sparse auto-encoder to explore coarse-graining
strategies and causal abstractions from micro-variables to
macro-ones. MgCSL then takes multi-granularity variables
as inputs to train multilayer perceptrons and to delve the
causality between variables. To enhance the efficacy on highdimensional data, MgCSL introduces a simplified acyclicity
constraint to adeptly search the directed acyclic graph among
variables. Experimental results show that MgCSL outperforms competitive baselines, and finds out explainable causal
connections on fMRI datasets.

Introduction

However, these algorithms simply deem causal relationships stand exclusively at the level of individual variables
(micro-variable), ignoring the collective interactions from
multiple variables (macro-variable). For instance, the brain
can be characterized at a micro granularity of neurons and
their synapses, but high-order synergistic subsystems are
widespread, which typically sit between canonical functional networks and may serve an integrative role (Varley
et al. 2023). Actually, observational data can be regarded
as knowledge in the lowest granularity level, while knowledge can be regarded as the abstraction of data at different granularity levels (Wang 2017; Wang et al. 2022). Similar viewpoints appear in the research of complex systems,
which suggests that causal relationship is more pronounced
at the macro-scale of a system than at its micro-scale. This
phenomenon, widely known as causal emergence, manifests extensively across scientific domains such as physics
(Loewer 2012), physiology (Noble 2012), sociology (ElderVass 2012), and beyond. Due to the intricacy of macro-level
causality, available algorithms often overlook or misinterpret the underlying causal structure. Furthermore, the high
complexity of causal discovery algorithms causes a signifi-

Data science is moving from the data-centric paradigm forward the science-centric paradigm, and causal revolution
is sweeping across various research fields. Causality learning endeavors to unearth causal relationships among variables from observational data and generate causal graph,
that is, directed acyclic graph (DAG). Unlike correlationbased study, causality analysis reveals the causal mechanism
of data generation. Identifying causality holds paramount
significance for stable inference and rational decisions
in many applications, such as recommendation systems
(Wang et al. 2020), medical diagnostics (Richens, Lee, and
Johri 2020), epidemiology (Vandenbroucke, Broadbent, and
Pearce 2016) and many others (Von Kügelgen et al. 2022).
For its significance, numerous studies have been conducted toward causal structure learning. Constraint-based
algorithms (Spirtes et al. 2000; Colombo, Maathuis et al.
2014; Marella and Vicard 2022) acquire a set of causal
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13727

