The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Runtime Analysis of the SMS-EMOA for Many-Objective Optimization
Weijie Zheng1 , Benjamin Doerr2 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, International Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Harbin Institute of
Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Laboratoire d’Informatique (LIX), École Polytechnique, CNRS, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France
zhengweijie@hit.edu.cn, lastname@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract

2023a) for the journal version). This work quickly inspired
many interesting follow-up results in bi-objective optimization (Zheng and Doerr 2022; Bian and Qian 2022; Doerr
and Qu 2023a,b,c; Dang et al. 2023a,b; Cerf et al. 2023). In
contrast to these positive results for two objectives, Zheng
and Doerr (2023b) proved that for m ≥ 3 objectives the
NSGA-II needs at least exponential time (in expectation
and with high probability) to cover the full Pareto front of
the m-objective O NE M IN M AX benchmark, a simple manyobjective version of the basic O NE M AX problem where all
search points are Pareto optimal. They claimed that the main
reason for this low efficiency is the independent computation
of the crowding distance in each objective.
A very recent work showed that the NSGA-III, a successor algorithm of the NSGA-II aimed at better coping
with many objectives, can efficiently solve the 3-objective
O NE M IN M AX problem (Wietheger and Doerr 2023). Since
apparently practitioners much prefer the NSGA-II (more
than 17,000 citations on Google scholar only in the last five
years) over the NSGA-III (5,035 citations since its publication in 2013), it remains an interesting question whether
there are variants of the NSGA-II which better cope with
many objectives.
With the SMS-EMOA, an interesting variant of the
NSGA-II was proposed by Beume, Naujoks, and Emmerich
(2007). This algorithm is a steady-state variant of the
NSGA-II (that is, in each iteration only a single offspring
is generated and possibly integrated into the population)
that further replaces the crowding distance as secondary selection criterion with the classic hypervolume contribution.
Many empirical works (see the almost 2,000 papers citing (Beume, Naujoks, and Emmerich 2007)) confirmed the
good performance of the SMS-EMOA for many-objective
optimization. The first mathematical runtime analysis of the
SMS-EMOA was conducted very recently by Bian et al.
(2023), who proved that its expected runtime on the biobjective OJZJ problem is O(nk+1 ). They also proposed
a stochastic population update mechanism and proved that it
has the often superior runtime of O(nk+1 min{1, n/2k/4 }).
Zheng et al. (2024) proved that the SMS-EMOA has an expected runtime of O(n4 ) on the bi-objective DLTB problem.
Our Contributions: This paper conducts the first mathematical runtime analysis of the SMS-EMOA for more
than two objectives. We first define the mOJZJ benchmark,

The widely used multiobjective optimizer NSGA-II was recently proven to have considerable difficulties in manyobjective optimization. In contrast, experimental results in
the literature show a good performance of the SMS-EMOA,
which can be seen as a steady-state NSGA-II that uses the
hypervolume contribution instead of the crowding distance
as the second selection criterion.
This paper conducts the first rigorous runtime analysis of
the SMS-EMOA for many-objective optimization. To this
aim, we first propose a many-objective counterpart, the mobjective mOJZJ problem, of the bi-objective OJZJ benchmark, which is the first many-objective multimodal benchmark used in a mathematical runtime analysis. We prove that
SMS-EMOA computes the full Pareto front of this benchmark in an expected number of O(M 2 nk ) iterations, where
n denotes the problem size (length of the bit-string representation), k the gap size (a difficulty parameter of the problem), and M = (2n/m − 2k + 3)m/2 the size of the Pareto
front. This result together with the existing negative result on
the original NSGA-II shows that in principle, the general approach of the NSGA-II is suitable for many-objective optimization, but the crowding distance as tie-breaker has deficiencies.
We obtain three additional insights on the SMS-EMOA. Different from a recent result for the bi-objective OJZJ benchmark, the stochastic population update often does not help for
mOJZJ. It results in a 1/Θ(min{M k 1/2 /2k/2 , 1}) speedup, which is Θ(1) for large m such as m > k. On the positive side, we prove that heavy-tailed mutation still results
in a speed-up of order k0.5+k−β . Finally, we conduct the
first runtime analyses of the SMS-EMOA on the bi-objective
O NE M IN M AX and LOTZ benchmarks and show that it has
a performance comparable to the GSEMO and the NSGA-II.

Introduction
The NSGA-II is the most widely-applied multiobjective evolutionary algorithm (MOEA). Non-dominated sorting and
crowding distance are its two major features differentiating
it from basic MOEAs such as the GSEMO or the (µ + 1)
SIBEA. Zheng, Liu, and Doerr (2022) conducted the first
runtime analysis of the NSGA-II (see (Zheng and Doerr
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20874

