The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Operator-Learning-Inspired Modeling of Neural Ordinary Differential Equations
Woojin Cho1 * , Seunghyeon Cho1 * , Hyundong Jin1 , Jinsung Jeon1 ,
Kookjin Lee2 , Sanghyun Hong3 , Dongeun Lee4 , Jonghyun Choi1 , Noseong Park1
1
Yonsei University
Arizona State University
3
Oregon State University
4
Texas A&M University-Commerce
{snowmoon, seunghyeoncho, tuzi04, jjsjjs0902}@yonsei.ac.kr,
kjlee8344@gmail.com, sanghyun.hong@oregonstate.edu, dongeun.lee@tamuc.edu, {jc, noseong}@yonsei.ac.kr
2

Abstract

et al. 2020b), a representative class of neural operators, have
demonstrated their effectiveness in building surrogate models for solution operators of parametric partial differential
equations (PDEs).
However, as opposed to NODEs, which have been explored
in many different ML downstream tasks as generic neural network architectures, neural operators so far have been applied
mostly to learning the solution operators of PDEs; the only
exception we found is to use neural operators in computer
vision task (Guibas et al. 2021). Thus, in this study, we aim
to bring the expressive power of neural operators into the
modeling NODEs resulting in neural-operator-based NODE
and apply this novel combination to many different downstream tasks. We are motivated to conduct this study based on
a couple of observations: (1) as ODEs can be interpreted as
a particular type of PDEs, which involve derivatives in only
one variable, the ODE function can be modeled as neural
operators, and (2) as neural operators are effective in learning
“parametric” PDE operators via a function-to-function mapping principle, the neural-operator-based NODE is expected
to be equipped with stronger expressivity.

Neural ordinary differential equations (NODEs), one of the
most influential works of the differential equation-based deep
learning, are to continuously generalize residual networks and
opened a new field. They are currently utilized for various
downstream tasks, e.g., image classification, time series classification, image generation, etc. Its key part is how to model the
time-derivative of the hidden state, denoted dh(t)
. People have
dt
habitually used conventional neural network architectures,
e.g., fully-connected layers followed by non-linear activations.
In this paper, however, we present a neural operator-based
method to define the time-derivative term. Neural operators
were initially proposed to model the differential operator of
partial differential equations (PDEs). Since the time-derivative
of NODEs can be understood as a special type of the differential operator, our proposed method, called branched Fourier
neural operator (BFNO), makes sense. In our experiments with
general downstream tasks, our method significantly outperforms existing methods.

Introduction
Recently, in deep-learning community, there have been growing attention in developing differential-equation(DE)-based
neural network architectures. One of the most representative
DE-based models is neural ordinary differential equations
(NODEs) (Chen et al. 2018), which serve as a general purpose
neural network architecture, powered by deep implicit layers,
modeling a continuous-depth representation and achieving
state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in many different downstream tasks, e.g., time-series modeling (Chen et al. 2018;
Song et al. 2020; Kidger et al. 2020; Morrill et al. 2021;
Choi, Jeon, and Park 2021; Jhin et al. 2022; Kim et al. 2022;
Jeon et al. 2022). Another fast growing area of deep learning is scientific machine learning (SML), where learning the
deep-learning-based solution operator (also known as neural operators) of parametric partial differential equations has
been of particular interest to researchers (Li et al. 2020b; Cao
2021; Gupta, Xiao, and Bogdan 2021; Rahman, Ross, and
Azizzadenesheli 2022). Fourier neural operators (FNOs) (Li
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11543

Our approach: NODEs model the dynamics of hidden
state h(t) as a form of a system of ODEs from data such that
dh(t)
= f (h(t), t; θf ),
(1)
dt
where θf denotes a set of learnable parameters. Taking the
forward pass is equivalent to solving the initial value problem
(IVP) in Eq. (2) with the initial value h(t0 ):
Z t1
h(t1 ) = h(t0 ) +
f (h(t), t; θf )dt,
(2)
t0

and the last hidden state h(t1 ) is typically used for downstream tasks (e.g., classification).
The ODE function (the right hand side, or RHS) in Eq. (1)
can be considered as applying the differential operator to
h(t) and it is natural to redesign RHS, f , as neural operators.
From our empirical studies, we observed that naı̈vely adapting recent neural operator methods, such as Fourier neural
operators (FNOs), to NODEs, however, results in degradation of performance. We speculate that this degradation is
caused by a habitual choice of a rather simple architectural

