The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

VLCounter: Text-Aware Visual Representation for Zero-Shot Object Counting
Seunggu Kang, WonJun Moon, Euiyeon Kim, Jae-Pil Heo*
Sungkyunkwan University
{seunggu35, wjun0830, keywi9811, jaepilheo}@g.skku.edu

Exemplar Discovering Stage

Abstract

two-stage

Exemplars

Zero-Shot Object Counting (ZSOC) aims to count referred instances of arbitrary classes in a query image without humanannotated exemplars. To deal with ZSOC, preceding studies
proposed a two-stage pipeline: discovering exemplars and
counting. However, there remains a challenge of vulnerability to error propagation of the sequentially designed twostage process. In this work, we propose an one-stage baseline, Visual-Language Baseline (VLBase), exploring the implicit association of the semantic-patch embeddings of CLIP.
Subsequently, we extend the VLBase to Visual-language
Counter (VLCounter) by incorporating three modules devised to tailor VLBase for object counting. First, we introduce Semantic-conditioned Prompt Tuning (SPT) within the
image encoder to acquire target-highlighted representations.
Second, Learnable Affine Transformation (LAT) is employed
to translate the semantic-patch similarity map to be appropriate for the counting task. Lastly, we transfer the layerwisely encoded features to the decoder through Segmentaware Skip Connection (SaSC) to keep the generalization capability for unseen classes. Through extensive experiments
on FSC147, CARPK, and PUCPR+, we demonstrate the benefits of our end-to-end framework, VLCounter. Code is available at https://github.com/seunggu0305/VLCounter

1

Exemplar
Discoverer

𝑻 “pigeons”
𝑰

one-stage
Counting Stage
49.1

Counter
𝑫𝐩𝐫𝐞𝐝

Figure 1: Comparison between two-stage pipeline and
one-stage pipeline (ours). The two-stage pipeline requires training the exemplar discoverer (orange) before the
counter (blue), along with the need for an extra training
dataset to optimize the discoverer. In contrast, our one-stage
pipeline is designed to be simpler and does not necessitate
any additional data or training stage.

on identifying exemplar patches within the image and subsequently adopt the counting framework from the literature
of few-shot object counting (Shi et al. 2022; Ranjan et al.
2021). To identify the exemplar patches, RepRPN (Ranjan
and Nguyen 2022) considered the repetition score to detect object patches that frequently appear within the image.
Requirement for counting the desired classes over frequent
ones, ZSC (Xu et al. 2023) utilized the class names to enable
the class specification. They localize exemplars by identifying the k-nearest neighbors of the class name embeddings
among randomly cropped patches. Despite their progress,
the potential localization error propagation in the two-stage
training pipeline (Nag et al. 2022) is an untapped problem in
ZSOC frameworks. Indeed, they utilized additional datasets
to train decent exemplar discovery networks.
This paper pursues a simplified zero-shot object counting framework. We instantiate an end-to-end ZSOC counter
namely Visual-Language Baseline (VLBase), which consists of a CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) encoder and counting decoder. By leveraging the embedding space of CLIP
which enables the implicit association of the semantic and
patch embeddings to localize the target object (Zhou, Loy,
and Dai 2022; Li et al. 2023), VLBase eliminates the need
for an exemplar discovery process.
Additionally, we introduce VLCounter which is built
upon VLBase by incorporating three modules devised to tailor VLBase for object counting. First, we propose Semantic-

Introduction

Object counting, which was initially studied for specific targets, e.g., crowds (Zhang et al. 2016), cells (Xie, Noble, and
Zisserman 2018), animals (Arteta, Lempitsky, and Zisserman 2016), and cars (Mundhenk et al. 2016), has shown that
the number of objects can be counted even within a dense
image. Furthermore, recent works have shown significant
advances in inferring the number of arbitrary objects with
several human-annotated exemplar patches. However, such a
strong prerequisite that every cumbersome guidance must be
equipped is undoubtedly the main challenge to overcome to
grant applicability to object counting methods. In this context, Zero-Shot Object Counting (ZSOC) was proposed to
mitigate the need for human labor.
Current ZSOC approaches commonly adopt a two-stage
pipeline as illustrated in Fig. 1. These works primarily focus
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2714

