The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dual-Channel Learning Framework for Drug-Drug Interaction Prediction via
Relation-Aware Heterogeneous Graph Transformer
Xiaorui Su1,2,3 , Pengwei Hu1,2 , Zhu-Hong You4 , Philip S. Yu3 , Lun Hu1,2, *
1

Xinjiang Technical Institutes of Physics and Chemistry, Urumqi, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, USA
4
Guangxi Key Lab of Human-machine Interaction and Intelligent Decision, Nanning, China
suxiaorui19@mails.ucas.ac.cn, zhuhongyou@gxas.cn, psyu@uic.edu, {hpw, hulun}@ms.xjb.ac.cn
Abstract

cause injuries or deaths to patients. Therefore, the identification of potential DDIs is of great significance for alleviating impacts of such emergencies, thus guiding drug development and benefiting public health.
In recent years, a significant line of research has been explored for identifying potential DDIs from graph-structured
data, including homogeneous graphs and heterogeneous
graphs (Zhao et al. 2023). Compared to homogeneous
graphs composed solely of drug entities, heterogeneous
graphs excel in abstracting and modeling complex systems,
thereby generating greater interest. In the field of DDI predictions, two kinds of heterogeneous graphs are commonly
used. One is biomedical knowledge graph, where each node
represents a molecule, such as drug or protein, and edge
is the relation between them. The other is drug molecular
graph, where each node denotes an atom, and each edge is a
bond.
In view of the success of graph neural networks (GNNs)
(Kipf and Welling 2017), there are several attempts to adopt
GNNs to learn with heterogeneous graphs. In the case of
biomedical knowledge graphs, a relation-specific transformation is designed to encode semantic relationships between
entities. Subsequently, a message-passing framework can be
employed to propagate and aggregate information throughout the graph, enabling the learning of drug node-level representations. On the other hand, a common paradigm involves
assigning a [VNode] (virtual node) to each atom or utilizing
a pooling function to aggregate information from individual atoms. This allows for the creation of a drug graph-level
representation that captures the overall structure of the drug
molecule.
Indeed, GNN-based methods have demonstrated impressive performance in the DDI prediction task, significantly
advancing the analysis of biomedical knowledge graphs and
drug molecular graphs. However, they do have certain limitations (Chen, O’Bray, and Borgwardt 2022). The major limitation is that they learn drug representations solely by aggregating information from local neighbors. As a result, they
might encounter challenges in effectively capturing complex graph structures and long-range dependencies. This
limitation could impede their ability to fully comprehend
the intricate relationships inherent in biomedical knowledge
graphs and drug molecular graphs. In addition, these methods also suffer from the issue of over-squashing. The over-

Identifying novel drug-drug interactions (DDIs) is a crucial
task in pharmacology, as the interference between pharmacological substances can pose serious medical risks. In recent years, several network-based techniques have emerged
for predicting DDIs. However, they primarily focus on local structures within DDI-related networks, often overlooking the significance of indirect connections between pairwise
drug nodes from a global perspective. Additionally, effectively handling heterogeneous information present in both
biomedical knowledge graphs and drug molecular graphs remains a challenge for improved performance of DDI prediction. To address these limitations, we propose a Transformerbased relatIon-aware Graph rEpresentation leaRning framework (TIGER) for DDI prediction. TIGER leverages the
Transformer architecture to effectively exploit the structure of
heterogeneous graph, which allows it direct learning of long
dependencies and high-order structures. Furthermore, TIGER
incorporates a relation-aware self-attention mechanism, capturing a diverse range of semantic relations that exist between
pairs of nodes in heterogeneous graph. In addition to these advancements, TIGER enhances predictive accuracy by modeling DDI prediction task using a dual-channel network, where
drug molecular graph and biomedical knowledge graph are
fed into two respective channels. By incorporating embeddings obtained at graph and node levels, TIGER can benefit
from structural properties of drugs as well as rich contextual
information provided by biomedical knowledge graph. Extensive experiments conducted on three real-world datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of TIGER in DDI prediction.
Furthermore, case studies highlight its ability to provide a
deeper understanding of underlying mechanisms of DDIs.

Introduction
Drug-drug interactions (DDIs) refer to the biological effects
of concomitantly administered drugs, which can modify the
pharmacological effects of the drug, thereby leading to adverse drug reactions (ADRs) (Vilar et al. 2014). Studies
(Finkel, Clark, and Cubeddu 2009) have shown that when
2-5 drugs are combined, the incidence of adverse reactions
is 18.6%. When more than 5 drugs are taken together, the incidence of adverse reactions is 81.4%. Such situations may
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

249

