The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Natural Strategic Ability in Stochastic Multi-Agent Systems
Raphaël Berthon1 , Joost-Pieter Katoen1 , Munyque Mittelmann2 , Aniello Murano2
1

RWTH Aachen University, Germany
University of Naples Federico II, Italy
{berthon,katoen}@cs.rwth-aachen.de, {munyque.mittelmann, aniello.murano}@unina.it
2

Abstract

ples include, among others, the affluence of users interacting with the system, unknown preference of its agents
modeled with probabilistic distributions, and errors of its
sensorial components. All the aforementioned logics also
have downsides, either complexity-wise or memory-wise.
PSL is undecidable, and is still 3EXPSPACE when restricted to memoryless strategies. PATL model checking is
in NP ∩ co-NP but requires infinite-memory strategies.
Stochastic game logic is PSPACE with memoryless deterministic strategies, and EXPSPACE with memoryless
probabilistic strategies. These last two results are of interest,
but the memoryless assumption is quite restrictive.
Natural strategies, first defined in (Jamroga, Malvone,
and Murano 2019a), are lists of condition-action pairs with
a bounded memory representation. This definition contrasts
with combinatorial strategies (i.e., functions from histories
to actions), considered typically in the semantics of logics
for MAS, including ATL and ATL∗ . The motivation for natural strategies, as argued in (Jamroga, Malvone, and Murano 2019a), is that combinatorial strategies are not realistic
in the context of human behavior, because of the difficulty
to execute and design complex plans. In particular, systems
that are difficult to use are often ignored by the users, even
if they respect design specifications such as security constraints. Artificial agents with limited memory or computational power cannot use combinatorial strategies either. On
the other end of the spectrum, memoryless strategies that
depend only on the current state cannot provide adequate
solutions to many planning problems.
Natural strategies encompass both bounded memory and
specifications of agents with “simple” strategies, by allowing agents to use some past observations without requiring infinite memory. They aim at capturing the intuitive approach a human would use when describing strategies. As
a result, these strategies are easier to explain using natural
language. They also intrinsically feature imperfect information, since they reason about the sequence of propositional
variables observed in previous states, instead of the states
themselves. Although the systems with whom these agents
interact may be stochastic, the study of natural strategies has
been until now restricted to fully deterministic settings. For
the first time, we consider PATL and PATL∗ under natural strategies and investigate their model checking problem
for stochastic MAS. Remarkably, the logics we consider can

Strategies synthesized using formal methods can be complex
and often require infinite memory, which does not correspond
to the expected behavior when trying to model Multi-Agent
Systems (MAS). To capture such behaviors, natural strategies
are a recently proposed framework striking a balance between
the ability of agents to strategize with memory and the modelchecking complexity, but until now it has been restricted to
fully deterministic settings. For the first time, we consider the
probabilistic temporal logics PATL and PATL∗ under natural
strategies (NatPATL and NatPATL∗ , resp.). As main result
we show that, in stochastic MAS, NatPATL model-checking
is NP-complete when the active coalition is restricted to deterministic strategies. We also give a 2NEXPTIME complexity result for NatPATL∗ with the same restriction. In the
unrestricted case, we give an EXPSPACE complexity for
NatPATL and 3EXPSPACE complexity for NatPATL∗ .

Introduction
In the last decade, much attention has been devoted to
the verification of Multi-Agent Systems (MAS). One of the
most important early developments was the Alternatingtime Temporal Logics ATL and ATL∗ (Alur, Henzinger, and
Kupferman 2002). Since its initial proposal, ATL has been
extended in various directions, considering, for instance,
strategy contexts (Laroussinie and Markey 2015) or adding
imperfect information and epistemic operators (Jamroga
and Bulling 2011). Strategy Logic (SL) (Chatterjee, Henzinger, and Piterman 2010; Mogavero et al. 2014) extends
ATL to treat strategies as first-order variables. The probabilistic logics PATL, PATL∗ (Chen and Lu 2007), Stochastic Game Logic (Baier et al. 2012), and PSL (Aminof et al.
2019) enhances ATL, ATL∗ , ATL with strategy contexts, and
SL, resp., to the probabilistic setting. Those logics allow us
to express that a coalition can enforce that the probability of
satisfying their goal meets a specified constraint.
The importance of the aforementioned logics lies in the
uncertainty often faced by MAS, due to the occurrence
of randomization, such as natural events and the behavior of their components (i.e., the agents). While those aspects cannot be known with certainty, they can be measured based on experiments or past observations. ExamCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17308

