The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Evolving Parameterized Prompt Memory for Continual Learning
Muhammad Rifki Kurniawan1 , Xiang Song1 , Zhiheng Ma3 ,
Yuhang He2 , Yihong Gong1, 2 , Qi Yang4 , Xing Wei1 *
1

School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
College of Artificial Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{rifki259, songxiang} @stu.xjtu.edu.cn, zh.ma@siat.ac.cn, {heyuhang, ygong, yangqi, weixing} @mail.xjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

To meet this challenge, some methods replay the previous
samples (Rebuffi et al. 2017), penalize significant network
changes on either parameters (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017) or
prior neural activations (Tao et al. 2020), or dynamically
learn less-interference parameters (Douillard et al. 2022).
However, training tabula rasa is no longer viable due to
available pre-training, yet directly training pre-existing CL
algorithms from pre-trained models yields inconsistent performance (Lee, Zhong, and Wang 2023).
Continual adaptation through the prompting of the pretrained model, specifically Vision Transformer (Dosovitskiy
et al. 2021), demonstrates a promising avenue. L2P (Wang
et al. 2022c) builds a prompt pool to compose key-prompt
pairs and exploits a discrete key-value bottleneck for prompt
selection. DualPrompt (Wang et al. 2022b) complements
L2P with a versatile G-Prompt attached on some earlier
blocks. S-prompt (Wang, Huang, and Hong 2022) ensures
that previous tasks prompts remain undisturbed by isolating
the prompt learning process for each task. However, since
they utilize a pool-based framework, the corresponding issue of suboptimality hinders the final performance as a result of inaccurate prompts selection at test-time (Wang et al.
2022b). Furthermore, aggressive discretization of query-key
association means that non-identical classes should attach
the same prompt if from the same task, avoiding prompt
shareability among nearly identical instances at fine-grained
representation. To bridge this gap, we propose a parameterized prompt memory scheme with incremental evolution in
continual learning.
We redesign prompt parameterization as feed-forward
networks (FFNs) with multilayer perceptron (MLP) bottleneck, depicted in Figure 1, where we introduce dual functional prompt memory composing reference prompt memory (RPM) and working prompt memory (WPM). The RPM
generalizes all prompts so far, while the WPM is taskspecific and adapts quickly as new tasks appear. To integrate both without forgetting, we draw inspiration from linear mode connectivity (Frankle et al. 2019), where there
is a single basin with a low error landscape between different task solutions. Specifically, we introduce incremental fusion during the inter-task period to functionally align
WPM with RPM, and then integrate both together in param-

Recent studies have demonstrated the potency of leveraging
prompts in Transformers for continual learning (CL). Nevertheless, employing a discrete key-prompt bottleneck can lead
to selection mismatches and inappropriate prompt associations during testing. Furthermore, this approach hinders adaptive prompting due to the lack of shareability among nearly
identical instances at more granular level. To address these
challenges, we introduce the Evolving Parameterized Prompt
Memory (EvoPrompt), a novel method involving adaptive
and continuous prompting attached to pre-trained Vision
Transformer (ViT), conditioned on specific instance. We formulate a continuous prompt function as a neural bottleneck
and encode the collection of prompts on network weights.
We establish a paired prompt memory system consisting of
a stable reference and a flexible working prompt memory.
Inspired by linear mode connectivity, we progressively fuse
the working prompt memory and reference prompt memory during inter-task periods, resulting in continually evolved
prompt memory. This fusion involves aligning functionally
equivalent prompts using optimal transport and aggregating
them in parameter space with an adjustable bias based on
prompt node attribution. Additionally, to enhance backward
compatibility, we propose compositional classifier initialization, which leverages prior prototypes from pre-trained models to guide the initialization of new classifiers in a subspaceaware manner. Comprehensive experiments validate that our
approach achieves state-of-the-art performance in both class
and domain incremental learning scenarios. Source code is
available at https://github.com/MIV-XJTU/EvoPrompt.

Introduction
Despite deep networks have achieved remarkable performance on parallel multi-task learning (Misra et al. 2016),
they mostly suffer from catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey
and Cohen 1989) of past knowledge and are biased toward the recent task under sequential tasks setting. Thus,
the key issue of CL methods is how to balance the flexibility and rigidity, which is referred to as the stabilityplasticity dilemma (Mermillod, Bugaiska, and Bonin 2013).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13301

