The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Percentile Risk-Constrained Budget Pacing for Guaranteed Display Advertising in
Online Optimization
Liang Dai1 , Kejie Lyu1 , Chengcheng Zhang1 , Guangming Zhao2 , Zhonglin Zu1 , Liang Wang2 , Bo
Zheng2
1

Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
2
Alibaba Group, Beijing, China
{dailiang.dl, lvkejie.lkj, xuelun.zcc, lambert.zgm, zhonglin.zuzl, liangbo.wl, bozheng}@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

pacing control for hundreds or thousands of GD advertisements on a brand advertising platform that deals with billions of daily requests is a challenging task. To summarize,
the main challenges are as follows:

Guaranteed display (GD) advertising is a critical component
of advertising since it provides publishers with stable revenue
and enables advertisers to target specific audiences with guaranteed impressions. However, smooth pacing control for online ad delivery presents a challenge due to significant budget
disparities, user arrival distribution drift, and dynamic change
between supply and demand. This paper presents robust riskconstrained pacing (RCPacing) that utilizes Lagrangian dual
multipliers to fine-tune probabilistic throttling through monotonic mapping functions within the percentile space of impression performance distribution. RCPacing combines distribution drift resilience and compatibility with guaranteed allocation mechanism, enabling us to provide near-optimal√online services. We also show that RCPacing achieves O( T )
dynamic regret where T is the length of the horizon. RCPacing’s effectiveness is validated through offline evaluations
and online A/B testing conducted on Taobao brand advertising platform.

• Significant differences among campaigns: the guaranteed
daily impressions range from thousands to millions, the
targeted audience size also vary greatly. Moreover, different campaigns have different optimization goals, such
as click-through rate (CTR) or conversion rate (CVR).
• Drastic changes in traffic environment: these changes include significant fluctuations in overall traffic, dynamic
shifts in the distribution of user arrival over time, and the
impact of other campaigns going online or offline.
The existing smooth pacing techniques have primarily focused on RTB ads (Nuara et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2020), which
is incompatible with GD allocation. Although some research
has considered the smoothness or representativeness in online optimal allocation of GD ads, it is often not optimized
and evaluated as a separate key metric. In this paper, we consider smooth pacing for GD ads from the perspective of a
publisher. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

Introduction
According to a report by the Internet Advertising Bureau,
online display advertising generated a remarkable revenue
of $63.5 billion in 2022, demonstrating a substantial yearover-year increase of 12.0% (IAB 2023). Ad exposures in
display markets are sold through both guaranteed and nonguaranteed (like real-time bidding or RTB) selling channels.
Within the guaranteed display (GD) selling channel, an advertiser (demand side) and publisher (supply side) negotiate
a fixed price (cost-per-mille or CPM) for ad placement, including details such as when, where, and how the ad campaigns will be displayed. These contractual arrangements
guarantee the delivery of a specified number of impressions
that meet specific targeting criteria during a specified period.
In addition to contractual agreements, advertisers usually expect their ad campaigns to be delivered smoothly and
steadily during the purchased period for various reasons, including making campaign performance as good as possible,
reaching a wider audience, increasing the display ratio of
the target audience, and maintaining stable online viewership for live streaming events. However, smooth and robust

• We introduce a novel framework called RCPacing, which
employs Lagrangian dual multipliers to adjust probabilistic throttling based on monotonic functions within the
percentile space, allowing us to effectively manage risk
and ensure optimal ad delivery performance.
• We√also show that RCPacing attains regret of order
O( T ) when the length of the horizon T and the initial
number of resources are scaled proportionally.
• As there exists a tradeoff between smooth and optimal
allocation in online matching problems, RCPacing offers
flexible control over this balance.
• We implement RCPacing in our online display advertising system and conduct extensive online/offline experimental evaluations. The results demonstrate that RCPacing is highly effective in improving both the performance
and smoothness of online delivery for GD campaigns.

Related Work
In the past few years, the allocation of GD advertising has
received significant attention from researchers (Wu et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2022). It is typically modeled as an online

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7987

