The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Rethinking Mesh Watermark: Towards Highly Robust and Adaptable Deep 3D
Mesh Watermarking
Xingyu Zhu1,2,3 , Guanhui Ye2 , Xiapu Luo3 , Xuetao Wei2,1 *
1
Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous Systems,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, China
3
Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
12150086@mail.sustech.edu.cn, 12132370@mail.sustech.edu.cn, csxluo@comp.polyu.edu.hk, weixt@sustech.edu.cn
Cover mesh
𝑁𝑣 = 2500

Abstract
The goal of 3D mesh watermarking is to embed the message in 3D meshes that can withstand various attacks imperceptibly and reconstruct the message accurately from watermarked meshes. The watermarking algorithm is supposed
to withstand multiple attacks, and the complexity should not
grow significantly with the mesh size. Unfortunately, previous methods are less robust against attacks and lack of
adaptability. In this paper, we propose a robust and adaptable deep 3D mesh watermarking D E E P 3DM A R K that leverages attention-based convolutions in watermarking tasks to
embed binary messages in vertex distributions without texture assistance. Furthermore, our D E E P 3DM A R K exploits the
property that simplified meshes inherit similar relations from
the original ones, where the relation is the offset vector directed from one vertex to its neighbor. By doing so, our
method can be trained on simplified meshes but remains effective on large size meshes (size adaptable) and unseen categories of meshes (geometry adaptable). Extensive experiments demonstrate our method remains efficient and effective even if the mesh size is 190× increased. Under mesh
attacks, D E E P 3DM A R K achieves 10%∼50% higher accuracy
than traditional methods, and 2× higher SNR and 8% higher
accuracy than previous DNN-based methods.

Decimation
Process
01011010
Train set
Message

Training

ℰϕ

𝒟θ

01011010
Reconstructed
Message

𝒟θ

11011010
Reconstructed
Message

𝒟θ

11011010
Reconstructed
Message

Stega mesh

Adaptability
Increased 𝑁𝑣

ℰϕ

11011010
Message

Unseen Geometry

Attacked
stega mesh

Mesh
Attack

Stega mesh

Robustness

Figure 1: We train our D E E P 3DM A R K on simplified meshes
(top) and test on varied mesh sizes and unseen geometry
(middle) to show adaptation. We further test D E E P 3DM A R K
on multiple mesh attacks (bottom).

methods (Peng, Long, and Long 2021; Tsai 2020) embed
secret messages in the least significant bits (LSBs) of vertex coordinates, but they are vulnerable to Gaussian noises.
Others (Tsai and Liu 2022; Hou et al. 2023) embed secret
messages in the most significant bits (MSBs) of vertex coordinates, which makes them robust against noises. However, they still cannot withstand rotation and scaling. Recent DNN-based methods show the possibility of embedding watermarks in either vertex domain (Wang et al. 2022)
or texture domain (Yoo et al. 2022). However, these methods are either only able to extract messages with textured
meshes(Yoo et al. 2022) or low in watermarked mesh quality
(Wang et al. 2022). Moreover, watermark quality and embedding overhead should be less impacted by variations in
mesh sizes and geometries for practical application consideration. Previous work has yet to explore a robust and adaptable watermarking method.
In this paper, we propose a highly robust and adaptable deep 3D watermarking D E E P 3DM A R K . Compared to
traditional methods, D E E P 3DM A R K is more robust against
multiple mesh attacks even without prior knowledge of the

Introduction
Digital watermarking is a technology used in copyright protection of multimedia, such as images, videos, point clouds,
and meshes. The goal of digital watermarking is to obtain
watermarked media by embedding messages in the media in
the embedding phase and reconstructing the message from
the watermarked media in the reconstruction phase. However, previous 3D mesh watermarking methods pursue high
capacity while ignoring robustness. The watermark should
be imperceptible and robust so that it can withstand attacks
and be adaptable so that it can be applied to arbitrary mesh
sizes and geometries.
Previous 3D mesh watermarking methods can be classified into DNN-based and traditional methods. Traditional
methods focus on improving the capacity of watermarking
(i.e., the number of embedded bits per vertices) while ignoring the robustness of their watermark. For example, some
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7784

