The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hyperspectral Image Reconstruction via Combinatorial Embedding of
Cross-Channel Spatio-Spectral Clues
Xingxing Yang1 , Jie Chen1 * , Zaifeng Yang2
1

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science Technology and Research
csxxyang@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, chenjie@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, yang zaifeng@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg
2

Abstract

CESST (Our Method)

Existing learning-based hyperspectral reconstruction methods show limitations in fully exploiting the information
among the hyperspectral bands. As such, we propose to investigate the chromatic inter-dependencies in their respective hyperspectral embedding space. These embedded features can be fully exploited by querying the inter-channel
correlations in a combinatorial manner, with the unique and
complementary information efficiently fused into the final
prediction. We found such independent modeling and combinatorial excavation mechanisms are extremely beneficial
to uncover marginal spectral features, especially in the long
wavelength bands. In addition, we have proposed a spatiospectral attention block and a spectrum-fusion attention module, which greatly facilitates the excavation and fusion of information at both semantically long-range levels and finegrained pixel levels across all dimensions. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments show that our method
(dubbed CESST) achieves SOTA performance. Code for this
project is at: https://github.com/AlexYangxx/CESST.

MST-L(Cai et al. 2022b)
MST++(Cai et al. 2022c)MPRNet(Zamir et al. 2021)
MIRNet(Zamir et al. 2020)
Restormer(Zamir et al. 2022)
HINet(Chen et al. 2021b)
HDNet(Hu et al. 2022)
AWAN(Li et al. 2020)

EDSR(Lim et al. 2017)
HRNet+(Zhao et al. 2020)
HSCNN++(Shi et al. 2018)

Figure 1: HSI reconstruction on NTIRE2022 HSI dataset
(Arad et al. 2022).

Introduction
Combining spectroscopy and image processing techniques,
the hyperspectral imaging system (HIS) records rich spectral information along long-range-distributed spectral bands
as well as spatial information. In the past few years, HIS has
emerged as a powerful tool in remote sensing (Yuan, Zheng,
and Lu 2017), medical image processing (Lu and Fei 2014),
agriculture (Adão et al. 2017), etc. Nonetheless, HIS usually
requires a long acquisition time and captures images with
limited spatial resolution, which constrained its applications,
especially in dynamic or real-time scenarios (Arad et al.
2020). To facilitate and promote the applications of HIS,
recent studies have explored efficient data captures, e.g.,
snapshot compressive imaging system that records 3D hyperspectral cube into the 2D measurement (Channing 2022;
Cai et al. 2022a). However, these methods require expensive, bulky equipment and complicated reconstruction processing for high-fidelity 3D hyperspectral cubes. To this end,
an increased interest in the hyperspectral image (HSI) reconstruction from RGB images using deep learning methods has

emerged, which shows great potential due to the handy RGB
image capture devices and satisfactory HSI reconstruction
performance (Yan et al. 2020; Cai et al. 2022c).
Conventional hyperspectral reconstruction methods are
mainly model-based, e.g., sparse coding (Arad and BenShahar 2016), which fails in exploring the intrinsic spectral
relations between input RGB images and the corresponding
hyperspectral images and suffers from representation capacity. Over the years, an enormous amount of deep-learningbased research has been developed that mainly focuses on
deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in an end-toend manner (Wang et al. 2018a, 2019). However, CNNs still
fail to capture long-range dependencies and rely on delicately designed modules.
Recently, vision transformer (Liu et al. 2021) (ViT) has
been introduced into computer vision from natural language
processing (NLP) and shows great potential in learning longrange dependencies and non-local self-similarities. However, existing frameworks for HSI reconstruction have two
main limitations: (i) the complexity of the standard global
transformer (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) is quadratic to the spatial dimension, which occupies substantial computational re-

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6567

