The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Optimal Survival Trees:
A Dynamic Programming Approach
Tim Huisman, Jacobus G. M. van der Linden, Emir Demirović
Delft University of Technology
T.J.Huisman-1@student.tudelft.nl, {J.G.M.vanderLinden, E.Demirovic}@tudelft.nl

Abstract

Anderson (1989) provided one of the first survival tree methods, by applying recursive splitting of censored survival data
with an interface similar to CART (Breiman et al. 1984).
Other similar greedy top-down induction heuristics were developed by LeBlanc and Crowley (1993), Su and Fan (2004),
and Hothorn, Hornik, and Zeileis (2006), each applying different splitting techniques.
To improve the performance of survival trees, Bertsimas
et al. (2022) recently proposed a local search method called
Optimal Survival Trees (OST), based on the method proposed in (Dunn 2018; Bertsimas and Dunn 2019). Despite
its name, OST does not provide a guarantee of global optimality, but iteratively finds local improvements to the tree
structure and converges to a local optimum.
Trees that do provide a guarantee of global optimality
over a training set for a given size limit are called optimal
decision trees. Out-of-sample results for optimal decision
trees for classification typically also show an improvement
over heuristics (Bertsimas and Dunn 2017). Therefore, optimal decision tree methods can provide better performance,
while producing smaller trees, which increases their interpretability (Piltaver et al. 2016). However, to the best of our
knowledge, there are no globally optimal decision tree methods for survival analysis yet.

Survival analysis studies and predicts the time of death, or
other singular unrepeated events, based on historical data,
while the true time of death for some instances is unknown.
Survival trees enable the discovery of complex nonlinear relations in a compact human comprehensible model, by recursively splitting the population and predicting a distinct survival distribution in each leaf node. We use dynamic programming to provide the first survival tree method with optimality
guarantees, enabling the assessment of the optimality gap of
heuristics. We improve the scalability of our method through
a special algorithm for computing trees up to depth two. The
experiments show that our method’s run time even outperforms some heuristics for realistic cases while obtaining similar out-of-sample performance with the state-of-the-art.

Introduction
The aim of survival analysis is to study and predict the time
until a singular unrepeated event occurs, such as death or
mechanical failure. Applications include not only evaluating the effectiveness of medical treatment (Selvin 2008), but
also, for example, recidivism risk estimation in criminology
(Chung, Schmidt, and Witte 1991), fish migration analysis
(Castro-Santos and Haro 2003) and studies on human migration and fertility (Eryurt and Koç 2012).
Survival analysis is challenging because the time of event
of some instances is unknown, i.e., it is censored. This
study focuses on the most common form of censoring: rightcensored data, where the true time of the event is unknown,
for example, because an instance survived beyond the end of
the experiment record.
The application of survival analysis in the medical and
other high-stake domains motivates the use of humaninterpretable machine learning models, such as decision
trees (Rudin 2019). A decision tree recursively partitions
instances by their attributes into buckets, i.e., the leaves of
the tree. In each of these leaf nodes, a survival curve can be
computed, as shown, for example, in Fig. 1. The advantage
of decision trees is that they can model complex nonparametric relations while remaining easy to understand (Freitas
2014; Carrizosa, Molero-Rı́o, and Morales 2021). Davis and

Figure 1: An example of a survival tree. Each leaf has a different survival distribution.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12680

