The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FedFixer: Mitigating Heterogeneous Label Noise in Federated Learning
Xinyuan Ji1, 2 , Zhaowei Zhu3 , Wei Xi1 * , Olga Gadyatskaya2 , Zilong Song1 , Yong Cai4 , Yang Liu5 *
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Leiden University
3
Docta.ai
4
IQVIA Inc & California State University, Monterey Bay
5
University of California, Santa Cruz
{jixinyuan1996, weixi.cs}@gmail.com, yangliu@ucsc.edu
Abstract

man labeling errors (Wei et al. 2022; Han et al. 2018; Yi
et al. 2022). Fig. 1(a) visually demonstrates significant differences in the label noise distribution between client p and
client q. Consequently, the existence of heterogeneous label
noise severely degrades the generalization performance of
FL model (Wang et al. 2022), leading to an even more pronounced impact on FL compared to CL with noisy labels, as
shown in Fig. 1(b). Therefore, there is a critical need for a
robust label noise learning method tailored to FL to address
this challenge effectively.
Numerous research efforts have been devoted to addressing noisy labels in CL (Cheng et al. 2021; Li, Socher, and
Hoi 2019; Liu and Guo 2020; Natarajan et al. 2013; Wei
et al. 2020). However, when directly applied to FL, these
CL-based methods encounter significant challenges. For instance, learning a model using local noisy label data on the
client side is susceptible to overfitting due to the limited
sample size. Furthermore, training a global model through
FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017) struggles to effectively learn
client-specific samples, potentially leading to difficulties in
correctly identifying whether high-loss samples are noisy label samples or client-specific samples. Moreover, existing
methods designed for the issue of label noise in FL can be
broadly categorized into coarse-grained (Chen et al. 2020;
Li et al. 2021a; Yang et al. 2021) and fine-grained (Tuor
et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2022) methods. However, these methods usually ignore the heterogeneity of noisy label samples
in FL. They encounter difficulty in the personalized identification of noisy label samples across diverse clients. This
difficulty impairs their potential to achieve substantial performance improvements. It is challenging to effectively recognize wrongly labeled samples from different clients in FL.
In this paper, we propose FedFixer, an FL algorithm with
the dual model structure to mitigate the impact of heterogeneous noisy label samples in FL. FedFixer consists of two
models: the global model (w) and the auxiliary personalized model (θ). During the local training process at each
client, the global model w and personalized model θ are alternately updated using the samples selected by each other.
With alternative updates of dual models, FedFixer can effectively decrease the risk of error accumulation from a single model over time. Unfortunately, unlike the global model
which benefits from updates through aggregation, the local
updates of the personalized model are prone to overfitting

Federated Learning (FL) heavily depends on label quality
for its performance. However, the label distribution among
individual clients is always both noisy and heterogeneous.
The high loss incurred by client-specific samples in heterogeneous label noise poses challenges for distinguishing between client-specific and noisy label samples, impacting the
effectiveness of existing label noise learning approaches. To
tackle this issue, we propose FedFixer, where the personalized model is introduced to cooperate with the global model
to effectively select clean client-specific samples. In the dual
models, updating the personalized model solely at a local
level can lead to overfitting on noisy data due to limited samples, consequently affecting both the local and global models’ performance. To mitigate overfitting, we address this concern from two perspectives. Firstly, we employ a confidence
regularizer to alleviate the impact of unconfident predictions
caused by label noise. Secondly, a distance regularizer is implemented to constrain the disparity between the personalized and global models. We validate the effectiveness of FedFixer through extensive experiments on benchmark datasets.
The results demonstrate that FedFixer can perform well in
filtering noisy label samples on different clients, especially in
highly heterogeneous label noise scenarios.

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) aims to learn a common model
from different clients while maintaining client data privacy, and it has gradually been applied to real-world applications (Li et al. 2020; He et al. 2020, 2019; Pu et al.
2023a). However, the presence of heterogeneous label noise
(Li et al. 2019, 2021b; Zhu et al. 2021) in each local
client severely degrades the generalization performance of
FL models (Wang et al. 2022).
Unlike Centralized Learning (CL) with noisy labels (Zhu
et al. 2023; Zhu, Wang, and Liu 2022; Zhu, Dong, and Liu
2022), FL confronts a unique situation where each client’s
label noise distribution1 may be heterogeneous due to variations in the true class distribution and personalized hu* Corresponding authors: Wei Xi and Yang Liu.
1

Label noise distribution refers to the distribution of both noisy
label samples (whose labels are wrong) and clean label samples(whose labels are true).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12830

