The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DTF-AT: Decoupled Time-Frequency Audio Transformer for Event Classification
Tony Alex1 , Sara Ahmed1,2 , Armin Mustafa1,2 , Muhammad Awais1,2 , Philip JB Jackson1,2
1

Surrey Institute for People-Centred AI, University of Surrey, Guildford, GU2 7XH, UK
2
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing (CVSSP), University of Surrey
t.alex@surrey.ac.uk, sara.atito@surrey.ac.uk, armin.mustafa@surrey.ac.uk, muhammad.awais@surrey.ac.uk,
p.jackson@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and Transformerbased networks have recently enjoyed significant attention
for various audio classification and tagging tasks following
their wide adoption in the computer vision domain. Despite
the difference in information distribution between audio spectrograms and natural images, there has been limited exploration of effective information retrieval from spectrograms
using domain-specific layers tailored for the audio domain.
In this paper, we leverage the power of the Multi-Axis Vision
Transformer (MaxViT) to create DTF-AT (Decoupled TimeFrequency Audio Transformer) that facilitates interactions
across time, frequency, spatial, and channel dimensions. The
proposed DTF-AT architecture is rigorously evaluated across
diverse audio and speech classification tasks, consistently establishing new benchmarks for state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance. Notably, on the challenging AudioSet 2M classification task, our approach demonstrates a substantial improvement of 4.4% when the model is trained from scratch and
3.2% when the model is initialised from ImageNet-1K pretrained weights. In addition, we present comprehensive ablation studies to investigate the impact and efficacy of our
proposed approach. The codebase and pretrained weights are
available on https://github.com/ta012/DTFAT.git

+

DTF-AT

Applause Detected

Frequency Branch Kernel (Freq > Time)

Time Branch Kernel (Time > Freq)

Figure 1: Overview of the audio classification task (left) and
Time-Frequency Decoupling (right), α: branch multiplier.

of inductive bias (Dai et al. 2021). Conversely, the datadependent attention weights, help transformer layer in learning more complex interactions compared to convolutional
layers with the added risk of overfitting. Furthermore, large
receptive fields in transformers give them higher modelling
capacity than convolutional layers (Dai et al. 2021). Thus
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) tend to work well
even with small datasets, where transformers tend to fail,
where as transformers can outperform convolutional networks on large datasets. Additionally, the success of various
hybrid vision architectures (Dai et al. 2021; Tu et al. 2022;
Fan et al. 2021) serves as a testament to synergistic learning capabilities brought by convolutions and self-attention.
The datasets in audio vary significantly in sizes, e.g., ESC50
dataset has 2000 audio files while Audioset2M has around 2
million audio files. Therefore, it is important to have a network that works well across varying dataset sizes and audio
file durations.
A common trend in audio deep learning research is to
adopt successful vision networks, because of the 2D nature of the most commonly used audio input format (melspectrogram). Although its 2-D nature similar to that of an
image facilitates it to be processed as one by the vision networks, it is important to note that the information distribution across an audio spectrogram is distinct from that in

Introduction
The field of Audio pattern recognition has seen massive
progress due to the advent of deep learning. From sequential models to convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Hershey et al. 2017; Kong et al. 2020) and now to transformers
(Gong, Chung, and Glass 2021a; Koutini et al. 2022; Chen
et al. 2022a), the incremental progress in neural network
architectures has been reflected in the performance of audio classification tasks. Convolutional neural networks have
been the go to network for audio classification up until the
introduction of Transformers. Recently Transformers were
shown to outperform CNN-based networks.
Both convolutional and transformer (self-attention) layer
exhibit intrinsic learning capabilities that differentiate them
significantly, making the replacement of one with the other
difficult. The use of data-independent fixed kernels makes
convolution less prone to overfitting and better in generalisation even with small datasets due to their strong prior
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17647

