The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dynamic Feature Pruning and Consolidation for Occluded Person
Re-identification
YuTeng Ye1 , Hang Zhou1 , Jiale Cai1 , Chenxing Gao1 , Youjia Zhang1 , Junle Wang2 , Qiang Hu3 ,
Junqing Yu1 , Wei Yang1 *
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
Tencent
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{yuteng ye, henrryzh, jaile cai, cxg, youjiazhang, yjqing, weiyangcs}@hust.edu.cn; wangjunle@gmail.com;
qiang.hu@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

to focus on non-occluded features. Others (Yu et al. 2021;
Xu et al. 2022) first partition input image into horizontal
or vertical parts, and then identify the occlusion status of
each part with off-the-shelf models (Mask-RCNN (He et al.
2017), HR-Net (Sun et al. 2019)), and finally recover occluded features from K-nearest neighbors in a gallery according to non-occluded features. Both strategies rely on
extra modules for detecting occlusions and will easily fail
in the presence of heavy occlusion and persons as occluders,
and further background noise persists as the partition usually
is very coarse.

Occluded person re-identification (ReID) is a challenging
problem due to contamination from occluders. Existing approaches address the issue with prior knowledge cues, such as
human body key points and semantic segmentations, which
easily fail in the presence of heavy occlusion and other humans as occluders. In this paper, we propose a feature pruning
and consolidation (FPC) framework to circumvent explicit
human structure parsing. The framework mainly consists of
a sparse encoder, a multi-view feature mathcing module, and
a feature consolidation decoder. Specifically, the sparse encoder drops less important image tokens, mostly related to
background noise and occluders, solely based on correlation
within the class token attention. Subsequently, the matching
stage relies on the preserved tokens produced by the sparse
encoder to identify k-nearest neighbors in the gallery by measuring the image and patch-level combined similarity. Finally, we use the feature consolidation module to compensate pruned features using identified neighbors for recovering essential information while disregarding disturbance from
noise and occlusion. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed framework on occluded, partial,
and holistic Re-ID datasets. In particular, our method outperforms state-of-the-art results by at least 8.6% mAP and 6.0%
Rank-1 accuracy on the challenging Occluded-Duke dataset.

Inspired by the recent advances in sparse encoders (Rao
et al. 2021; Liang et al. 2022), we propose a feature pruning, matching, and consolidation (FPC) framework for Occluded Person Re-Identification which adaptively removes
interference from occluders and background and consolidates the contaminated features. Firstly, we send the query
image into a modified transformer encoder with token sparsification to drop interference tokens (usually related to occluders and background) while preserving attentive tokens.
Different from extra cue-based approaches that rely on prior
information about human semantics, the sparse encoder exploits correlation properties on attention maps and generalizes better to various occlusion situations. In addition, our
sparse encoder removes interference from the background
as an extra benefit. Then, we rank the full tokens in the
gallery memory according to their similarity with the query
image. We obtain the gallery memory containing [cls] token and patch tokens via pre-training a vision transformer
encoder. The similarity metric for matching is defined as the
linear combination of image-level cosine distance and patchlevel earth mover’s distance (Rubner, Tomasi, and Guibas
2000) for bridging the domain gap between the sparse query
feature and holistic features in the gallery memory. At last,
we select the k-nearest neighbors for each query and construct multi-view features by concatenating averaged [cls]
tokens and respective patch tokens of both the query and its
selected neighbors. We send the multi-view feature into a
transformer decoder for feature consolidation. We compensate the occluded query feature with gallery neighbors and
achieve better performance. During training, our method utilizes the entire training set as the gallery, a common practice
in ReID literature (Xu et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2021). While for

Introduction
Person Re-Identification (ReID) refers to the process of
retrieving the same person from a gallery set under nonoverlapping surveillance cameras (Chen et al. 2017; Ye et al.
2021), and has been making remarkable progress in tackling
appearance change in deep learning era (Wu et al. 2019;
Lavi, Serj, and Ullah 2018). However, the re-identification
of occluded persons remains a challenging problem because of two reasons: 1. the inference from wrongly included occluder features and 2. the partial or full absence
of essential target features. To tackle occlusions, many existing approaches explicitly recover human semantics, via
human pose estimation (Miao et al. 2019; Gao et al. 2020;
Wang et al. 2022a) or body segmentation (Huang, Chen,
and Huang 2020), as extra supervision to guide the network
* indicates corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6684

