The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fine-Grained Prototypes Distillation for Few-Shot Object Detection
Zichen Wang, Bo Yang* , Haonan Yue, Zhenghao Ma
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
{wangchen1801, hnyue, mazh0819}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, byang@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-shot object detection (FSOD) aims at extending a generic
detector for novel object detection with only a few training examples. It attracts great concerns recently due to the practical
meanings. Meta-learning has been demonstrated to be an effective paradigm for this task. In general, methods based on metalearning employ an additional support branch to encode novel
examples (a.k.a. support images) into class prototypes, which
are then fused with query branch to facilitate the model prediction. However, the class-level prototypes are difficult to precisely generate, and they also lack detailed information, leading to instability in performance. New methods are required
to capture the distinctive local context for more robust novel
object detection. To this end, we propose to distill the most
representative support features into fine-grained prototypes.
These prototypes are then assigned into query feature maps
based on the matching results, modeling the detailed feature
relations between two branches. This process is realized by our
Fine-Grained Feature Aggregation (FFA) module. Moreover,
in terms of high-level feature fusion, we propose Balanced
Class-Agnostic Sampling (B-CAS) strategy and Non-Linear
Fusion (NLF) module from differenct perspectives. They are
complementary to each other and depict the high-level feature
relations more effectively. Extensive experiments on PASCAL
VOC and MS COCO benchmarks show that our method sets a
new state-of-the-art performance in most settings. Our code is
available at https://github.com/wangchen1801/FPD.

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed method, which we denote as FPD. In addition to class-level prototypes, we distill
representative detailed features into fine-grained prototypes,
enabling more robust novel object detection.

Therefore, the key question is how to transfer the knowledge learnt from base classes to the novel classes. Transfer
learning based methods (Wang et al. 2020; Cao et al. 2021;
Qiao et al. 2021) focus on fine-tuning the model more effectively. They use the same architecture as generic object
detection, additionally with advanced techniques such as
parameter freezing and gradient decoupling to improve performance. Meta-learning based methods (Kang et al. 2019;
Wang, Ramanan, and Hebert 2019; Yan et al. 2019; Han et al.
2023), instead, follow the idea: learn how to learn the new
tasks rapidly. As illustrated in Figure 2, an additional support branch is incorporated to encode support images into
class-level prototypes, which function as dynamic parameters
to interact with the query branch. In this way, the connections between novel examples and the model predictions are
enhanced, thereby improving the generalization ability and
learning the new tasks more quickly.
This work studies the meta-learning based FSOD and aims
at realizing a more effective method. In general, features from
the two branches are fused on top of the framework to make

Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision
and the methods based on deep learning have been well
established over the past few years (Redmon et al. 2016;
Ren et al. 2017; Carion et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2016). While
remarkable achievements have been made, most of them
require a large amount of labeled data to obtain a satisfactory
performance, otherwise they are prone to overfitting and
hardly generalize to the unknow data.
Few-shot object detection (FSOD) is a more challenging
task to detect object specially in data-scarce scenarios. FSOD
assumes that there are sufficient amount of examples for
base classes while only k-shot examples for each novel class.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5859

