The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multichannel AV-wav2vec2: A Framework for Learning Multichannel
Multi-Modal Speech Representation
Qiushi Zhu1 , Jie Zhang1 * , Yu Gu2 , Yuchen Hu3 , Lirong Dai1
1

NERC-SLIP, University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China
2
Tencent AI LAB
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
qszhu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, colinygu@tencent.com, yuchen005@e.ntu.edu.sg, {jzhang6,lrdai}@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

For multichannel ASR, there are two mainstream approaches: 1) a front-end beamformer in combination with a
back-end single-channel ASR model (Xiao, Watanabe et al.
2016; Tu, Du et al. 2019; Kenichi, Wu et al. 2019; Kumatani, McDonough et al. 2012), and 2) end-to-end multichannel schemes (Ganapathy and Peddinti 2018; Chang,
Radfar et al. 2021a; Park, Kumatani et al. 2020; Chang,
Radfar et al. 2021b). In the former category, most methods
are devoted to front-end beamforming, where multichannel
recordings are first fed to the beamformer to obtain a singlechannel speech, which is then input to the back-end singlechannel ASR model. Multichannel neural filtering methods
include fixed beamforming (Kenichi, Wu et al. 2019; Wu,
Kenichi et al. 2019) and adaptive beamforming (Li, Sainath
et al. 2016; Heymann, Drude et al. 2016). The weights of
fixed beamformers are fixed in the inference stage, while
that of adaptive beamformers can vary with input utterances
or noise statistics. The front-end beamformer and back-end
ASR can be trained separately or jointly to improve the
model capacity. All these methods can improve the multichannel ASR performance to some extent, but the problem
is that the training of the front-end beamformer depends on
the use of clean speech data and synthesized speech data,
and the noise statistics of the synthesized speech may significantly differ from those of the real speech, which might
be detrimental to the back-end single-channel ASR.

Self-supervised speech pre-training methods have developed
rapidly in recent years, which show to be very effective for
many near-field single-channel speech tasks. However, farfield multichannel speech processing is suffering from the
scarcity of labeled multichannel data and complex ambient noises. The efficacy of self-supervised learning for farfield multichannel and multi-modal speech processing has not
been well explored. Considering that visual information helps
to improve speech recognition performance in noisy scenes,
in this work we propose a multichannel multi-modal speech
self-supervised learning framework AV-wav2vec2, which utilizes video and multichannel audio data as inputs. First, we
propose a multi-path structure to process multichannel audio streams and a visual stream in parallel, with intra- and
inter-channel contrastive losses as training targets to fully exploit the spatiotemporal information in multichannel speech
data. Second, based on contrastive learning, we use additional
single-channel audio data, which is trained jointly to improve
the performance of speech representation. Finally, we use a
Chinese multichannel multi-modal dataset in real scenarios to
validate the effectiveness of the proposed method on audiovisual speech recognition (AVSR), automatic speech recognition (ASR), visual speech recognition (VSR) and audiovisual speaker diarization (AVSD) tasks.

Introduction
Over the past few years, speech devices have become ubiquitous. A variety of technologies have emerged to allow them
to better recognize speech in noisy environments. According to the distance from the speaker to the device, it can be
divided into near-field and far-field automatic speech recognition (ASR) (Li, Deng et al. 2014). Considering the number of microphones for collecting signals, one can design
single-channel ASR (Gulati, Qin et al. 2020) and multichannel ASR (Xiao, Watanabe et al. 2016; Ochiai, Watanabe
et al. 2017; Tu, Du et al. 2019; Chang, Radfar et al. 2021a;
Park, Kumatani et al. 2020) systems. With the recently developed deep learning techniques, near-field single-channel
ASR models have been able to achieve satisfactory performance in various environments, while far-field multichannel
ASR still remains challenging, particularly in noisy scenes.

End-to-end multichannel ASR models (Ganapathy and
Peddinti 2018; Chang, Radfar et al. 2021a; Park, Kumatani
et al. 2020; Chang, Radfar et al. 2021b) are thus proposed to skip the beamforming step and directly utilize
the raw multichannel speech data for modeling, since the
raw data contains rich real speech and noise statistics. It
was shown in the literature that the end-to-end approach
is superior to the front-end and back-end cascade counterparts. For example, three-dimensional convolutional neural networks (3-D CNNs) have been used for multichannel
end-to-end ASR, which outperform beamformer-based and
2-D CNN-based methods (Ganapathy and Peddinti 2018).
Chang et al. (Chang, Radfar et al. 2021a) utilized a multichannel transformer model for ASR, which outperforms
the single-channel transformer model as well as the beamformer cascaded with the single-channel transformer model.
Subsequently, the multichannel transformer transducer was
proposed in (Chang, Radfar et al. 2021b), which has a

* Corresponding author: Jie Zhang.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19768

