The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Efficient and Robust Multi-Agent Communication via Graph
Information Bottleneck
Shifei Ding1,2 , Wei Du1,* , Ling Ding3,* , Lili Guo1,2 , Jian Zhang1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou 221116, China
Mine Digitization Engineering Research Center of Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China, Xuzhou
221116, China
3
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300350, China
dingsf@cumt.edu.cn, 1394471165@qq.com, dltjdx2022@tju.edu.cn, liliguo@cumt.edu.cn, zhangjian10231209@cumt.edu.cn
2

Abstract

ized local Q function for each agent and utilizing a mixing
network to integrate these local Q values into global value.
Despite the function representation advantages, value
function decomposition methods still perform unsatisfactorily in multi-agent scenarios requiring action coordination,
probably mainly due to partial observability and stochasticity during the decentralized execution period. Partial observability and stochasticity can heighten the uncertainty of
an agent about the state and actions of other agents, which
can lead to action miscoordination. To tackle these issues,
various multi-agent communicative reinforcement learning
(MACRL) methods have been presented, which allow agents
to exchange information such as local individual observation or the corresponding feature embedding during the execution period. By exchanging messages between agents,
MACRL greatly enhances the coordination ability of multiple agents in a variety of tasks (Sukhbaatar, Fergus et al.
2016; Jiang and Lu 2018; Wang et al. 2020, 2019).
Graph Neural Network (GNN) is an effective representation method that processes the attribute information and
topological information of the graph-structured data into
feature representation for downstream tasks such as node
classification and link prediction (Gilmer et al. 2017; Park
and Neville 2019). MACRL has utilized GNN to build a
communication learning paradigm, which considers agents
and communication channels as nodes and edges in a graph,
with the action selection corresponding to node labeling. In
fact, many state-of-the-art MACRL methods, such as TarMAC (Das et al. 2019) and MAGIC (Niu, Paleja, and Gombolay 2021), fall into this paradigm. Message representation
learning in GNN-based MACRL is a challenging and crucial task because both agent feature embeddings and graph
structure carry important information for decision-making
and action selection. However, recent GNN-based MACRL
works still encounter some issues. On the one side, the features of neighbor agents may include useless information
that can have a negative impact on the selection of optimal
action. Besides, GNN-based MACRL relies on the edges of
the graph to pass messages among agents, which also makes
it vulnerable to adversarial attacks and noise on the agent
features and graph structure.
As shown in Figure 1, D = (A, H) carries information
from both the graph topological structure A and agent feature embeddings H. If communication message represen-

Efficient communication learning among agents has been
shown crucial for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL), as it can promote the action coordination
of agents and ultimately improve performance. Graph neural network (GNN) provide a general paradigm for communication learning, which consider agents and communication
channels as nodes and edges in a graph, with the action selection corresponding to node labeling. Under such a paradigm,
an agent aggregates information from neighbor agents, which
can reduce uncertainty in local decision-making and induce
implicit action coordination. However, this communication
paradigm is vulnerable to adversarial attacks and noise, and
how to learn robust and efficient communication under perturbations has largely not been studied. To this end, this paper introduces a novel Multi-Agent communication mechanism via Graph Information bottleneck (MAGI), which can
optimally balance the robustness and expressiveness of the
message representation learned by agents. This communication mechanism aims at learning the minimal sufficient message representation for an agent by maximizing the mutual information (MI) between the message representation and the
selected action, and simultaneously constraining the MI between the message representation and the agent feature. Empirical results demonstrate that MAGI is more robust and efficient than state-of-the-art GNN-based MARL methods.

Introduction
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
has attracted prevalent interest and achieved surprising success in various challenging real-world tasks, such as auction
trading (Qiu et al. 2021), autonomous driving (Du and Ding
2021), and traffic signal control (Yang et al. 2021). To solve
the issues of scalability and non-stationarity in MARL, the
paradigm of centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE) is widely adopted, in which decentralized policies can be derived in a centralized manner so that experiences, parameters, etc., are shared during the training phase.
The value function decomposition methods (Hostallero et al.
2019; Sunehag et al. 2020; Rashid et al. 2018; Wang et al.
2021) further extend this paradigm by learning a decentral*Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17346

