The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Step Vulnerability Guided Mean Fluctuation Adversarial Attack
against Conditional Diffusion Models
Hongwei Yu1 , Jiansheng Chen1 * , Xinlong Ding1 , Yudong Zhang2 , Ting Tang1 , Huimin Ma1
1

School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, China
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, China
yuhongwei22@xs.ustb.edu.cn, jschen@ustb.edu.cn, dingxl22@xs.ustb.edu.cn, zhangyd16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
m202220901@xs.ustb.edu.cn, mhmpub@ustb.edu.cn
Abstract

2021; Gal et al. 2022), sketches (Voynov, Aberman, and
Cohen-Or 2022; Peng et al. 2023), and text (Nichol et al.
2021; Poole et al. 2022; Ramesh et al. 2022; Saharia et al.
2022a). These prompts are encoded by a prompt encoder and
serve as conditional inputs to each step of the reverse process, enabling effective control over the generation. Due to
its stable theoretical foundation (Song et al. 2020; Bao et al.
2022) and highly applicable techniques (Gal et al. 2022; Lu
et al. 2022), conditional diffusion models have been successfully used in diverse fields, including image synthesis (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song, Meng, and Ermon 2020; Song
and Ermon 2019; Ruiz et al. 2023), image editing (Kawar
et al. 2023; Batzolis et al. 2021; Esser et al. 2021), and
video synthesis (Yang, Srivastava, and Mandt 2022). However, with the successful application of the conditional diffusion model, there has been a concern that its high-quality
generation results may bring about privacy and copyright issues. Therefore, researchers (Salman et al. 2023; Liang et al.
2023; Zhuang, Zhang, and Liu 2023) are beginning to study
the adversarial attack against diffusion models as a possible
technique for preventing the abuse of diffusion models.

The high-quality generation results of conditional diffusion
models have brought about concerns regarding privacy and
copyright issues. As a possible technique for preventing the
abuse of diffusion models, the adversarial attack against diffusion models has attracted academic attention recently. In
this work, utilizing the phenomenon that diffusion models are
highly sensitive to the mean value of the input noise, we propose the Mean Fluctuation Attack (MFA) to introduce mean
fluctuations by shifting the mean values of the estimated
noises during the reverse process. In addition, we reveal that
the vulnerability of different reverse steps against adversarial attacks actually varies significantly. By modeling the step
vulnerability and using it as guidance to sample the target
steps for generating adversarial examples, the effectiveness of
adversarial attacks can be substantially enhanced. Extensive
experiments show that our algorithm can steadily cause the
mean shift of the predicted noises so as to disrupt the entire
reverse generation process and degrade the generation results
significantly. We also demonstrate that the step vulnerability
is intrinsic to the reverse process by verifying its effectiveness
in an attack method other than MFA. Code and Supplementary is available at https://github.com/yuhongwei22/MFA

Existing research (Liang et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023)
has revealed that conditional input is probably a weak point
of the conditional diffusion model. This is because conditional diffusion models usually feed conditions to each step
of the reverse process so that attackers can effectively influence the reverse process by adding adversarial perturbations to prompts. Most previous adversarial attacks against
conditional diffusion models mainly focus on attacking the
prompt encoder and the internal structure of Unet (Zhuang,
Zhang, and Liu 2023; Zhang et al. 2023), known as the embedding attack. The core of such an attack is to increase
the distance between the clean condition input and the corresponding adversarial example in the embedding space.
As such, the embedding attack is more likely to attack the
prompt encoder rather than the whole diffusion model since
the reverse denoising process is basically not involved. Recently, there have been works (Liang et al. 2023; Liu et al.
2023) that consider the adversarial attack against the reverse
process. A typical attacking strategy is to increase the error
of the estimated noise in the reverse process. For example,
AdvDM (Liang et al. 2023) increases the estimation error
of the noise by directly maximizing the training loss of the
diffusion model. Nevertheless, such an approach treats the

Introduction
Due to the high generation quality and training stability, the
diffusion model has become a competitive deep generation
model recently (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song, Meng,
and Ermon 2020; Croitoru et al. 2023; Rombach et al. 2022).
A Diffusion model consists of two essential processes. The
forward process is a Markov chain that gradually incorporates noises into the input data to diffuse it to a standard
Gaussian noise. Conversely, the reverse process functions as
a parametric Markov chain that runs in the opposite direction
and is designed to learn how to reverse the diffusion process
by estimating the added noises. To date, diffusion models
have demonstrated outstanding performances by achieving
many state-of-the-art results in various generation tasks.
To achieve better control over the generation during the
reverse process, various prompts are used in diffusion models, such as images (Rombach et al. 2022; Batzolis et al.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6791

