The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MCA: Moment Channel Attention Networks
Yangbo Jiang1,2 , Zhiwei Jiang3 , Le Han1,2 , Zenan Huang1,2 , Nenggan Zheng1,2,4,5 *
1

Qiushi Academy for Advanced Studies, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
3
Guangzhou Electronic Technology Co., Ltd., Chinese Academy of Sciences, GuangZhou, China
4
State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
5
CCAI by MOE and Zhejiang Provincial Government(ZJU), Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
{jiangyangbo, hanle, lccurious}@zju.edu.cn, j_z_w@163.com, zng@cs.zju.edu.cn
2

(a)

Abstract

Frequency

Activation

Channel attention mechanisms endeavor to recalibrate channel weights to enhance representation abilities of networks.
However, mainstream methods often rely solely on global
average pooling as the feature squeezer, which significantly
limits the overall potential of models. In this paper, we investigate the statistical moments of feature maps within a neural
network. Our findings highlight the critical role of high-order
moments in enhancing model capacity. Consequently, we introduce a flexible and comprehensive mechanism termed Extensive Moment Aggregation (EMA) to capture the global
spatial context. Building upon this mechanism, we propose
the Moment Channel Attention (MCA) framework, which
efficiently incorporates multiple levels of moment-based information while minimizing additional computation costs
through our Cross Moment Convolution (CMC) module. The
CMC module via channel-wise convolution layer to capture
multiple order moment information as well as cross channel
features. The MCA block is designed to be lightweight and
easily integrated into a variety of neural network architectures. Experimental results on classical image classification,
object detection, and instance segmentation tasks demonstrate that our proposed method achieves state-of-the-art results, outperforming existing channel attention methods.

(b)

(c)

Index

Value

Density

Density

(d)

X

X

Figure 1: The activation of feature map exhibits a distinct
probability distribution, as illustrated in (a) and (b). While
the first-order moment is inadequate to represent a standard Gaussian distribution in (c), and combining the first and
second-order moment falls short in capturing non-Gaussian
distributions (as depicted in (d)). Extensive moment aggregation mechanism offers a viable solution to this challenge.

Introduction
Channel attention mechanisms have aroused wide concern
in the field of computer vision due to their remarkable
performance on various tasks, including image classification(Hu, Shen, and Sun 2018; Woo et al. 2018), object detection(Dai et al. 2017; Carion et al. 2020), instance segmentation(Yuan et al. 2018; Fu et al. 2019), face recognition(Yang et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2020b), image generation
(Gregor et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2022) and
multi-modal learning (Su et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2018), etc.
The objective of channel attention method is to learn the aggregation of global spatial information and adaptively recalibrate the weight of each channel. As an effective method, the
channel attention approach has become an essential module
in various neural networks and has been widely employed to
enhance the representational power of network.

In recent years, several effective channel attention methods have been presented. Hu et al. (Hu, Shen, and Sun 2018)
introduced the Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks (SENet)
with squeeze and excitation modules. The squeeze module maps global spatial information with global average
pooling (GAP), while the excitation module recalibrates the
weights of each channel based on their channel-wise relationships. Since then, other channel attention algorithms
(Lee, Kim, and Nam 2019; Wang et al. 2020a; Ruan et al.
2021) have achieved significant improvements to both the
squeeze and excitation modules. From a statistical perspective, the squeeze module of SENet (Hu, Shen, and Sun
2018), ECANet (Wang et al. 2020a), and GCT (Ruan et al.
2021) utilize first-order statistics (GAP) to extract global information from the feature map without considering highorder statistics. Despite SRM (Lee, Kim, and Nam 2019)

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2579

