The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PA2D-MORL: Pareto Ascent Directional Decomposition Based Multi-Objective
Reinforcement Learning
Tianmeng Hu, Biao Luo *
School of Automation, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China
tianmeng0824@163.com, biao.luo@hotmail.com

Abstract

exist because conflicting objectives cannot be simultaneously optimized. Instead, there exists a set of Pareto-optimal
policies. Adapting to requirements and application scenarios, human users must select a trade-off among multiple objectives that reflects their objective preferences, and different
preferences align with different Pareto-optimal policies.
In this context, multi-objective reinforcement learning has
attracted increasing attention and many advanced methods
have been proposed. Among them, the multi-policy MORL
(Chen et al. 2019; Yang, Sun, and Narasimhan 2019; Xu
et al. 2020; Hayes et al. 2022) is dedicated to searching a
non-dominated policy set consisting of a series of policies
aligned to different objective preferences. Compared with
the single-policy approach (Chen, Wu, and Liu 2021; Skalse
et al. 2022; Kyriakis and Deshmukh 2022), the multi-policy
approach has great advantages in terms of applicability and
flexibility, despite being more complicated. On the one hand,
by visualizing the non-dominated policy set, users are free to
select satisfactory policies to suit various demands. On the
other hand, the multi-policy MORL can also be combined
with methods that focus on real-world applications, such as
safe RL (Horie et al. 2019), since the policies that satisfy
the safety constraints can be easily identified from the nondominated policy set.
Recently, deep policy gradient methods and the actorcritic architecture have also been introduced into multiobjective reinforcement learning to address complex tasks
with continuous or high-dimensional state-action spaces.
The Pareto policy adaptation (PPA) (Kyriakis and Deshmukh 2022) method designs a loss function based on a
multi-objective gradient and attempts to search for a single
solution in a given preference distribution. It is easy to implement, but the policy needs to be fine-tuned or retrained
when preferences change. In contrast, the Prediction-Guided
MORL (PGMORL) (Xu et al. 2020) method employs an intuitive prediction model and an evolutionary architecture to
address multi-objective robot control problems and achieve
high-quality sets of non-dominated policies. However, the
limitations of the prediction model can negatively affect
the performance of policies and the stability of the results.
Therefore, instead of introducing predictive models, we explore completely different solutions.
In this paper, we focus on multi-policy MORL and propose a novel policy gradient-based approach to obtain high-

Multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL) provides
an effective solution for decision-making problems involving conflicting objectives. However, achieving high-quality
approximations to the Pareto policy set remains challenging, especially in complex tasks with continuous or highdimensional state-action space. In this paper, we propose
the Pareto Ascent Directional Decomposition based MultiObjective Reinforcement Learning (PA2D-MORL) method,
which constructs an efficient scheme for multi-objective
problem decomposition and policy improvement, leading to
a superior approximation of Pareto policy set. The proposed
method leverages Pareto ascent direction to select the scalarization weights and computes the multi-objective policy gradient, which determines the policy optimization direction and
ensures joint improvement on all objectives. Meanwhile, multiple policies are selectively optimized under an evolutionary framework to approximate the Pareto frontier from different directions. Additionally, a Pareto adaptive fine-tuning
approach is applied to enhance the density and spread of the
Pareto frontier approximation. Experiments on various multiobjective robot control tasks show that the proposed method
clearly outperforms the current state-of-the-art algorithm in
terms of both quality and stability of the outcomes.

Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a promising approach
for solving decision-making and planning problems, and it
has found widespread applications in various fields such as
robot control (Schulman et al. 2017), autonomous driving
(Feng et al. 2023), gaming (Silver et al. 2017), and recommender systems (Do et al. 2022). In Deep RL, an agent’s
behavior is guided by a reward function that defines the
optimization objective. However, decision-making problems
can involve multiple conflicting objectives, which is an important challenge for real-world applications of RL (DulacArnold et al. 2021). For instance, an autonomous driving
task may have two objectives: vehicle speed and passenger comfort, while a robot control task may involve forward speed and energy efficiency. In such multi-objective
decision-making problems, a single optimal policy does not
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12547

