The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Brush Your Text: Synthesize Any Scene Text on Images via Diffusion Model
Lingjun Zhang1,2 * † , Xinyuan Chen2 * , Yaohui Wang2 , Yue Lu1‡ , Yu Qiao2
1
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
51215904033@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, chenxinyuan@pjlab.org.cn, wangyaohui@pjlab.org.cn, ylu@cs.ecnu.edu.cn,
yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn
2

Abstract

erate text better. While these methods are capable of generating structurally accurate scene text, they demand a large
amount of training data which is not suitable for minority
languages and still lack control over the generated scene
text. Some researchers (Wu et al. 2019; Yang, Huang, and
Lin 2020; Lee et al. 2021; Krishnan et al. 2023) exploit GAN
(Goodfellow et al. 2014) based scene text editing methods
to generate scene text, which is more controllable. However,
these methods are confined to generating scene text at the
string level and do not possess the capability to generate
complete scene compositions.
To tackle these challenges, we propose a training-free
framework, Diff-Text, and a simple yet highly effective
approach for multilingual scene text image generation.
Our proposed framework inherits the off-the-shelf diffusion
model while specializing in text generation by localized attention constraint method along with positive and negative
image-level prompts. Specifically, given a text to be rendered, we first render it to a sketch image and then detect the edge map which is used as the control input of our
model. Our model generates a realistic scene image according to the control input and the prompt input which contains a description of a scene. However, the control inputs
are easily treated as grotesque patterns instead of texts on
signs or billboards. Recent research (Hertz et al. 2022) suggests that the input prompts exert their influence on the object placement within the generated images via the crossattention mechanism. Inspired by this observation, we first
identify the keywords in the prompt that correspond to the
textual region, such as “sign”, “notice”, and “billboard”, and
then constrain the cross-attention maps for these keywords
to the textual region. Furthermore, we introduce a positive
image-level prompt that further refines the placement of the
textual region and a negative image-level prompt that enhances the alignment between the generated scene text and
edge image, thereby ensuring greater accuracy in the generated scene text. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
and robustness of our method.

Recently, diffusion-based image generation methods are
credited for their remarkable text-to-image generation capabilities, while still facing challenges in accurately generating multilingual scene text images. To tackle this problem,
we propose Diff-Text, which is a training-free scene text
generation framework for any language. Our model outputs
a photo-realistic image given a text of any language along
with a textual description of a scene. The model leverages
rendered sketch images as priors, thus arousing the potential multilingual-generation ability of the pre-trained Stable
Diffusion. Based on the observation from the influence of
the cross-attention map on object placement in generated
images, we propose a localized attention constraint into the
cross-attention layer to address the unreasonable positioning
problem of scene text. Additionally, we introduce contrastive
image-level prompts to further refine the position of the textual region and achieve more accurate scene text generation.
Experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms the
existing method in both the accuracy of text recognition and
the naturalness of foreground-background blending. Code:
https://github.com/ecnuljzhang/brush-your-text.

Introduction
Minority languages, such as Arabic, Thai, and Kazakh, not
only have a significant number (reaching 5000 to 7000),
but their low-resource nature also impedes the progress of
computer vision, particularly in the domain of image generation. In recent years, with the advancement of diffusion
models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020), significant progress
has been made in generating realistic and prompt-aligned
images (Rombach et al. 2022; Ramesh et al. 2022; Saharia
et al. 2022). However, achieving accurate scene text generation remains challenging due to the fine-grained structure
within the scene text.
Recent efforts utilize diffusion models to overcome the
limitations of traditional methods and enhance text rendering quality. For instance, Imagen (Saharia et al. 2022) and
DeepFloyd (DeepFloydLab 2023) use the T5 series to gen-

Related Works

* Equal Contribution.

Scene Text Generation automates the creation of scene text
images from provided textual content. Notably, SynthText
(Gupta, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2016) is widely used to train
scene text recognition models. It employs existing models

†

Work done as an intern at Shanghai AI Laboratory.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

7215

