The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Response Enhanced Semi-supervised Dialogue Query Generation
Jianheng Huang1,2,3 * , Ante Wang1,2,3 * , Linfeng Gao1,3 , Linfeng Song4 , Jinsong Su1,2,3†
1

School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, China
3
Key Laboratory of Digital Protection and Intelligent Processing of Intangible Cultural Heritage
of Fujian and Taiwan (Xiamen University), Ministry of Culture and Tourism, China
4
Tencent AI Lab
{enatsu, wangante, 22920202200799}@stu.xmu.edu.cn,
lfsong@tencent.com, jssu@xmu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

and Weston 2022). Typically, to bridge a model with a search
engine, a query producer is used to generate search queries
for retrieving relevant websites. In this work, we focus on
dialogue query generation, which is more challenging as it
has to mine user intents from complex dialogue contexts.
To train such a query producer, previous studies resort
to supervised learning, where conversations with annotated
search queries are used to fine-tune a pre-trained model
(Lewis et al. 2019; Raffel et al. 2020). However, it is costly
to construct a dataset with enough human annotations, and
the trained model may still have a disappointing performance in out-of-domain conversations. A common practice
to tackle these issues is semi-supervised learning (Yarowsky
1995; Blum and Mitchell 1998), which has been widely investigated in both CV (Rosenberg, Hebert, and Schneiderman 2005) and NLP (Zhang and Zong 2016; He et al. 2020)
fields. It suits the dialogue query generation task well because abundant conversations without annotated queries are
easy to obtain. As implemented in self-training, we expect
the model to generate pseudo queries for unlabeled conversations. While in practice, some pseudo queries are often unsatisfying, which may lead to error accumulation and model
performance degradation. It can be said that the challenge
of effectively collecting high-quality pseudo queries to construct pseudo instances continues to be a hurdle in this task.
Fortunately, we notice that a search query can be highly
relevant to the topic of its corresponding dialogue response.
When augmenting the input with response information, the
model can often generate better search queries. As illustrated
in the first case of Table 1, the standard query producer (QP)
solely incorporates the dialogue history as input and mistakenly recognizes “north atlantic” as the query. In contrast, the
response-augmented query producer (RA) accurately predicts the correct query by inferring the mainly discussed
topic “ireland” (referred to by “it”) in the response. This
demonstrates the potential of RA to generate high-quality
pseudo queries which can subsequently be used to construct
pseudo instances for training QP.1 However, we notice that
RA may also generate some low-quality queries especially
when it is overly influenced by the response. In the second

Leveraging vast and continually updated knowledge from the
Internet has been considered an important ability for a dialogue system. Therefore, the dialogue query generation task
is proposed for generating search queries from dialogue histories, which will be submitted to a search engine for retrieving
relevant websites on the Internet. In this regard, previous efforts were devoted to collecting conversations with annotated
queries and training a query producer (QP) via standard supervised learning. However, these studies still face the challenges of data scarcity and domain adaptation. To address
these issues, in this paper, we propose a semi-supervised
learning framework – SemiDQG, to improve model performance with unlabeled conversations. Based on the observation that the search query is typically related to the topic
of dialogue response, we train a response-augmented query
producer (RA) to provide rich and effective training signals for QP. We first apply a similarity-based query selection
strategy to select high-quality RA-generated pseudo queries,
which are used to construct pseudo instances for training QP
and RA. Then, we adopt the REINFORCE algorithm to further enhance QP, with RA-provided rewards as fine-grained
training signals. Experimental results and in-depth analysis
of three benchmarks show the effectiveness of our framework in cross-domain and low-resource scenarios. Particularly, SemiDQG significantly surpasses ChatGPT and competitive baselines. Our code is available at https://github.com/
DeepLearnXMU/SemiDQG.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the burgeoning of pre-trained
language models (PLMs) (Lewis et al. 2019; Raffel et al.
2020) and large language models (LLMs), which effectively
improve the performance of various downstream tasks and
pave the way for artificial general intelligence (AGI) (Goertzel and Pennachin 2007). Despite the variation in size,
these models can still fail to generate factual content, which
is known as hallucination (Ji et al. 2023; OpenAI 2023).
To tackle this issue, researchers have explored incorporating
external knowledge from search engines (Komeili, Shuster,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Note that we focus on improving the performance of QP in that
the response information is inaccessible in practical application.

18307

