The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GMP-AR: Granularity Message Passing and Adaptive Reconciliation for
Temporal Hierarchy Forecasting
Fan Zhou1 , Chen Pan1 , Lintao Ma1 , Yu Liu1 , Siqiao Xue1 , James Zhang1 , Jun Zhou1 , Hongyuan
Mei2 , Weitao Lin1 , Zi Zhuang1 , Wenxin Ning1 , Yunhua Hu1
1

Ant Group, Hangzhou China
2
TTIC, Chicago USA
{hanlian.zf, bopu.pc, maining.mlt}@antgroup.com
Abstract
Time series forecasts of different temporal granularity are
widely used in real-world applications, e.g., sales prediction
in days and weeks for making different inventory plans. However, these tasks are usually solved separately without ensuring coherence, which is crucial for aligning downstream
decisions. Previous works mainly focus on ensuring coherence with some straightforward methods, e.g., aggregation
from the forecasts of fine granularity to the coarse ones,
and allocation from the coarse granularity to the fine ones.
These methods merely take the temporal hierarchical structure to maintain coherence without improving the forecasting accuracy. In this paper, we propose a novel granularity
message-passing mechanism (GMP) that leverages temporal hierarchy information to improve forecasting performance
and also utilizes an adaptive reconciliation (AR) strategy to
maintain coherence without performance loss. Furthermore,
we introduce an optimization module to achieve task-based
targets while adhering to more real-world constraints. Experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate that our framework
(GMP-AR) achieves superior performances on temporal hierarchical forecasting tasks compared to state-of-the-art methods. In addition, our framework has been successfully applied
to a real-world task of payment traffic management in Alipay
by integrating with the task-based optimization module.

Figure 1: An example of temporal hierarchical time series (HTS) structure for ten-minute frequency as the bottom
level, half-hour and hour frequencies as aggregated levels of
coarser granularity.

of inventory on hand to meet customer demand, while also
minimizing the cost of carrying excess inventory.
As shown in Fig. 1, a temporal hierarchical structure is
formed naturally with different levels of temporal granularity. The time series of the finest granularity makes up
the bottom level, and it is aggregated into upper levels of
coarser granularity. This type of time series is commonly
referred to as a temporal hierarchical time series or temporal HTS (Athanasopoulos et al. 2017). Temporal HTS forecasting tasks are challenging because they require accurate
prediction results for different granularity while satisfying
aggregation (coherence) constraints that time series at upper levels are the aggregation of those at lower levels. It is
difficult to produce accurate predictions for all levels with
a single model because time series at each level have different granularity and exhibit their own specific dynamics,
such as different trends and various seasonalities. In addition, independent forecasts (i.e., base forecasts) are unlikely
to adhere to the coherence constraints across temporal granularity. The inaccurate and incoherent forecasts would result
in inefficient planning of downstream tasks and pose risks to
decision-making.
Previous works on temporal hierarchy forecasting can be
categorized into two types: vanilla forecasting methods for
temporal HTS and multivariate HTS methods applied to
temporal hierarchy. Most temporal HTS methods (Athanasopoulos et al. 2017; Theodosiou and Kourentzes 2021) are
statistical and theoretically explainable, but forecast performance is limited when applied to complex real-world
datasets, implemented in the THIEF package.
The multivariate HTS methods typically follow a two-

Introduction
Time series forecasting is widely used in many important real-world tasks, such as supply chains management (Athanasopoulos, Ahmed, and Hyndman 2009;
Rostami-Tabar et al. 2013), traffic flow prediction (Laptev
et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018). Forecasting of different temporal granularity is essential for informed decision-making in
downstream tasks. In management and operational scenarios, forecasting at different time scales is necessary to formulate plans that span from short-term to long-term. For instance, in the retail sales industry, managers need to make
decisions about how much inventory to order and how to allocate it to different stores. Daily predictions can be used to
plan the daily commodity distribution to each store, while
weekly predictions can be used to purchase commodities in
bulk. This ensures that the stores have the proper amount
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9414

