The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Decoupled Textual Embeddings for Customized Image Generation
Yufei Cai1,2,3 , Yuxiang Wei3 , Zhilong Ji4 , Jinfeng Bai4 , Hu Han1,2 , Wangmeng Zuo3,5
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Harbin Institute of Technology
4
Tomorrow Advancing Life
5
Pengcheng Lab
caiyufei23@mails.ucas.ac.cn, yuxiang.wei.cs@gmail.com, zhilongji@hotmail.com, jfbai.bit@gmail.com
hanhu@ict.ac.cn, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn
Abstract

small set of images describing target concept (typically 35 images). Existing methods for customized text-to-image
generation (Kumari et al. 2023; Ruiz et al. 2023; Gal
et al. 2022) usually aligned the target concept with a userspecified word by finetuning the word embedding or model
parameters. However, due to the limited training examples,
the learned concept inevitably contains subject-unrelated information (e.g., image background, subject pose and position), resulting in degenerated editability. Although some
studies (Avrahami et al. 2023; Wei et al. 2023) employed
a subject mask to filter the background information, the gain
was unsatisfactory, as the irrelevant disturbances (e.g., blank
background and pose) still entangled with the learned concept. Disenbooth (Chen et al. 2023) decomposed the target
concept into a subject embedding and an additional irrelevant embedding to exclude the irrelevant information. However, there lacks explicit supervision to effectively facilitate
the decoupling between the subject concept and the irrelevant information.
To address the above issues, we propose DETEX, a
method that learns disentangled concept embedding for
flexible customized text-to-image generation. Following the
principles of Custom Diffusion (Kumari et al. 2023), we
adapt the pretrained Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al.
2022) model to new concept by finetuning both model parameters and the word embedding. Instead of learning a
single concept embedding to represent all given images,
our DETEX represents the target concept and subjectunrelated information using separate word embeddings, i.e.,
an image-shared subject embedding and several imagespecific subject-unrelated embeddings. Specifically, we introduce a learnable image-shared subject embedding to represent the target concept. To decouple irrelevant attributes
from the subject embedding, for each input image, we additionally introduce several image-specific subject-unrelated
embeddings to capture the irrelevant information. Here, we
consider irrelevant information from two main aspects: pose
(view) and background. The corresponding attribute words
(i.e., [B] background and [P] pose/view) are incorporated with the embeddings to facilitate them capturing
the irrelevant information.
To effectively decouple the target concept with unrelated
pose and background information, we propose a joint training strategy. Specifically, we encourage different embed-

Customized text-to-image generation, which aims to learn
user-specified concepts with a few images, has drawn significant attention recently. However, existing methods usually suffer from overfitting issues and entangle the subjectunrelated information (e.g., background and pose) with the
learned concept, limiting the potential to compose concept
into new scenes. To address these issues, we propose the
DETEX, a novel approach that learns the disentangled concept embedding for flexible customized text-to-image generation. Unlike conventional methods that learn a single concept
embedding from the given images, our DETEX represents
each image using multiple word embeddings during training, i.e., a learnable image-shared subject embedding and
several image-specific subject-unrelated embeddings. To decouple irrelevant attributes (i.e., background and pose) from
the subject embedding, we further present several attribute
mappers that encode each image as several image-specific
subject-unrelated embeddings. To encourage these unrelated
embeddings to capture the irrelevant information, we incorporate them with corresponding attribute words and propose
a joint training strategy to facilitate the disentanglement. During inference, we only use the subject embedding for image generation, while selectively using image-specific embeddings to retain image-specified attributes. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the subject embedding obtained
by our method can faithfully represent the target concept,
while showing superior editability compared to the state-ofthe-art methods. Our code will be available at https://github.
com/PrototypeNx/DETEX.

Introduction
Recently, diffusion models (Ramesh et al. 2022; Saharia
et al. 2022; Rombach et al. 2022; Nichol et al. 2022) have
demonstrated remarkable superiority in text-to-image generation. Benefiting from the large-scale pretraining, these
models can generate diverse and photo-realistic images
based on textual descriptions, showing great potential in various tasks, such as artistic and video creation (Saharia et al.
2022; Ramesh et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023).
Besides text-to-image generation, substantial efforts have
been devoted to customized image generation (Gal et al.
2022), which aims to learn user-specified concept from a
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

909

