The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Causal Walk: Debiasing Multi-Hop Fact Verification with Front-Door Adjustment
Congzhi Zhang* , Linhai Zhang* , Deyu Zhou†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory of Computer Network
and Information Integration, Ministry of Education, Southeast University, China
{zhangcongzhi, lzhang472, d.zhou}@seu.edu.cn

Claim: Shands Hospital of Gainesville Florida
has confirmed its first case of coronavirus.

Abstract
Multi-hop fact verification aims to detect the veracity of the
given claim by integrating and reasoning over multiple pieces
of evidence. Conventional multi-hop fact verification models
are prone to rely on spurious correlations from the annotation artifacts, leading to an obvious performance decline on
unbiased datasets. Among the various debiasing works, the
causal inference-based methods become popular by performing theoretically guaranteed debiasing such as casual intervention or counterfactual reasoning. However, existing causal
inference-based debiasing methods, which mainly formulate
fact verification as a single-hop reasoning task to tackle shallow bias patterns, cannot deal with the complicated bias patterns hidden in multiple hops of evidence. To address the
challenge, we propose Causal Walk, a novel method for debiasing multi-hop fact verification from a causal perspective with front-door adjustment. Specifically, in the structural causal model, the reasoning path between the treatment
(the input claim-evidence graph) and the outcome (the veracity label) is introduced as the mediator to block the confounder. With the front-door adjustment, the causal effect between the treatment and the outcome is decomposed into the
causal effect between the treatment and the mediator, which
is estimated by applying the idea of random walk, and the
causal effect between the mediator and the outcome, which
is estimated with normalized weighted geometric mean approximation. To investigate the effectiveness of the proposed
method, an adversarial multi-hop fact verification dataset
and a symmetric multi-hop fact verification dataset are proposed with the help of the large language model. Experimental results show that Causal Walk outperforms some previous debiasing methods on both existing datasets and the
newly constructed datasets. Code and data will be released
at https://github.com/zcccccz/CausalWalk.

Florida is among 12 states
reporting cases of …

Reasoning path
Shortcut path

Shands Hospital in Gainesville
is part of the University of
Florida Health medical network.

The post was flagged as part
of Facebook's efforts to combat But a member of UF Health' s
false news and misinformation communications team responded
directly to the Facebook post saying
on its News Feed.
he could state "we have no cases of
Label: REFUTES
the 2019 novel coronavirus to date."

Figure 1: Illustration of an example of bias in multi-hop
fact verification dataset, which is taken from the PolitiHop
dataset. The solid line indicates the reasoning path while the
dashed line indicates the shortcut path.

2019). However, in many cases, the process of verifying a
claim requires integrating and reasoning over several pieces
of evidence (Ostrowski et al. 2021). Therefore, multi-hop
fact verification, which performs a multi-hop reasoning process to verify a claim, has become an attractive research
topic recently (Zhou et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2020a; Si, Zhu,
and Zhou 2023).
Though notable progress has been made, most multi-hop
fact verification methods focus on learning label-specific
features for judging the veracity of the given claim, which
may expose the models to hidden data bias. Previous
study (Schuster et al. 2019) has shown that there are annotation biases in a commonly used fact verification dataset,
FEVER (Thorne et al. 2018), where most of the claims require only a single piece of evidence to verify. As shown
in Figure 1, we observe that there are also biases in the
multi-hop fact verification datasets such as PolitiHop (Ostrowski et al. 2021). The sentence “The post was flagged
as part ...” appears 85 times in the training set of PolitiHop
with a high correlation with the REFUTES label. Therefore, it is easy for the black-box neural network methods
to learn such shortcut paths instead of multi-hop reasoning
to cheat and obtain the right answer. We found obvious performance declines for some popular multi-hop fact verification methods when such biases are removed in a synthetic
dataset. The same phenomenon, known as disconnected reasoning, has also been found in multi-hop question answering
datasets (Trivedi et al. 2020).

Introduction
Fact verification aims to verify the given claim based on
the retrieved evidence, which is a challenging task. Previous work formulates fact verification as a natural language inference task, where multiple evidence pieces are
concatenated together and a single-hop inference is performed (Hanselowski et al. 2018; Nie, Chen, and Bansal
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19533

