The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Chain of Generation:
Multi-Modal Gesture Synthesis via Cascaded Conditional Control
Zunnan Xu, Yachao Zhang † , Sicheng Yang, Ronghui Li, Xiu Li†
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
University Town of Shenzhen, Nanshan District, Shenzhen, Guangdong, P.R. China
xzn23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {yachaozhang, li.xiu}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

FGD(The lower, the better)

Abstract
This study aims to improve the generation of 3D gestures by
utilizing multimodal information from human speech. Previous studies have focused on incorporating additional modalities to enhance the quality of generated gestures. However,
these methods perform poorly when certain modalities are
missing during inference. To address this problem, we suggest using speech-derived multimodal priors to improve gesture generation. We introduce a novel method that separates
priors from speech and employs multimodal priors as constraints for generating gestures. Our approach utilizes a chainlike modeling method to generate facial blendshapes, body
movements, and hand gestures sequentially. Specifically, we
incorporate rhythm cues derived from facial deformation and
stylization prior based on speech emotions, into the process
of generating gestures. By incorporating multimodal priors,
our method improves the quality of generated gestures and
eliminate the need for expensive setup preparation during inference. Extensive experiments and user studies confirm that
our proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art performance.

Speech+Face+Emotion+SpeakerID
Speech+Face+Emotion
Speech+Face
Speech+SpeakerID

Ours

CaMN w retraining

Speech+Emotion+SpeakerID
Speech+Face+SpeakerID
Speech+Emotion
Only Speech(Audio+Text)

CaMN w/o retraining

MultiContext

Figure 1: Performance comparison with limited modal during inference. The performance of existing multimodal
methods is significantly hindered by the inadequate incorporation of multiple modalities during the inference stage. Our
method addresses this limitation by utilizing prior information from speech to enable multimodal conditional control.

matches the rhythm and intention of the speech. Previous
studies (Yoon et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022a) have demonstrated the effectiveness of introducing more modalities for
gesture synthesis. However, most of these studies have not
fully explored the potential of multimodal gesture synthesis
modeling. In CaMN (Liu et al. 2022a), facial blendshapes
and emotion labels are incorporated as additional inputs and
represented as embeddings that are concatenated with the
existing inputs to generate more native and expressive gestures. However, as shown in Figure 1, when the number of
input modalities decreases, the performance of the model experiences a notable decline. In practical applications, it is
common to encounter scenarios where some modalities are
missing partially. Retraining a new model to accommodate
these missing modalities can be a costly endeavor.
Recent studies (Yang et al. 2023b; Qi et al. 2023) have
explored incorporating emotion labels into the generation
of human gestures using various techniques (e.g., random
mask, cross attention), resulting in diverse and emotive gestures. However, these approaches still rely on using additional modalities, such as emotion labels, during the inference process. The inconsistency between the assigned emotions and the context of speech may also lead to unnatural
gestures. Furthermore, existing works overlook the importance of facial expressions in capturing speaker rhythm and

Introduction
Gesture synthesis is a significant area of research within the
realm of human-computer interaction (HCI), with diverse
applications across various fields such as movies, robotics,
virtual reality, and digital humans (Kucherenko et al. 2021).
It is a challenging task that requires accounting for the dynamic movements of the human body, as well as the underlying rhythm, emotion, and intentionality (Nyatsanga et al.
2023). In co-speech gesture generation, three key indicators have emerged: (i) generating gestures that synchronize
with the audio and accurately depict the semantic content
of the spoken text, (ii) generating gestures that are consistent with the speaker’s style, and (iii) aligning the generated
gestures with the speaker’s intentions, including symbolic
actions that may resemble sign language.
While substantial progress has been made in generating
gestures synchronized to audio (Ginosar et al. 2019; Qian
et al. 2021; Yazdian, Chen, and Lim 2022; Yang et al. 2023d;
Ao, Zhang, and Liu 2023; Yang et al. 2023a), there has
been limited exploration of emotive gesture generation that
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Corresponding author

6387

