The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

What Are the Rules? Discovering Constraints from Data
Boris Wiegand1,2 , Dietrich Klakow2 , Jilles Vreeken3
1

SHS – Stahl-Holding-Saar, Dillingen, Germany
2
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
3
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Germany
boris.wiegand@stahl-holding-saar.de, dietrich.klakow@lsv.uni-saarland.de, jv@cispa.de

State-of-the-art methods to learn constraints purely from
valid solutions either suffer from a limited constraint language, resulting in a long list of hard-to-read constraints,
and need a lot of data (Prestwich 2021), or cannot learn
from real-world data because they are not robust to noise
(Kumar et al. 2019; Kumar, Kolb, and Guns 2022). Furthermore, although learning conditions for actions in AI planning is closely related to learning constraints for constraint
programming, none of the existing approaches is directly applicable to AI planning problems. Most of AI planning specific work (Arora et al. 2018; Aineto, Celorrio, and Onaindia
2019; Segura-Muros, Pérez, and Fernández-Olivares 2021)
considers constraint learning as only one of many problems
to solve. Not focusing on constraint learning prevents these
methods from being effective on this task.
To overcome all these limitations, we formalize the problem of learning constraints from exemplary solutions in
terms of the Minimum Description Length (MDL) principle, by which we select the model with the best lossless
compression of the data. Since solving the problem exactly
involves #P-hard model counting, we propose the greedy
URP I L S algorithm for Unveiling Rules from PosItive LabelS. Through extensive experiments on both constraint programming and AI planning benchmark data, we empirically show that URP I L S discovers more accurate and succinct constraints with less constraint terms, is more robust to
noise, and has lower sample complexity than the state of the
art. In summary, our main contributions are as follows. We

Abstract
Constraint programming and AI planning are powerful tools
for solving assignment, optimization, and scheduling problems. They require, however, the rarely available combination
of domain knowledge and mathematical modeling expertise.
Learning constraints from exemplary solutions can close this
gap and alleviate the effort of modeling. Existing approaches
either require extensive user interaction, need exemplary invalid solutions that must be generated by experts at great expense, or show high noise-sensitivity.
We aim to find constraints from potentially noisy solutions,
without the need of user interaction. To this end, we formalize the problem in terms of the Minimum Description
Length (MDL) principle, by which we select the model with
the best lossless compression of the data. Solving the problem involves model counting, which is #P-hard to approximate. We therefore propose the greedy URP I L S algorithm
to find high-quality constraints in practice. Extensive experiments on constraint programming and AI planning benchmark data show URP I L S not only finds more accurate and
succinct constraints, but also is more robust to noise, and has
lower sample complexity than the state of the art.

Introduction
Constraint programming, the holy grail of programming
(Barták 1999), separates the concerns of modeling a problem
and finding a solution. As modeling the problem requires
the rarely available combination of both domain knowledge
and mathematical modeling expertise, learning constraints
from data enables broader application of constraint programming (O’Sullivan 2010). Handcrafted solutions are often
recorded for real-world assignment problems like scheduling and staff rostering, and thus provide a promising knowledge base to mine constraints. Existing approaches do not
satisfactorily solve this task. Active learning (Bessiere et al.
2013; Tsouros and Stergiou 2020; Belaid et al. 2022) needs
thousands of queries even for simple problems, which is intractable if a human expert must label these queries. Passive learning approaches (Pawlak and Krawiec 2017; Kumar
et al. 2020; Prestwich et al. 2021) need invalid examples,
i.e., non-solutions, in their training set. Those are usually
not collected and experts must create them at great expense.

(a) formalize the problem of learning constraints from exemplary solutions in terms of the MDL principle,
(b) propose an efficient heuristic to discover constraints for
both constraint programming and AI planning,
(c) provide an extensive empirical evaluation,
(d) make code, data and additional details publicly available
in the supplementary materials.
In the next section, we introduce necessary notation and
basic concepts we use in the paper. Then, we formalize the
problem in terms of MDL. Next, we propose our greedy
URP I L S algorithm and describe how to adapt URP I L S
to AI planning problems. After giving an overview of related work, we provide an extensive empirical evaluation on
benchmark datasets. Finally, we discuss limitations, outline
potential future work and draw a conclusion.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8182

