The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Optimal Advantage from Preferences and Mistaking It for Reward
W. Bradley Knox1,2 * , Stephane Hatgis-Kessell1 * , Sigurdur Orn Adalgeirsson2 , Serena Booth3 ,
Anca Dragan4 , Peter Stone1,5 , Scott Niekum6
1

University of Texas at Austin
2
Google Research
3
MIT CSAIL
4
UC Berkeley
5
Sony AI
6
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Abstract

(3) by descriptive analysis, showing that the likelihood of a
human preferences dataset is higher under the regret preference model than under the partial return preference model;
and (4) by empirical analysis, showing that with both human
and synthetic preferences, the regret model requires fewer
preference labels. Section 2 of this paper provides details on
the general problem setting and on these two models.
In this paper, we explore the consequences of using algorithms that are designed with the assumption that preferences are determined by partial return when these preferences are instead determined by regret. We show in Section 3
that these algorithms learn an approximation of the optimal
advantage function, A⇤r , not of the reward function, as presumed in many prior works. We then study the implications
of this mistaken interpretation. When interpreted as reward,
the exact optimal advantage is highly shaped and preserves
the set of optimal policies, which enables partial-returnbased algorithms to perform well. However, the learned approximation of the optimal advantage function, Ab⇤r , will have
errors. We characterize when and how such errors will affect
the set of optimal policies with respect to this mistaken reward, and we uncover a method for reducing a harmful type
of error. We conclude that this incorrect usage of Ab⇤r still permits decent performance under certain conditions, though it
is less desirable than the appropriate and simpler approach
of greedy maximization of Ab⇤r .
We then show in Section 4 that many recent algorithms
used to fine-tune state-of-the-art language models (e.g.,
ChatGPT (OpenAI 2022)) can be viewed as an instance of
learning an optimal advantage function and inadvertently
treating it as one. In multi-turn (i.e., sequential) settings such
as that of ChatGPT, this alternative framing removes an arbitrary assumption of these algorithms: that a reward function
learned for a sequential task is instead used in a bandit setting, effectively setting the discount factor to 0.
This paper provides the following contributions. (1) We
show theoretically that under ideal learning conditions (with
no approximation error), mistakenly assuming the partial
return preference model results in a highly shaped reward
function that preserves the set of optimal policies. (2) With
approximation error (e.g., from finite data), we find that mistakenly assuming the partial return preference model only

We consider algorithms for learning reward functions from
human preferences over pairs of trajectory segments, as used
in reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF).
Most recent work assumes that human preferences are generated based only upon the reward accrued within those segments, or their partial return. Recent work casts doubt on
the validity of this assumption, proposing an alternative preference model based upon regret. We investigate the consequences of assuming preferences are based upon partial return when they actually arise from regret. We argue that the
learned function is an approximation of the optimal advantage function, not a reward function. We find that if a specific
pitfall is addressed, this incorrect assumption is not particularly harmful, resulting in a highly shaped reward function.
Nonetheless, this incorrect usage of the approximation of the
optimal advantage function is less desirable than the appropriate and simpler approach of greedy maximization of it.
From the perspective of the regret preference model, we also
provide a clearer interpretation of fine tuning contemporary
large language models with RLHF. This paper overall provides insight regarding why learning under the partial return
preference model tends to work so well in practice, despite it
conforming poorly to how humans give preferences.

1

Introduction

When learning from human preferences (in RLHF), the
dominant model assumes that human preferences are determined only by each segment’s accumulated reward, or
partial return. Knox et al. (2022) argued that the partial
return preference model has fundamental flaws that are removed or ameliorated by instead assuming that human preferences are determined by the optimal advantage of each
segment, which is a measure of deviation from optimal
decision-making and is equivalent to the negated regret.
This past work argues for the superiority of the regret preference model (1) by intuition, regarding how humans are
likely to give preferences (e.g., see Fig. 2); (2) by theory,
showing that regret-based preferences have a desirable identifiability property that preferences from partial return lack;
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10066

