The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multimodal Graph Neural Architecture Search under Distribution Shifts
Jie Cai 1 , Xin Wang 1,2 * , Haoyang Li 1 , Ziwei Zhang 1 , Wenwu Zhu1,2 *
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
caij20@tsinghua.org.cn, {xin wang, zwzhang, wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn, lihy18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

testing multimodal graphs are sampled from the same distribution. Different MGNN architectures have been proven
to have different performances on different tasks and data
distributions because of the diverse message-passing mechanisms (Li et al. 2022b) and crossmodal interaction modes.
However, distribution shifts in multimodal graph data which indicate changes in the statistical properties of data
across domains or over time, are very common in real-world
applications. Distribution shifts can arise from various factors, such as modifications in real-world conditions, variations in data collection processes, or the presence of confounding variables. Especially in the case of multimodal
graph data, where each graph or node is characterized by
multiple modalities, may be impacted by distinct factors.
Furthermore, these factors always interact with each other in
intricate and complex ways. Furthermore, distribution shifts
in multimodal graph data occur not only in single-modal or
multimodal interactions within a node but also in the overall
distribution of the graph. As shown in Figure 1, the distribution of multimodal reviews on Amazon varies across different commodity categories, such as dress, trousers and shoes.
Existing MGNAS or NAS approaches are based on the ID
assumption. When there is a distribution shift, each MGNN
is trained on the training dataset and evaluated on the validation dataset. The best-performing model on the validation dataset is then selected for the new data distribution.
However, it is important to note that the selected MGNN is
more prone to overfitting the training distribution, resulting
in the over-exploitation of spurious features and disregard
of invariant features. Consequently, the best MGNN architecture derived by MGNAS may be sub-optimal in out-ofdistribution (OOD) scenarios due to the mistakenly learned
features and the inadequate evaluation strategy.
The problem of distribution shifts can be particularly
challenging, and developing effective methods to handle distribution shifts in multimodal graph data is an essential research topic. The first challenge in addressing the OOD generalization problem of MGNAS is how to model the distribution shifts across graph structures, modalities, and their complex interactions. Given the complex nature of feature interactions in multimodal graphs, distinguishing between invariant and variant features can pose significant challenges. The
second challenge lies in automating the search for the best
model in multimodal graph OOD situations. It will be ben-

Multimodal graph neural architecture search (MGNAS) has
shown great success for automatically designing the optimal
multimodal graph neural network (MGNN) architecture by
leveraging multimodal representation, crossmodal information and graph structure in one unified framework. However,
existing MGNAS fails to handle distribution shifts that naturally exist in multimodal graph data, since the searched architectures inevitably capture spurious statistical correlations
under distribution shifts. To solve this problem, we propose
a novel Out-of-distribution Generalized Multimodal Graph
Neural Architecture Search (OMG-NAS) method which optimizes the MGNN architecture with respect to its performance
on decorrelated OOD data. Specifically, we propose a multimodal graph representation decorrelation strategy, which encourages the searched MGNN model to output representations that eliminate spurious correlations through iteratively
optimizing the feature weights and controller. In addition,
we propose a global sample weight estimator that facilitates
the sharing of optimal sample weights learned from existing architectures. This design promotes the effective estimation of the sample weights for candidate MGNN architectures
to generate decorrelated multimodal graph representations,
concentrating more on the truly predictive relations between
invariant features and ground-truth labels. Extensive experiments on real-world multimodal graph datasets demonstrate
the superiority of our proposed method over SOTA baselines.

1

Introduction

Multimodal graph data is ubiquitous in various real-world
applications such as social media (Li et al. 2019b; Tao et al.
2020; Li et al. 2021a), biomedicine (Wen et al. 2022), and
health (Gao et al. 2021a). Accordingly, the development of a
capable multimodal graph neural architecture search (MGNAS) algorithm is of significant importance to effectively
process this complex data type for various tasks and data distributions. MG-NAS aims at automatically designing multimodal graph neural networks (MGNN) and getting more
powerful models, which achieves great success in various
multimodal graph tasks (Cai et al. 2022) under the identically distributed (ID) assumption, where the training and
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8227

