The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Sampling-Resilient Multi-Object Tracking
Zepeng Li1 , Dongxiang Zhang2 * , Sai Wu2 , Mingli Song2 , Gang Chen2
1

The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{lizepeng,zhangdongxiang,wusai,brooksong,cg}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) is a cornerstone operator for
video surveillance applications. To enable real-time processing of large-scale live video streams, we study an interesting scenario called down-sampled MOT, which performs object tracking only on a small subset of video frames. The
problem is challenging for state-of-the-art MOT methods,
which exhibit significant performance degradation under high
frame reduction ratios. In this paper, we devise a samplingresilient tracker with a novel sparse-observation Kalman filter
(SOKF). It integrates an LSTM network to capture non-linear
and dynamic motion patterns caused by sparse observations.
Since the LSTM-based state transition is not compatible with
the original noise estimation mechanism, we propose new estimation strategies based on Bayesian neural networks and
derive the optimal Kalman gain for SOKF. To associate the
detected bounding boxes robustly, we also propose a comprehensive similarity metric that systematically integrates multiple spatial matching signals. Experiments on three benchmark datasets show that our proposed tracker achieves the
best trade-off between efficiency and accuracy. With the same
tracking accuracy, we reduce the total processing time of
ByteTrack by 2× in MOT17 and 3× in DanceTrack.

Figure 1: We plot the trade-off between tracking efficiency
and accuracy for mainstream MOT methods, by adjusting
the sampling rate in MOT17. When the video frame reduction ratio is high, the tracking accuracy of existing methods
declines to an impractical level. Our SR-Track is the only
approach to achieve promising HOTA with very small processing time (e.g., around 30 seconds to reach HOTA= 66).

Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) aims at detecting and tracking
moving objects from video clips or live streams, while maintaining a unique identifier for each object. Massive research
efforts have been devoted into this domain with fruitful
progress. The proposed trackers have witnessed great success in numerous applications, such as smart video surveillance (Xu et al. 2018; Xiao et al. 2023), traffic monitoring (Tian, Lauer, and Chen 2020; Zhang et al. 2023), customer behavior analysis (Merad et al. 2016) and sports analytics (Lu et al. 2013).
In this paper, we study an interesting scenario called
down-sampled MOT, which performs object tracking only
upon a small subset of video frames. Since the processing
time of MOT is positively correlated with the number of
sampled frames, the task has the potential to achieve an ideal
trade-off between tracking efficiency and accuracy, and thus

is particularly useful in handling large-scale video streams
with limited computing resources. In other words, with the
same amount of GPU cards, a tracker that works well on
a higher frame reduction ratio can support MOT on many
more video streams simultaneously.
Down-sampled MOT is challenging because the motion
dynamics increase and the patterns become non-linear and
more difficult to capture. In addition, the data association
strategy such as IoU that works well in dense frames fails
in the scenario of sparse frames. Therefore, directly applying state-of-the-art MOT methods on the down-sampled
frames would result in significant performance degradation.
As shown in Figure 1, we report the trade-off between efficiency and accuracy in terms of HOTA, by adjusting different sampling rates. When the video frame reduction ratio is high, it’s indeed that the processing time can be significantly reduced. However, the tracking accuracy also declines to an impractical level. Detailed performance analysis

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3297

