The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CycleVTON: A Cycle Mapping Framework for Parser-Free Virtual Try-On
Chenghu Du1, * , Junyin Wang1, * , Yi Rong1,2,3,† , Shuqing Liu4 , Kai Liu1 , Shengwu Xiong1,2,3,5,†
1

School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, 430070
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai 200232
3
Sanya Science and Education Innovation Park, Wuhan University of Technology, Sanya, 572000
4
School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan Textile University, Wuhan, 430200
5
School of Information Science and Technology, Qiongtai Normal University, Haikou, 571127
{duch, wjy199708, yrong, liukai356, xiongsw}@whut.edu.cn, liushuqingwtu@foxmail.com
Abstract

w/ Paser

(a) Paired

Image-based virtual try-on aims to transfer a target clothing
onto a specific person. A significant challenge is arbitrarily
matched clothing and person lack corresponding ground truth
to supervised learning. A recent pioneering work leveraged
an improved cycleGAN to enable one network to generate
the desired image for another network during training. However, there is no difference in the result distribution before
and after the clothing changes. Therefore, using two different
networks is unnecessary and may even increase the difficulty
of convergence. Furthermore, the introduced human parsing
used to provide body structure information in the input also
have a negative impact on the try-on result. How to employ
a single network for supervised learning while eliminating
human parsing? To tackle these issues, we present a Cycle
mapping Virtual Try-On Network (CycleVTON), which can
produce photo-realistic try-on results by using a cycle mapping framework without the parser. In particular, we introduce a flow constraint loss to achieve supervised learning
of arbitrarily matched clothing and person as inputs to the
deformer, thus naturally mimicking the interaction between
clothing and the human body. Additionally, we design a skin
generation strategy that can adapt to the shape of the target
clothing by dynamically adjusting the skin region, i.e., by first
removing and then filling skin areas. Extensive experiments
conducted on challenging benchmarks demonstrate that our
proposed method exhibits superior performance compared to
state-of-the-art methods.

(d) DCTON

CNN 1

w/ Paser

CNN 2

(b) Unpaired
Surface

Fake
Person

Clothes 1 Person

CNN

Clothes 2 Surface

(e) CycleVTON
(Ours)

(c) Non-existent

CNN
Clothes 1

Person

Fake
Person

Clothes 2

Figure 1: Comparison of (a, b) actual dataset cases and (c)
non-existent dataset case. Comparison of (d) cycle consistency pipeline, DCTON, and (e) our cycle mapping pipeline.

works (Han et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018) employed a learnable network with Thin-plate Spline (TPS), which achieved
clothing warping by fitting estimated control points to target points. However, it mainly focused on pixel variations
around control points, leading to excessive distortion, especially in regions with complex changes such as sleeves.
Although over-distortion is constrained by regularizing TPS
(Yang et al. 2020), this global deformation approach can
still result in significant misalignments between the clothing
and the human body. An advantageous approach is the semirigid Moving Least Squares (MLS) (Schaefer, McPhail, and
Warren 2006; Yang, Yu, and Liu 2022), which fits a local
surface based on the neighborhood of control points, ensuring the best alignment with the surrounding data points. This
method (Yang, Yu, and Liu 2022) effectively balances the
deformation in both non-rigid and rigid regions of the clothing. However, when dealing with highly flexible non-rigid
regions like sleeves, MLS struggles to achieve precise and
effective alignment. Another effective method is the learnable appearance flow (AF) (Zhou et al. 2016). It estimates
a dense pixel offset field by focusing on the variations of
each pixel, enabling clothing deformation (Han et al. 2019).
However, excessively flexible AF can still lead to excessive
deformation. In addition, the above-mentioned methods take
only semantic information as input and lack ground truth
flow; therefore, they cannot perceive the spatial and depth

Introduction
Image-based virtual try-on aims to provide users with photorealistic online try-on services. Recently, it has gained significant attention due to its immense practical and commercial value. However, two inherent challenges exist for this
task. First, target clothing images are flat and must be deformed non-rigidly to fit the body’s posture, thus mimicking
the natural interaction between clothing and body. Second,
unpaired input data lacks ground truth leading to the inability to conduct supervised learning (see Fig. 1).
In 2D space, non-rigidly deforming the clothing image to
naturally fit the human pose is highly challenging. Earlier
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1618

