The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Trend-Aware Supervision: On Learning Invariance for Semi-Supervised Facial
Action Unit Intensity Estimation
Yingjie Chen1 * , Jiarui Zhang1 * , Tao Wang1† , Yun Liang2
1

School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing China
School of Integrated Circuits, Peking University, Beijing China
chenyingjie@pku.edu.cn, zjr954@pku.edu.cn, wangtao@pku.edu.cn, ericlyun@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract
With the increasing need for facial behavior analysis, semisupervised AU intensity estimation using only keyframe annotations has emerged as a practical and effective solution
to relieve the burden of annotation. However, the lack of annotations makes the spurious correlation problem caused by
AU co-occurrences and subject variation much more prominent, leading to non-robust intensity estimation that is entangled among AUs and biased among subjects. We observe
that trend information inherent in keyframe annotations could
act as extra supervision and raising the awareness of AUspecific facial appearance changing trends during training is
the key to learning invariant AU-specific features. To this end,
we propose Trend-Aware Supervision (TAS), which pursues
three kinds of trend awareness, including intra-trend ranking
awareness, intra-trend speed awareness, and inter-trend subject awareness. TAS alleviates the spurious correlation problem by raising trend awareness during training to learn AUspecific features that represent the corresponding facial appearance changes, to achieve intensity estimation invariance.
Experiments conducted on two commonly used AU benchmark datasets, BP4D and DISFA, show the effectiveness of
each kind of awareness. And under trend-aware supervision,
the performance can be improved without extra computational or storage costs during inference.

Figure 1: Motivation. (a) Illustration of keyframes and
local trends. (b) Spurious correlation caused by AU cooccurrences. The limited annotations may lead the model to
learn only AU features of one of the two AUs instead of
both, resulting in non-robust intensity estimation entangled
between them. (c) Spurious correlation caused by subject
variation. Subject variation magnified by the lack of annotations may lead the model to learn non-causal gender features
instead of AU features for estimating the intensity of AU12
(orange denotes the dominant features for estimation).

Introduction
Facial behavior analysis is a fundamental task in the field
of affective computing with wide application scenarios such
as driver fatigue monitoring in driver assistance systems
and pain estimation in medical treatment. According to
FACS (Friesen and Ekman 1978), facial action units (AU)
are defined as subtle facial muscle movements, and almost
all facial behaviors can be expressed as certain combinations
of AUs. To describe more fine-grained facial behavior, not
only the states of AUs (activated or not) but also their intensity values are required. Therefore, AU intensity estimation has become a popular solution for facial behavior analysis. In FACS, the intensity values of AU are quantified into
six discrete ordinal intensity levels, including neutral, trace,
slight, pronounced, extreme, and maximum (from 0 to 5).

Automatic AU intensity estimation aims to learn a model
using FACS-quantified annotations to estimate the intensity
values of multiple AUs for a facial image.
The training data requires manual labeling by FACScertificated experts, which is time-consuming and expensive. Therefore, training AU intensity estimation models using limited annotations, referred to as semi-supervised AU
intensity estimation, has attracted increasing attention. To
annotate the intensity of each AU for each frame in a video
sequence, annotators usually skim through the whole video

* Equal Contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

483

