The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Region-Disentangled Diffusion Model for High-Fidelity PPG-to-ECG Translation
Debaditya Shome , Pritam Sarkar , Ali Etemad
Queen’s University, Canada
{debaditya.shome, pritam.sarkar, ali.etemad}@queensu.ca

Abstract
The high prevalence of cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) calls
for accessible and cost-effective continuous cardiac monitoring tools. Despite Electrocardiography (ECG) being the gold
standard, continuous monitoring remains a challenge, leading
to the exploration of Photoplethysmography (PPG), a promising but more basic alternative available in consumer wearables.
This notion has recently spurred interest in translating PPG to
ECG signals. In this work, we introduce Region-Disentangled
Diffusion Model (RDDM), a novel diffusion model designed
to capture the complex temporal dynamics of ECG. Traditional
Diffusion models like Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) face challenges in capturing such nuances due
to the indiscriminate noise addition process across the entire
signal. Our proposed RDDM overcomes such limitations by incorporating a novel forward process that selectively adds noise
to specific regions of interest (ROI) such as QRS complex in
ECG signals, and a reverse process that disentangles the denoising of ROI and non-ROI regions. Quantitative experiments
demonstrate that RDDM can generate high-fidelity ECG from
PPG in as few as 10 diffusion steps, making it highly effective
and computationally efficient. Additionally, to rigorously validate the usefulness of the generated ECG signals, we introduce
CardioBench, a comprehensive evaluation benchmark for a
variety of cardiac-related tasks including heart rate and blood
pressure estimation, stress classification, and the detection
of atrial fibrillation and diabetes. Our thorough experiments
show that RDDM achieves state-of-the-art performance on
CardioBench. To the best of our knowledge, RDDM is the first
diffusion model for cross-modal signal-to-signal translation in
the bio-signal domain.

1

Introduction

The persistent rise in cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) is a
leading cause of mortality worldwide, with an estimated
17.9 million fatalities attributed to CVDs in a year (Kauffman 2020). Early detection, timely intervention, and widelyaccessible health-monitoring devices are crucial factors in
preventing CVDs and reducing related healthcare costs. Democratizing accurate cardiac monitoring is critical, as it empowers individuals and communities to take control of their
cardiovascular health regardless of socioeconomic status or
geographic location (Bayoumy et al. 2021).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15009

Electrocardiography (ECG) has long been the gold standard for cardiac monitoring, offering crucial insights to diagnose numerous CVDs (Hannun et al. 2019). However, their
requirement for specialized equipment and skilled medical
personnel limits their accessibility and affordability for daily
life cardiac activity monitoring. Continuous ECG monitoring
is always preferred over conventional clinical settings as it
offers a comprehensive assessment of cardiac activity by collecting and analyzing data from patients uninterruptedly in
their day-to-day life, and is not limited to a single point in
time. For example, the detection of Atrial Fibrillation (AFib)
remains challenging due to its asymptomatic and intermittent
nature (Camm, Corbucci, and Padeletti 2012), which often
goes undetected in clinical settings that usually take place
over the short duration of a patient’s visit to the physician
(Steinhubl et al. 2018).
To overcome these limitations, Photoplethysmography
(PPG) has emerged as a promising non-invasive and costeffective alternative for continuous cardiac monitoring in
wrist-based wearable devices. PPG is a non-invasive optical
signal that measures blood volume fluctuations to capture
cardiac activity. However, PPG lacks detailed cardiac information in comparison to ECG, which limits its use in diagnosing CVDs. Due to the non-invasive nature and ability of
PPGs to be integrated into wearable devices, it provides an
unmatched level of ubiquity.
To leverage the convenience and continuous monitoring
ability of PPG and the diagnostic utility of ECG, PPG-toECG translation has emerged as a promising, yet challenging
alternative (Sarkar and Etemad 2021; Vo et al. 2021; Lan
2023). The goal of PPG-to-ECG translation is to use deep
learning techniques to generate ECG signals from PPG, with
the aim that intricate CVD-related information in PPG signals
become more prominent and detectable in the output ECG.
We identify two key areas that require significant improvement in the context of PPG-to-ECG translation. First, recent
advances in Diffusion models have shown great promise in
producing hyper-realistic content with high fidelity (Saharia
et al. 2022; Blattmann et al. 2023; Ruan et al. 2023). Yet, to
our knowledge, they have not been successfully explored for
PPG-to-ECG translation. More specifically, designing Diffusion models capable of effectively learning the nuances of
both spatial and temporal dynamics of bio-signals like ECG
has not been explored. Second, despite promising results in

