The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Ultrametric Trees for Optimal Transport Regression
Samantha Chen1 , Puoya Tabaghi2 , Yusu Wang2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego
2
Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute, University of California, San Diego
sac003@ucsd.edu, ptabaghi@ucsd.edu, yusuwang@ucsd.edu

Abstract

2018; Solomon et al. 2015). Since the optimal transport distance is computationally expensive (cubic in the number of
points), several methods have emerged to efficiently approximate optimal transport distance. One of the most popular
methods is the Sinkhorn distance, which uses entropic regularization to compute an approximation of optimal transport
in quadratic time (Cuturi 2013).
Another approach relies on approximating the original
metric with a tree metric (Evans and Matsen 2012; Le et al.
2019a; Indyk and Thaper 2003; Takezawa et al. 2021; Yamada et al. 2022). While this approach yields a coarser approximation of the optimal transport, it has linear time complexity with respect to the size of the metric space. The classic Quadtree is one of the most widely used tree approximations methods. It recursively partitions a metric space into
four quadrants to construct internal nodes and represents
each element of the original discrete metric space as a leaf
node. Quadtree Wasserstein distance approximates the true
optimal transport distance with a logarithmic distortion (Indyk and Thaper 2003). Flowtree (Backurs et al. 2019) and
sliced-tree Wasserstein (Le et al. 2019b) are Quadtreebased methods designed to improve over the 1-Wasserstein
distance approximation of the Quadtree algorithm. A main
drawback of Quadtree-based methods is that they require a
Euclidean embedding of the original discrete metric space.
In contrast, clustertree is a tree-based approximation that
does not require a Euclidean embedding of the original discrete metric space (Le et al. 2019b). Given a fixed Quadtree
or clustertree topology, Yamada et al. (2022) propose a stateof-the-art method based on optimizing the weights on the
tree to best approximate Wasserstein distances but does not
change the topology of the input tree.
Our goal is to find the tree topology and weight that
closely approximates the Wasserstein distance in the original
metric space. To achieve this, we introduce a projected gradient descent procedure over the space of ultrametrics to find
a tree that approximates the original Wasserstein distances.
As constraining the problem to tree metrics is challenging in
general, we instead use ultrametrics — a subfamily of tree
metrics — as a proxy for tree weights and structure.
Problem Statement (informal) Let X be a point set in a
metric space and W1 (·, ·) be the optimal transport distance.
We want to learn an ultrametric on X such that ultrametric
optimal transport Wu approximates W1 . To achieve this, we

Optimal transport provides a metric which quantifies the dissimilarity between probability measures. For measures supported in discrete metric spaces, finding the optimal transport
distance has cubic time complexity in the size of the space.
However, measures supported on trees admit a closed-form
optimal transport that can be computed in linear time. In this
paper, we aim to find an optimal tree structure for a given
discrete metric space so that the tree-Wasserstein distance
approximates the optimal transport distance in the original
space. One of our key ideas is to cast the problem in ultrametric spaces. This helps us optimize over the space of ultrametric trees — a mixed-discrete and continuous optimization
problem — via projected gradient decent over the space of
ultrametric matrices. During optimization, we project the parameters to the ultrametric space via a hierarchical minimum
spanning tree algorithm, equivalent to the closest projection
to ultrametrics under the supremum norm. Experimental results on real datasets show that our approach outperforms previous approaches (e.g. Flowtree, Quadtree) in approximating
optimal transport distances. Finally, experiments on synthetic
data generated on ground truth trees show that our algorithm
can accurately uncover the underlying trees.

1

Introduction

First formulated by Gaspard Monge in 18th-century France,
the optimal transport problem is often explained by analogy
to the problem of minimizing the time spent transporting
coal from mines to factories. More formally, given two distributions and a transportation cost, optimal transport aims
to find the lowest-cost way of moving points from the first
distribution to the second one. When the transportation cost
is a metric, the optimal transport distance is also called the
1-Wasserstein distance (Villani 2009).
Optimal transport is applied in many areas such as machine learning (Solomon et al. 2014; Frogner et al. 2015;
Montavon, Müller, and Cuturi 2016; Kolouri et al. 2017; Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017; Genevay et al. 2016; Lee
and Raginsky 2018), statistics (El Moselhy and Marzouk
2012; Reich 2013; Panaretos and Zemel 2016), and computer graphics (Dominitz and Tannenbaum 2009; Rubner,
Tomasi, and Guibas 2000; Rabin et al. 2011; Lavenant et al.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20657

