The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Combating Insider Threat in the Open-World Environments:
Identification, Monitoring, and Data Augmentation
Dawei Zhou
Department of Computer Science
Virginia Tech, VA, USA
zhoud@vt.edu

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed a dramatic increase in a class
of security threats known as “insider threats”. These threats
occur when individuals with authorized access to an organization’s network engage in harmful activities, potentially
leading to the disclosure of vital information or adversely affecting the organization’s systems (e.g., financial loss, system crashes, and national security challenges). Distinct from
other types of terror attacks, combating insider threats exhibits several unique challenges, including (1) rarity, (2) nonseparability, (3) label scarcity, (4) dynamics, and (5) heterogeneity, making themselves extremely difficult to identify and
mitigate. We target the challenging problem of combating insider threats in open-world environments by leveraging a variety of data sources (e.g., internal system logs, employee networks, human trafficking, and smuggling networks). To effectively combat these intricate threats, we introduce an interactive learning mechanism that is composed of three mutually beneficial learning modules: insider identification, insider monitoring, and data augmentation. Each module plays
a crucial role in enhancing our ability to detect and mitigate
insider threats, thereby contributing to a more secure and resilient organizational environment.

Figure 1: Research overview.
synthetic insiders to alleviate the label scarcity issue. The
proposed mechanism operates through a mutually beneficial synergy among these three modules, where M1 serves
as the de-novo step to characterize and identify potential
insider threats without or with limited annotated data; M2
aims to provide a proper lens (e.g., from the right/relevant
data sources, in the subspace spanned by the right/relevant
attributes, at the right/relevant time steps) to examine and
interpret the outputs from M1 and M3; M3 incorporates the
discoveries from M1 and M2 to mimic the underlying data
distribution and thus enable task-specific data augmentation.

Introduction
Our research goal is to build an interactive learning mechanism for insider threat detection on open-world data (Zhou
and He 2023; Zhou 2021; Wu et al. 2023), which can be
deployed to solve diverse tasks, ranging from insider characterization to insider tracking; from representing insiders
in a salient embedding space to interpreting the prediction
results; from mimicking the underlying distribution of insider threats to data augmentation. As shown in Figure 1,
the proposed framework consists of three key modules: (M1)
Insider Identification: characterize the descriptive and essential properties of insiders and detect groups of insiders
with common traits (e.g., traitors, masqueraders, and unintentional perpetrators). (M2) Insider Monitoring: track the
evolution of insider behaviors over time and provide a visual analytic system for analysis, annotation, and diagnosis. (M3) Data Augmentation: sanitize input data (e.g., completing missing data and cleaning noisy data) and generate

Acknowledgements
This work is supported by Cisco, Deloitte, Commonwealth
Cyber Initiative, 4-VA, and Virginia Tech. The views and
conclusions are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies of the funding
agencies or the government.

References
Wu, L.; Lei, B.; Xu, D.; and Zhou, D. 2023. Towards reliable
rare category analysis on graphs via individual calibration.
In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2629–2638.
Zhou, D. 2021. Harnessing rare category trinity for complex
data. Ph.D. thesis.
Zhou, D.; and He, J. 2023. Rare Category Analysis for Complex Data: A Review. ACM Computing Surveys, 56(5): 1–35.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22688

