The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Learnable Discrete-Prior Fusion Autoencoder with Contrastive
Learning for Tabular Data Synthesis
Rongchao Zhang1 , Yiwei Lou1 , Dexuan Xu2 , Yongzhi Cao1 , Hanpin Wang1 , Yu Huang1,3 *
1

Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies (Peking University), Ministry of Education, School of Computer
Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
School of Software & Microelectronics, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China
{rcz,xudexuan}@stu.pku.edu.cn, cyfqylyw@gmail.com, {caoyz,whpxhy,hy}@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

faces the risk of data leakage (Bietti et al. 2022). Meanwhile,
several approaches (Geng and Viswanath 2016; Wang and
Hegde 2019) add random noise to the original data for information exchange, causing the information from the original data to be corrupted. Differential privacy protects personal privacy by adding randomness. Nevertheless, owing
to the ever-present irreconcilable conflict between data leakage risk and availability, such approaches still have a loss
of raw information, which results in poorly trained AI models (Cheng et al. 2022). The adoption of synthetic data for
machine learning has gained significant traction in recent
years (Cortés et al. 2022). Researchers have been exploring a well-secured approach to generate synthetic data that
closely resembles real data, often referred to as “almost-butnot-quite replica data” (Ganev, Oprisanu, and De Cristofaro
2022). This approach ensures that the synthetic data captures
essential characteristics and patterns present in the original
dataset while also preserving data privacy and confidentiality. As a result of these efforts, many synthesis data methods have emerged, such as Bayesian network-based (Zhang
et al. 2017; Baak et al. 2022), GAN-based (Xu et al. 2019;
Esmaeilpour et al. 2022; Xiao, Wu, and Lin 2021), and VAEbased (Xu et al. 2019; Dilokthanakul et al. 2017).
However, tabular data commonly contains both discrete
and continuous modal features (Chen 2021), which is complicated to model, thus it poses a great challenge in designing the fusion scheme for model architecture. Existing approaches (Park et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2019; Esmaeilpour et al.
2022) regard discrete and continuous features as separate
entities, which have not taken the full capture of their correlations. Recently, transformer based on the self-attention
mechanism has shown superiority (Kim et al. 2021) on computer vision and natural language processing tasks. The merits of self-attention mechanism bring a new perspective to
the development of feature fusion (Sun et al. 2021). Nevertheless, up until the date of this work, the attempt of extending transformers to capture interactive shared information representations of tabular data remains scarce. Besides,
since different discrete features are dependent on each other,
how the interaction of different discrete modalities should
take place is the key question to answer.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework named
GTCoder for synthetic data generation, which plays the

The actual collection of tabular data for sharing involves confidentiality and privacy constraints, leaving the potential risks
of machine learning for interventional data analysis unsafely
averted. Synthetic data has emerged recently as a privacyprotecting solution to address this challenge. However, existing approaches regard discrete and continuous modal features as separate entities, thus falling short in properly capturing their inherent correlations. In this paper, we propose
a novel contrastive learning guided Gaussian Transformer
autoencoder, termed GTCoder, to synthesize photo-realistic
multimodal tabular data for scientific research. Our approach
introduces a transformer-based fusion module that seamlessly
integrates multimodal features, permitting for mining more
informative latent representations. The attention within the
fusion module directs the integrated output features to focus on critical components that facilitate the task of generating latent embeddings. Moreover, we formulate a contrastive
learning strategy to implicitly constrain the embeddings from
discrete features in the latent feature space by encouraging
the similar discrete feature distributions closer while pushing the dissimilar further away, in order to better enhance the
representation of the latent embedding. Experimental results
indicate that GTCoder is effective to generate photo-realistic
synthetic data, with interactive interpretation of latent embedding, and performs favorably against some baselines on most
real-world and simulated datasets.

Introduction
Machine learning has demonstrated immense potential
across various industries, and the demand for more sophisticated, cutting-edge AI technology is growing in numerous applications (Patel et al. 2023). Currently, machine
learning heavily relies on feature extraction algorithms to
extract valuable insights from large-scale datasets. However, the real-world datasets collected in most fields are often disappointing (Price and Cohen 2019), given that these
datasets frequently involve confidentiality and privacy concerns. Data isolation and privacy pose significant challenges
for AI applications dealing with large-scale data. To solve
such challenges, federated learning has provided a welldeveloped solution, but it is complicated to manage and still
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16803

