The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generalized Planning in PDDL Domains with Pretrained Large Language Models
Tom Silver1 , Soham Dan2 , Kavitha Srinivas2 ,
Joshua B. Tenenbaum1 , Leslie Kaelbling1 , Michael Katz2
1

MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
2
IBM Research

Abstract

Chowdhery et al. 2022), especially in code generation (Chen
et al. 2021; Nijkamp et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023a), this
work asks a simple question: can pretrained LLMs be
used for generalized planning? In particular, we investigate whether GPT-4 (OpenAI 2023) can be used to write a
domain-specific Python program that solves a set of tasks in
a planning domain. For each domain, we prompt GPT-4 with
the domain and a small number of training tasks encoded in
the Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL) (McDermott 2000). We then ask GPT-4 to write a program that consumes a (parsed) task description and outputs a plan. To prevent it from writing domain-general search-based code—a
natural inclination given the association between PDDL and
search in its pretraining data—we instruct GPT-4 to implement “a simple strategy that does not use search.”
Beyond this basic protocol, we consider two extensions.
First, inspired by Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al. 2022;
Jiang et al. 2023), we prompt GPT-4 to write a natural language summary of the PDDL domain. We then
ask it to describe a solution strategy before finally implementing the strategy in Python. Second, inspired by Inner Monologue (Huang et al. 2022b) and Corrective Reprompting (Raman et al. 2022), we automatically provide
feedback to GPT-4 in the case where it fails to solve training tasks. For example, if executing the Python code results
in an exception, we present GPT-4 with that exception and
ask it to fix the code. We repeat this automated debugging
process up to four times or until all training tasks are solved.
See Figure 1 for an overview of this pipeline.
In our experiments, we evaluate this approach on seven
PDDL domains: six from recent work in generalized planning (Yang et al. 2022), and a seventh novel domain. We
find that the approach is a strong baseline compared to existing generalized planning approaches. This is an important
finding that we expect to inform further research in generalized planning. We also present a suite of ablations and additional analyses to unpack the contributions of CoT summarization, automated debugging, names in the PDDL, and
GPT-4 vs. GPT-3.5. Our results suggest that automated debugging, PDDL names, and GPT-4 are very important, while
the impact of CoT is non-uniform. Finally, we provide qualitative analyses of common failure cases, suggesting directions for future work. We conclude that GPT-4 is a surprisingly powerful generalized planner when properly guided.

Recent work has considered whether large language models (LLMs) can function as planners: given a task, generate
a plan. We investigate whether LLMs can serve as generalized planners: given a domain and training tasks, generate a
program that efficiently produces plans for other tasks in the
domain. In particular, we consider PDDL domains and use
GPT-4 to synthesize Python programs. We also consider (1)
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) summarization, where the LLM is
prompted to summarize the domain and propose a strategy
in words before synthesizing the program; and (2) automated
debugging, where the program is validated with respect to the
training tasks, and in case of errors, the LLM is re-prompted
with four types of feedback. We evaluate this approach in
seven PDDL domains and compare it to four ablations and
four baselines. Overall, we find that GPT-4 is a surprisingly
powerful generalized planner. We also conclude that automated debugging is very important, that CoT summarization
has non-uniform impact, that GPT-4 is far superior to GPT3.5, and that just two training tasks are often sufficient for
strong generalization.

Introduction
While some classes of sequential decision-making tasks are
provably intractable (Chapman 1987), others can be solved
efficiently with a single domain-specific program. In the latter case, there is considerable interest in automatically synthesizing these programs given a small number of training
tasks. In AI planning, several approaches to this generalized
planning problem have been proposed, with programs expressed as lifted decision lists, as finite state machines, or
in domain-specific languages (Srivastava 2011; Bonet and
Geffner 2015; Jiménez, Segovia-Aguas, and Jonsson 2019;
Rivlin, Hazan, and Karpas 2020). In reinforcement learning,
goal-conditioned policies and value functions can be understood as particular kinds of programs learned with the same
generalized planning objective (Sutton et al. 2011; Schaul
et al. 2015). Despite these efforts, it remains challenging to
efficiently synthesize programs from few training tasks that
generalize to a wide variety of held-out tasks.
Given the tremendous recent progress in large language
models (LLMs) (Brown et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021;
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20256

