The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DPA-P2PNet: Deformable Proposal-Aware P2PNet for Accurate Point-Based Cell
Detection
1,2 *

Zhongyi Shui

2

2

1,2

1,2

1,2

, Sunyi Zheng * , Chenglu Zhu , Shichuan Zhang , Xiaoxuan Yu , Honglin Li ,
1,2
1,2
2†
Jingxiong Li , Pingyi Chen , Lin Yang
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
School of Engineering, Westlake University
{shuizhongyi, yanglin}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract

detection methodologies embrace a instance segmentation
paradigm. Although these approaches showcase impressive
capability in capturing intricate details of cell morphology,
their training requires a formidable investment of valuable
resources due to the laborious nature of cell mask annotation. As a matter of fact, the expensive annotation has long
plagued the advancement and application of mask-based cell
detection models.

Point-based cell detection (PCD), which pursues highperformance cell sensing under low-cost data annotation,
has garnered increased attention in computational pathology
community. Unlike mainstream PCD methods that rely on
intermediate density map representations, the Point-to-Point
network (P2PNet) has recently emerged as an end-to-end solution for PCD, demonstrating impressive cell detection accuracy and efficiency. Nevertheless, P2PNet is limited to decoding from a single-level feature map due to the scale-agnostic
property of point proposals, which is insufficient to leverage
multi-scale information. Moreover, the spatial distribution of
pre-set point proposals is biased from that of cells, leading
to inaccurate cell localization. To lift these limitations, we
present DPA-P2PNet in this work. The proposed method directly extracts multi-scale features for decoding according
to the coordinates of point proposals on hierarchical feature
maps. On this basis, we further devise deformable point proposals to mitigate the positional bias between proposals and
potential cells to promote cell localization. Inspired by practical pathological diagnosis that usually combines high-level
tissue structure and low-level cell morphology for accurate
cell classification, we propose a multi-field-of-view (mFoV)
variant of DPA-P2PNet to accommodate additional large FoV
images with tissue information as model input. Finally, we
execute the first self-supervised pre-training on immunohistochemistry histopathology image data and evaluate the suitability of four representative self-supervised methods on the
PCD task. Experimental results on three benchmarks and a
large-scale and real-world interval dataset demonstrate the
superiority of our proposed models over the state-of-the-art
counterparts. Codes and pre-trained weights are available at
https://github.com/windygoo/DPA-P2PNet.

To reduce the annotation cost while maintaining sufficient clinical support, point-based cell detection (PCD) has
emerged as a promising and rapidly evolving frontier in
computational pathology (Zhou et al. 2018; Huang et al.
2020; Abousamra et al. 2021; Cai et al. 2021; Zhang et al.
2022; Ryu et al. 2023). The goal of PCD is to predict a
2D point set that represents the coordinates and classes of
cells present in an input image. To accomplish this, prevalent
PCD methods connect to off-the-shelf segmentation models
via carefully crafted pseudo mask labels derived from point
annotations. Subsequently, a series of post-processing steps
comprising thresholding, local maxima detection and nonmaximum suppression are applied to the predicted density
maps to locate cells. However, the heuristic post-processing
not only demands tedious hyper-parameter tuning but also
results in low throughput. To address these issues, a recent
study (Shui et al. 2022) introduced Point-to-Point Network
(P2PNet) (Song et al. 2021) to establish an end-to-end PCD
system. Specifically, P2PNet adopts a detection paradigm,
where the cell coordinates and categories can be directly obtained by refining and classifying pre-defined point proposals on an input image. Moreover, P2PNet employs a oneto-one matching scheme to suppress duplicate predictions,
eliminating the need for error-prone and time-consuming
post-processing. Because of these improvements, P2PNet
can achieve superior accuracy and efficiency over the mainstream density map-based PCD methods.

Introduction
Identifying various types of cells such as tumor cells, lymphocytes, and fibroblasts in histopathology whole slide images (WSIs) is crucial for numerous downstream tasks
including tumor microenvironment analysis (Jiao et al.
2021), cancer diagnosis (Cheng et al. 2022) and prognosis (Howard, Kanetsky, and Egan 2019). Predominant cell

Despite its successful application, we contend that the
performance and flexibility of P2PNet can be limited from
the following two aspects. (i) Unlike anchor boxes that naturally account for object scales, point proposals are scaleagnostic. As a result, P2PNet can only decode from a singlelevel feature map, which is inadequate to represent multiscale information. Considering the substantial variability in
cell size and morphology, as well as the heterogeneity in in-

*

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4864

