The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hybrid-SORT: Weak Cues Matter for Online Multi-Object Tracking
Mingzhan Yang1,2 * , Guangxin Han1 * , Bin Yan1 , Wenhua Zhang1 ,
Jinqing Qi1 , Huchuan Lu1 , Dong Wang1†
1
Dalian University of Technology
Shenzhen Tvt Digital Technology Co., Ltd
{18742525689, hanguangxindlut, yan bin, 1062894314zwh}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {jinqing, lhchuan, wdice}@dlut.edu.cn
2

Abstract

in the current frame, the Intersection over Union (IoU) between detections and estimated tracklet locations becomes
ambiguous, and the appearance features of both objects are
dominated by the foreground ones (red dash arrow in the
Strong Cues part of Figure 1).
In the Weak Cues part of Figure 1, we demonstrate that
weak cues, such as confidence state, height state, and velocity direction, can effectively alleviate the ambiguous associations where strong cues become unreliable. However,
to the best of our knowledge, weak cues have been ignored
in most methods except for very few (e.g., OC-SORT (Cao
et al. 2023), MT-IOT (Yan et al. 2022)), as they only possess
reliable discrimination among certain objects. As shown in
Figure 1, the confidence state is only reliable for distinguishing ID 2 from other IDs.
In this paper, we select the confidence state and height
state as potential types of weak cues, in addition to the velocity direction used in OC-SORT (Cao et al. 2023). The confidence state can explicitly indicate the occluding/occluded
(i.e., foreground/background) relations among clustered objects, providing a critical clue that strong cues (i.e., spatial
and appearance information) lack. Height state is a stable
property of objects which is usually robust to diverse object
poses and contains some degree of depth information (i.e.,
reflects the distance from the camera to the objects).
To maintain the Simple, Online and Real-Time (SORT)
characteristics, we propose simple yet effective strategies
to exploit the aforementioned weak cues, namely Tracklet
Confidence Modeling (TCM) and Height Modulated IoU
(HMIoU). For TCM, we use Kalman Filter and Linear Prediction to estimate the confidence state of tracklets, which
is then used as a metric to associate with detections. For
HMIoU, the height state is also modeled by Kalman Filter.
The height cost matrix for the association is first defined as
the IoU along the height axis for the estimated tracklet box
and detection box, then fused with the standard IoU matrix
based on the area metric.
To evaluate the generalization ability of our design, we apply the proposed designs to 5 different representative trackers, including SORT (Bewley et al. 2016), DeepSORT (Wojke, Bewley, and Paulus 2017), MOTDT (Chen et al. 2018),
ByteTrack (Zhang et al. 2022), and OC-SORT (Cao et al.
2023). Both of our designs for confidence state and height
state consistently achieve significant improvements, demon-

Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) aims to detect and associate all
desired objects across frames. Most methods accomplish the
task by explicitly or implicitly leveraging strong cues (i.e.,
spatial and appearance information), which exhibit powerful instance-level discrimination. However, when object occlusion and clustering occur, spatial and appearance information will become ambiguous simultaneously due to the
high overlap among objects. In this paper, we demonstrate
this long-standing challenge in MOT can be efficiently and
effectively resolved by incorporating weak cues to compensate for strong cues. Along with velocity direction, we introduce the confidence and height state as potential weak
cues. With superior performance, our method still maintains Simple, Online and Real-Time (SORT) characteristics. Also, our method shows strong generalization for diverse trackers and scenarios in a plug-and-play and trainingfree manner. Significant and consistent improvements are
observed when applying our method to 5 different representative trackers. Further, with both strong and weak cues,
our method Hybrid-SORT achieves superior performance on
diverse benchmarks, including MOT17, MOT20, and especially DanceTrack where interaction and severe occlusion frequently happen with complex motions. The code and models
are available at https://github.com/ymzis69/HybridSORT.

Introduction
Recently, tracking-by-detection (Bewley et al. 2016; Wojke,
Bewley, and Paulus 2017; Zhang et al. 2021, 2022; Du et al.
2023; Ren et al. 2023; Cao et al. 2023) has become the most
popular paradigm in Multi-Object-Tracking (MOT), which
divides the problem into two sub-tasks. The first task is to
detect objects in each frame. The second task is to associate
them in different frames. The association task is primarily solved by explicitly or implicitly utilizing strong cues,
including spatial and appearance information. This design
is reasonable because these strong cues provide powerful
instance-level discrimination. However, the commonly used
strong cues suffer from degradation under challenging situations such as occlusion and clustering (ID 1 and 2 in Figure 1). Specifically, when two objects are highly overlapped
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6504

