The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Parameterization of (Partial) Maximum Satisfiability above Matching in a
Variable-Clause Graph
Vasily Alferov1 , Ivan Bliznets2 , Kirill Brilliantov3
1

Independent Researcher
University of Groningen
3
St. Petersburg Department of Steklov Mathematical Institute of the RAS
vasily.v.alferov@gmail.com, iabliznets@gmail.com/i.bliznets@rug.nl, ki.br178@gmail.com
2

Abstract

a new algorithm, introducing a novel approach with a runtime of O∗ (1.0927L )1 , where L is the total number of literals within the input formula. Building upon this progress,
at AAAI-2023 Brilliantov et al. published a subsequent enhancement that achieved an even more impressive upper
bound of O∗ (1.0911L ) (Brilliantov, Alferov, and Bliznets
2023). It is worth highlighting that prior to these results,
the previous best-known upper bound dated back over two
decades ago (Bansal and Raman 1999), yielding an upper
bound of O∗ (1.1057L ).
This trend of improvements also extends to another crucial measure of the input formulas: the total number of
clauses. At AAAI-2019, Xu et al. introduced an algorithm
with a time complexity of O∗ (1.2989m ) (Xu et al. 2019),
presenting a substantial leap in performance. Following this
result, at IJCAI-2022, Xiao further refined the landscape by
unveiling an algorithm with an improved time complexity of
O∗ (1.2886m ) (Xiao 2022). These advancements superseded
the previously established best upper bound, which had remained unchallenged since 2004 (Chen and Kanj 2004).
The number of clauses that one is asked to satisfy in a
given CNF formula is also a natural and well-studied measure. For this measure, the best-known algorithm was developed in (Chen, Xu, and Wang 2015), and the running time
′
of the algorithm is O∗ (1.325k ), where k ′ is the number of
clauses that we need to satisfy (we note that generally this
measure is denoted by k, in order to avoid ambiguity we denote this measure by k ′ ).
In this paper, we study the M AX SAT problem from parameterized point of view. Specifically, we study M AX SAT
parameterized above lower bounds. The M AX SAT has several natural lower bounds computable in polynomial time. It
is well known that there is a truth assignment that satisfies
at least half of all clauses. If we consider an assignment π1
that sets all variables to True, and assignment π2 that sets
all variables to False then at least one of them satisfies at
least half of all clauses. Let us denote by ℓ0 the number of
all clauses satisfied by the assignment π1 . It is obvious, that
optimal truth assignment satisfies at least ℓ0 clauses. In order to compute the third lower bound we do the following.
Let us construct a graph in which each vertex corresponds

In the paper, we study the Maximum Satisfiability and
the Partial Maximum Satisfiability problems. Using Gallai–Edmonds decomposition, we significantly improve the
upper bound for the Maximum Satisfiability problem parameterized above maximum matching in the variable-clause
graph. Our algorithm operates with a runtime of O∗ (2.83k ), a
substantial improvement compared to the previous approach
requiring O∗ (4k ), where k denotes the relevant parameter.
Moreover, this result immediately implies O∗ (1.14977m )
and O∗ (1.27895m ) time algorithms for the (n, 3)-MaxSAT
and (n, 4)-MaxSAT where m is the overall number of
clauses. These upper bounds improve prior-known upper
bounds equal to O∗ (1.1554m ) and O∗ (1.2872m ). We also
adapt the algorithm so that it can handle instances of Partial
Maximum Satisfiability without losing performance in some
cases. Note that this is somewhat surprising, as the existence
of even one hard clause can significantly increase the hardness of a problem.

Introduction
The Maximum Satisfiability (M AX SAT) problem holds significant importance in various fields of artificial intelligence,
computer science, mathematics, and engineering due to its
theoretical relevance, algorithmic challenges, and practical
applications. M AX SAT is a natural extension of the wellstudied Boolean Satisfiability (SAT) problem. Investigating
M AX SAT contributes to a deeper understanding of the complexity landscape of optimization and decision problems.
The study of the Satisfiability and Maximum Satisfiability
problems provides insights into the boundaries of what algorithms can achieve. The Satisfiability problem was one of
the first problems for which NP-completeness was shown.
For a detailed survey about SAT and M AX SAT problems,
we refer to (Biere, Heule, and van Maaren 2021). A diverse
array of strategies has been employed to address the inherent complexity of the M AX SAT problem. These encompass
a spectrum of approaches, including randomized, approximation, exact, and parameterized algorithms.
After a prolonged period of silence, new results from an
exact exponential point of view start to appear for M AX SAT
again. At AAAI-21 (Alferov and Bliznets 2021) presented

1 ∗
O (·) supresses polynomial factors similarly as O(·) supresses constant factors

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7918

