The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Recognizing Ultra-High-Speed Moving Objects with Bio-Inspired Spike Camera
Junwei Zhao1,2 , Shiliang Zhang1 † , Zhaofei Yu1,2 † , Tiejun Huang1,2
1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
{jwz, slzhang.jdl, yuzf12, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

sets a limit on the maximum sampling frequency of spike
signals (El-Desouki et al. 2009). If the speed of a moving object exceeds a theoretical upper threshold (e.g., 500
km/h), the spike signals will become distorted, resulting in
information loss during the imaging process. Consequently,
the brightness intensity maps generated from spike streams
will present blur, as depicted in Fig. 1 (c). We designate this
phenomenon as spiking motion blur. In spiking vision community, research on spiking motion blur is still in its early
stage. This work is hence motivated to explore the capability of spike cameras in recording ultra-high-speed motions
that exceed their physical limit.
Moreover, the lack of datasets has hindered the research
on ultra-high-speed moving object recognition. Existing
spiking datasets, as shown in Table 1, mainly consist of synthetic data generated from video frames rather than real data.
The speeds of moving objects in synthetic data are constrained by video frame rates, which are much lower than
the sampling frequency of spike cameras. Additionally, the
majority of these datasets are designed for pixel-level vision
tasks (Zheng et al. 2023b) such as depth estimation, optical
flow estimation, and reconstruction, making them unsuitable
for instance-level tasks. Although Zhao et al. (2023a) and
Zhao et al. (2023b) introduced datasets for neuromorphic
recognition, the speeds of moving objects in these datasets
are lower than ultra-high speed. Therefore, a dataset featuring ultra-high-speed motions is required.
We theoretically analyze the causes of motion blur in the
spike camera imaging process. First, we establish the relationship between moving objects and spike signal generation. Then, we analyze the distortion conditions of spike signal sampling based on the Shannon sampling theorem and
find that spiking motion blur is caused by temporal undersampling and spatial misalignment. Based on findings of
the analysis, we propose a robust representation learning
method that utilizes the temporal-spatial contexts of spike
streams to address the issues of spiking motion blur. We
employ multi-span dilated convolution in the temporal domain to extract temporal features and perform re-weighting
aggregation on the extracted temporal features from different spans. In the spatial domain, we utilize cascaded residual deformable convolution to capture the correlation among
neighbouring pixels. Finally, we integrate the temporal and
spatial features through cross-attention fusion.

Bio-inspired spike camera mimics the sampling principle of
primate fovea. It presents high temporal resolution and dynamic range, showing great promise in fast-moving object
recognition. However, the physical limit of CMOS technology in spike cameras still hinders their capability of recognizing ultra-high-speed moving objects, e.g., extremely fast motions cause blur during the imaging process of spike cameras.
This paper presents the first theoretical analysis for the causes
of spiking motion blur and proposes a robust representation that addresses this issue through temporal-spatial context
learning. The proposed method leverages multi-span feature
aggregation to capture temporal cues and employs residual
deformable convolution to model spatial correlation among
neighbouring pixels. Additionally, this paper contributes an
original real-captured spiking recognition dataset consisting
of 12,000 ultra-high-speed (equivalent speed > 500 km/h)
moving objects. Experimental results show that the proposed
method achieves 73.2% accuracy in recognizing 10 classes
of ultra-high-speed moving objects, outperforming existing
spike-based recognition methods. Resources will be available
at https://github.com/Evin-X/UHSR.

Introduction
Conventional frame cameras suffer from visual cue loss and
severe motion blur in high-speed scenarios due to their limited frame rate (e.g., 30 fps) and single-exposure imaging
principle, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). In contrast, bio-inspired
spike cameras simulate the sensing principle of retinal photosensitive cells, where each pixel perceives light independently and generates spikes asynchronously (Zheng et al.
2023c). This unique imaging principle allows spike cameras to achieve a sampling frequency that is 1000× higher
than human vision (Huang et al. 2022), enhancing their capability in capturing high-speed moving objects, as shown
in Fig. 1 (b). Previous efforts (e.g., Zhao et al. (2021b), Hu
et al. (2022), Zhang et al. (2022a), Zhao et al. (2022)) have
shown promising advantages of spike cameras in recording
and recognizing high-speed objects over frame cameras.
Current spike cameras are implemented using CMOS
technology. The photo-electric conversion time of each pixel
† Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7478

