The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Root Cause Analysis in Microservice Using Neural Granger Causal Discovery
Cheng-Ming Lin, Ching Chang, Wei-Yao Wang, Kuang-Da Wang, Wen-Chih Peng
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
zmlin1998.cs10@nycu.edu.tw, blacksnail789521@gmail.com, sf1638.cs05@nctu.edu.tw, gdwang.cs10@nycu.edu.tw,
wcpeng@cs.nycu.edu.tw

Abstract
In recent years, microservices have gained widespread adoption in IT operations due to their scalability, maintenance, and
flexibility. However, it becomes challenging for site reliability
engineers (SREs) to pinpoint the root cause due to the complex relationships in microservices when facing system malfunctions. Previous research employed structured learning
methods (e.g., PC-algorithm) to establish causal relationships
and derive root causes from causal graphs. Nevertheless, they
ignored the temporal order of time series data and failed to
leverage the rich information inherent in the temporal relationships. For instance, in cases where there is a sudden spike
in CPU utilization, it can lead to an increase in latency for
other microservices. However, in this scenario, the anomaly
in CPU utilization occurs before the latency increase, rather
than simultaneously. As a result, the PC-algorithm fails to
capture such characteristics. To address these challenges, we
propose RUN, a novel approach for root cause analysis using
neural Granger causal discovery with contrastive learning.
RUN enhances the backbone encoder by integrating contextual information from time series, and leverages a time series
forecasting model to conduct neural Granger causal discovery. In addition, RUN incorporates Pagerank with a personalization vector to efficiently recommend the top-k root causes.
Extensive experiments conducted on the synthetic and realworld microservice-based datasets demonstrate that RUN noticeably outperforms the state-of-the-art root cause analysis
methods. Moreover, we provide an analysis scenario for the
sock-shop case to showcase the practicality and efficacy of
RUN in microservice-based applications. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/zmlin1998/RUN.

1

Figure 1: An example of causal structure discovery-based
techniques for RCA.
tions can effectively pinpoint the underlying causes when a
system malfunction occurs.
In recent years, as the companies experience continued
growth, the system operations have scaled up and grown
increasingly complex. Therefore, these organizations have
opted to migrate from the so-called monolithic architecture
to microservice architecture (Liu et al. 2021). Microservice
architecture offers benefits such as better scalability, easier
maintenance, and greater flexibility. Each service can be independently scaled based on demand, enabling efficient resource utilization. Developers can focus on individual services, making it simpler to debug, test, and deploy changes.
Despite the numerous benefits of microservices, when an
anomaly arises in one service, the interdependencies among
services can create a domino effect, resulting in subsequent
issues and ultimately leading to system failure (Zhang et al.
2022). In such scenarios, in-depth analysis becomes imperative to identify the culprit of the anomaly and mitigate the
problem effectively.
However, in microservice monitoring systems, only the
operational values of the system are recorded, without documenting the relationships between them. Hence, researchers
have recently employed causal structure discovery-based
techniques for Root Cause Analysis (RCA) in cloud applications (Wang et al. 2023), aiming to identify the underlying
causes of anomalies. Figure 1 illustrates a flow of RCA using the causal structure discovery-based approach. When the
anomaly detection alarm is triggered by an anomalous Key
Performance Indicator (KPI), engineers initially designate

Introduction

Root cause analysis plays a crucial role in numerous domains such as cloud system operations (Soldani, Forti, and
Brogi 2022), manufacturing processes (Oliveira, Miguéis,
and de Moura Borges 2023), or telecommunications networks (Chen et al. 2022). For instance, during the manufacturing process of wafers, if the thickness of a wafer is
found to deviate from the standard, root cause analysis can
be employed to identify the specific manufacturing step that
caused the abnormal thickness. By applying root cause analysis to sensor data with complex relationships, these situaCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

206

