The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Resisting Backdoor Attacks in Federated Learning via Bidirectional Elections
and Individual Perspective
Zhen Qin1 , Feiyi Chen1 , Chen Zhi2 , Xueqiang Yan3 , Shuiguang Deng1 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo, China
3
Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China
{zhenqin, chenfeiyi, zjuzhichen}@zju.edu.cn, yanxueqiang1@huawei.com, dengsg@zju.edu.cn
Abstract
Existing approaches defend against backdoor attacks in federated learning (FL) mainly through a) mitigating the impact of
infected models, or b) excluding infected models. The former
negatively impacts model accuracy, while the latter usually relies on globally clear boundaries between benign and infected
model updates. However, in reality, model updates can easily
become mixed and scattered throughout due to the diverse
distributions of local data. This work focuses on excluding
infected models in FL. Unlike previous perspectives from a
global view, we propose Snowball, a novel anti-backdoor FL
framework through bidirectional elections from an individual
perspective inspired by one principle deduced by us and two
principles in FL and deep learning. It is characterized by a)
bottom-up election, where each candidate model update votes
to several peer ones such that a few model updates are elected
as selectees for aggregation; and b) top-down election, where
selectees progressively enlarge themselves through picking
up from the candidates. We compare Snowball with state-ofthe-art defenses to backdoor attacks in FL on five real-world
datasets, demonstrating its superior resistance to backdoor
attacks and slight impact on the accuracy of the global model.

Figure 1: 2D-visualized 50 model updates in one round of
FL (practical non-IID MNIST with α=0.5, PDR=0.3).

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017) enables multiple devices to jointly train machine learning models without
sharing their raw data. Due to the unreachability to distributed
data, it is vulnerable to attacks from malicious clients (Wang
et al. 2020), especially backdoor attacks that neither significantly alter the statistical characteristics of models as
Gaussian-noise attacks (Blanchard et al. 2017) nor cause a
distinct modification to the training data as label-flipping
attacks (Liu et al. 2021), and thus, are more covert against
many existing defenses (Zeng et al. 2022).
Existing defenses to backdoor attacks in FL are mainly
based on a) mitigating the impact of infected models (Bagdasaryan et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2019; Xie et al. 2021; Nguyen
et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023) or b) excluding infected models based on their deviations (Blanchard et al. 2017; Ozdayi,
Kantarcioglu, and Gel 2021; Fung, Yoon, and Beschastnikh
2018; Rieger et al. 2022; Li et al. 2020a; Shejwalkar and
* Shuiguang Deng is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14677

Houmansadr 2021; Zhang et al. 2022; Shi et al. 2022; Nguyen
et al. 2022). The former may negatively impact global model
accuracy (Yu et al. 2021). The latter assumes globally clear
boundaries between benign and infected model updates (Zeng
et al. 2022). However, backdoor attacks typically manipulate a limited subset of parameters, resulting in the similarity
between benign and infected model updates. Besides, the
nature of Non-Independent and Identically Distributed (nonIID) data in FL increases diversity among model updates.
Actually, benign and infected model updates are easy to
be mixed with complicatedly non-IID data (practical non-IID
(Hsu, Qi, and Brown 2019; Huang et al. 2021) and feature
distribution skew (Tan et al. 2022)), or with not very high
poison data ratio (PDR). We experimentally demonstrate it
in Figure 1, where benign and infected updates are mixedly
scattered. In such cases, anomaly detections based on linear
similarity may not perform satisfactorily. Besides, when facing a relatively high malicious client ratio (MCR), infected
model updates are easier to be mistreated as benign ones,
however, many existing defenses are only evaluated with
MCR ≤ 10% (Xie et al. 2021; Ozdayi, Kantarcioglu, and
Gel 2021; Zeng et al. 2022; Lu et al. 2022). Although model
deviations may be better captured by nonlinear neural networks, the patterns of benign models in FL are usually hard
to acquire due to unpredictable distributions and trajectory
shifts of model updates. Li et al. (2020a) use the test data to
generate model weights for training the detection model, but
the test data with a similar distribution to all clients may be
usually unavailable. Besides, model weights usually follow
extremely complex distributions, making them hard to learn.
To better leverage powerful neural networks to detect mali-

