The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Machine Learning-Powered Combinatorial Clock Auction
Ermis Nikiforos Soumalias1,3† , Jakob Weissteiner1,3† , Jakob Heiss2,3 , Sven Seuken1,3
1

University of Zurich
2
ETH Zurich
3
ETH AI Center
ermis@ifi.uzh.ch, weissteiner@ifi.uzh.ch, jakob.heiss@math.ethz.ch, seuken@ifi.uzh.ch

Abstract

2013) to TV ad slots (Goetzendorff et al. 2015) and airport
landing/take-off slots (Rassenti, Smith, and Bulfin 1982).
One of the key challenges in CAs is that the bundle space
grows exponentially in the number of items, making it infeasible for bidders to report their full value function in all
but the smallest domains. Moreover, Nisan and Segal (2006)
showed that for general value functions, CAs require an exponential number of bids in order to achieve full efficiency
in the worst case. Thus, practical CA designs cannot provide efficiency guarantees in real world settings with more
than a modest number of items. Instead, the focus has shifted
towards iterative combinatorial auctions (ICAs), where bidders interact with the auctioneer over a series of rounds, providing a limited amount of information, and the aim of the
auctioneer is to find a highly efficient allocation.
The most established mechanism following this interaction paradigm is the combinatorial clock auction (CCA)
(Ausubel, Cramton, and Milgrom 2006). The CCA has
been used extensively for spectrum allocation, generating
over $20 Billion in revenue between 2012 and 2014 alone
(Ausubel and Baranov 2017). Speed of convergence is a critical consideration for any ICA since each round can entail
costly computations and business modelling for the bidders
(Kwasnica et al. 2005; Milgrom and Segal 2017; Bichler,
Hao, and Adomavicius 2017). Large spectrum auctions following the CCA format can take more than 100 bidding
rounds. In order to decrease the number of rounds, many
CAs in practice use aggressive price update rules (e.g., increasing prices by up to 10% each round), which can harm
efficiency (Ausubel and Baranov 2017). Thus, it remains a
challenging problem to design a practical ICA that elicits information via demand queries, is efficient, and converges in
a small number of rounds. Specifically, given the value of resources allocated in such real-world ICAs, increasing their
efficiency by even one percentage point already translates
into monetary gains of hundreds of millions of dollars.

We study the design of iterative combinatorial auctions
(ICAs). The main challenge in this domain is that the bundle space grows exponentially in the number of items. To
address this, several papers have recently proposed machine
learning (ML)-based preference elicitation algorithms that
aim to elicit only the most important information from bidders. However, from a practical point of view, the main shortcoming of this prior work is that those designs elicit bidders’ preferences via value queries (i.e., “What is your value
for the bundle {A, B}?”). In most real-world ICA domains,
value queries are considered impractical, since they impose
an unrealistically high cognitive burden on bidders, which is
why they are not used in practice. In this paper, we address
this shortcoming by designing an ML-powered combinatorial
clock auction that elicits information from the bidders only
via demand queries (i.e., “At prices p, what is your most preferred bundle of items?”). We make two key technical contributions: First, we present a novel method for training an
ML model on demand queries. Second, based on those trained
ML models, we introduce an efficient method for determining the demand query with the highest clearing potential, for
which we also provide a theoretical foundation. We experimentally evaluate our ML-based demand query mechanism
in several spectrum auction domains and compare it against
the most established real-world ICA: the combinatorial clock
auction (CCA). Our mechanism significantly outperforms the
CCA in terms of efficiency in all domains, it achieves higher
efficiency in a significantly reduced number of rounds, and,
using linear prices, it exhibits vastly higher clearing potential.
Thus, with this paper we bridge the gap between research and
practice and propose the first practical ML-powered ICA.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial auctions (CAs) are used to allocate multiple items among several bidders who may view those items
as complements or substitutes. In a CA, bidders are allowed to submit bids over bundles of items. CAs have enjoyed widespread adoption in practice, with their applications ranging from allocating spectrum licences (Cramton

1.1

ML-Powered Preference Elicitation

To address this challenge, researchers have proposed various ways of using machine learning (ML) to improve the
efficiency of CAs. The seminal works by Blum et al. (2004)
and Lahaie and Parkes (2004) were the first to frame preference elicitation in CAs as a learning problem. In the
same strand of research, Brero, Lubin, and Seuken (2018,

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* The full paper including appendix is available on arXiv via:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.10226.
†
These authors contributed equally.

9891

