The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hot or Cold? Adaptive Temperature Sampling for Code Generation with Large
Language Models
Yuqi Zhu1 , Jia Li2 , Ge Li* 2 , YunFei Zhao2 , Jia Li2 , Zhi Jin2 , Hong Mei2,3
2

1
Academy of Military Sciences, China
Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies (Peking University), Ministry of Education; School of Computer
Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Advanced Institute of Big Data, Beijing, China
zhuyuqi1997@126.com, lijia@stu.pku.edu.cn, {lige, zhaoyunfei, lijiaa, zhijin, meih}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown
impressive abilities in code generation. However, existing
LLMs’ decoding strategies are designed for Natural Language (NL) generation, overlooking the differences between
NL and programming languages (PL). Due to this oversight, a
better decoding strategy for code generation remains an open
question. In this paper, we conduct the first systematic study
to explore a decoding strategy specialized in code generation. With an analysis of loss distributions of code tokens,
we find that code tokens can be divided into two categories:
challenging tokens that are difficult to predict and confident
tokens that can be easily inferred. Among them, the challenging tokens mainly appear at the beginning of a code block.
Inspired by the above findings, we propose a simple yet effective method: Adaptive Temperature (AdapT) sampling, which
dynamically adjusts the temperature coefficient when decoding different tokens. We apply a larger temperature when
sampling for challenging tokens, allowing LLMs to explore
diverse choices. We employ a smaller temperature for confident tokens avoiding the influence of tail randomness noises.
We apply AdapT sampling to LLMs with different sizes and
conduct evaluations on two popular datasets. Results show
that AdapT sampling significantly outperforms state-of-theart decoding strategy.

Figure 1: An illustration of a code snippet and its corresponding loss distribution. The challenging tokens are highlighted in yellow.

Nonetheless, the results generated by these methods lack diversity and are prone to generating empty or repetitive results (Zhang et al. 2021). The second category is samplingbased methods, which randomly sample the next token
based on the probability distribution. The state-of-the-art
(SOTA) approach (Chen et al. 2021) uses temperature sampling that reshapes the probability distribution by introducing a temperature coefficient to control the level of sampling
randomness.
Despite the promising results, temperature sampling has
limitations in code generation. Since it is initially used to
generate Natural Language (NL) with a flexible syntax, its
effectiveness decreases when transitioning to code generation, which is a high-accuracy demanding task. For instance,
CodeGeeX (Zheng et al. 2023), when utilizing temperature sampling, attains 36.0% Pass@15 on the HumanEval
dataset. Thus, it is necessary to explore more advanced decoding strategies to improve the accuracy of LLMs in code
generation.
In this paper, we present the first systematic study to explore a decoding strategy for code generation with LLM.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
(1) By analyzing the loss distribution of code tokens,

Introduction
Code generation aims to automatically generate a program that satisfies a natural language requirement (Li et al.
2023d,a,b). In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs)
have attracted great attention for their potential for automating coding (Li et al. 2023c,e). Noteworthy models like AlphaCode (Li et al. 2022) and Codex (Chen et al. 2021) have
demonstrated their impressive ability to solve unforeseen
programming challenges.
LLMs rely on a decoding strategy to generate code. Existing LLM’s decoding strategies for code generation mainly
fall into two categories. The first category is search-based
methods, which aim to maximize the probability of the
next generated token, including greedy search (Black and
E 2012) and beam search (Freitag and Al-Onaizan 2017).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

437

