The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Graph Reasoning Transformers for Knowledge-Aware Question Answering
Ruilin Zhao1,3 , Feng Zhao1 * , Liang Hu2 , Guandong Xu3
1

Natural Language Processing and Knowledge Graph Lab, School of Computer Science and Technology,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
3
Data Science and Machine Intelligence Lab, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia
{ruilinzhao,zhaof}@hust.edu.cn, lianghu@tongji.edu.cn, guandong.xu@uts.edu.au
Abstract

(a) QA Context Example
If it is not used for hair, a round brush is used for what?
A. hair brush B. bathroom C. art supplies D. shower

Augmenting Language Models (LMs) with structured knowledge graphs (KGs) aims to leverage structured world
knowledge to enhance the capability of LMs to complete
knowledge-intensive tasks. However, existing methods are
unable to effectively utilize the structured knowledge in a KG
due to their inability to capture the rich relational semantics
of knowledge triplets. Moreover, the modality gap between
natural language text and KGs has become a challenging obstacle when aligning and fusing cross-modal information. To
address these challenges, we propose a novel knowledgeaugmented question answering (QA) model, namely, Graph
Reasoning Transformers (GRT). Different from conventional
node-level methods, the GRT serves knowledge triplets as
atomic knowledge and utilize a triplet-level graph encoder to
capture triplet-level graph features. Furthermore, to alleviate
the negative effect of the modality gap on joint reasoning, we
propose a representation alignment pretraining to align the
cross-modal representations and introduce a cross-modal information fusion module with attention bias to enable crossmodal information fusion. Extensive experiments conducted
on three knowledge-intensive QA benchmarks show that the
GRT outperforms the state-of-the-art KG-augmented QA systems, demonstrating the effectiveness and adaptation of our
proposed model.

(b) Retrieved KG
(c) Triplet-level Reasoning
(art supply, used for, painting)
KG for art supplies
hair
brush art supply (round brush, used for painting)
NOT(hair brush, used for, hair)
……

…

round brush painting

……

art supply

Figure 1: (a) An example of QA context from a knowledgeaware QA dataset. (b) We follow the procedure of Yasunaga
et al. (2021) to retrieve the relevant KG. (c) Knowledgeaware QA places emphasis on aggregating knowledge
triplets that support the answer.

(Wei et al. 2022). Moreover, LLM hallucination greatly affects their performance in knowledge-intensive QA tasks
that require high accuracy and interpretability, as they usually generate answers that sound reasonable but lack interpretability (Ji et al. 2023). In this context, the augmentation of LMs with knowledge graphs (KGs) has gained
widespread attention.
Since vanilla LMs are “blind” to other modalities in natural language text, previous works (Yasunaga et al. 2021;
Zhang et al. 2022) tended to use graph neural networks
(GNNs) to encode KGs. These methods use the GNN message passing method to aggregate information from the
neighbours of each node and combine node and language
features for answer prediction. While GNNs have been
widely used to handle graph structures in downstream tasks
such as node classification, node clustering, and link prediction, recent works have shown that GNNs are unable to fully
utilize external knowledge graphs in knowledge-aware QA
tasks. Jiang et al. (2022) surprisingly found that even when
reducing the dimensionality of the GNN node embeddings
from 1024 to 1, the performance of KG-augmented QA
systems was still unchanged. Wang et al. (2022) leveraged

Introduction
Pretrained language models (LMs) have been widely applied
to various downstream natural language processing (NLP)
tasks due to their impressive natural language understanding
and generation performance (Radford et al. 2018a,b). However, the reliance on parametric knowledge leads LMs to
generate answers with factual errors when addressing questions that demand current or domain-specific knowledge, as
LMs are based on occasionally obsolete or inaccurate parametric knowledge for reasoning. This leads to the fact that
large LMs (LLMs) (Chowdhery et al. 2022; Brown et al.
2020) with few-shot prompting still lag behind small finetuned state-of-the-art models on knowledge-aware question
answering (QA) tasks such as CommonsenseQA and OpenbookQA, even when using elaborate prompting strategies
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19652

