The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Responsible Bandit Learning via Privacy-Protected Mean-Volatility Utility
Shanshan Zhao1 , Wenhai Cui1 , Bei Jiang2 , Linglong Kong2 , Xiaodong Yan1, 3 *
1

Mathematics Discipline, Shandong University
Mathematics Discipline, University of Alberta
3
Shandong National Center for Applied Mathematics
{sszhao, cuiwenhai}@mail.sdu.edu.cn, {bei1, lkong}@ualberta.ca, yanxiaodong@sdu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

by the centroid curator, a local differential privacy algorithm
for the multi-armed bandit field was proposed to provide
comprehensive privacy protection for users (Ren et al. 2020;
Han et al. 2021).
By incorporating differential privacy into the study of
K-armed bandit algorithms, many trustworthy bandit algorithms have been developed (Basu, Dimitrakakis, and
Tossou 2019). While these algorithms demonstrate fast conK
vergence rates O( ϵ√
), they also come with significant limn
itations: (i) Using the statistics or data obtained from traditional bandit processes for statistical inference is challenging. Taking the example of the adaptive testing of the twoarmed bandit algorithm under the privacy mechanism, we
assume that the objective is the average of cumulative rewards obtained through the strategy θϵ during the n rounds
of arm-pulling process, denoted as Qθnϵ . The distribution of
Qθnϵ at the n-th time step is determined by the strategy and
the rewards obtained in the first n − 1 rounds within the
privacy mechanism. As a result, the accurate distribution of
Qθnϵ is complex and difficult to explicitly express. Moreover,
employing the standard test on data derived from the bandit
algorithm would result in overlooking crucial information
like strategy and sample characteristics. Particularly when
dealing with limited sample sizes (n), utilizing normal tests
on data safeguarded by privacy measures can yield unreliable conclusions and an increased likelihood of Type I errors (Williams et al. 2021). It is challenging to draw statistically significant conclusions from the results (Villar, Bowden, and Wason 2015; Yao et al. 2021). (ii) The accountability of these privacy-preserving bandit algorithms to agents
(i.e., the reliability of decision-making at each moment) is
unknown. Due to the traditional two-armed bandit being designed from the perspective of maximizing the amount of information within the system (mean), it does not take into account the uncertainty brought by external information. The
agent cannot perceive the risks associated with fluctuations
outside the system. Strategies formulated under this objective often lead the model into local optima due to neglecting uncertainty (volatility). For instance, when the average
reward of the left arm is only slightly higher than that of
the right arm, but the volatility of the left arm’s rewards is
significantly greater than that of the right arm. In this situation, the agent tends to choose the right arm to minimize
extreme losses and ensure that the obtained rewards remain

For ensuring the safety of users by protecting the privacy,
the traditional privacy-preserving bandit algorithm aiming to
maximize the mean reward has been widely studied in scenarios such as online ride-hailing, advertising recommendations, and personalized healthcare. However, classical bandit
learning is irresponsible in such practical applications as they
fail to account for risks in online decision-making and ignore
external system information. This paper firstly proposes privacy protected mean-volatility utility as the objective of bandit learning and proves its responsibility, because it aims at
achieving the maximum probability of utility by considering the risk. Theoretically, our proposed responsible bandit
learning is expected to achieve the fastest convergence rate
among current bandit algorithms and generates more statistical power than classical normality-based test. Finally, simulation studies provide supporting evidence for the theoretical results and demonstrate stronger performance when using
stricter privacy budgets.

Introduction
As users become increasingly concerned with the privacy
and security of their online information and activities, including medical records (Price and Cohen 2019), shopping
records (Martin and Murphy 2017; Petrescu and Krishen
2018), browsing history (Talukder et al. 2010), and other internet usage, systems such as recommendation engines and
advertising distributors require large amounts of user data to
provide personalized recommendations and better services
(Shin et al. 2018). This creates a dilemma as such data collection may compromise user privacy. To address this issue, it is important to develop algorithms that can balance
the needs of the system with the protection of user privacy.
One widely-used algorithm that provides high-level privacy
protection is differential privacy (Dwork, Roth et al. 2014),
which theoretically guarantees that any attacker cannot infer
changes or additions/deletions of individual records based
on the output. Currently, differential privacy has been widely
applied to multi-armed bandit algorithms (Huang et al. 2011;
Tossou and Dimitrakakis 2016; Wang et al. 2020). However,
due to the fact that differential privacy cannot prevent attacks
* Xiaodong Yan is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21815

