The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Reduced Fluid Dynamics
Zherong Pan, Xifeng Gao, Kui Wu
Lightspeed Studios
{zrpan,xifgao,kwwu}@global.tecent.com

Abstract

Although abundant numerical tools (Petrila and Trif 2004;
Demkowicz et al. 1989) have been developed over the past
decades with improved efficacy, their algorithmic complexity is still challenging the limits of current computational
resources. On a parallel front, the idealized, incompressible,
inviscid Eulerian fluid should be time reversible and energy
preserving (Duponcheel, Orlandi, and Winckelmans 2008),
and dedicated numerical schemes are proposed to faithfully
preserve these properties in a discrete setting (Rowley and
Marsden 2002; Pavlov et al. 2011). This implies that the initial condition of a trajectory can be recovered from any state
thereafter and the discrete total energy is a constant throughout the predicted trajectory. Although idealized fluid models
are not pursued in applications, their accurate prediction is
an important criterion of reliable numerical schemes.
Recently, a row of approaches have been proposed to
identify high-dimensional fluid dynamic systems using compact learnable models. A large body of prior works fall into
the category of non-intrusive approaches, which parameterize fluid dynamic transfer function using general learning models such as radial basis functions (Zhang, Kou, and
Wang 2016), feed-forward networks (Hsieh and Tang 1998),
recurrent networks (Pearlmutter 1989; Wang et al. 2018),
convolutional autoencoder (Wu et al. 2021; Hasegawa et al.
2020), etc. Unfortunately, all these non-intrusive learning
techniques cannot preserve the time reversible property of
idealized Eulerian fluid, potentially leading to large prediction error or requiring a large dataset. Recent works propose physics-informed loss (PINNs) (Raissi, Perdikaris, and
Karniadakis 2019) to minimize the physics-rule violation as
much as possible, but since the underlying learning models
are not exactly time reversible, the energy loss can still occur
and even accumulate over long trajectories. To ensure exact
time reversibility, the seminal work (Greydanus, Dzamba,
and Yosinski 2019) proposes to learn the Hamiltonian operator and then uses symplectic integrator to predict the trajectory. Although this method could be applied to fluid mechanics, their computational cost is as high as conventional
fluid simulator (if not even higher) since the Hamiltonian
network needs to be evaluated separately for each fluid particle. So far, we are still lacking a learning-based fluid dynamic model that both preserves exact time reversibility and
reduces the dimension.
On the other hand, model reduction approaches (Berkooz,

Predicting the state evolution of ultra high-dimensional, timereversible fluid dynamic systems is a crucial but computationally expensive task. Existing physics-informed neural networks either incur high inference cost or cannot preserve
the time-reversible nature of the underlying dynamics system. We propose a model-based approach to identify lowdimensional, time reversible, nonlinear fluid dynamic systems. Our method utilizes the symplectic structure of reduced
Eulerian fluid and use stochastic Riemann optimization to
obtain a low-dimensional bases that minimize the expected
trajectory-wise dimension-reduction error over a given distribution of initial conditions. We show that such minimization is well-defined since the reduced trajectories are differentiable with respect to the subspace bases over the entire
Grassmannian manifold, under proper choices of timestep
sizes and numerical integrators. Finally, we propose a loss
function measuring the trajectory-wise discrepancy between
the original and reduced models. By tensor precomputation,
we show that gradient information of such loss function can
be evaluated efficiently over a long trajectory without timeintegrating the high-dimensional dynamic system. Through
evaluations on a row of simulation benchmarks, we show that
our method reduces the discrepancy by 50-90 percent over
conventional reduced models and we outperform PINNs by
exactly preserving the time reversibility.

Introduction
High-dimensional Partial Differential Equations (PDE),
especially fluid dynamic systems, find vast applications
in the field of scientific computation (Moin and Mahesh 1998; Alfonsi 2009), PDE-constrained optimization (Biegler et al. 2003; Herzog and Kunisch 2010), design
prototyping (Baysal and Eleshaky 1992; Zang and Green
1999), fluidic devices design (Du et al. 2020; Li et al. 2022),
and digital entertainment (Bridson and Batty 2010; Bridson
2015), to name a few. A fundamental task of all these applications lies in the efficient prediction of numerical solutions
over a long horizon. In design prototyping, for example, a
designer needs to quickly preview the fluid flow surrounding
an aerial vehicle in order to refine its form factor. In a game
engine, a fluid simulator needs to achieve real-time performance to provide interactive special effects for players.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14517

