The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Q-SENN: Quantized Self-Explaining Neural Networks
Thomas Norrenbrock, Marco Rudolph, Bodo Rosenhahn
Institute for Information Processing (tnt)
L3S - Leibniz Universität Hannover, Germany
{norrenbr, rudolph, rosenhahn}@tnt.uni-hannover.de

Abstract

n
io
at

iz

al

Non-overlapping Activations

Diversity

G

en

er

Fi

de

lit

y

Explanations in Computer Vision are often desired, but most
Deep Neural Networks can only provide saliency maps with
questionable faithfulness. Self-Explaining Neural Networks
(SENN) extract interpretable concepts with fidelity, diversity,
and grounding to combine them linearly for decision-making.
While they can explain what was recognized, initial realizations lack accuracy and general applicability. We propose the
Quantized-Self-Explaining Neural Network “Q-SENN”. QSENN satisfies or exceeds the desiderata of SENN while being
applicable to more complex datasets and maintaining most or
all of the accuracy of an uninterpretable baseline model, outperforming previous work in all considered metrics. Q-SENN
describes the relationship between every class and feature
as either positive, negative or neutral instead of an arbitrary
number of possible relations, enforcing more binary humanfriendly features. Since every class is assigned just 5 interpretable features on average, Q-SENN shows convincing local
and global interpretability. Additionally, we propose a feature
alignment method, capable of aligning learned features with
human language-based concepts without additional supervision. Thus, what is learned can be more easily verbalized. The
code is published: https://github.com/ThomasNorr/Q-SENN

consistently localized on human attribute

Grounding

Introduction
The ability to comprehend the decision-making process of
deep learning models is gaining significance, especially for
safety-critical applications like autonomous driving or medical diagnosis, where practitioners and legal requirements
necessitate a thorough understanding of the decision and its
reasoning (Molnar 2020; Bibal et al. 2021). However, the
high dimensionality of image data has made it challenging to
develop interpretable models for computer vision, with many
problems still unsolved. Alvarez Melis and Jaakkola (2018)
proposed Self-Explaining Neural Networks (SENN) which
can be described as linear combination of interpretable concepts extracted from the input, but their realization lacked accuracy and applicability to complex datasets beyond MNIST.
They had three desiderata for the concepts: Fidelity refers
to relevancy, Diversity to non-overlapping concepts, and
Grounding to the alignment with a human concept. We propose the Quantized-SENN (Q-SENN), which satisfies these
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21482

Figure 1: Q-SENN optimizes for Diversity, Grounding and
Fidelity: The global explanation shows one example class
being recognized through 5 interpretable features that show
high Diversity and Grounding, consistently localizing on
the same meaningful human attributes across images, e. g.,
belly, crown, upper tail, upper wing and eye. When measuring Fidelity, the features generalize to unseen data and
the local explanation fits the class explanation. Visualization
techniques are based on overlaying color-coded feature maps,
described in the supplementary material.

requirements. Q-SENN is motivated by former works such
as the SLDD-Model (Norrenbrock, Rudolph, and Rosenhahn
2022), PIP-Net (Nauta et al. 2023), ProtoPool (Rymarczyk
et al. 2022) or the Concept Bottleneck Model (CBM) (Koh
et al. 2020), as they all aim to obtain human-understandable
concepts as input to an interpretable classifier C. Our proposed Q-SENN improves the interpretability of C compared

