The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Regulating AI: Applying Insights from Behavioural Economics and Psychology to
the Application of Article 5 of the EU AI Act
Huixin Zhong, Eamonn O’Neill, Janina A. Hoffmann
Centre for Doctoral Training in Accountable, Responsible and Transparent AI, University of Bath, United Kingdom
hz877@bath.ac.uk, E.ONeill@bath.ac.uk, jah253@bath.ac.uk

Abstract

safety, livelihood or rights, such as social ranking systems
and manipulation of individuals. These types of AI technologies are prohibited. High Risk: This category includes AI
technologies applied in critical infrastructures such as transport, education, employment and worker management. High
risk AI technologies must meet strict standards before being deployed in the market. High-risk AI technologies are
required to conduct adequate risk assessments and include
mitigation systems to ensure the high quality and robustness of the products. Limited Risk: This category refers to
AI technologies that must meet specific transparency obligations when interacting with users, such as chatbots. Minimal or No Risk: This category includes AI technologies that
pose minimal risks to consumers, such as AI-powered video
games.
The EU AI Act is structured in Articles, each addressing
the regulation of AI technologies based on their corresponding risk levels. Article 5 of the Act is dedicated to the regulation of AI technologies that could present unacceptable
risks, thus justifying their prohibition in the EU market. In
particular, Article 5, paragraph 1, points (a) and (b) are focused on the regulation of AI manipulation that could affect
the general public and vulnerable groups. These terms were
originally expressed as follows (Commission 2023):

Article 5 of the European Union’s Artificial Intelligence Act
is intended to regulate AI use to prevent potentially harmful
consequences. Nevertheless, applying this legislation practically is likely to be challenging because of ambiguously used
terminologies and because it fails to specify which manipulation techniques may be invoked by AI, potentially leading to significant harm. This paper aims to bridge this gap
by defining key terms and demonstrating how AI may invoke
these techniques, drawing from insights in psychology and
behavioural economics. First, this paper provides definitions
of the terms “subliminal techniques”, “manipulative techniques” and “deceptive techniques”. Secondly, we identified
from the literature in cognitive psychology and behavioural
economics three subliminal and five manipulative techniques
and exemplify how AI might implement these techniques to
manipulate users in real-world case scenarios. These illustrations may serve as a practical guide for stakeholders to detect
cases of AI manipulation and consequently devise preventive
measures. Article 5 has also been criticised for offering inadequate protection. We critically assess the protection offered by Article 5, proposing specific revisions to paragraph
1, points (a) and (b) of Article 5 to increase its protective effectiveness.

Introduction

(a) the placing on the market, putting into
service or use of an AI system that deploys subliminal techniques beyond a person’s consciousness in order to materially distort a person’s behaviour in a manner that causes or is likely to
cause that person or another person physical or
psychological harm;
(b) the placing on the market, putting into
service or use of an AI system that exploits any
of the vulnerabilities of a specific group of persons due to their age, physical or mental disability, in order to materially distort the behaviour of
a person pertaining to that group in a manner that
causes or is likely to cause that person or another
person physical or psychological harm.

The European Commission first drafted the EU AI Act in
April 2021. In June 2023, the members of the European Parliament solidified the negotiating position for the AI Act,
marking a notable step forward in the development of the
world’s first legal framework for AI. Negotiations will commence with EU member countries to shape the final legislation. The goal is to reach a final agreement by the end of
2023 (Parliament 2023b). The EU AI Act proposes to apply a different regulatory standards to AI technologies depending upon the risk level of the technology rather than
the type of technology itself. This risk based approach to
AI applications aims to ensure the safety and trustworthiness of AI while encouraging innovation and development.
The Act broadly categorizes AI technologies into four different risk levels. Unacceptable risk: This category includes
AI technologies that pose a clear threat to an individual’s

However, Article 5 has been criticized for lack of clarity
(Franklin et al. 2022), inadequate protective measures (Uuk
2022), and failure to achieve its stated objectives (Cohen
2023). Partly in response to these criticisms, the EU Par-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20001

