The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Set Prediction Guided by Semantic Concepts for Diverse Video Captioning
Yifan Lu1,2 * , Ziqi Zhang1 * , Chunfeng Yuan1† , Peng Li3,4 , Yan Wang3,4 , Bing Li1 , Weiming Hu1,2,5
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, CASIA
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Alibaba Group
4
Zhejiang Linkheer Science and Technology Co., Ltd.
5
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
{luyifan2021, zhangziqi2017}@ia.ac.cn, {cfyuan, bli, wmhu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {sanjie.lp, wy84378}@alibaba-inc.com
2

Pair-wise Loss
G.T. Sent.

Abstract
Diverse video captioning aims to generate a set of sentences
to describe the given video in various aspects. Mainstream
methods are trained with independent pairs of a video and
a caption from its ground-truth set without exploiting the
intra-set relationship, resulting in low diversity of generated
captions. Different from them, we formulate diverse captioning into a semantic-concept-guided set prediction (SCG-SP)
problem by fitting the predicted caption set to the groundtruth set, where the set-level relationship is fully captured.
Specifically, our set prediction consists of two synergistic
tasks, i.e., caption generation and an auxiliary task of concept
combination prediction providing extra semantic supervision.
Each caption in the set is attached to a concept combination
indicating the primary semantic content of the caption and
facilitating element alignment in set prediction. Furthermore,
we apply a diversity regularization term on concepts to encourage the model to generate semantically diverse captions
with various concept combinations. These two tasks share
multiple semantics-specific encodings as input, which are obtained by iterative interaction between visual features and
conceptual queries. The correspondence between the generated captions and specific concept combinations further guarantees the interpretability of our model. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets show that the proposed SCGSP achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance under both
relevance and diversity metrics.

Set Prediction Loss
G.T. Set

×M
Pred. Sent.

Pred. Set

Captioner

Captioner

Encoding

Visual
Encoder

Implicit/Explicit
Control Signals

Semantics-Specific
Encodings

Text
Encoder

Semantics-specific
Visual Encoder

(a) CVAE/Control-based methods

(b) SCG-SP

Figure 1: Difference between (a) existing CVAE/controlbased diverse captioning methods and (b) our proposed
SCG-SP. There is no direct interaction among generated
captions in CVAE-based or control-based methods, where
the loss is calculated with independent training samples.
Our proposed SCG-SP generates captions based on multiple
semantics-specific visual encodings with sufficient interaction and is trained by a set-level prediction loss to exploit
the set-level relationship.

Introduction

Mahajan, Gurevych, and Roth 2020; Mahajan and Roth
2020; Nie et al. 2022) and control-based methods (Chen,
Deng, and Wu 2022; Cornia, Baraldi, and Cucchiara 2019;
Deshpande et al. 2019). As shown in Fig.1(a), both methods
share a general pipeline that the diverse generation is conditioned on a visual encoding and multiple implicit or explicit
control signals.
CVAE-based methods learn a latent distribution to encode
diversity. Multiple latent variables, regarded as implicit control signals, are sampled from the learned distribution for
diverse caption generation. However, CVAE-based methods
are trained with a pair-wise loss, which ignores the intraset relationship. This issue arises from the absence of direct
interaction between generated captions for the same video
and leads to inadequate capture of the diverse characteristics of captions. Moreover, CVAE-based methods have limited interpretability because of the unrevealed relationship

Diverse video captioning (DivVC) is an emerging research
branch of vision-language tasks. DivVC aims to generate
a set of multiple captions that are semantically related to
the given video and distinct from one another. DivVC overcomes the limitation of traditional video captioning methods, which only generate a single sentence for a video and
fail to cover a wealth of visual information (Liu et al. 2022;
Nie et al. 2022).
Mainstream diverse captioning methods can be classified
into two categories: conditional variational encoder (CVAE)
based methods (Aneja et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2019; Deb
et al. 2022; Jain, Zhang, and Schwing 2017; Liu et al. 2022;
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3909

