The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Neural Amortized Inference for Nested Multi-Agent Reasoning
Kunal Jha1 , Tuan Anh Le2 , Chuanyang Jin3 , Yen-Ling Kuo4 ,
Joshua B. Tenenbaum5 , Tianmin Shu5,6
1

Dartmouth College
2
Google Research
3
New York University
4
University of Virginia
5
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
6
Johns Hopkins University
kunal.a.jha.24@dartmouth.edu, tuananhl@google.com, cj2133@nyu.edu, ylkuo@virginia.edu, jbt@mit.edu,
tianmin.shu@jhu.edu
If Bob helps Alice

Abstract
Multi-agent interactions, such as communication, teaching,
and bluffing, often rely on higher-order social inference, i.e.,
understanding how others infer oneself. Such intricate reasoning can be effectively modeled through nested multi-agent
reasoning. Nonetheless, the computational complexity escalates exponentially with each level of reasoning, posing
a significant challenge. However, humans effortlessly perform complex social inferences as part of their daily lives.
To bridge the gap between human-like inference capabilities
and computational limitations, we propose a novel approach:
leveraging neural networks to amortize high-order social inference, thereby expediting nested multi-agent reasoning. We
evaluate our method in two challenging multi-agent interaction domains. The experimental results demonstrate that our
method is computationally efficient while exhibiting minimal
degradation in accuracy.

Alice

Bob
If Bob hinders Alice

Figure 1: Illustration of nested reasoning between two
agents. Alice wants to get the apple and Bob may help or
hinder Alice. Agents do not know each other’s goals. It is
crucial that Alice successfully infers Bob’s intent so that Alice can choose the optimal path to either cooperate with Bob
or compete with Bob. Such inference requires nested reasoning – in this case, Alice infers how Bob infers Alice.
human-like nested reasoning to date. One of the main challenges is that inference under the I-POMDP framework is recursive and hence slow. In complex domains in which there
are large state, action, and goal spaces, solving I-POMDP
becomes computationally intractable.
However, recursively reason effortlessly in our daily life
despite the complexity of the inference. This work aims to
develop an efficient inference method for nested multi-agent
reasoning. We follow the I-POMDP framework and propose
to amortize inference at different levels of the I-POMDP by
training neural networks to sample data-driven proposals.
This allows us to sample a small number of hypotheses to
cover the ground truth, which drastically decreases the overall computation required without sacrificing accuracy.
We demonstrate our approach in two complex domains
requiring higher-order social reasoning. In the first domain,
we consider a two-player game in 2D grid worlds, Construction, in which one agent (Bob) needs to help or hinder another agent (Alice) but the two agents do not know each
other’s goal. To successfully infer the goals of Bob, one
would need nested goal inference. Additionally, we evaluate our approach in a driving domain, in which drivers must
infer each other’s mental states (including goals and beliefs
about the physical states) recursively to avoid collision and
to signal danger to other drivers in anticipation of a crash.

Introduction
We reason about and act in a world that contains not only
inanimate objects but also agents. Reasoning about other
agents is key to our everyday abilities to empathize, communicate, teach, and more. Imbuing AI systems with adequate
social inference is key to enabling rich multi-agent interactions. For instance, as illustrated in Figure 1, to successfully
interact with another agent, one would need to infer not only
the agent’s goal but also how the other agent infers the goal
of oneself. Current multi-agent systems still cannot conduct
nested multi-agent reasoning efficiently and flexibly.1
There have been prior works attempting to build agents
that can conduct nested reasoning with each other to achieve
sophisticated interactions. Most notably, Interactive Partially
Observable Markov Decision Making Process (I-POMDP)
(Gmytrasiewicz and Doshi 2005) provides a framework for
modeling multi-agent systems with nested reasoning. While
the framework is general and can be applied to a broad range
of domains, we still cannot equip autonomous agents with
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The code and the supplementary material are available at https:
//www.tshu.io/nested reasoning.

530

