The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Intentional Evolutionary Learning for Untrimmed Videos with Long Tail
Distribution
Yuxi Zhou1,2, * † , Xiujie Wang1, * , Jianhua Zhang1,† , Jiajia Wang1 , Jie Yu1 , Hao Zhou1 , Yi Gao1 ,
Shengyong Chen1
1
Department of Computer Science, Tianjin University of Technology, Tianjin, China
DCST, BNRist, RIIT, Institute of Internet Industry, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
joy yuxi@pku.edu.cn, 1747897282@qq.com, zjh@ieee.org, wjj21@stud.tjut.edu.cn, YJ15303364087@gmail.com,
zhouhao@stud.tjut.edu.cn, gaoyi01020304@stud.tjut.edu.cn, sy@ieee.org
2

Abstract

ing action prediction tasks on untrimmed videos is challenging”. We believe that one reason for the unsatisfactory
results is that it ignores the long-tail distribution. Becasue
in untrimmed vidoes, human actions coexisting with noisy
backgrounds and thus each category of actions constitutes
a minority among the background samples which lead to a
long-tail distribution phenomenon. Taking the “Cliff Diving” video in the THUMOS14 dataset in Figure 1 as an
example, the video lasts for 6 minutes, with a few target
actions “diving” and “cliff diving” alternating with messy
backgrounds. Moreover, as untrimmed videos manifest as
video data streams in natural scenarios, the distribution differences between current data streams and new data streams
may be substantial. However, there is no relevant method
to solve the adaptive problem of long-tail distribution with
concept drift (Krawczyk et al. 2017) characteristics (which
refers to the possibility that data from non-stationary models
may evolve over time, resulting in changes in target concepts
and/or attribute distributions) in video streams.
Additionally, existing intent understanding efforts can
only predict the subsequent action but fail to assess the persistence and evolution patterns of intentions. However, predicting the evolution patterns of intentions can provide very
important support for human-machine collaboration. For example, in Figure 1, predicting the current action A4 is ’cliffdiving’ and how long the person is about to ’dive’ is important for warning of dangerous scenarios.
To address these challenges, a novel intentional evolutionary learning method is developed. Our work and contributions can be summarized as follows.

Human intention understanding in untrimmed videos aims
to watch a natural video and predict what the person’s intention is. Currently, exploration of predicting human intentions in untrimmed videos is far from enough. On the
one hand, untrimmed videos with mixed actions and backgrounds have a significant long-tail distribution with concept
drift characteristics. On the other hand, most methods can
only perceive instantaneous intentions, but cannot determine
the evolution of intentions. To solve the above challenges,
we propose a loss based on Instance Confidence and Class
Accuracy (ICCA), which aims to alleviate the prediction
bias caused by the long-tail distribution with concept drift
characteristics in video streams. In addition, we propose an
intention-oriented evolutionary learning method to determine
the intention evolution pattern (from what action to what action) and the time of evolution (when the action evolves).
We conducted extensive experiments on two untrimmed
video datasets (THUMOS14 and ActivityNET v1.3), and our
method has achieved excellent results compared to SOTA
methods. The code and supplementary materials are available
at https://github.com/Jennifer123www/UntrimmedVideo.

Introduction
Humans are born with the ability to observe the world and
understand the intentions of the collaborators (i.e., predict
what will happen soon). The ability to understand intention
is fundamental to interaction between human and environment. However, designing algorithms to automatically understand intentions (Wanyan et al. 2023) is challenging, as it
is necessary to model the relationship between past and future events without completely observing untrimmed videos.
Currently, most methods on intent understanding primarily focus on trimmed videos, which process a full video into
short clips with one action label each and make it unsuitable for direct application in real-world scenarios. This is
due to the fact that videos are generally untrimmed. Recently, (Rodin et al. 2022) attempted to fine-tune trimmed
methods to untrimmed videos and concluded that “perform-

• A loss based on Instance Confidence and Class Accuracy
(ICCA) is presented that significantly enhances the classification accuracy under the influence of long-tail distribution with concept drift characteristics.
• An intention-oriented evolutionary learning method is
proposed to determine the intention evolution pattern
(from what action to what action) and the time of evolution (when the action evolves).

* These authors contributed equally.

• We demonstrate the effectiveness and advancement of
our proposed method on THUMOS14 and ActivityNET
v1.3 datasets.

†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7713

