The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

HOP to the Next Tasks and Domains for Continual Learning in NLP
Umberto Michieli, Mete Ozay
Samsung Research UK
{u.michieli, m.ozay}@samsung.com

Abstract

quentially, the naı̈vely FT model faces catastrophic forgetting (CF, McCloskey and Cohen 1989) of previous knowledge due to the non-stationary data distribution, and cannot make use of past knowledge to improve capability on
subsequent problems (forward KT, Lopez-Paz and Ranzato
2017) or vice-versa (backward KT). In particular, high CF
and low KT hinder performance of CL for NLP, as several
NLP applications share similar knowledge that can be exploited to achieve higher accuracy on future/previous problems, without accuracy degradation. Indeed, ideally, learning a sequence of problems should allow multiple problems
to support each other via KT (Rusu et al. 2016; Ke, Liu, and
Huang 2020). To address such issues towards more versatile
NLP models, we focus on CL to tune a pre-trained AdapterBERT for a stream of problems.
In CL, a model learns a sequence of problems incrementally. After each incremental learning (IL) stage is completed, its training data is typically discarded (Chen and
Liu 2018). Three main families of CL setups can be identified (Van de Ven and Tolias 2019): namely, Task-IL (TIL),
Domain-IL (DIL), and Class-IL (CIL). TIL builds one
model for each task (e.g., to classify sentiment in products’
reviews). At test time, task identifier specifies the proper
model for each input sample. This could significantly increase the number of parameters; however, in our case, most
of the parameters are shared across problems and only a few
parameters are problem-specific. DIL is similar to TIL, however, builds a single head for each domain as classes are
shared across domains. In DIL, no identifier is required at
test time and subsequent problems present data from different domains (e.g., reviews from online commerce, or
from movie critique, etc.). In CIL, non-overlapping classes
are learned progressively. Opposed from traditional CL approaches used in Computer Vision (CV), most of the NLP
problems are formulated as either TIL or DIL (Biesialska,
Biesialska, and Costa-jussà 2020; Ke and Liu 2022; Ke et al.
2021b; Sun, Ho, and Lee 2019) and, to the best of our knowledge, no prior work has addressed them both jointly.
Differently from concurrent CL NLP approaches, in this
paper, we evaluate models on both TIL and DIL in a unified framework which employs parameter-efficient transfer
learning strategies to adapt the models to each end problem:
(i) as in current state-of-the-art approaches (Ke, Xu, and Liu
2021; Ke, Liu, and Huang 2020), we use Adapter-BERT

Continual Learning (CL) aims to learn a sequence of problems (i.e., tasks and domains) by transferring knowledge acquired on previous problems, whilst avoiding forgetting of
past ones. Different from previous approaches which focused
on CL for one NLP task or domain in a specific use-case, in
this paper, we address a more general CL setting to learn from
a sequence of problems in a unique framework. Our method,
HOP, permits to hop across tasks and domains by addressing the CL problem along three directions: (i) we employ a
set of adapters to generalize a large pre-trained model to unseen problems, (ii) we compute high-order moments over the
distribution of embedded representations to distinguish independent and correlated statistics across different tasks and domains, (iii) we process this enriched information with auxiliary heads specialized for each end problem. Extensive experimental campaign on 4 NLP applications, 5 benchmarks and
2 CL setups demonstrates the effectiveness of our HOP.

Introduction
Current practice to obtain a deep learning model to perform a specific assignment is to train the model on a specific
dataset for that particular assignment (Chen and Liu 2018).
However, this paradigm has several inherent limitations. For
example, as models get larger, training from scratch requires a larger amount of expensive labeled data and computation time, which can be reduced by knowledge transfer
(KT) from a pre-trained model on a base domain. This problem is generally addressed via adapting (e.g., through finetuning, FT) large pre-trained language models (e.g., BERT,
Devlin et al. 2019) to various downstream NLP applications, such as Text Classification (TC, Wang et al. 2023a;
Wu et al. 2023; Ke, Xu, and Liu 2021; Hu et al. 2021), Natural Language Inference (NLI, Pfeiffer et al. 2020), Document (Ke et al. 2020) or Aspect (Ke, Xu, and Liu 2021;
Zhou et al. 2021) Sentiment Classification (DSC and ASC).
In our work, we employ the Adapter-BERT (Houlsby et al.
2019) model. FT a large pre-trained model reaches stateof-the-art results on NLP benchmarks with a static distribution. However, if a stream of problems1 are presented seCopyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
For the sake of clarity, we refer to problems as either tasks or
domains experienced by the CL method over time.

14359

