The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

An Interpretable Approach to the Solutions of High-Dimensional Partial
Differential Equations
Lulu Cao1,2 , Yufei Liu1,2 , Zhenzhong Wang3 , Dejun Xu1,2 , Kai Ye1,2 , Kay Chen Tan3 , Min Jiang1,2 *
1

School of Informatics, Key Laboratory of Digital Protection and Intelligent Processing of Intangible Cultural Heritage of
Fujian and Taiwan, Ministry of Culture and Tourism, Xiamen University
2
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen
University
3
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
lulucao@stu.xmu.edu.cn, phenanthra@stu.xmu.edu.cn, zhenzhong16.wang@connect.polyu.hk, xudejun@stu.xmu.edu.cn,
yekai@stu.xmu.edu.cn, kaychen.tan@polyu.edu.hk, minjiang@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract

PDEs in real-world problems. Many PDEs do not have analytical solutions and require numerical methods to solve
them (Gugat 2006). Moreover, even if an analytical solution
exists, the solving process may be very complex especially
when the dimension of the problem increases (AbrahamShrauner 2018; Gockenbach 2011). Therefore, researchers
have been working to find more efficient methods for solving analytical solutions of PDEs.
Traditional numerical methods (Prathap and Rao 2023;
Mu and Kim 2023; Zheng and Wang 2023; Du and Cai 2021;
Lai et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2019) and deep learning methods
(Choi, Kim, and Hong 2023; Tang et al. 2023; Peng, Hu,
and Xu 2023) are commonly used to solve PDEs. However,
these methods have some limitations compared to solving
analytical solutions directly. Numerical methods usually require discretization of the problem, which introduces discretization errors (Li et al. 2020a). In addition, the convergence speed of numerical methods may be slow and requires
a lot of computational resources (Karniadakis et al. 2021).
Deep learning methods can learn the solution directly from
data and can be used to solve PDEs in complex geometries
without the need for a structured grid (Ta et al. 2023; Koyamada et al. 2021). However, these learning-based methods
require a large amount of training data and need to adjust
many hyper-parameters (Lu, Jin, and Karniadakis 2019).
In addition to solving ability and efficiency, interpretability is also indispensable in practical applications of PDE
solvers. Compared with a black-box solver, an interpretable
one can provide some clues to the process of solving the
equation, thus helping users understand the physical laws of
the original problem behind the PDEs. Disappointingly, the
solutions obtained by both the traditional numerical methods and deep learning methods are not interpretable (Oh
et al. 2023b). Therefore, assigning interpretability to efficient PDE solvers is of practical significance and has not
yet been tackled.
Symbolic regression has been proven to be an effective
tool to achieve interpretability in many fileds, which can
find a function that best fits the given data by searching the
space of mathematical expressions (Dong et al. 2023; Chang
et al. 2023). Genetic programming is often used for sym-

In recent years, machine learning algorithms, especially deep
learning, have shown promising prospects in solving Partial Differential Equations (PDEs). However, as the dimension increases, the relationship and interaction between variables become more complex, and existing methods are difficult to provide fast and interpretable solutions for highdimensional PDEs. To address this issue, we propose a genetic programming symbolic regression algorithm based on
transfer learning and automatic differentiation to solve PDEs.
This method uses genetic programming to search for a mathematically understandable expression and combines automatic
differentiation to determine whether the search result satisfies the PDE and boundary conditions to be solved. To
overcome the problem of slow solution speed caused by
large search space, we propose a transfer learning mechanism that transfers the structure of one-dimensional PDE analytical solution to the form of high-dimensional PDE solution. We tested three representative types of PDEs, and the
results showed that our proposed method can obtain reliable
and human-understandable real solutions or algebraic equivalent solutions of PDEs, and the convergence speed is better than the compared methods. Code of this project is at
https://github.com/grassdeerdeer/HD-TLGP.

Introduction
A partial differential equation (PDE) is an equation that contains an unknown function and its partial derivatives. The
unknown function is a multivariable function, and the independent variables include time and space. Solving PDEs
analytically is of great significance for understanding phenomena in physics (Roubı́ček 2013), engineering (Çayan,
Özhan, and Sezer 2022), finance (Acevedo and Lelièvre
2018), and other fields. Analytical solutions of PDEs can
demonstrate the interactions between variables affect the results, which provides a clear basis for engineers to understand the underlying physical principles of the problem and
make more informed design decisions (Oh et al. 2023a).
However, it is challenging to obtain analytical solutions of
* Corresponding author: Min Jiang, minjiang@xmu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20640

