The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SSMG: Spatial-Semantic Map Guided Diffusion Model for Free-Form
Layout-to-Image Generation
Chengyou Jia1 * , Minnan Luo1† , Zhuohang Dang1 , Guang Dai2,3 , Xiaojun Chang4,5 ,
Mengmeng Wang6,2 , Jingdong Wang7
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, MOEKLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
SGIT AI Lab
3
State Grid Corporation of China
4
University of Technology Sydney
5
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
6
Zhejiang University
7
Baidu Inc
{cp3jia, dangzhuohang}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, minnluo@xjtu.edu.cn, {guang.gdai, cxj273}@gmail.com,
mengmengwang@zju.edu.cn, wangjingdong@outlook.com

Abstract

methods of Layout-to-Image (L2I) generation have risen to
prominence, enabling the rendering of realistic and complex
scene images from user-specified layouts. Owing to its finegrained control, L2I generation possesses enormous potential for a wide range of display applications. These range
from enhancing the user experience in interactive design to
revolutionizing content creation in film and animation (Zhu
et al. 2016; Isola et al. 2017; Croitoru et al. 2023).
Recent methods adapt large-scale pre-trained diffusion
models (Rombach et al. 2022) for the L2I generation,
demonstrating superior performance compared to GANbased approaches (Park et al. 2019; Richardson et al. 2021;
Lee et al. 2020). These methods (Li et al. 2023; Yang et al.
2023; Zheng et al. 2023; Zhang and Agrawala 2023) can be
broadly classified into two types, token-guided and imageguided. Token-guided methods, as illustrated in Figure 1, tokenize the layout of spatial and semantic information to embeddings, which are then integrated into T2I models via an
attention mechanism. Semantic information “classes” is typically managed by a text encoder, e.g., CLIP (Radford et al.
2021), while spatial position information is handled by various tokenization methods, e.g., Fourier embedding in GLIGEN (Li et al. 2023) or learnable matrixes in ReCO (Yang
et al. 2023). However, the tokenization of spatial information, akin to textualization, fails to effectively harness the
inherent 2D spatial structure of the layout. Consequently, as
demonstrated in Figure 1, it struggles to achieve fine-grained
spatial control at the pixel level, leading to issues such as
imprecise object boundaries and loss of objects. In contrast, ControlNet (Zhang and Agrawala 2023), a representative image-guided work, incorporates visual conditions, e.g.,
the layout of boxes, into frozen T2I diffusion models to enable additional condition signals. ControlNet duplicates the
weights of the diffusion model into a “trainable copy” and
a “locked copy”, with the trainable copy being trained to
learn these visual conditions. This approach provides more
accurate spatial controllability. Nevertheless, the semantic

Despite significant progress in Text-to-Image (T2I) generative models, even lengthy and complex text descriptions still
struggle to convey detailed controls. In contrast, Layout-toImage (L2I) generation, aiming to generate realistic and complex scene images from user-specified layouts, has risen to
prominence. However, existing methods transform layout information into tokens or RGB images for conditional control in the generative process, leading to insufficient spatial
and semantic controllability of individual instances. To address these limitations, we propose a novel Spatial-Semantic
Map Guided (SSMG) diffusion model that adopts the feature
map, derived from the layout, as guidance. Owing to rich spatial and semantic information encapsulated in well-designed
feature maps, SSMG achieves superior generation quality
with sufficient spatial and semantic controllability compared
to previous works. Additionally, we propose the RelationSensitive Attention (RSA) and Location-Sensitive Attention
(LSA) mechanisms. The former aims to model the relationships among multiple objects within scenes while the latter is
designed to heighten the model’s sensitivity to the spatial information embedded in the guidance. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that SSMG achieves highly promising results,
setting a new state-of-the-art across a range of metrics encompassing fidelity, diversity, and controllability.

Introduction
Despite notable advancements in Text-to-Image (T2I) generative models (Nichol et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022),
text descriptions often struggle to adequately convey detailed controls, even when composed of lengthy and complex texts (as shown “Text Guided” in Figure 1). In contrast,
* This work was completed during the internship at SGIT AI

Lab, State Grid Corporation of China.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2480

