The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MotionGPT: Finetuned LLMs Are General-Purpose Motion Generators
Yaqi Zhang1,2 , Di Huang3 , Bin Liu1,2 * , Shixiang Tang3 , Yan Lu3 ,
Lu Chen4 , Lei Bai4 , Qi Chu1,2 , Nenghai Yu1,2 , Wanli Ouyang4
1

School of Cyber Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
CAS Key Laboratory of Electromagnetic Space Information
3
The University of Sydney
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory
zhangyq99@mail.ustc.edu.cn, flowice@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

This paper proposes a novel and more unified framework for text-motion generation. The framework facilitates the generation of human motions using multiple control conditions, formulated as output_motion =
f (text, task, input_motion). Newly added inputs task and
input_motion represent the task and given motion prompts,
respectively. Here, task indicates the specific task the model
should adapt to, while input_motion provides the keyframe
poses corresponding to the given task. This framework is a
departure from traditional text-motion generation models as
the introduction of input_motion enables more precise control. For example, given an input_motion and set the task
as "generate motion given initial poses", the model should
compensate for the subsequent frames of the given frames.
Such a framework offers a more practical and comprehensive
solution for human motion generation, where task instructions and multimodal conditions can flexibly control motion
generation.
The challenge of building a model to complete such (text,
motion)-motion generation task lies in understanding multimodal control conditions and generating human motions with
varying motion lengths and richer patterns. We argue that
these challenges can be naturally resolved by adapting from
LLMs for the following reasons. First, recent studies have
demonstrated that LLMs can understand multimodal inputs,
e.g., images (Zhu et al. 2023; Du et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023a;
Liu et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2023) and videos (Li et al. 2023b),
through a lightweight adapter (Hu et al. 2021a). Therefore,
we expect the LLMs can also understand motion sequences
with an appropriate adapter. Second, LLMs can provide diverse human motion contexts for motion generation because
they have encoded diverse motion patterns from extensive
large-scale text data. This enables our motion generator finetuned from LLMs can produce motions with rich patterns.
Third, since LLMs output tokens aggressively, producing human motion with flexible sequences is no longer an obstacle.
To this end, we propose a Motion General-Purpose generaTor (MotionGPT) by fine-tuning an LLM following designed instructions. Specifically, MotionGPT first maps human poses into discrete motion codes via the pre-trained
motion VQ-VAE and then generates instructions by combining codes from language prompts and motion prompts. The
LLMs are fine-tuned by answering the correct human pose sequences to the instructions in an efficient way of well-known

Generating realistic human motion from given action descriptions has experienced significant advancements because of the
emerging requirement of digital humans. While recent works
have achieved impressive results in generating motion directly
from textual action descriptions, they often support only a
single modality of the control signal, which limits their application in the real digital human industry. This paper presents
a Motion General-Purpose generaTor (MotionGPT) that can
use multimodal control signals, e.g., text and single-frame
poses, for generating consecutive human motions by treating
multimodal signals as special input tokens in large language
models (LLMs). Specifically, we first quantize multimodal
control signals into discrete codes and then formulate them
in a unified prompt instruction to ask the LLMs to generate
the motion answer. Our MotionGPT demonstrates a unified
human motion generation model with multimodal control signals by tuning a mere 0.4% of LLM parameters. To the best
of our knowledge, MotionGPT is the first method to generate
human motion by multimodal control signals, which we hope
can shed light on this new direction. Visit our webpage at
https://qiqiapink.github.io/MotionGPT/.

Introduction
Human motion is pivotal in various applications such as
video gaming, filmmaking, and virtual reality. Recent advancements in AI (Saharia et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2022; Ramesh
et al. 2022; Rombach et al. 2022; Ramesh et al. 2021; Ouyang
et al. 2022; Lu et al. 2023) have paved the way for novel
approaches to motion creation, enabling various control conditions including textual descriptions, music pieces, and human poses. However, one significant shortcoming of existing
works (Petrovich, Black, and Varol 2022; Zhang et al. 2022;
Tevet et al. 2023; Petrovich, Black, and Varol 2021; Zhuang
et al. 2022) is that they only target a single type of control
condition, greatly limiting their applications in the real world,
e.g., unable to generate motion sequences conditioned on text
descriptions and several keyframe human poses. To facilitate
such applications, it is important to develop a unified human motion generation framework that can efficiently utilize
multiple control signals simultaneously.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7368

