The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PointPatchMix: Point Cloud Mixing with Patch Scoring
Yi Wang1 * , Jiaze Wang2 * , Jinpeng Li2 , Zixu Zhao2 ,
Guangyong Chen3 , Anfeng Liu1† , Pheng-Ann Heng2
1

Central South University, Hunan, China
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
3
Zhejiang Lab, Zhejiang, China
csu-wy@csu.edu.cn, jzwang@link.cuhk.edu.hk, afengliu@mail.csu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Data augmentation is an effective regularization strategy for
mitigating overfitting in deep neural networks, and it plays
a crucial role in 3D vision tasks, where the point cloud data
is relatively limited. While mixing-based augmentation has
shown promise for point clouds, previous methods mix point
clouds either on block level or point level, which has constrained their ability to strike a balance between generating
diverse training samples and preserving the local characteristics of point clouds. The significance of each part component of the point clouds has not been fully considered,
as not all parts contribute equally to the classification task,
and some parts may contain unimportant or redundant information. To overcome these challenges, we propose PointPatchMix, a novel approach that mixes point clouds at the
patch level and integrates a patch scoring module to generate
content-based targets for mixed point clouds. Our approach
preserves local features at the patch level, while the patch
scoring module assigns targets based on the content-based
significance score from a pre-trained teacher model. We evaluate PointPatchMix on two benchmark datasets including
ModelNet40 and ScanObjectNN, and demonstrate significant
improvements over various baselines in both synthetic and
real-world datasets, as well as few-shot settings. With PointMAE as our baseline, our model surpasses previous methods by a significant margin. Furthermore, our approach shows
strong generalization across various point cloud methods and
enhances the robustness of the baseline model. Code is available at https://jiazewang.com/projects/pointpatchmix.html.

Figure 1: Illustration of generating mixed data using PointPatchMix. Given two point clouds, PointPatchMix processes
them at the patch level, with each patch comprising 32
points. A pre-trained teacher model scores each patch based
on self-attention mechanism. Then, the mixed point cloud
consists of patches selected by mask tokens and the new
ground truth is generated.

distribution. To alleviate this challenge, many works (Kim
et al. 2021; Rao et al. 2021; Lee et al. 2022) have put efforts into point cloud data augmentation techniques which
serve to enrich the variety within the training data, thereby
enhancing the generalizability of point cloud classifiers.
Many techniques have been proposed to augment point
cloud data, such as handcrafted approaches (Ren, Pan, and
Liu 2022; Qi et al. 2017a,b; Goyal et al. 2021), and automatically generated approaches. (Li et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2022a; Chen et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2021). Notably, Among
them, mixing-based augmentation (Zhang et al. 2022a; Chen
et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2021) has shown great potential for
point clouds. In this paradigm, mixed point clouds are endowed with labels derived from their original counterparts.
For instance, PointMixup (Chen et al. 2020) defines data
augmentation between point clouds as a shortest path linear interpolation and generates new samples by optimally
assigning a path function. Similarly, PointCutMix (Zhang
et al. 2022a) determines optimal correspondences between
two point clouds and create fresh training instances through
point replacement.
Despite the significant advancements in mixing-based

Introduction
The precise classification of point clouds has emerged as
a pivotal and intricate research focus in the field of computer vision, boasting extensive applications in real-world
scenarios such as virtual reality, augmented reality, and autonomous navigation. Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have
made remarkable progress in this area in recent years (Qi
et al. 2017a,b; Zhao et al. 2021; Pang et al. 2022; Yu et al.
2022). However, the scarcity of point cloud training data inherently exposes DNNs to overfitting risk, attributed to their
inclination to model approximation based on the given data
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5686

