The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Cheaper and Faster: Distributed Deep Reinforcement Learning
with Serverless Computing
Hanfei Yu1 , Jian Li2 , Yang Hua3 , Xu Yuan4 , Hao Wang1
1

Louisiana State University
2
Stony Brook University
3
Queen’s University Belfast
4
University of Delaware
{hyu25, haowang}@lsu.edu, jian.li.3@stonybrook.edu, Y.Hua@qub.ac.uk, xyuan@udel.edu
Actor

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has gained immense success in many applications, including gaming AI, robotics, and
system scheduling. Distributed algorithms and architectures
have been vastly proposed (e.g., actor-learner architecture) to
accelerate DRL training with large-scale server-based clusters. However, training on-policy algorithms with the actorlearner architecture unavoidably induces resource wasting
due to synchronization between learners and actors, thus resulting in significantly extra billing. As a promising alternative, serverless computing naturally fits on-policy synchronization and alleviates resource wasting in distributed DRL
training with pay-as-you-go pricing. Yet, none has leveraged
serverless computing to facilitate DRL training. This paper
proposes M INIONS RL, the first serverless distributed DRL
training framework that aims to accelerate DRL trainingand cost-efficiency with dynamic actor scaling. We prototype
M INIONS RL on top of Microsoft Azure Container Instances
and evaluate it with popular DRL tasks from OpenAI Gym.
Extensive experiments show that M INIONS RL reduces total
training time by up to 52% and training cost by 86% compared to latest solutions.

Learner

Running

Idle but incur costs
Idle

Round i

…

…

Synchronization

…

Idle

Trajectories
Update
RL Model

Idle

(b) Server-based training
f

…

Released
t

…

Distribute model
f

Released
t

Round i+1
…
(a) One-round on-policy training

t

f
(c) Serverless training

t

Figure 1: Server-based v.s. serverless architectures.

Achiam et al. 2017; Wijmans et al. 2019) have emerged
as a prominent DRL algorithm family, fully leveraging the
actor-learner training architecture with distributed computing clusters (Gu et al. 2017).
To facilitate efficient learning in a distributed environment
with consistent DRL policies, on-policy algorithms enforce
a synchronization process between learners and actors after
every training round, as Fig. 1(a) shows. Due to the stochastic environment dynamics (e.g., game environments), some
actors might have episodes that end sooner, leading them to
finish rounds earlier and wait in idle for other actors. Additionally, all actors remain idle during the policy update by
the learner as Fig. 1(b) shows. However, these idle actors
significantly waste computing resources, amplifying training costs with server-based clusters.
The dilemma of server-based DRL training. State-of-theart server-based approaches reserve a fixed number of workers (e.g., physical or cloud servers) for distributed DRL
training. These methods face two primary challenges: 1)
their coarse-grained resource management (e.g., server-level
instead of CPU core-level) leaves idle actors’ resources
unreleased; and 2) the prolonged server startup process
(minute-level) prevents efficient mitigation of DRL actors’
idle time through frequent server toggling. Thus, we propose

Introduction
The success of AlphaGo (Silver et al. 2016) inspires various deep reinforcement learning (DRL) applications, such
as gaming AI (Vinyals et al. 2019; Berner et al. 2019),
robotics (Ji et al. 2022; Thumm and Althoff 2022), system
scheduling (Mao et al. 2022; Qiu et al. 2023), bioinformatics (Jumper et al. 2021), and large language model training (OpenAI 2023). DRL training is expensive, which takes
numerous trials and errors, consuming countless computing
resources and time. Thus, a few distributed DRL algorithms
are proposed to parallelize and accelerate the training with
multiple servers (Luo et al. 2020; Wijmans et al. 2019; Espeholt et al. 2018; Horgan et al. 2018; Kapturowski et al. 2018;
Hessel et al. 2018; Espeholt et al. 2020).
The actor-learner architecture represents one of the most
efficient distributed DRL training paradigms available (Luo
et al. 2020; Espeholt et al. 2018, 2020). This approach
decouples the DRL agent’s responsibilities into two distinct roles: actors for data sampling and learners for policy updates. On-policy algorithms (Schulman et al. 2017;
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16539

