The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

From Hope to Safety: Unlearning Biases of Deep Models via Gradient
Penalization in Latent Space
Maximilian Dreyer* 1 , Frederik Pahde* 1 , Christopher J. Anders2 ,
Wojciech Samek1,2,3 , Sebastian Lapuschkin1
1

Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute, 10587 Berlin, Germany
2
Technical University of Berlin, 10587 Berlin, Germany
3
BIFOLD – Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data, 10587 Berlin, Germany
{wojciech.samek,sebastian.lapuschkin}@hhi.fraunhofer.de
Abstract

biased model: use of collar
features to predict hair color.

Deep Neural Networks are prone to learning spurious correlations embedded in the training data, leading to potentially
biased predictions. This poses risks when deploying these
models for high-stake decision-making, such as in medical
applications. Current methods for post-hoc model correction
either require input-level annotations which are only possible for spatially localized biases, or augment the latent feature space, thereby hoping to enforce the right reasons. We
present a novel method for model correction on the concept level that explicitly reduces model sensitivity towards
biases via gradient penalization. When modeling biases via
Concept Activation Vectors, we highlight the importance of
choosing robust directions, as traditional regression-based approaches such as Support Vector Machines tend to result in
diverging directions. We effectively mitigate biases in controlled and real-world settings on the ISIC, Bone Age, ImageNet and CelebA datasets using VGG, ResNet and EfficientNet architectures. Code and Appendix are available on
https://github.com/frederikpahde/rrclarc.

1

a modeling bias via CAV
with
without
signal

choose the right direction

b correcting bias
bias samples
Vanilla
(without correction)

Introduction

For over a decade, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) face a
growing interest in industry and research, featuring application in fields such as medicine or autonomous driving due
to their strong predictive performance. However, their high
performance may potentially be inflated by spurious correlations in the training data, which can pose serious risks in
safety-critical applications (Geirhos et al. 2020). Several so
called “short-cuts” have been found in medical settings, including hospital tags in COVID-19 radiographs (DeGrave,
Janizek, and Lee 2021), or skin markings for skin lesion
detection (Cassidy et al. 2022). Such short-cuts might also
compromise fairness, as shown in Figure 1, where a DNN
learned to use apparel features, i.e., a collar, to infer that the
hair is not blonde, due to overly-present dark-haired men
wearing a suit in the training dataset.
In order to reveal such spurious behavior, the field of eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) has proposed several
techniques identifying irregularities in a model’s global behavior (Lapuschkin et al. 2019; Bykov et al. 2023; Pahde

A-ClArC
activation space
RR-ClArC (ours)
gradient space
ensure the right reasons

Figure 1: Our DNN bias correction method RR-ClArC consists of two steps: first finding the bias direction in the
model’s latent space, and secondly reducing model sensitivity towards the direction in a fine-tuning step. (a): When
modeling the bias (here “collar”) via CAVs, robust approaches such as signal-CAV are key to model correction.
Most traditional regression solvers (e.g., SVMs) lead to diverging directions. (b): Compared to activation-based methods, such as A-ClArC, that implicitly regularize model behavior, RR-ClArC explicitly reduces bias sensitivity via gradient penalization, ultimately reducing the relevance of the
bias most strongly, as shown in the explanation heatmaps.

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21046

