The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Mono3DVG: 3D Visual Grounding in Monocular Images
Yang Zhan1 , Yuan Yuan1 * , Zhitong Xiong2 *
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Optics and Electronics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
2
Technical University of Munich (TUM), Munich, Germany
{zhanyangnwpu, y.yuan1.ieee, xiongzhitong}@gmail.com

Abstract

it unable to accomplish specific object localization based
on human instructions. To carry out more effective humanmachine interaction on devices equipped with cameras, such
as drones, surveillance systems, intelligent vehicles, and
robots, it is necessary to perform visual grounding using natural language in monocular RGB images.
In this work, we introduce a task of 3D object localization through language descriptions with geometry information directly in a single RGB image, termed Mono3DVG
(see Fig. 1). Specifically, we build a large-scale dataset,
Mono3DRefer, which provides 41,140 natural language expressions of 8,228 objects. Mono3DRefer’s descriptions
contain both appearance and geometry information, generated by ChatGPT and refined manually. Geometry information can provide more precise instructions and identify invisible objects. Even if the appearance of an object is the
primary visual perception for humans, they tend to use geometry information to distinguish objects.
To perform inference based on the language with appearance and geometry information, we propose a novel end-toend transformer-based approach, namely Mono3DVG-TR,
which consists of a multi-modal feature encoder, a dual textguided adapter, a grounding decoder, and a grounding head.
First, we adopt transformer and CNN to extract textual and
multi-scale visual features. Depth predictor is designed to
explicitly learn geometry features. Second, to refine multiscale visual and geometry features of the referred object,
we propose the dual text-guided adapter to perform textguided feature learning based on pixel-wise attention. Finally, a learnable query first aggregates the initial geometric features, then enhances text-related geometric features by
text embedding and finally collects appearance features from
multiscale visual features. The depth-text-visual stacking attention fuses object-level geometric cues and visual appearance into the query, fully realizing text-guided decoding.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

We introduce a novel task of 3D visual grounding in monocular RGB images using language descriptions with both appearance and geometry information. Specifically, we build
a large-scale dataset, Mono3DRefer, which contains 3D object targets with their corresponding geometric text descriptions, generated by ChatGPT and refined manually. To foster this task, we propose Mono3DVG-TR, an end-to-end
transformer-based network, which takes advantage of both
the appearance and geometry information in text embeddings
for multi-modal learning and 3D object localization. Depth
predictor is designed to explicitly learn geometry features.
The dual text-guided adapter is proposed to refine multiscale
visual and geometry features of the referred object. Based on
depth-text-visual stacking attention, the decoder fuses objectlevel geometric cues and visual appearance into a learnable
query. Comprehensive benchmarks and some insightful analyses are provided for Mono3DVG. Extensive comparisons
and ablation studies show that our method significantly outperforms all baselines. The dataset and code will be released.

Introduction
For intelligent systems and robots, understanding objects
based on language expressions in real 3D scenes is an important capability for human-machine interaction. Visual
grounding (Deng et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2022; Zhan, Xiong,
and Yuan 2023) has made significant progress in 2D scenes,
but these approaches cannot obtain the true 3D extent of
the objects. Therefore, recent researches (Chen, Chang, and
Nießner 2020; Achlioptas et al. 2020) utilize RGB-D sensors for 3D scanning and build indoor point cloud scenes for
3D visual grounding. The latest work (Lin et al. 2023) focuses on outdoor service robots and utilizes LiDAR and an
industrial camera to capture point clouds and RGB images
as multimodal visual inputs. However, the practical application of these works is limited due to the expensive cost and
device limitations of RGB-D scans and LiDAR scans.
Monocular 3D object detection (Huang et al. 2022a;
Brazil et al. 2023) can obtain the 3D coordinates of all objects in the scene and only requires RGB images. While this
approach has broad applications, it overlooks the semantic understanding of the 3D space and its objects, making

• We introduce a novel task of 3D visual grounding in
monocular RGB images using descriptions with appearance and geometry information, termed Mono3DVG.
• We contribute a large-scale dataset, which contains
41,140 expressions generated by ChatGPT and refined
manually based on the KITTI, named Mono3DRefer.
• We propose an end-to-end transformer-based network,

* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6988

