The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ERL-TD: Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning Enhanced with Truncated
Variance and Distillation Mutation
Qiuzhen Lin1 , Yangfan Chen1 , Lijia Ma1 , Wei-Neng Chen2 , Jianqiang Li3 *
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
lijq@szu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

to produce offspring through genetic crossover and mutation, while individuals with low fitness are eliminated. EA
shows advantages such as strong search capability, robustness, and stable convergence. Even though EA has achieved
some success in training deep neural networks for RL (Such
et al. 2018), it is obviously less sample-efficient than the RL
methods like Deep Q-Learning (Mnih et al. 2015).
Since RL and EA have complementary advantages, a
natural idea is to integrate them for designing better policy optimization algorithms. In this exciting direction, there
are many novel ideas emerging in recent years (Gangwani
and Peng 2018; Khadka and Tumer 2018). A first work is
Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning (ERL) proposed in
(Khadka and Tumer 2018), which is an innovative framework integrating Genetic Algorithm (GA) (Mitchell 1998)
with Deep Deterministic Policy Gradien (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al. 2015). This method maintains an RL agent and
multiple actor networks, which coexist and interact with
each other. By this way, it facilitates the sharing of knowledge among populations, which allows efficient information transfer and accelerates the learning process. However,
the integration of EA and RL is still rudimentary. As a result, many variants of ERL (Sigaud 2022) are subsequently
proposed, which are improved from two aspects: enhancing the communication between RL policy and EA policies (Khadka et al. 2019; Li et al. 2022), and improving
the crossover and mutation operators (Gangwani and Peng
2018; Bodnar, Day, and Lió 2020). However, the above ERL
algorithms still suffer from low efficiency and poor stability,
which are mainly induced by inaccuracy of Q-values evaluation and randomness of evolution. Generally, Q-values are
used to guide the direction of actions in RL, while evolutionary operators will generate promising candidates in EA.
Thus, without accurate Q-values estimation in RL and efficient evolutionary operators in EA, the population of actor
networks would generate a large number of meaningless experiences, leading to inefficiency and poor stability.
Here, we discuss ERL from the perspectives of Q-values
estimation and population evolution. As it is described in
(Thrun and Schwartz 1993), off-policy RL often suffers
from overestimation bias, which also exists in ERL. To address this issue, we use the mean of multiple networks minus the exponential of their variance as the target to update
Q-networks. Since each network has a different initializa-

Recently, an emerging research direction called Evolutionary
Reinforcement Learning (ERL) is proposed, which combines
evolutionary algorithm into reinforcement learning (RL) for
tackling the tasks of sequential decision making. However,
the recently proposed ERL algorithms often suffer from two
challenges: the inaccuracy of policy estimation caused by the
overestimation bias in RL and the insufficience of exploration
caused by inefficient mutations. To alleviate these problems,
we propose an Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning algorithm enhanced with Truncated variance and Distillation mutation, called ERL-TD. We utilize multiple Q-networks to
evaluate state-action pairs, so that multiple networks can provide more accurate evaluations for state-action pairs, in which
the variance of evaluations can be adopted to control the overestimation bias in RL. Moreover, we propose a new distillation mutation to provide a promising mutation direction,
which is different from traditional mutation generating a large
number of random solutions. We evaluate ERL-TD on the
continuous control benchmarks from the OpenAI Gym and
DeepMind Control Suite. The experiments show that ERLTD shows excellent performance and outperforms all baseline RL algorithms on the test suites.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a branch of machine learning that focuses on teaching an agent how to make decisions
through trial and error interactions with an environment. It
is inspired by the way that human learns from feedback and
rewards, which has been applied in various domains (Grinsztajn, Furelos-Blanco, and Barrett 2022; Zhao et al. 2022;
Rey, Hammad, and Saberi 2023), including robotics (Luo
et al. 2023), game playing (Vinyals et al. 2019), autonomous
driving (Sallab et al. 2017), and resource management (Ni
et al. 2021). Although RL demonstrates impressive capabilities in solving the tasks of sequential decision-making, it
still suffers from weak exploration and the sensitivity of hyperparameters. On the other hand, Evolutionary Algorithm
(EA) is a kind of computational intelligence methods, which
simulates the natural evolutionary process by maintaining a
population and iteratively searching for superior solutions.
In each iteration, individuals with high fitness are selected
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13826

