The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Uncertainty Quantification for Data-Driven Change-Point Learning via
Cross-Validation
Hui Chen1 * , Yinxu Jia2 * , Guanghui Wang3 * † , Changliang Zou2 *
1

School of Mathematics and Statistics, Jiangsu Normal University
School of Statistics and Data Science, LPMC, KLMDASR, and LEBPS, Nankai University
3
School of Statistics, Academy of Statistics and Interdisciplinary Sciences, and KLATASDS-MOE, East China Normal
University
chenhuiah@163.com, yxjia@mail.nankai.edu.cn, ghwang.nk@gmail.com, zoucl@nankai.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Accurately detecting multiple change-points is critical for
various applications, but determining the optimal number of
change-points remains a challenge. Existing approaches based
on information criteria attempt to balance goodness-of-fit and
model complexity, but their performance varies depending on
the model. Recently, data-driven selection criteria based on
cross-validation has been proposed, but these methods can be
prone to slight overfitting in finite samples. In this paper, we
introduce a method that controls the probability of overestimation and provides uncertainty quantification for learning
multiple change-points via cross-validation. We frame this
problem as a sequence of model comparison problems and
leverage high-dimensional inferential procedures. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach through experiments
on finite-sample data, showing superior uncertainty quantification for overestimation compared to existing methods. Our
approach has broad applicability and can be used in diverse
change-point models.

Introduction
Change-point detection plays a crucial role in diverse domains, including machine learning and statistics (Aue and
Horváth 2013; Niu, Hao, and Zhang 2016; Aminikhanghahi
and Cook 2017; Fearnhead and Rigaill 2020; Truong, Oudre,
and Vayatis 2020; Cho and Kirch 2021). Consider a scenario
where we have collected a sequence of independent data observations from a parametric multiple change-point model.
In this model, the data is divided into Kn + 1 pieces, each
adhering to a parametric model. Importantly, the parameters differ between successive pieces, representing variations
such as the mean or variance of the data, or regression coefficients illustrating the relationship between a response and
covariates.
Among the primary challenges in the multiple changepoint model is the estimation of the number of change-points.
Existing approaches involve selecting an optimal threshold
or penalty, where the ideal value may depend on the specific
model at hand. For instance, in binary segmentation and its
* These authors contributed equally, and are listed in alphabetical

order.
†
Guanghui Wang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11294

variants (Venkatraman 1992; Fryzlewicz 2014; Harchaoui,
Moulines, and Bach 2008; Li et al. 2015), each step of the
partitioning algorithm requires the determination of a threshold to decide when to stop segment partitioning. Nonetheless, identifying the appropriate threshold poses a significant
challenge. Similarly, in the case of penalized minimization
algorithms (Yao 1988; Bai and Perron 1998; Braun, Braun,
and Müller 2000; Hannart and Naveau 2012; Killick, Fearnhead, and Eckley 2012; Zou et al. 2014; Haynes, Eckley, and
Fearnhead 2017; Haynes, Fearnhead, and Eckley 2017; Wang,
Zou, and Yin 2018; Cho and Kirch 2022; Baranowski, Chen,
and Fryzlewicz 2019; Fearnhead, Maidstone, and Letchford
2019), it becomes crucial to carefully select the penalized
parameters.
In recent developments, Zou, Wang, and Li (2020) introduced a data-driven selection criterion utilizing crossvalidation (CV) to address the issue of threshold or penalty
selection. This criterion is versatile, as it can be applied alongside various change-point detection algorithms and is suitable for different parametric change-point models. Building
upon this work, Pein and Shah (2021) further refined the
cross-validation criterion with a specific focus on detecting
changes that involve large magnitudes.
Cross-validation has been widely used as a technique to
estimate the prediction error of a model (Allen 1974; Stone
1974; Geisser 1975). The fundamental concept behind crossvalidation is to fit and evaluate candidate models on separate
datasets to obtain an unbiased performance evaluation. However, traditional cross-validation methods, such as leave-oneout and V-fold variants, have limitations when it comes to
model selection. These methods can suffer from overfitting,
which leads to inaccurate model selection. Theoretical studies
by Shao (1993); Zhang (1993); Yang (2007) have shown that
cross-validation may not consistently select the correct model
in low-dimensional linear models unless the training-testing
split ratio tends to zero. Unfortunately, achieving such ideal
split ratios is not useful in real-world applications. Recent advances in this field by Austern and Zhou (2020); Bayle et al.
(2020) have focused on studying the asymptotic distribution
of the cross-validated risk under certain stability conditions.
The cross-validation criterion in the context of changepoint detection problems introduced by Zou, Wang, and Li
(2020) demonstrated that the criterion can lead to consistent

