The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

NegVSR: Augmenting Negatives for Generalized Noise Modeling in Real-world
Video Super-Resolution
Yexing Song1 , Meilin Wang1 , Zhijing Yang1 , Xiaoyu Xian2 , Yukai Shi1 *
1

School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology
2
CRRC Academy
Songsheng0505@gmail.com, xxy@crrc.tech, {wml, yzhj, ykshi}@gdut.edu.cn

Methods
Mixup (Zhang et al. 2017)
CutOut (DeVries and Taylor 2017)
CutMix (Yun et al. 2019)
FMix (Harris et al. 2020)
Mixup Noise
NegMix, w/ LAug−N P (ours full)

Abstract
The capability of video super-resolution (VSR) to synthesize high-resolution (HR) video from ideal datasets has been
demonstrated in many works. However, applying the VSR
model to real-world video with unknown and complex degradation remains a challenging task. First, existing degradation metrics in most VSR methods are not able to effectively
simulate real-world noise and blur. On the contrary, simple
combinations of classical degradation are used for real-world
noise modeling, which led to the VSR model often being violated by out-of-distribution noise. Second, many SR models focus on noise simulation and transfer. Nevertheless, the
sampled noise is monotonous and limited. To address the
aforementioned problems, we propose a Negatives augmentation strategy for generalized noise modeling in Video SuperResolution (NegVSR) task. Specifically, we first propose sequential noise generation toward real-world data to extract
practical noise sequences. Then, the degeneration domain is
widely expanded by negative augmentation to build up various yet challenging real-world noise sets. We further propose
the augmented negative guidance loss to learn robust features among augmented negatives effectively. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets (e.g., VideoLQ and FLIR)
show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods
with clear margins, especially in visual quality. Project page
is available at: https://negvsr.github.io/.

NIQE ↓
3.635
3.563
3.470
3.585
3.643
3.188

Table 1: The quantitative comparison of our model with various data augmentation methods uses REDS and FLIR training dataset as the training video. ’Mixup Noise’ denotes the
mixing of VSR inputs with a solitary noise extracted from
the FLIR training dataset. ’NegMix’ is our negative augmentation method for VSR. The performance evaluation is performed on the VideoLQ dataset.

2020; Wang et al. 2021; Shi et al. 2020; Wei et al. 2020)
have ensured that the real-world model can produce highquality images across various domains. For instance, RealESRGAN (Wang et al. 2021) proposed a high-order degradation model that better simulates real-world degradation.
They expand the degeneration domain by a second-order degeneration model composing various classical degeneration
kernels. But the high-order degradation mode has a theoretical upper bound on the degradation domain, which means
the permutations of all the classical degenerate kernels are
included. However, this strategy solely deals with a limited
portion of real-world scene degradation.
Recently, many noise migration and simulation methods (Ji et al. 2020; Li et al. 2022; Dong et al. 2023; Pan et al.
2023) can extract the noise from the real-world dataset. They
sample noise by calculating the feature from the real-world
scene dataset. Estimating blur kernels and noise by modeling real-world noise effectively improves the quality of reconstructed images (Zhang et al. 2021). Furthermore, suppose the sampled noise is mixed with the VSR input during
training. The high-level semantic information in the input
image will be further degraded, which helps the discriminative model learn robust features. However, in the VSR task,
the noise domain shows a different pattern with space-time
structure in the same video sequence, leading to misaligned
information in the space-time dimensions. It reveals that the
concept of concurrently processing sequential frames and in-

Introduction
Video super-resolution (VSR) is the process of changing
from low-resolution (LR) video to high-resolution (HR)
video. Currently, VSR is divided into traditional VSR and
real-world VSR (Chan et al. 2022b), depending on the existence of the HR labels. Nevertheless, the VSR model frequently suffers from overfitting to a specific dataset within
a fixed domain, which leads to the test results are often violated by unknown degeneration (Ji et al. 2020). Due to the
domain gap, traditional VSR methods often fail to reconstruct real-world images effectively. Thus, it is crucial to develop a more robust restoration system for VSR.
The primary objective in the real-world VSR task is to
extract more representative spatial structures and reasonable texture details from images. Many works (Ji et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10705

