The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Three Heads Are Better than One:
Complementary Experts for Long-Tailed Semi-supervised Learning
Chengcheng Ma1, 2 * , Ismail Elezi3 , Jiankang Deng3 , Weiming Dong1† , Changsheng Xu1
1

2

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, London, UK

Abstract

In the fully-supervised setting, DNNs trained on imbalanced labeled data are prone to mostly predict the head
classes. This issue is exacerbated in LTSSL, as the unlabeled
data are mostly pseudo-labeled as head classes during training, intensifying the training bias. This can lead to lower
test accuracy on tail classes, especially when the class distributions of the labeled and unlabeled data are mismatched.
Unfortunately, most of the pioneer LTSSL works assume
a similar class distribution between labeled and unlabeled
sets, causing lower performances when such assumption is
inevitably violated. Very recently, ACR (Wei and Gan 2023)
proposes to handle varying class distributions of unlabeled
sets by introducing adaptive logit adjustment and achieving
state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance. Though effective, its
pseudo-labels are generated by a single classifier. As we will
show in the experimental section, the pseudo-label quality
by ACR can be further improved.
In this paper, we propose a flexible and end-to-end LTSSL
algorithm, namely ComPlementary Experts (CPE). To cope
with varying class distributions of unlabeled sets, we train
multiple experts where each expert is tasked to model
one class group. We do so by using different logit adjustments (Menon et al. 2020) during the computation of the
supervised loss. Specifically, the first expert is trained with
regular cross entropy loss to fit the skewed class distribution
of labeled sets, so it is natural to see it perform well when
the distribution of unlabeled and labeled sets are consistent.
In contrast, the second and third experts are trained with different intensities of logit adjustments, which are encouraged
to yield class-balanced and inversely skewed predictions, respectively. Thus, they can deal with the uniform and inverse
long-tailed cases, where the corresponding shape of predictions is just in need. In such a complementary manner, one
of three experts in our CPE algorithms can always predict
pseudo-labels with higher F1 scores than ACR (see Fig. 1).
Having three experts results in a higher recall in the unlabeled samples belonging to medium and tail classes, especially in the uniform and inverse cases. Consequently, the
extracted features within medium and tail classes tend to follow distribution with larger variances compared with head
classes. To prevent such phenomenon from harming model
performance, we propose Classwise Batch Normalization
(CBN) mechanism to realize classwise feature processing.
In CBN, we design three different batch normalization lay-

We address the challenging problem of Long-Tailed SemiSupervised Learning (LTSSL) where labeled data exhibit imbalanced class distribution and unlabeled data follow an unknown distribution. Unlike in balanced SSL, the generated
pseudo-labels are skewed towards head classes, intensifying the training bias. Such a phenomenon is even amplified
as more unlabeled data will be mislabeled as head classes
when the class distribution of labeled and unlabeled datasets
are mismatched. To solve this problem, we propose a novel
method named ComPlementary Experts (CPE). Specifically,
we train multiple experts to model various class distributions,
each of them yielding high-quality pseudo-labels within one
form of class distribution. Besides, we introduce Classwise
Batch Normalization for CPE to avoid performance degradation caused by feature distribution mismatch between head
and non-head classes. CPE achieves state-of-the-art performances on CIFAR-10-LT, CIFAR-100-LT, and STL-10-LT
dataset benchmarks. For instance, on CIFAR-10-LT, CPE improves test accuracy by over >2.22% compared to baselines.
Code is available at https://github.com/machengcheng2016/
CPE-LTSSL.

Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is a promising approach
for improving the performance of deep neural networks
(DNNs). In SSL, only a limited amount of labeled data is
available, with the majority of data being unlabeled. Most
existing SSL approaches assume that the labeled and unlabeled data follow the same distribution and that the distribution is class-balanced. However, this assumption is often
violated in real-world applications, where the class distribution of the labeled data is often long-tailed, with a few
(head) classes containing significantly more samples than
the other (tail) classes. In long-tailed semi-supervised learning (LTSSL), the distribution of the unlabeled data can take
three forms: (i) it can be long-tailed, following the same distribution as the labeled data; (ii) it can be uniform, with a
balanced class distribution; or (iii) it can be inverse longtailed, with the head classes of the labeled data being the
tail classes of the unlabeled data, and vice versa.
* This work was done during an internship in Huawei Inc.
†

Corresponding author (weiming.dong@ia.ac.cn).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14229

