The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Deploying ADVISER: Impact and Lessons from Using Artificial Intelligence for
Child Vaccination Uptake in Nigeria
Opadele Kehinde1 , Ruth Abdul1 , Bose Afolabi1 , Parminder Vir1
Corinne Namblard1 , Ayan Mukhopadhyay2 * , Abiodun Adereni†1
2

1
HelpMum, Ibadan, Nigeria
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, USA

Abstract

Addressing maternal and infant health is one of the core
imperatives of the United Nations’ sustainable development
goals (UN-SDGs) (United Nations 2020). Specifically, the
SDGs highlight the immediate need to mobilize resources to
completely eradicate preventable infant deaths. While mobilizing resources is important, the availability of limited resources (e.g., healthcare centers, community health workers,
etc.) means that optimizing the allocation of such resources
is critical. We hypothesize that data-driven optimization can
particularly benefit in this context, when used in close collaboration with local partners and domain experts. In this paper, we describe the deployment of an AI-enabled optimization engine called ADVISER, an acronym that stands for AIdriven Vaccination Intervention Optimiser, in Oyo, Nigeria.
The ADVISER framework, proposed by Nair et al. (2022),
optimizes the allocation of health interventions in resourceconstrained settings. Nair et al. (2022) describe how a combination of heuristic search and learning from historical data
can design targeted intervention, directing resources to people who need it the most, thereby improving overall health
outcomes.
While the efficacy of mathematical and data-driven optimization techniques is naturally attractive for resource allocation, deploying such frameworks in practice is particularly challenging. First, data gathering, cleaning, and measuring impact through pre- and post-surveys is often a tedious process. Second, while optimization frameworks can
leverage sophisticated computing infrastructure in academic
and industrial settings, deployment costs borne by non-profit
organizations in the developing world must be low enough
to be economically viable. Third, as we show later, hyperparameters used during algorithm development can often
be misleading during deployment, and algorithms must be
adapted according to updated settings. Finally, scaling complex socio-technical interventions requires sustained collaborations with local partners, community members, and government agencies.
In this paper, we describe how we deployed the ADVISER framework to over 13,000 families in the state
of Oyo, Nigeria, and addressed these challenges over the
course of the deployment. The key components of the deployed framework are:

More than 5 million children under five years die from largely
preventable or treatable medical conditions every year, with
an overwhelmingly large proportion of deaths occurring in
underdeveloped countries with low vaccination uptake. One
of the United Nations’ sustainable development goals (SDG
3) aims to end preventable deaths of newborns and children
under five years of age. We focus on Nigeria, where the rate
of infant mortality is appalling. In particular, low vaccination
uptake in Nigeria is a major driver of more than 2,000 daily
deaths of children under the age of five years. In this paper,
we describe our collaboration with government partners in
Nigeria to deploy ADVISER: AI-Driven Vaccination Intervention Optimiser. The framework, based on an integer linear
program that seeks to maximize the cumulative probability
of successful vaccination, is the first successful deployment
of an AI-enabled toolchain for optimizing the allocation of
health interventions in Nigeria. In this paper, we provide a
background of the ADVISER framework and present results,
lessons, and success stories of deploying ADVISER to more
than 13,000 families in the state of Oyo, Nigeria.

Introduction
Annually, more than five million children die from medical conditions that are largely preventable or treatable (Nair
et al. 2022). A disproportionate fraction of these deaths
occur in the global south, particularly in countries with
low vaccination uptake. We focus on Nigeria, where infant
deaths in the country are also shockingly high, with more
than two thousand daily deaths of children under the age of
five years (Okwuwa and Adejo 2020). Several factors cause
high infant mortality in Nigeria. First, the immunization rate
among infants is extremely low despite major efforts by the
government. For example, vaccination is available for free
through many community health centers. Second (and partly
responsible for the first challenge), families often lack the
funds required to travel to the community health centers. Finally, while the government and non-profit agencies strive to
raise awareness and design interventions to increase vaccination uptake, scaling such interventions has been challenging in practice.
* ayan.mukhopadhyay@vanderbilt.edu
†

biodun@helpmum.org
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. To the best of our knowledge, our work presents the first
successful deployment of an AI-based framework for op-

22185

