The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Open-Set Facial Expression Recognition
Yuhang Zhang1 , Yue Yao2 , Xuannan Liu1 , Lixiong Qin1 , Wenjing Wang1 , Weihong Deng1
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Australian National University
{zyhzyh, liuxuannan, lxqin, wwj311, whdeng}@bupt.edu.cn, yue.yao@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Facial expression recognition (FER) models are typically
trained on datasets with a fixed number of seven basic classes.
However, recent research works (Cowen et al. 2021; Bryant
et al. 2022; Kollias 2023) point out that there are far more
expressions than the basic ones. Thus, when these models
are deployed in the real world, they may encounter unknown
classes, such as compound expressions that cannot be classified into existing basic classes. To address this issue, we propose the open-set FER task for the first time. Though there are
many existing open-set recognition methods, we argue that
they do not work well for open-set FER because FER data are
all human faces with very small inter-class distances, which
makes the open-set samples very similar to close-set samples.
In this paper, we are the first to transform the disadvantage of
small inter-class distance into an advantage by proposing a
new way for open-set FER. Specifically, we find that small
inter-class distance allows for sparsely distributed pseudo labels of open-set samples, which can be viewed as symmetric noisy labels. Based on this novel observation, we convert
the open-set FER to a noisy label detection problem. We further propose a novel method that incorporates attention map
consistency and cycle training to detect the open-set samples.
Extensive experiments on various FER datasets demonstrate
that our method clearly outperforms state-of-the-art open-set
recognition methods by large margins. Code is available at
https://github.com/zyh-uaiaaaa.

Figure 1: We show the extracted features using CLIP on
CIFAR-10 and RAF-DB. CIFAR-10 (RAF-DB) has a large
(small) inter-class distance. The small inter-class distance of
FER data makes open-set samples similar to close-set samples and degrades the performance of the SOTA open-set
recognition method DIAS from 0.850 to 0.714. Our method
outperforms DIAS by large margins (over 20% improvement based on the original AUROC) on the open-set FER
task of three different FER datasets.
To solve the above problem, we propose the open-set
FER for the first time, which aims to maintain the high
accuracy of FER models in the closed set while enabling
them to identify samples that belong to unknown classes.
Specifically, FER models should be able to detect samples
that do not fit perfectly into the close-set classes. However,
it is a non-trivial problem because of the overconfidence
problem (Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune 2015; Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Liu et al. 2023) of deep learning
models. While some open-set recognition methods (Zhou,
Ye, and Zhan 2021; Moon et al. 2022) have tried to solve
a similar problem, we argue that they fail in open-set FER.
We claim that open-set FER is a much more difficult task
because FER data are all human faces with very small interclass distances. This characteristic makes the open-set samples very similar to the close-set samples, which largely
degrades the performance of existing open-set recognition
methods.
In this paper, different from existing methods, we pro-

Introduction
Facial expression recognition (FER) is vital in humancentered computing as it helps machines understand human feelings (Li and Deng 2020). Existing FER models
are trained with the fixed seven basic classes. However, as
pointed out by recent research works published in Nature
and top computer vision conferences (Cowen et al. 2021;
Bryant et al. 2022; Kollias 2023), humans can display various expressions that go beyond the basic classes in realworld deployments, such as other different expressions and
compound expressions. Close-set FER models trained on
the basic classes are unreliable when encountering new unknown expressions as these samples are always misclassified
as one of the given classes with high confidence. This limitation hinders the real-world deployment of FER models.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

646

