The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Consistency-Guided Temperature Scaling Using Style and Content Information
for Out-of-Domain Calibration
Wonjeong Choi1 , Jungwuk Park1 , Dong-Jun Han2 , Younghyun Park1 , Jaekyun Moon1
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
2
Purdue University
{dnjswjd5457, savertm, dnffkf369}@kaist.ac.kr, han762@purdue.edu, jmoon@kaist.edu

Abstract
Research interests in the robustness of deep neural networks
against domain shifts have been rapidly increasing in recent
years. Most existing works, however, focus on improving the
accuracy of the model, not the calibration performance which
is another important requirement for trustworthy AI systems.
Temperature scaling (TS), an accuracy-preserving post-hoc
calibration method, has been proven to be effective in indomain settings, but not in out-of-domain (OOD) due to the
difficulty in obtaining a validation set for the unseen domain
beforehand. In this paper, we propose consistency-guided temperature scaling (CTS), a new temperature scaling strategy
that can significantly enhance the OOD calibration performance by providing mutual supervision among data samples
in the source domains. Motivated by our observation that overconfidence stemming from inconsistent sample predictions is
the main obstacle to OOD calibration, we propose to guide
the scaling process by taking consistencies into account in
terms of two different aspects - style and content - which are
the key components that can well-represent data samples in
multi-domain settings. Experimental results demonstrate that
our proposed strategy outperforms existing works, achieving
superior OOD calibration performance on various datasets.
This can be accomplished by employing only the source domains without compromising accuracy, making our scheme
directly applicable to various trustworthy AI systems.

Introduction
Despite the huge success of deep neural networks (DNNs) in
various fields such as computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2017) and natural language processing (Mikolov
et al. 2013), it is still difficult to actively utilize DNNs in
safety-critical or high-risk applications including medical engineering and defect detection. One of the main reasons is that
there is a huge risk when the prediction of the model becomes
incorrect. In such applications, it is important for the neural
network to reliably indicate whether its prediction is likely
to be correct or not. In other words, the model should have a
reliable confidence about its prediction. Given the model that
has a reliable confidence, we can use the prediction of the
model (e.g., for disease diagnosis) if the prediction is likely to
be correct (i.e., high confidence), but may rely more on other
factors (e.g., decision of the doctor) if the prediction is likely
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11588

to be incorrect (i.e., low confidence). Therefore, promoting
the quality of the prediction confidence of DNNs is a key
mission for trustworthy AI (Tomani and Buettner 2021; Guo
et al. 2017). However, the problem of modern DNNs is that
they often produce over-confident predictions, which means
that the confidence of predictions is not reliable.
In this context, model calibration has been developed as
an important research direction to improve the reliability of
confidence of DNNs. In general, we say that the model is
well-calibrated if the confidence approximates the probability
of being correct well. The authors of (Guo et al. 2017) have
shown that modern neural networks have poor calibration performance due to over-confident predictions, and suggested a
simple yet effective method termed temperature scaling (TS).
TS is a post-hoc calibration method that calibrates the confidence of the trained model to make the confidence similar
to a true probability using a validation set, without affecting
the performance of the trained model. Various other methods
such as train-time regularization (Thulasidasan et al. 2019;
Krishnan and Tickoo 2020; Mukhoti et al. 2020; Hebbalaguppe et al. 2022) and probabilistic approaches (Gal and
Ghahramani 2016; Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell
2017) have been also proposed in the literature improve the
model’s calibration performance.
However, most prior works focus on the in-domain setting,
under the assumption that the domain distributions of train
data and test data are the same. This assumption often does
not hold in practice having domain shifts between training
and testing: in out-of-domain (OOD) settings, the neural network needs to make predictions for samples from the unseen
domain (target domain) that has not been observed in the
training set (source domains). Existing calibration strategies
face great challenges in the OOD settings due to the difficulty of knowing the unseen domain beforehand. Although
several works (Tomani et al. 2021; Gong et al. 2021; Yu et al.
2022) have recently suggested some TS-based calibration
methods under domain shift, their calibration performance is
still limited when the disparity between the source and target
domains becomes severe, as we will see in Section .
Main contributions. To handle the fundamental challenges
of existing calibration methods in OOD settings, we propose
consistency-guided temperature scaling (CTS), a new TSbased post-hoc strategy that can achieve superior OOD cali-

