The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Real3D: The Curious Case of Neural Scene Degeneration
Dengsheng Chen1 , Jie Hu1 , Xiaoming Wei1 , Enhua Wu2,3,4
1
Meituan
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, ISCAS
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
University of Macau
{chendengsheng, hujie39, weixiaoming}@meituan.com, ehwu@um.edu.mo
2

Abstract

Song and Ermon 2019). Therefore, recent studies (Lin et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2022; Poole et al. 2022a) try the feasibility
of leveraging text-to-image diffusion models (Saharia et al.
2022b; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) for generating 3D scenes
directly from text descriptions. These studies have demonstrated remarkable abilities in producing text-conditioned 3D
content. The diffusion model functions as a critic to refine
the 3D neural scenes, which can be represented by either implicit or explicit neural networks, such as a Neural Radiance
Field, or NeRF (Gu et al. 2021). This refinement process
involves using a score function to ensure that the rendered
images align with the photo-realistic image distribution from
different viewpoints, given an input text prompt. However,
the neural scenes are prone to get stuck in certain undesirable
local optima, which fully satisfy the description of the given
prompt but lead to unnatural-looking scenes or “neural scene
degeneration”, as depicted in Fig. 2.
The challenge of scene degeneration poses a significant
obstacle in effectively utilizing prior knowledge networks to
enhance the quality and realism of 3D neural scenes. In this
work, we use a discriminator to effectively address neural
scene degeneration. This is a novel approach that has not been
previously explored. Furthermore, we introduce Real3D, a
dual-renderer text-to-3D generation model that combines the
advantages of implicit and explicit rendering techniques. Our
experimental results demonstrate that Real3D outperforms all
existing state-of-the-art text-to-3D generation methods. Overall, our work offers valuable insights for the development of
learning-based 3D scene generation approaches.

Despite significant progress in utilizing pre-trained text-toimage diffusion models to guide the creation of 3D scenes,
these methods often struggle to generate scenes that are sufficiently realistic, leading to ”neural scene degeneration”. In
this work, we propose a new 3D scene generation model called
Real3D. Specifically, Real3D designs a pipeline from a NeRFlike implicit renderer to a tetrahedrons-based explicit renderer,
greatly improving the neural network’s ability to generate
various neural scenes. Moreover, Real3D introduces an additional discriminator to prevent neural scenes from falling into
undesirable local optima, thus avoiding the degeneration phenomenon. Our experimental results demonstrate that Real3D
outperforms all existing state-of-the-art text-to-3D generation
methods, providing valuable insights to facilitate the development of learning-based 3D scene generation approaches.

Introduction
3D object generation has recently garnered significant attention in the fields of computer graphics and computer vision,
owing to its numerous applications in areas such as gaming,
virtual/augmented reality, and 3D printing.
Early approaches for 3D object generation primarily relied
on categorical models, wherein the neural network could only
synthesize a particular class of objects. However, in artistic
contexts such as animation and game development, artists
may require the ability to generate a diverse range of objects,
posing a significant challenge for categorical models alone.
One of the major obstacles to 3D object generation lies in the
limited availability and diversity of 3D datasets. Compared to
image and video content, 3D datasets are relatively scarce on
the internet, primarily due to the exorbitant expenses involved
in capturing and rendering 3D objects. Consequently, the
existing 3D datasets are often confined to a handful of classes
and cannot encompass a broad range of 3D objects, further
impeding the 3D content creation process.
In the meantime, the recent advancements in diffusion
models (Balaji et al. 2022; Nichol et al. 2021; Ramesh et al.
2022; Saharia et al. 2022a) have spurred significant progress
in the generative modeling of images using text prompts,
enhancing the creative process of generating image content (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015;

Related Work
Text-to-Image Generation. Text-to-image generation has
witnessed significant advancements in recent years, owing
to diffusion models (Balaji et al. 2022; Ramesh et al. 2022).
These models integrate rich semantic concepts from the text,
such as nouns, adjectives, and artistic styles, to generate
highly realistic images of objects and scenes with exceptional
detail and quality. Nevertheless, the image sampling process
with diffusion models can be computationally expensive. To
generate high-resolution images, state-of-the-art models use
a cascade of super-resolution models (Saharia et al. 2022a)
or employ a sampling strategy from a lower-resolution latent space, which is then decoded into high-resolution images (Rombach et al. 2022). Despite advancements in generat-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1028

