The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

How to Evaluate Behavioral Models
Greg d’Eon1 , Sophie Greenwood1,2 * , Kevin Leyton-Brown1 , James R. Wright3
1

University of British Columbia
2
Cornell University
3
University of Alberta
gregdeon@cs.ubc.ca, sjgreenwood@cs.cornell.edu, kevinlb@cs.ubc.ca, jrwright@ualberta.ca

Abstract

In this paper, we attempt to answer this question with a
first-principles argument. Though we are motivated by behavioral game theory—and so it is the basis of our examples—
our argument depends only on four key characteristics of this
field. First, there is some mapping of interest from settings
to distributions over finite sets of discrete outcomes (e.g.,
the distribution of human decisions in strategic situations).
Second, it is possible to collect multiple samples from this
mapping for any given setting (e.g., by running an experiment with multiple participants). Third, a researcher seeks
a predictive model of this mapping, which can predict the
distribution of unseen data. Fourth, this model must also be
interpretable, having few parameters whose values can be
inspected and understood, and so it cannot generally represent the true mapping perfectly. Our arguments can therefore
be extended to other domains that share these characteristics;
we give several examples at the end of this paper.
From these characteristics, we argue that loss functions
should satisfy five key axioms. The first two, which we call
alignment axioms, ensure that the loss function induces a correct preference ordering over predictions. These axioms, sample Pareto-alignment and distributional Pareto-alignment,
ensure that the loss function penalizes predictions that are
clearly worse (on a given dataset or in expectation over realizations of this data, respectively). The other three, interpretability axioms, relate the numerical value of the loss to
a prediction’s quality. Empirical distribution sufficiency requires that the loss be invariant to the number or order of the
observations; counterfactual Pareto-regularity ensures that
the loss appropriately respects changes in the data, and zero
minimum gives the loss an interpretable optimum.
We show that it is possible to satisfy all of these axioms: we
identify an entire family of loss functions that do so, which we
dub “diagonal bounded Bregman divergences”. Exactly one
widely used loss function, the squared L2 error between the
predicted and empirical distributions, belongs to this set; we
show how each of the other common loss functions violates
at least one axiom. In particular, the entire class of scoring
rules,1 a class of loss functions with celebrated alignment

Researchers building behavioral models, such as behavioral
game theorists, use experimental data to evaluate predictive
models of human behavior. However, there is little agreement
about which loss function should be used in evaluations, with
error rate, negative log-likelihood, cross-entropy, Brier score,
and squared L2 error all being common choices. We attempt
to offer a principled answer to the question of which loss
functions should be used for this task, formalizing axioms
that we argue loss functions should satisfy. We construct a
family of loss functions, which we dub “diagonal bounded
Bregman divergences”, that satisfy all of these axioms. These
rule out many loss functions used in practice, but notably
include squared L2 error; we thus recommend its use for
evaluating behavioral models.

1

Introduction

Theoretical models of decision-making are often poor descriptions of behavior in practice. As a prime example, classic
economic models such as Nash equilibrium fail to describe
salient aspects of human behavior: people often choose dominated actions (Goeree and Holt 2001) and fail to account
for others’ strategic decision making (Kneeland 2015). In response to such failures, fields such as behavioral game theory
aim to develop interpretable models that can predict human
responses to strategic situations. Such models are helpful to
cognitive scientists, for learning how humans think when confronted with economic or strategic choices; to designers of
economic systems, for tuning these systems to perform better
in practice; and to designers of cooperative AI agents, for
enabling these agents to effectively coordinate their behavior
with humans (Hu et al. 2020; Carroll et al. 2019).
However, evaluating the quality of such a model on a
dataset requires a loss function. Researchers working in behavioral game theory have made a wide variety of different
choices about precisely which loss function to use for such
evaluations, with error rate, negative log-likelihood, crossentropy, and (at least two notions of) mean-squared error all
being common choices. Clearly, the choice is a substantive
one, as different losses will disagree about the quality of a
prediction. Which loss function should they use?

1

The term “scoring rule” has multiple definitions in the literature. We use a standard definition (e.g., Savage 1971; Gneiting and
Raftery 2007) that a scoring rule computes a loss separately for each
observation, then takes the mean of these losses (Definition 2.1).
Other authors (e.g., Abernethy and Frongillo 2012) use the term to

*Work done while at the University of British Columbia.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9636

