The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Finite-Time Frequentist Regret Bounds of Multi-Agent Thompson Sampling on
Sparse Hypergraphs
Tianyuan Jin1 , Hao-Lun Hsu2 , William Chang3 , Pan Xu2
1

National University of Singapore
2
Duke University
3
University of California, Los Angeles
tianyuan@u.nus.edu, hao-lun.hsu@duke.edu, chang314@g.ucla.edu, pan.xu@duke.edu
each agent chooses an arm from its own arm set [K]. We
define the concatenation of these arms as the joint arm. The
bandit learner aims to coordinate with all agents and choose
joint arms that maximize the cumulative rewards obtained
from pulling those joint arms. It is important to note that
the size of the joint arm space is exponential in the number
of agents, specifically A = K m . This exponential growth
poses computational challenges in coordination and arm selection. To address this issue, it was proposed to factor all
agents into ρ possibly overlapping groups (see wind farm
application), which forms a hypergraph over the agents with
each agent representing a node and each group representing
a hyperedge (an illustration can be found in Section 2 and
Figure 1). Instead of pulling the joint arm, the learner only
needs to pull the local arms, where each pulled local arm is
defined as the concatenation of the arms chosen by agents
within the same group. We assume each group has d agents,
and thus the total number of local arms Aloc is at most ρK d ,
which is much smaller than the number of joint arms when
the groups are small. This approach gives rise to MAMAB
problems with specific coordination graph structures, which
have found practical applications in various domains such as
traffic light control (Wiering et al. 2000), warehouse commissioning (Claes et al. 2017), and wind farm control (Gebraad and van Wingerden 2015; Verstraeten et al. 2019).
We evaluate a learning strategy based on its cumulative
rewards obtained by interacting with the environment for a
total of T rounds. This evaluation can be equivalently measured by calculating the regret of the strategy compared to an
oracle algorithm that always selects the arm with the highest reward. Mathematically, the regret is defined as RT =
PT
T µ∗ − E[ t=1 f (At )], where µ∗ is the mean of the optimal
arm and f (At ) represents the reward obtained when pulling
the joint arm At at time t according to the given strategy.
The goal of the algorithm (or learner) is to coordinate with
all agents to determine the joint arm to pull in order to minimize this regret.
Thompson sampling (Thompson 1933), introduced by
Thompson in 1933, has emerged as an attractive algorithm
for bandit problems. It is favored for its simplicity of implementation, good empirical performance, and strong theoretical guarantees (Chapelle and Li 2011; Agrawal and Goyal
2017; Jin et al. 2021a). The key idea behind Thompson sampling is to sample reward estimates for each possible arm

Abstract
We study the multi-agent multi-armed bandit (MAMAB)
problem, where agents are factored into overlapping groups.
Each group represents a hyperedge, forming a hypergraph
over the agents. At each round of interaction, the learner pulls
a joint arm (composed of individual arms for each agent)
and receives a reward according to the hypergraph structure.
Specifically, we assume there is a local reward for each hyperedge, and the reward of the joint arm is the sum of these local
rewards. Previous work introduced the multi-agent Thompson sampling (MATS) algorithm and derived a Bayesian regret bound. However, it remains an open problem how to derive a frequentist regret bound for Thompson sampling in this
multi-agent setting. To address these issues, we propose an
efficient variant of MATS, the epsilon-exploring Multi-Agent
Thompson Sampling (ϵ-MATS) algorithm, which performs
MATS exploration with probability epsilon while adopts a
greedy policy otherwise. We prove that ϵ-MATS achieves a
worst-case frequentist regret bound that is sublinear in both
the time horizon and the local arm size. We also derive a
lower bound for this setting, which implies our frequentist
regret upper bound is optimal up to constant and logarithm
terms, when the hypergraph is sufficiently sparse. Thorough
experiments on standard MAMAB problems demonstrate the
superior performance and the improved computational efficiency of ϵ-MATS compared with existing algorithms in the
same setting.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a fundamental problem in
machine learning, where an agent learns to make optimal
decisions in an environment by trial and error. A specific instance of RL is the multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem, in
which an agent must choose between a set of arms, and each
of the arms has a random reward distribution. The agent’s
goal is to maximize its total reward over time. In standard
MAB problems, an agent is provided with a set of arms
[K] := 1, 2, ..., K, and each arm, when pulled, generates
a reward following a 1-subgaussian distribution with an unknown mean. The agent’s objective is to maximize its overall
rewards within a specified time frame.
We consider the multi-agent MAB (MAMAB) problem,
where there are m agents. At each round of the interaction,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12956

