The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Federated Learning with Extremely Noisy Clients via Negative Distillation
Yang Lu 1,2 , Lin Chen 1,2 , Yonggang Zhang 3 , Yiliang Zhang 1,2 ,
Bo Han 3 , Yiu-ming Cheung 3 , Hanzi Wang 1,2 *
1

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China
luyang@xmu.edu.cn, chenlin191209@163.com, ylzhangcs@hotmail.com, hanzi.wang@xmu.edu.cn,
csygzhang@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, ymc@comp.hkbu.edu.hk
Abstract

Federated learning (FL) has shown remarkable success in
cooperatively training deep models, while typically struggling with noisy labels. Advanced works propose to tackle
label noise by a re-weighting strategy with a strong assumption, i.e., mild label noise. However, it may be violated in
many real-world FL scenarios because of highly contaminated clients, resulting in extreme noise ratios, e.g., >90%.
To tackle extremely noisy clients, we study the robustness
of the re-weighting strategy, showing a pessimistic conclusion: minimizing the weight of clients trained over noisy
data outperforms re-weighting strategies. To leverage models
trained on noisy clients, we propose a novel approach, called
negative distillation (FedNed). FedNed first identifies noisy
clients and employs rather than discards the noisy clients in
a knowledge distillation manner. In particular, clients identified as noisy ones are required to train models using noisy labels and pseudo-labels obtained by global models. The model
trained on noisy labels serves as a ‘bad teacher’ in knowledge
distillation, aiming to decrease the risk of providing incorrect information. Meanwhile, the model trained on pseudolabels is involved in model aggregation if not identified as a
noisy client. Consequently, through pseudo-labeling, FedNed
gradually increases the trustworthiness of models trained on
noisy clients, while leveraging all clients for model aggregation through negative distillation. To verify the efficacy
of FedNed, we conduct extensive experiments under various
settings, demonstrating that FedNed can consistently outperform baselines and achieve state-of-the-art performance.

Figure 1: The test accuracy of the global model by controlling the weight of a single client model. We set ten client
models including eight clean ones (with a noise ratio of 0%)
and two extremely noisy ones (with a noise ratio of 99%). K
is the total number of clients, which is ten in this example.

client may be with different degrees (Xu et al. 2022). Different from the label-noise learning in a batch setting, the
server in FL needs to judge the degree of label noise for each
client before model aggregation, because the server has no
information about which client has label noise.
Many efforts have been devoted to alleviating the labelnoise issue in FL (Liang et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2021; Chen
et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2022; Kim et al.
2022; Xu et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2023a). Advanced works
have shown the promising benefits of assigning different
weights to each client during the model aggregation process. The intuition behind these methods is that all client
models have the potential to contribute to the global model
by model aggregation, highlighting the importance of aggregation weights assigned for each client. The basic intuition is built upon a strong assumption that the label noise
on each client is relatively mild. Namely, models trained on
mild noise can benefit global models by aggregation.
However, the strong assumption could be violated in
many practical FL scenarios. For instance, some clients may
be highly contaminated with noise ratios exceeding 90%,
due to unintentional mislabeling or deliberate data poisoning. These clients are referred to as ‘extremely noisy’ clients
in the context of this work. Consequently, models trained

Introduction
The rise of federated learning (FL) benefits from its capacity for large-scale distributed model training in a datapreserving manner (Kairouz et al. 2021). The server aggregates client models to produce a global model and sends it
back for subsequent training. When the sample annotation
is accurate, the global model can generally exhibit promising performance, even when the data is somehow non-IID
distributed (Ma et al. 2022). Another challenge in FL is the
label-noise problem. Usually, as each client collects and annotates the data by itself, the inaccurate annotation in each
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14184

