The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Direct May Not Be the Best: An Incremental Evolution View of Pose Generation
Yuelong Li1,2 , Tengfei Xiao3 , Lei Geng4 , Jianming Wang2 *
2

1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Tiangong University, Tianjin, 300387, China
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Autonomous Intelligence Technology and Systems, Tiangong University, Tianjin, 300387, China
3
School of Software, Tiangong University, Tianjin, 300387, China
4
School of Life Sciences, Tiangong University, Tianjin, 300387, China
liyuelong@pku.edu.cn, newtnt121@qq.com, {genglei,wangjianming}@tiangong.edu.cn

Incremental Evolution
Pose Generation
Model

Output Pose

Generation Course

One-to-One
Pose Generation
Model

Input

Intermediate
Pose I

Target Pose

Source Image

Pose diversity is an inherent representative characteristic of
2D images. Due to the 3D to 2D projection mechanism, there
is evident content discrepancy among distinct pose images.
This is the main obstacle bothering pose transformation related researches. To deal with this challenge, we propose
a fine-grained incremental evolution centered pose generation framework, rather than traditional direct one-to-one in
a rush. Since proposed approach actually bypasses the theoretical difficulty of directly modeling dramatic non-linear
variation, the incurred content distortion and blurring could
be effectively constrained, at the same time the various individual pose details, especially clothes texture, could be precisely maintained. In order to systematically guide the evolution course, both global and incremental evolution constraints
are elaborately designed and merged into the overall framework. And a novel triple-path knowledge fusion structure is
worked out to take full advantage of all available valuable
knowledge to conduct high-quality pose synthesis. In addition, our framework could generate a series of valuable byproducts, namely the various intermediate poses. Extensive
experiments have been conducted to verify the effectiveness
of the proposed approach. Code is available at https://github.
com/Xiaofei-CN/Incremental-Evolution-Pose-Generation.

Target Pose

Source Image

Abstract

Output
Pose
Intermediate
Pose II

Intermediate
Pose III

(a) One-to-One Generation (b) Proposed Incremental Evolution Pose Generation

Figure 1: The basic flows of classical one-to-one pose generation (a) and proposed incremental evolution synthesis (b).
Clearly, human pose variation involves dramatic nonlinear visual content variation modeling, which is still theoretically difficult by now. Thus, in the past, unlike relatively
rigid human face (Li and Feng 2012; Hassner et al. 2015;
Shu et al. 2015), pose generation is always a much tougher
task and effective solutions are relatively rare. Real breakthrough developments come until the era of deep neural networks, which is an excellent modeling technique with overwhelming advantages over traditional modeling approaches,
as to description capacity, robustness, flexibility, and especially complex non-linear modeling.
In the past few decades, accompanied by the booming
of deep learning techniques, a number of pose synthesizing approaches have been worked out. Competitive process
originated Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Gui
et al. 2023) is a powerful modeling architecture famous for
prominent missing information compensation and complex
content generation capability. Thus, this structure is an evident characteristic of numerous pose generation approaches
(Tang et al. 2023; Khatun et al. 2023; Men et al. 2020; Roy
et al. 2023; Zhu et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2022, 2021). Knowledge transferring in feature space is also
a popular way to realize pose transformation (Khatun et al.
2023; Lv et al. 2021; Zhang, Liu, and Li 2020), where multistage information fusing is widely used to release the stress
of missing information modeling. In additional, newly developed attention centered Transformer structure has also
proved its effectiveness for robust modeling human pose

Introduction
At present, 2D image is still the most widely used visual
information transmission and storing carrier, which is structure simple, display intuitive, and manufacturing efficient.
But since 2D images are only projections of genuine 3D objects to 2D planes, pose variation is an intrinsic characteristic of this data category. Clearly, the dimension degrading
mechanism and object self-occlusion imply the projection
process is irreversible, and thus adjust or normalize object
pose becomes a quite tough mission that bothers tremendous 2D image based compute vision tasks, such as object
detection, tracking, recognition, and understanding. Among
massive existing objects, with no doubt, human body is one
of the most challenging one, due to prominent shape flexibility, diverse subtle clothes texture, and plenty of potential
pose categories. In this paper, we specifically focus on human pose transformation and generation.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3270

