The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TOP-ReID: Multi-Spectral Object Re-identification with Token Permutation
Yuhao Wang1 , Xuehu Liu2 , Pingping Zhang1 * , Hu Lu3 , Zhengzheng Tu4 , Huchuan Lu1
1

School of Future Technology, School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology
2
School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology
3
School of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University
924973292@mail.dlut.edu.cn, liuxuehu@whut.edu.cn, {zhpp, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, luhu@ujs.edu.cn
zhengzhengahu@163.com
Blurred

Abstract

Daytime

Low Resolution

Darkness

Glare

Clear

Multi-spectral object Re-identification (ReID) aims to retrieve specific objects by leveraging complementary information from different image spectra. It delivers great advantages
over traditional single-spectral ReID in complex visual environment. However, the significant distribution gap among
different image spectra poses great challenges for effective
multi-spectral feature representations. In addition, most of
current Transformer-based ReID methods only utilize the
global feature of class tokens to achieve the holistic retrieval,
ignoring the local discriminative ones. To address the above
issues, we step further to utilize all the tokens of Transformers and propose a cyclic token permutation framework for
multi-spectral object ReID, dubbled TOP-ReID. More specifically, we first deploy a multi-stream deep network based on
vision Transformers to preserve distinct information from different image spectra. Then, we propose a Token Permutation
Module (TPM) for cyclic multi-spectral feature aggregation.
It not only facilitates the spatial feature alignment across different image spectra, but also allows the class token of each
spectrum to perceive the local details of other spectra. Meanwhile, we propose a Complementary Reconstruction Module (CRM), which introduces dense token-level reconstruction constraints to reduce the distribution gap across different image spectra. With the above modules, our proposed
framework can generate more discriminative multi-spectral
features for robust object ReID. Extensive experiments on
three ReID benchmarks (i.e., RGBNT201, RGBNT100 and
MSVR310) verify the effectiveness of our methods. The code
is available at https://github.com/924973292/TOP-ReID.

RGB

NIR

TIR

Training

Multi-Spectral Test

Missing-Spectral Test

Query

Gallery

Figure 1: The top displays instances from RGBNT201 in
various challenges, while the bottom presents the object
ReID settings for multi-spectral and missing-spectral test.

persons and the background in the RGB image spectrum.
Hence, relying only on RGB images poses great challenges
for robust object ReID. Fortunately, other image spectra are
very useful to address above problems. In fact, Near Infrared (NIR) imaging is unaffected by darkness and adverse
weather conditions (Li et al. 2020b). Thus, there have been
some efforts (Li et al. 2020a; Liu et al. 2021a; Zhang and
Wang 2023) to incorporate NIR images to enhance the performance of object ReID. Nonetheless, NIR images retain
some limitations (Zheng et al. 2021), as depicted in Fig. 1.
For example, the details of persons in NIR images tend to be
substantially obscured in the presence of glare. Meanwhile,
Thermal Infrared (TIR) imaging is more robust to these scenarios (Zheng et al. 2021). As illustrated in Fig. 1, TIR images can highlight persons from the background and preserve crucial details, such as glasses and backpacks. These
facts clearly show the information complementarity of different image spectra for object ReID. Based on the above
facts, multi-spectral object ReID aims to retrieve specific ob-

Introduction
Object Re-identification (ReID) aims to retrieve specific objects from images or videos across non-overlapping cameras, which has advanced significantly over the past decades.
In the traditional object ReID, researchers primarily utilize
single-spectral images (such as RGB, depth) to extract visual information of the targets. However, single-spectral images provide very limited representation abilities in scenarios characterized by low resolution, darkness, glare, etc. As
illustrated in the top row of Fig. 1, the outlines of persons
are notably blurred, leading to an evident confusion between
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5758

