The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Locality Preserving Refinement for Shape Matching with Functional Maps
Yifan Xia, Yifan Lu, Yuan Gao∗ , Jiayi Ma*
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
xiayifan@whu.edu.cn, lyf048@whu.edu.cn, ethan.y.gao@gmail.com, jyma2010@gmail.com

Target
Sinkhorn

Abstract
In this paper, we address the nonrigid shape matching with
outliers by a novel and effective pointwise map refinement
method, termed Locality Preserving Refinement. For accurate pointwise conversion from a given functional map, our
method formulates a two-step procedure. Firstly, starting with
noisy point-to-point correspondences, we identify inliers by
leveraging the neighborhood support, which yields a closedform solution with linear time complexity. After obtained
the reliable correspondences of inliers, we refine the pointwise correspondences for outliers using local linear embedding, which operates in an adaptive spectral similarity space
to further eliminate the ambiguities that are difficult to handle in the functional space. By refining pointwise correspondences with local consistency thus embedding geometric constraints into functional spaces, our method achieves
considerable improvement in accuracy with linearithmic time
and space cost. Extensive experiments on public benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our method over the
state-of-the-art methods. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/XiaYifan1999/LOPR.

LOPR

GT

3 iterations

7 iterations

Figure 1: Qualitative examples employing color transfer,
comparing our LOPR with representative state-of-the-art
Sinkhorn (Pai et al. 2021) by integrating them into the iteration of MWP. Notably, our LOPR exhibits the capacity to
recover more precise pointwise maps.

Introduction
Recognizing the similarity and correspondences between
two nonrigid shapes is a fundamental problem in computer
vision and graphics (Van Kaick et al. 2011; Sahillioğlu
2020), such as shape analysis (Hartman et al. 2023), style
transfer (Sumner and Popović 2004), pose estimation (Jiang
et al. 2022), and texture mapping (Ezuz and Ben-Chen
2017). Unlike rigid alignment with easy parametric modeling, the complexity of nonrigid transformation and the existence of unknown outliers make such a problem intractable
to be modeled.
Due to the approximately isometric nature of real-world
deformations, estimating the near-isometric maps for nonrigid shape matching receives increasing research interests
in the last decades (Sahillioğlu 2020). Among the numerous
strategies for seeking the near-isometric maps (Deng et al.
2022), functional maps (Ovsjanikov et al. 2012) stands out
as an exemplary technique due to its high efficiency. Observing the isometric invariance based on the Laplacian-Beltrami

operator, functional map framework proposes the determination of a functional map operator that maps two spaces
of square-integrable functions on respective shape, thereby
efficiently recovering pointwise correspondences. This enables algebraic operations on shape maps such as map sum,
and natural constraints become linear. For instance, local
volume preserving maps can be associated with the orthogonality of functional map matrices, near isometries correspond to the commutativity of Laplacian operator, and conformal maps would preserve functional inner products. Interested readers are referred to the introductory course (Ovsjanikov et al. 2016) for details.
Following the functional map framework, many works
are presented in recent years. BCICP (Ren et al. 2018) is
proposed to promote orientation preservation. PFM (Rodolà
et al. 2017) is devised for partial shape matching. Moreover, ZoomOut (Melzi et al. 2019), SmoothShells (Eisenberger, Lahner, and Cremers 2020), DiscreteOp (Ren et al.
2021), MWP (Hu et al. 2021), CFM (Donati et al. 2022),
and EDEO (Magnet et al. 2022) are proposed to enhance the
effectiveness of functional maps. The pointwise map recov-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6207

