The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On the Convergence of an Adaptive Momentum Method for Adversarial Attacks
Sheng Long1 * , Wei Tao1,2 * , Shuohao Li1 , Jun Lei1 , Jun Zhang1†
1

Laboratory for Big Data and Decision, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China
2
Strategic Assessments and Consultation Institute, Academy of Military Science, Beijing 100091, China
{longsheng, lishuohao, leijun1987, zhangjun1975}@nudt.edu.cn, wtao plaust@163.com

Abstract

(Papernot, McDaniel, and Goodfellow 2016; Papernot et al.
2017)(Xie et al. 2019). Notably, representative algorithms
derived from FGSM, namely MI-FGSM (Dong et al. 2018)
and Nesterov Iterative FGSM (NI-FGSM) (Lin et al. 2020),
correspond to Heavy-Ball (HB) (Polyak 1964) and Nesterov
Accelerated Gradient (NAG) (Nesterov 1983), respectively.
In particular, MI-FGSM is highly similar to HB, and we will
delve into the relationship between them in the next section. HB (also named SGD with momentum) with a constant
momentum parameter has been widely adopted in practice
to improve the generalization performance of deep learning models (Sutskever et al. 2013)(Goyal et al. 2017). HB
has also shown evidence of being helpful in dampening
oscillations (Ruder 2016), and escaping local minimum or
saddle points (Ochs et al. 2014)(Sun et al. 2019). Inheriting these benefits from HB, MI-FGSM achieves stability in
the update direction, generating adversarial examples with
stronger transferability.
However, from an optimization perspective, the monotonic time-varying momentum parameter is needed for the
convergence analysis. There are two proposals for momentum parameter to guarantee convergence, but completely opposite. Specifically, one assumes a strictly monotonically
decreasing schedule (β1,t−1 > β1,t , β1,t → 0) (Kingma
and Ba 2015)(Reddi, Kale, and Kumar 2018)(Wang et al.
2020)(Zhuang et al. 2020) while the other demands an increasing schedule (β1,t−1 < β1,t , β1,t → 1) (Ghadimi,
Feyzmahdavian, and Johansson 2015)(Yang, Lin, and Li
2016)(Tao et al. 2021)(Li, Liu, and Orabona 2022), which
not only creates a theory-practice gap but also causes confusion when selecting hyper-parameters in practice. On the
other hand, (Ghadimi, Feyzmahdavian, and Johansson 2015)
utilizes a constant momentum parameter, which guarantees
the convergence of HB, but relies on strong assumptions of
strong convexity and smoothness in the objective function.
(Alacaoglu et al. 2020) proposes a novel theoretical analysis framework for Adam-type methods and obtains datadependent regret bounds with a constant momentum parameter β1 , yet, their bound still falls short of the optimal upper
bound with a logarithmic factor gap.
Faced with these challenges, it is natural to question: (1)
Why not investigate the convergence of MI-FGSM using
the theoretical results of HB? (2) Why not directly use HB,
which guarantees convergence, to generate adversarial ex-

Adversarial examples are commonly created by solving a
constrained optimization problem, typically using sign-based
methods like Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM). These attacks can benefit from momentum with a constant parameter, such as Momentum Iterative FGSM (MI-FGSM), to
enhance black-box transferability. However, the monotonic
time-varying momentum parameter is required to guarantee
convergence in theory, creating a theory-practice gap. Additionally, recent work shows that sign-based methods fail to
converge to the optimum in several convex settings, exacerbating the issue. To address these concerns, we propose a
novel method which incorporates both an innovative adaptive
momentum parameter without monotonicity assumptions and
an adaptive step-size scheme that replaces the sign operation.
Furthermore, we derive a regret upper bound for general convex functions. Experiments on multiple models demonstrate
the efficacy of our method in generating adversarial examples
with human-imperceptible noise while achieving high attack
success rates, indicating its superiority over previous adversarial example generation methods.

Introduction
Deep neural networks are known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples, which are imperceptible to the human
eye but mislead the classifier (Szegedy et al. 2014)(Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015). Adversarial examples play
a key role in improving model robustness through adversarial training (Madry et al. 2018)(Shafahi et al. 2019)(Pang
et al. 2020)(Cai et al. 2021), thus offering a defense mechanism against unknown adversarial attacks. Generally speaking, crafting high-quality adversarial examples has garnered considerable attention. The generation process is typically formulated as a constrained optimization problem and
solved using sign-based methods such as FGSM (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015), Basic Iterative Method
(BIM)(Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017), Project
Gradient Descent (PGD) (Madry et al. 2018), etc.
To further boost the attack success rate on black-box models, an effective strategy involves training adversarial examples with transferability on a white-box surrogate model
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14132

