The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Region Text-Driven Manipulation of Diffusion Imagery
Yiming Li1,2 , Peng Zhou3 , Jun Sun1 , Yi Xu1,2 *
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Digital Media Processing and Transmission, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
China Mobile (Suzhou) Software Technology Co., Ltd, China
{Yiming.Li, junsun, xuyi}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhoupengcv@outlook.com

Abstract

BackGround
Bedroom, sofa

Text-guided image manipulation has attracted significant attention recently. Prevailing techniques concentrate on image
attribute editing for individual objects, however, encountering
challenges when it comes to multi-object editing. The main
reason is the lack of consistency constraints on the spatial
layout. This work presents a multi-region guided image manipulation framework, enabling manipulation through regionlevel textual prompts. With MultiDiffusion as a baseline, we
are dedicated to the automatic generation of a rational multiobject spatial distribution, where disparate regions are fused
as a unified entity. To mitigate interference from regional fusion, we employ an off-the-shelf model (CLIP) to impose
region-aware spatial guidance on multi-object manipulation.
Moreover, when applied to the StableDiffusion, the presence
of quality-related yet object-agnostic lengthy words hampers the manipulation. To ensure focus on meaningful objectspecific words for efficient guidance and generation, we introduce a keyword selection method. Furthermore, we demonstrate a downstream application of our method for multiregion inversion, which is tailored for manipulating multiple objects in real images. Our approach, compatible with
variants of Stable Diffusion models, is readily applicable for
manipulating diverse objects in extensive images with highquality generation, showing superb image control capabilities. Code is available at https://github.com/liyiming09/multiregion-guided-diffusion.

1

Obeject 1
1girl, long hair,
white sweater, ...
Additional
Obeject 2
1girl, ponytail,
sitting on sofa, ...
(a)
Object addition
“1man, blue jeans, ...”
Object-related
prompts
Quality-related
prompts
Remove a quality prompt
“instrinsically detailed face”
(b)

Object-related
prompts*
Quality-related
prompts
Object-related
prompts
Quality-related
prompts*

Figure 1: Fig.(a) illustrates unexpected changes from region addition. In the latent space, object additions and
removals incur regional interference, leading to distorted
limbs. Fig.(b) demonstrates that although quality-related
prompts have a significant influence on generation, they are
unrelated to editing. Focusing on object-specific and editingrelated prompts enhances the quality of manipulation.

content. In practice, challenges persist in text-driven image
manipulation within real-world applications (Valevski et al.
2022; Zhu et al. 2020).
Inherited from the superior performance of diffusion
models (Mao, Wang, and Aizawa 2023; Voynov, Aberman,
and Cohen-Or 2022), certain diffusion-based image editing
methodologies (Wang et al. 2022b; Meng et al. 2021; Li
et al. 2019b; Sheynin et al. 2022), were developed to achieve
precise entity-level manipulations. However, these methodologies primarily focus on attribute editing for individual objects, encountering challenges when there are multiple objects within a real-world scene due to complex spatial layouts among them. For example, face editing (Ju et al. 2023;
Pu et al. 2022) involves editing attributes such as age, expression, and skin color. Pose transfer (Men et al. 2020) allows editing of attributes like posture, clothing, and texture.
Notably, these manipulations are limited to editing individual objects and achieving attribute modifications for a single

Intoduction

In recent years, text-guided image synthesis (Ruiz et al.
2023; Kawar et al. 2023; Ding et al. 2021) has received considerable attention. It is particularly noteworthy the work of
the diffusion model (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Nichol and
Dhariwal 2021; Song, Meng, and Ermon 2020), which has
emerged as the leading approach, renowned for its remarkable capacity to synthesize images with compelling realism
and diversity. Pre-trained diffusion models (Rombach et al.
2022; Saharia et al. 2022b) offer great potential in the field
of digital content creation, particularly in image manipulation (Kong et al. 2023; Han et al. 2023). In contrast, textbased operations (Crowson et al. 2022; Li et al. 2019a) struggle to provide users with intuitive control over generated
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3261

