The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Domain Multi-Scale Diffusion Model
for Low-Light Image Enhancement
Kai Shang1,2 , Mingwen Shao1 * , Chao Wang3 , Yuanshuo Cheng1 , Shuigen Wang4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Petroleum (East China), China
2
Shandong Institute of Petroleum and Chemical Technology, China
3
ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
4
Yantai IRay Technologies Lt. Co., China
skkkyup@163.com, smw278@126.com, chao.wang-11@student.uts.edu.au, cys1294414023@gmail.com,
shuigen.wang@iraytek.com
Sampling step (s)

Spatial

Frequency

Relative Frequency Amplitude

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved remarkable progress in lowlight image enhancement. However, there remain two practical limitations: (1) existing methods mainly focus on the
spatial domain for the diffusion process, while neglecting
the essential features in the frequency domain; (2) conventional patch-based sampling strategy inevitably leads to severe checkerboard artifacts due to the uneven overlapping.
To address these limitations in one go, we propose a MultiDomain Multi-Scale (MDMS) diffusion model for low-light
image enhancement. In particular, we introduce a spatialfrequency fusion module to seamlessly integrates spatial
and frequency information. By leveraging the Multi-Domain
Learning (MDL) paradigm, our proposed model is endowed
with the capability to adaptively facilitate noise distribution learning, thereby enhancing the quality of the generated images. Meanwhile, we propose a Multi-Scale Sampling (MSS) strategy that follows a divide-ensemble manner by merging the restored patches under different resolutions. Such a multi-scale learning paradigm explicitly derives
patch information from different granularities, thus leading
to smoother boundaries. Furthermore, we empirically adopt
the Bright Channel Prior (BCP) which indicates natural statistical regularity as an additional restoration guidance. Experimental results on LOL and LOLv2 datasets demonstrate
that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance for the
low-light image enhancement task. Codes are available at
https://github.com/Oliiveralien/MDMS.

s = 10

s = 15

s = 20

s = 25

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Motivations of our method. (a): Visualizations of
the frequency statistics for each sampling step s (Total sampling step S = 25). As shown in the box plot, the horizontal
axis is the sampling step s, while the vertical axis is the relative frequency amplitude. The red dashed line represents the
average frequency value, which gradually increases as the
number of steps goes. (b): Visualizations of the spatial (left)
and frequency (right) results during sampling.

Kaur 2011) and Retinex-based methods (Jobson, Rahman,
and Woodell 1997; Rahman, Jobson, and Woodell 2004),
usually struggle to handle intricate real-world scenarios.
Over the last decade, Deep Learning (DL) (LeCun, Bengio,
and Hinton 2015) methods have received a surge of recent
interest, resulting in several key advances in low-light image
enhancement. Although DL-based methods have achieved
visually plausible restoration results, these methods still require integrating elaborately crafted prior information or sophisticated network design and training. Recently, diffusion
models have gained significant attention, as they learn data
distributions by simulating a fixed forward process. These
models have demonstrated remarkable performance in various tasks, such as image restoration (Özdenizci and Legenstein 2023; Luo et al. 2023) and low-light Image enhancement (LLIE) (Zhou, Yang, and Yang 2023). However, existing diffusion-based LLIE methods still remain two problems: On the one hand, these methods tend to simply model
the noise distribution in the spatial domain while ignoring
the frequency domain features. As illustrated in Figure 1,
we visualize the frequency statistics and the sampling re-

Introduction
Images captured in low-light conditions often suffer additional derivative scenarios such as low contrast and high
noise levels, which may not only affect the visual appearance but also the performance on downstream vision
tasks ( e.g., classification (Dhananjaya, Kumar, and Yogamani 2021), detection (Wang et al. 2022b) and segmentation (Wang et al. 2022a)). Various attempts have been made
to improve low-light images and transform them into highquality images with normal light. Traditional methods such
as histogram equalization-based methods (Kaur, Kaur, and
* Corresponding author: Mingwen Shao
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4722

