The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Your Prompt Is My Command: On Assessing the Human-Centred Generality of
Multimodal Models (Abstract Reprint)
Wout Schellaert1 , Fernando Martı́nez-Plumed1 , Karina Vold2 , John Burden3 , Pablo A. M.
Casares4 , Bao Sheng Loe5 , Roi Reichart6 , Sean Ó hÉigeartaigh7 , Anna Korhonen8 , José
Hernández-Orallo1
1

2

VRAIN, Universitat Politècnica de València, Spain
Institute for the History and Philosophy of Science and Technology, University of Toronto, Canada
3
Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence, University of Cambridge, UK
4
Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain
5
Psychometrics Centre, University of Cambridge, UK
6
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Israel
7
Centre for the Study of Existential Risk, University of Cambridge, UK
8
Language Technology Laboratory (LTL), University of Cambridge, UK

Abstract Reprint. This is an abstract reprint of a journal article by Schellaert, Martı́nez-Plumed, Vold, Burden, Casares, Loe, Reichart, hÉigeartaigh, Korhonen, and
Hernández-Orallo (2023).

Abstract
Even with obvious deficiencies, large prompt-commanded
multimodal models are proving to be flexible cognitive tools
representing an unprecedented generality. But the directness, diversity, and degree of user interaction create a distinctive “human-centred generality” (HCG), rather than a
fully autonomous one. HCG implies that —for a specific
user— a system is only as general as it is effective for the
user’s relevant tasks and their prevalent ways of prompting.
A human-centred evaluation of general-purpose AI systems
therefore needs to reflect the personal nature of interaction,
tasks and cognition. We argue that the best way to understand these systems is as highly-coupled cognitive extenders, and to analyse the bidirectional cognitive adaptations
between them and humans. In this paper, we give a formulation of HCG, as well as a high-level overview of the elements and trade-offs involved in the prompting process. We
end the paper by outlining some essential research questions
and suggestions for improving evaluation practices, which
we envision as characteristic for the evaluation of general
artificial intelligence in the future.

References
Schellaert, W.; Martı́nez-Plumed, F.; Vold, K.; Burden, J.;
Casares, P. A. M.; Loe, B. S.; Reichart, R.; hÉigeartaigh,
S. Ó.; Korhonen, A.; and Hernández-Orallo, J. 2023. Your
Prompt is My Command: On Assessing the Human-Centred
Generality of Multimodal Models. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 77: 377–394.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22712

