The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Model Extraction Attacks in GAN-Based Image Translation
via Domain Shift Mitigation
Di Mi1 , Yanjun Zhang2 , Leo Yu Zhang3 ,
Shengshan Hu4 , Qi Zhong5 , Haizhuan Yuan1 , Shirui Pan3
1
Xiangtan University
University of Technology Sydney
3
Grifﬁth University
4
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
5
City University of Macau
midi xtu@163.com, yanjun.zhang@uts.edu.au, leo.zhang@grifﬁth.edu.au,
hushengshan@hust.edu.cn, qizhong@cityu.edu.mo, yhz@xtu.edu.cn, s.pan@grifﬁth.edu.au
2

Abstract

or privacy attacks on the service provider (Papernot et al.
2017; Zhang et al. 2022b; Ma et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2022).
Such vulnerabilities not only undermine the security of the
entire model supply chain but also pose a critical challenge
to the integrity of DNN-based services.
Despite the apparent simplicity of this attack process, a
signiﬁcant challenge persists for the adversary: the queried
samples are unlikely to perfectly match the secret training
dataset utilized for training the victim model, then how can
the MEA be executed in a manner that ensures both effectiveness and efﬁciency, given this discrepancy between
queried and training samples?
To close the distribution gap between query and training
samples, numerous works have been proposed for various
classiﬁcation tasks, including image processing (Orekondy,
Schiele, and Fritz 2019; Pal et al. 2020; Yuan et al. 2022;
Barbalau et al. 2020), NLP processing (Krishna et al. 2019;
Xu et al. 2021), and graph data processing (Wu et al. 2022;
Shen et al. 2022). For instance, in image classiﬁcation,
(Orekondy, Schiele, and Fritz 2019) suggested using reinforcement learning, and (Pal et al. 2020) suggested using
active learning as a means to identify better query samples. Alternatively, (Yuan et al. 2022; Barbalau et al. 2020)
advocated aligning the distribution of the secret training
dataset with Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). In
NLP tasks, (Xu et al. 2021) suggested targeting an ensemble
of victim APIs simultaneously, all providing the same service, to make them implicitly vote for good query samples.
Concurrent with classiﬁcation tasks, image-to-image
translation (I2IT) tasks, such as image super-resolution or
restoration, constitute another signiﬁcant application domain of DNNs. As a testament to this prevalence, Table 1
makes a comparison of the pay-per-use price between classiﬁcation and I2IT tasks on different platforms1,2 . Nonetheless, the MEA vulnerabilities in I2IT are rarely explored,
making their risk largely underestimated.
We attribute this to the natural difference between study-

Model extraction attacks (MEAs) enable an attacker to replicate the functionality of a victim deep neural network (DNN)
model by only querying its API service remotely, posing a
severe threat to the security and integrity of pay-per-query
DNN-based services. Although the majority of current research on MEAs has primarily concentrated on neural classiﬁers, there is a growing prevalence of image-to-image translation (I2IT) tasks in our everyday activities. However, techniques developed for MEA of DNN classiﬁers cannot be directly transferred to the case of I2IT, rendering the vulnerability of I2IT models to MEA attacks often underestimated.
This paper unveils the threat of MEA in I2IT tasks from a new
perspective. Diverging from the traditional approach of bridging the distribution gap between attacker queries and victim
training samples, we opt to mitigate the effect caused by the
different distributions, known as the domain shift. This is
achieved by introducing a new regularization term that penalizes high-frequency noise, and seeking a ﬂatter minimum to
avoid overﬁtting to the shifted distribution. Extensive experiments on different image translation tasks, including image
super-resolution and style transfer, are performed on different backbone victim models, and the new design consistently
outperforms the baseline by a large margin across all metrics.
A few real-life I2IT APIs are also veriﬁed to be extremely
vulnerable to our attack, emphasizing the need for enhanced
defenses and potentially revised API publishing policies.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have exhibited remarkable
success in diverse domains, driven by substantial investments in data processing, computational power, and expertise knowledge (Pouyanfar et al. 2018). This success has
been capitalized through the introduction of pay-per-query
API services4 . However, recent research has uncovered a notable vulnerability: model extraction attacks (MEAs). These
attacks empower an adversary to replicate the remote DNN’s
functionality by crafting surrogate models (Tramèr et al.
2016). Consequently, this allows unauthorized access to the
service, enabling the adversary to launch adversarial attacks

1

Providing image translation service: https://cloud.baidu.com,
https://imglarger.com, https://vanceai.com.
2
Providing classiﬁcation service: https://cloud.baidu.com,
https://aws.amazon.com, https://cloud.google.com.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19902

