The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dynamic Weighted Combiner for Mixed-Modal Image Retrieval
Fuxiang Huang, Lei Zhang* , Xiaowei Fu, Suqi Song
Learning Intelligence & Vision Essential (LiVE) Group
School of Microelectronics and Communication Engineering, Chongqing University, China
{huangfuxiang, leizhang, xwfu, songsuqi}@cqu.edu.cn

Target

Abstract

Mixed-modal query

Retrieval results

is darker and has
more contrast,
is similar but
black in colour

Mixed-Modal Image Retrieval (MMIR) as a flexible search
paradigm has attracted wide attention. However, previous approaches always achieve limited performance, due to two critical factors are seriously overlooked. 1) The contribution of
image and text modalities is different, but incorrectly treated
equally. 2) There exist inherent labeling noises in describing
users’ intentions with text in web datasets from diverse realworld scenarios, giving rise to overfitting. We propose a Dynamic Weighted Combiner (DWC) to tackle the above challenges, which includes three merits. First, we propose an Editable Modality De-equalizer (EMD) by taking into account
the contribution disparity between modalities, containing two
modality feature editors and an adaptive weighted combiner.
Second, to alleviate labeling noises and data bias, we propose
a dynamic soft-similarity label generator (SSG) to implicitly
improve noisy supervision. Finally, to bridge modality gaps
and facilitate similarity learning, we propose a CLIP-based
mutual enhancement module alternately trained by a mixedmodality contrastive loss. Extensive experiments verify that
our proposed model significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
methods on real-world datasets. The source code is available
at https://github.com/fuxianghuang1/DWC.

(a) Successful case：the mixed-modal query dominated by the image
is a turquoise
scoop neck shirt
with white
decorative motif,
has a decal design

(b) Failure case: the mixed-modal query dominated by the text

Figure 1: Overview of MMIR, i.e., image+text → image.
The mixed-modal query is dominated by different modalities unequally. (a) Dominated by image modality. (b) Dominated by text modality.

cus on designing complex components to learn composite
image-text representations. However, these methods usually
achieve poor retrieval results, with almost no more than 20%
of queries retrieving the correct image in the top-1 rank. We
cannot help asking why it happened?
Based on our observations and analysis, we have three
critical findings, which are seriously overlooked. First, the
contribution of image and text modality differs in diverse
real-world scenarios. We observe that previous methods
usually prefer to returning results similar to the query image
modality, which fails when the intended image similar to the
target does not exist. This is mainly due to that previous approaches depend heavily on the image modality but underestimate the text modality. Fig. 1 (a) fits this scenario, where
the query image is very similar to the target image. However, in real-world scenarios and the existing datasets, the
mixed-modal query is often dominated by the text modality, that is, the similarity between the query image and the
target image is very low. For example, as shown in Fig. 1
(b), only query text and the concept of shirt in query image are conducive to retrieval, while most visual information is redundant or even detrimental. We conduct an exploratory experiment with different modality queries individually in Fig. 2 (a), which verifies modality importance
disparity for different categories. Second, the widely used
datasets (Han et al. 2017; Guo et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2021)

Introduction
Image retrieval (Su, Zhong, and Zhang 2019; Brown et al.
2020; Huang et al. 2020; Shen et al. 2020; Hu et al. 2021;
Wei et al. 2020; Chun et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2021a; Huang,
Zhang, and Gao 2021; Dubey 2022), as a crucial computer
vision task, aims to search for items of interest from the
database. A key limitation of traditional image retrieval is
the in-feasibility to precisely describe users’ intentions (i.e.,
the concepts in users’ minds) through a single image or a single text. Therefore, to offer a flexible and intuitive user experience, a Mixed-Modal Image Retrieval (MMIR) paradigm
as shown in Fig. 1 is explored, where the search intention
is expressed with mixed modalities utilized to retrieve a target image. Therefore, MMIR requires a synergistic understanding of both visual and linguistic content, which is an
acknowledged challenge.
Most existing approaches (Wen et al. 2021; Gu et al. 2021;
Goenka et al. 2022; Huang and Zhang 2023) mainly fo* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2303

