The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Temporal Correlation Vision Transformer for Video Person Re-Identification
Pengfei Wu1 , Le Wang1 * , Sanping Zhou1 , Gang Hua3 , Changyin Sun2
1

National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University
3
Wormpex AI Research
xjtustuwpf@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {lewang,spzhou}@xjtu.edu.cn, ganghua@gmail.com, cysun@ahu.edu.cn
Abstract

(a)

Video Person Re-Identification (Re-ID) is a task of retrieving persons from multi-camera surveillance systems. Despite
the progress made in leveraging spatio-temporal information in videos, occlusion in dense crowds still hinders further progress. To address this issue, we propose a Temporal Correlation Vision Transformer (TCViT) for video person
Re-ID. TCViT consists of a Temporal Correlation Attention
(TCA) module and a Learnable Temporal Aggregation (LTA)
module. The TCA module is designed to reduce the impact
of non-target persons by relative state, while the LTA module is used to aggregate frame-level features based on their
completeness. Specifically, TCA is a parameter-free module
that first aligns frame-level features to restore semantic coherence in videos and then enhances the features of the target person according to temporal correlation. Additionally,
unlike previous methods that treat each frame equally with a
pooling layer, LTA introduces a lightweight learnable module
to weigh and aggregate frame-level features under the guidance of a classification score. Extensive experiments on four
prevalent benchmarks demonstrate that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance in video Re-ID.

(c)

(b)

Relatively static

Non-Target
Person
Target
Person

Relatively dynamic

Figure 1: Examples of occlusion cases in video person ReID. (a) The target person is the occluded one, while the nontarget person approaches from another direction. (b) The target person is the occluder, while the non-target person passes
the target at a faster pace. (c) The target person is in the center of the frames and relatively static to the bounding box.

Introduction
Video Person Re-Identification (Re-ID) is a key component of surveillance systems (Zheng et al. 2016; Chen et al.
2018a; Wang et al. 2014). It is different from image-based
Re-ID as it retrieves persons from video sequences, thus providing extra temporal clues. With the rise of deep learning
techniques, there has been considerable progress in video
person Re-ID. However, it is still challenging due to the
occlusion caused by dense crowds. Therefore, the focus of
video person Re-ID research is on how to exploit temporal
information without the interference of occlusion.
The existing methods (Liu et al. 2021a; Yang et al. 2020;
Yan et al. 2020; He et al. 2021b; Gu et al. 2020) can
be divided into two categories. The first is the one-stage
method (Liu et al. 2021a; Yang et al. 2020; Yan et al. 2020;
He et al. 2021b; Gu et al. 2020), which utilizes 3D convolution or graph neural networks to learn spatial-temporal information from videos. As mentioned in (Wu et al. 2022), 3D

convolution-based methods are often affected by misalignment of adjacent frames and the occlusion problem. Furthermore, graph neural networks (Liu et al. 2021a) usually
require an additional pose estimation network to model the
body relationships of the target person across frames. The
second type is the two-stage method (Wu et al. 2022; Hou
et al. 2019), which first extracts frame-level features separately and then performs temporal feature aggregation. This
kind of method uses attention mechanisms or generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Hou et al. 2019) to reduce the
impact of occlusion within frames, but usually treats video
frames equally during the aggregation stage.
As seen in Figure 1 (c), each frame in videos is cropped
according to the bounding box generated by the video person detector (Girshick 2015; Xu, Hrustic, and Vivet 2020),
which ensures that the target person is always in the center of

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6083

