The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fine-Tuning Large Language Model Based Explainable Recommendation with
Explainable Quality Reward
Mengyuan Yang1 , Mengying Zhu1 * , Yan Wang2 , Linxun Chen3 , Yilei Zhao1 , Xiuyuan Wang1 ,
Bing Han3 , Xiaolin Zheng1 , Jianwei Yin1
1
Zhejiang University, China
School of Computing, Macqaurie University, Australia
3
MYbank, Ant Group, China
{yangmy412, mengyingzhu, yilei zhao, xiuyuanwang, xlzheng}@zju.edu.cn, yan.wang@mq.edu.au
{linxun.clx, hanbing.hanbing}@antgroup.com, zjuyjw@cs.zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Large language model-based explainable recommendation
(LLM-based ER) systems can provide remarkable humanlike explanations and have widely received attention from
researchers. However, the original LLM-based ER systems
face three low-quality problems in their generated explanations, i.e., lack of personalization, inconsistency, and questionable explanation data. To address these problems, we propose a novel LLM-based ER model denoted as LLM2ER to
serve as a backbone and devise two innovative explainable
quality reward models for fine-tuning such a backbone in a
reinforcement learning paradigm, ultimately yielding a finetuned model denoted as LLM2ER-EQR, which can provide
high-quality explanations. LLM2ER-EQR can generate personalized, informative, and consistent high-quality explanations learned from questionable-quality explanation datasets.
Extensive experiments conducted on three real-world datasets
demonstrate that our model can generate fluent, diverse, informative, and highly personalized explanations.

Figure 1: The explanation generated by ChatGPT (GPT-3.5)
with an ER-related instructional prompt on July 10, 2023.

and contains a lot of terms that appear in the movie, which
may be difficult to understand for the user who, in fact, is
not familiar with the movie. Based on this example, we can
conclude that such an explanation suffers from low-quality
problem, making this explanation unable to improve user
satisfaction. Moreover, the widely recognized issue of hallucination (Ji et al. 2023) in LLM can lead to factual inaccuracies within explanations, thereby compounding the lowquality problem. Therefore, directly using an LLM to fulfill
the ER task cannot be one-size-fits-all.
With the above insightful study of LLM-based ER, we
analyze that the causes of the low-quality problem are threefold.
Cause 1: Prompts without integrating personalized information trigger a lack of personalization in explanations.
LLM is usually pre-trained on generic data and lacks personalized information from users, and thus it may generate explanations that do not match user preferences when
personalized user–item information is not integrated into
the prompt, i.e., the model input. Existing studies (Geng
et al. 2022; Li, Zhang, and Chen 2023) construct personalized prompts with personalized information to guide LLM
in generating explanations. However, the personalization degree in such generated explanations is limited, because they
incorporate user and item information separately rather than

Introduction
Explainable recommendation (ER) systems aim to provide
high-quality explanations to help users understand the recommendations and make decisions. According to the phenomenon reported in an exhaustive survey of explanation
quality (Lu et al. 2023), generating human-like explanations
can significantly improve the adoption rate of recommended
items. Among various explanation forms, such as tags (Yan
et al. 2020), reasoning paths (Wang et al. 2019) and images
(Chen et al. 2019a), the textual explanation generated by
large language models (LLMs) has attracted increasing attention due to their remarkable human-like natural language
generation capabilities.
Intuitively, a straightforward solution for an LLM-based
ER system is to feed an ER-related instructional prompt to
an LLM. In Figure 1, we show an ER process for a movie
named “X-Men” using a simple instruction with ChatGPT.
We can observe that the explanation given by ChatGPT assumes that the user is already a fan of the X-Men series
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9250

