The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

One-Step Forward and Backtrack: Overcoming Zig-Zagging in Loss-Aware
Quantization Training
Lianbo Ma1 , Yuee Zhou1 , Jianlun Ma1 , Guo Yu2 * , Qing Li3
1

Software College, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
Institute of Intelligent Manufacturing, NanJing Tech University, Nanjing, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
malb@swc.neu.edu.cn, {zhouyuee, jianlunma}@stumail.neu.edu.cn, guo.yu@njtech.edu.cn, liq@pcl.ac.cn
2

Abstract

In this paper, we focus on the compression approaches
of low-bit quantization, which are to reduce the model size
with no or minor performance degradation. Specifically, the
low-bit quantization is to quantize full-precision weights
(or activations) to low bitwidth ones (Rastegari et al. 2016;
Howard et al. 2017). To this end, pioneer quantization approaches strive to find the closest low-precision approximation of the full-precision weights during the model learning process (Peng et al. 2021; Hinton et al. 2012). However,
these approaches neglect the effect of quantization on the final loss, so that they may suffer from the severe accuracy
degradation problem (Fu et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2018c).
This problem becomes even more serious if the extremely
low bitwidth fixed point (e.g., 1-bit) representation is used
in the quantization (Bai, Wang, and Liberty 2018). Therefore, many studies on loss-aware quantization (LAQ) have
proposed to solve the above issue (Hou and Kwok 2018;
Hou et al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2018; Qu et al. 2020; Saito and
Mitsui 1996), and the main idea of LAQ is to optimize the
quantized weights rather than the full-precision ones during
the minimization of the loss function.
However, we discover that existing LAQ methods (Hou
et al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2018) may suffer from the zigzagging-like issue that the gradient directions rapidly oscillate or zig-zag during the gradient descent learning procedures, and such issue seriously slows down the model convergence. An example is shown in Fig.1 (a) that the quantized gradient direction at each step tends to be zig-zag or
rapidly oscillated and the search with quantized weights
needs more epochs to get converged in comparison with the
search with full-precision weights. In some extreme cases,
such issue even makes the search fail to converge and end
up with oscillation. Unfortunately, most recently published
studies do not realize this issue but compensates for the gradient quantization error by enhancing quantization representations(Lin et al. 2019; Peng et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2018; Qu
et al. 2020). Due to the big gap between extremely low-bit
(e.g.,1-bit) representations and full-precision (e.g., 32-bit)
ones, it is hard to make full compensation of quantization
error.
Inspired by the numerical analysis theory (Saito and Mitsui 1996) that iteratively using the trial results backtracked
from next-step search to update next-step items can contribute to the numerical stability, we try to tackle the above

Weight quantization is an effective technique to compress
deep neural networks for their deployment on edge devices
with limited resources. Traditional loss-aware quantization
methods commonly use the quantized gradient to replace the
full-precision gradient. However, we discover that the gradient error will lead to an unexpected zig-zagging-like issue
in the gradient descent learning procedures, where the gradient directions rapidly oscillate or zig-zag, and such issue
seriously slows down the model convergence. Accordingly,
this paper proposes a one-step forward and backtrack way for
loss-aware quantization to get more accurate and stable gradient direction to defy this issue. During the gradient descent
learning, a one-step forward search is designed to find the
trial gradient of the next-step, which is adopted to adjust the
gradient of current step towards the direction of fast convergence. After that, we backtrack the current step to update the
full-precision and quantized weights through the current-step
gradient and the trial gradient. A series of theoretical analysis and experiments on benchmark deep models have demonstrated the effectiveness and competitiveness of the proposed
method, and our method especially outperforms others on the
convergence performance.

Introduction
With the increase of computation and storage consumption in various cloud and edge computing applications, it
is challenging to deploy deep neural networks (DNNs) on
computation-constrained devices (Liu and Mattina 2019;
Jain et al. 2018). To enhance the efficiency of DNNs (e.g.,
low-power inference), it is critical to compress deep models with comparable performance (Xu et al. 2018; Dai et al.
2019). Typical compression approaches include low-rank
decomposition (Denton et al. 2014; Yu et al. 2017), model
pruning (He, Zhang, and Sun 2017; Lin et al. 2017; Luo, Wu,
and Lin 2017; Peng et al. 2019; Ye et al. 2018), knowledge
distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Romero et al.
2014; Zhang, Chen, and Sun 2021; Shen et al. 2021), and
low-bit quantization (Choi, El-Khamy, and Lee 2016; Han,
Mao, and Dally 2015; Lin et al. 2019; Peng and Chen 2019;
Rastegari et al. 2016).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14246

