The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning to Prompt Knowledge Transfer for Open-World Continual Learning
Yujie Li1,3 , Xin Yang1,2 * , Hao Wang4 , Xiangkun Wang1,2 , Tianrui Li5
1

Complex Laboratory of New Finance and Economics, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics
2
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics
3
School of Management Science and Engineering, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
5
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwest Jiaotong University
{yujie li, 222081202013}@smail.swufe.edu.cn, yangxin@swufe.edu.cn, cshaowang@gmail.com, trli@swjtu.edu.cn
Training Set

Training Set

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of continual learning in an
open-world scenario, referred to as Open-world Continual
Learning (OwCL). OwCL is increasingly rising while it is
highly challenging in two-fold: i) learning a sequence of
tasks without forgetting knowns in the past, and ii) identifying unknowns (novel objects/classes) in the future. Existing OwCL methods suffer from the adaptability of task-aware
boundaries between knowns and unknowns, and do not consider the mechanism of knowledge transfer. In this work,
we propose Pro-KT, a novel prompt-enhanced knowledge
transfer model for OwCL. Pro-KT includes two key components: (1) a prompt bank to encode and transfer both taskgeneric and task-specific knowledge, and (2) a task-aware
open-set boundary to identify unknowns in the new tasks.
Experimental results using two real-world datasets demonstrate that the proposed Pro-KT outperforms the state-of-theart counterparts in both the detection of unknowns and the
classification of knowns markedly. Code released at https:
//github.com/YujieLi42/Pro-KT.

Task 1

...

Task n

...

Test Set

Test Set

...
unknown
known
overlapping

unknown
known
overlapping

(a1) Task 1: MAS (Baseline)

(b1) Task 1: Pro-KT (Ours)

...

(a2) Task n: MAS (Baseline)

(b2) Task n: Pro-KT (Ours)

Figure 1: An example of our motivation. Top: A setting of
OwCL that learns a sequence of tasks, where the training
data of Task n have new classes versus Task 1 and the test
data of each task may have unknowns versus its training
data. Bottom: Evaluation results of MAS (a typical CL baseline) and Pro-KT (ours) on Task 1 and Task n, respectively.
The evaluation is to evaluate all test data after learning each
task. Note, the x-axis shows the unscaled class-maximum
logits of samples, and the y-axis shows the number of samples. The area of overlap denotes the performance of partitioning knowns and unknowns (less is better).

Introduction
Continual learning (CL, a.k.a lifelong learning) is a new
paradigm of machine learning that typically learns a large
number of tasks sequentially without forgetting knowledge
gained in the past and uses the knowledge to help new task
learning (Wang et al. 2019; Ke, Liu, and Huang 2020). This
paper concerns the problem of CL for a sequence of classification tasks, where each task involves a set of classes to
classify. To date, most existing methods, even the most recent counterparts such as (Guo, Liu, and Zhao 2023; Smith
et al. 2023), assume that the sets of training classes and test
classes are the same in the past or future tasks, referred to as
closed-world assumption (Fei and Liu 2016). However, the
closed-world assumption is often invalid in practice as the
real world is an open environment where it frequently happens that some tasks contain new classes that are unseen in
past tasks. For example, the previous task had only learned
cats and dogs, but now a new task is to classify a set of
birds. In this work, we study CL with open-world assumption, where test data include unknowns or novel classes.

Continual learning in an open world or simply Openworld Continual Learning (OwCL) is appealing yet challenging in recent years. Fig. 1 illustrates an example of our
motivation. Specifically, the scenario refers to an OwCL setting, assuming the training data of Task n have new classes
(i.e., rose and bus) and both the test data of Task 1 and
Task n have novel objects (e.g., bus in Task 1 and motorbike
in Task n) that are not seen in the training data. As shown
in Fig. 1 (a1) and (b1), both MAS (Aljundi et al. 2018) (a
typical CL baseline) and our method can distinguish the unknowns from knowns in Task 1 (the first task). However, as
shown in Fig. 1(a2) and (b2), MAS fails to exploit previous
unknowns (e.g., bus in Task 1) to help Task n, leading to the

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13700

