The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FedDiv: Collaborative Noise Filtering for Federated Learning with Noisy Labels
Jichang Li1,2 , Guanbin Li1,3 * , Hui Cheng4 , Zicheng Liao2,5 , Yizhou Yu2*
1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Research Institute of Sun Yat-sen University in Shenzhen, Sun Yat-sen

University, Guangzhou, China
2 Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
3 Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
4 UM-SJTU Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
5 Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China

csjcli@connect.hku.hk, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, chenghui 123@sjtu.edu.cn
zichengliao@gmail.com, yizhouy@acm.org

( )

Training Loss

( )

Clean samples
Noisy samples

aggregate

Clean component
Noisy component
noisy client
PDF

Federated Learning with Noisy Labels (F-LNL) aims at seeking an optimal server model via collaborative distributed
learning by aggregating multiple client models trained with
local noisy or clean samples. On the basis of a federated
learning framework, recent advances primarily adopt label
noise filtering to separate clean samples from noisy ones on
each client, thereby mitigating the negative impact of label
noise. However, these prior methods do not learn noise filters by exploiting knowledge across all clients, leading to
sub-optimal and inferior noise filtering performance and thus
damaging training stability. In this paper, we present FedDiv
to tackle the challenges of F-LNL. Specifically, we propose
a global noise filter called Federated Noise Filter for effectively identifying samples with noisy labels on every client,
thereby raising stability during local training sessions. Without sacrificing data privacy, this is achieved by modeling the
global distribution of label noise across all clients. Then, in
an effort to make the global model achieve higher performance, we introduce a Predictive Consistency based Sampler
to identify more credible local data for local model training, thus preventing noise memorization and further boosting the training stability. Extensive experiments on CIFAR10, CIFAR-100, and Clothing1M demonstrate that FedDiv
achieves superior performance over state-of-the-art F-LNL
methods under different label noise settings for both IID and
non-IID data partitions. Source code is publicly available at
https://github.com/lijichang/FLNL-FedDiv.

PDF

Local filter parameters
Global filter parameters
noisy client

Abstract

Training Loss

( )

clean client
PDF

PDF

clean client
( )

Training Loss
(a) Local Noise Filter

Training Loss
(b) Federated Noise Filter

Figure 1: (a) Local noise filtering may have limited capabilities as each client develops its own local noise filter using
its own private data only. Especially on clean clients, such
filters would incorrectly identify a subset of clean samples
to be noisy. (b) Collaborative noise filtering proposed by us
significantly improves the performance of label noise filtering on each client as a federated noise filter is learned by
distilling knowledge from all clients. PDF: Probability density function.

which is often not the case in reality due to data complexity
and uncontrolled label annotation quality (Tanno et al. 2019;
Kuznetsova et al. 2020). Especially with the blessing of privacy protection, it is impossible to ensure absolute label accuracy. Therefore, this work centers on Federated Learning
with Noisy Labels (F-LNL). In F-LNL, a global neural network model is fine-tuned via distributed learning across multiple local clients with noisy samples. Like (Xu et al. 2022),
we here also assume some local clients have noisy labels
(namely noisy clients), while others have only clean labels
(namely clean clients).
Besides the private data on local clients, F-LNL faces
two primary challenges: data heterogeneity and noise heterogeneity (Kim et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2022b). Data heterogeneity refers to the statistically heterogeneous data distributions across different clients, while noise heterogeneity represents the varying noise distributions among clients. It has
been demonstrated by (Xu et al. 2022; Kim et al. 2022) that
these two challenges in F-LNL may lead to instability during
local training sessions. Previous studies in F-LNL (Xu et al.

Introduction
Compared to traditional Centralized Learning (Li et al.
2019b, 2021, 2019a; Wu et al. 2019b,a; Huang et al. 2023),
Federated Learning (FL) is a novel paradigm facilitating collaborative learning across multiple clients without requiring
centralized local data (McMahan et al. 2017). Recently, FL
has shown significant real-world success in areas like healthcare (Nguyen et al. 2022), recommender systems (Yang et al.
2020), and smart cities (Zheng et al. 2022). However, these
FL methods presume clean labels for all client’s private data,
* Corresponding Authors are Guanbin Li and Yizhou Yu.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3118

