The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Maxileximin Envy Allocations and Connected Goods
Gianluigi Greco, Francesco Scarcello
University of Calabria
{gianluigi.greco, francesco.scarcello}@unical.it

Abstract

another agent. However, if we can find an envy-free (EF) allocation where no agent strictly prefers the bundle assigned
of another agent to her own bundle, such an allocation can
be clearly perceived as a fair one. Whenever these allocations do not exist, we have to find some other fair way for
assigning goods. In fact, there are many interesting works in
the literature which define relaxations of envy-freeness (cf.
Amanatidis, Birmpas, and Markakis 2018), notions such as
envy-freeness up to one good (Lipton et al. 2004) or up to
any good (Caragiannis et al. 2016), or the related maximin
share allocations (Budish 2011). Other approaches deal explicitly with the (unavoidable) envy, by trying to guarantee
to agents the maximum amount of fairness with respect to
the scenario at hands. For instance, one can minimize the
maximum envy ratio (Caragiannis et al. 2009), the multiplicative degree of envy (Nguyen and Rothe 2014), the number of envious agents (Netzer, Meisels, and Zivan 2016),
or the maximum envy (e.g., Cai, Filos-Ratsikas, and Tang
2016), just to name a few.
This work pushes ahead on this research and aims at identifying a solution that exists always and is as fair and acceptable as possible for all agents. Fairness properties are
well studied in coalitional game theory and fundamental to
solution concepts, such as the classical notion of Nucleolus (Schmeidler 1969), which minimizes in a lexicographic
way the dissatisfaction of all player coalitions. In our context, the dissatisfaction can be measured as the maximum
envy towards other agents. Following this approach, we argue that an important class of allocations, which received
less attention in the literature, is the one of the leximin allocations, that is, those minimizing the maximum envy and,
among possible solutions with equal maximum value, minimize the second-worst value, and so on.
Example 1. Consider a scenario where four indivisible
goods (say a, b, c, and d) are available. Figure 1 reports
on the left the utilities that three agents can get with these
goods. E.g., agent 1 values 3 the good a, and 2 the other
goods. Clearly, in any feasible allocation, one agent gets a
bundle with two goods, while the others get one good. The
figure also displays two allocations B and B0 . According to
the former, agent 1 and agent 3 have utility 3, while agent
2 gets the bundle {b, c} with a total utility 4. Both agents 1
and 3 would get utility 4 with the bundle assigned to agent 2,
hence the difference 4−3 is a measure of their envy. Agent 2

Fair allocation of indivisible goods presents intriguing challenges from both a social choice perspective and an algorithmic standpoint. Due to the indivisibility of goods, it is common for one agent to envy the bundle of goods assigned to
another agent and, indeed, envy-free solutions do not exist
in general. In line with the classical game-theoretic concept
of Nucleolus in coalitional games, we propose that a fair allocation should minimize the agents’ dissatisfaction profile
in a lexicographic manner, where the dissatisfaction of an
agent is defined as her maximum envy towards other agents.
Therefore, we seek allocations that minimize the maximum
envy. In cases where multiple solutions have an equal maximum value, we minimize the second-worst value, and so on.
Additionally, as is customary in fair division problems, we
also consider an efficiency requirement: among the allocations with the best agents’ dissatisfaction profile, we prioritize those that maximize the sum of agents’ utilities, known
as maximum social welfare. Such allocations, referred to as
maxileximin allocations, always exist.
In this study, we analyze the computational properties of
maxileximin allocations in the context of fair allocation problems with constraints. Specifically, we focus on the Connected Fair Division problem, where goods correspond to the
nodes of a graph, and a bundle of goods is allowed if the
subgraph formed by those goods is connected. We demonstrate that the problem is F∆P
2 -complete, even for instances
with simple graphical structures such as path and star graphs.
However, we identify islands of tractability for instances
with more intricate graphs, such as those having bounded
treewidth, provided that the number of agents is bounded by
a fixed number and utility functions use small values.

Introduction
Fair allocation of indivisible goods is a central problem
in social choice theory (Amanatidis et al. 2023; Steinhaus
1948; Brams and Taylor 1996), and it has been intensively
analysed from the computational and algorithmic viewpoint
by the AI community (Bouveret et al. 2016; Lang and Rothe
2016; Walsh 2020; Shams et al. 2022). With multiple agents
and indivisible goods, we cannot expect to be able to allocate
goods in a way that makes everyone happy, so that in general some agent could envy the bundle of goods assigned to
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9713

