The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Stop! Planner Time: Metareasoning for Probabilistic Planning
Using Learned Performance Profiles
Matthew Budd, Bruno Lacerda, Nick Hawes
Oxford Robotics Institute, University of Oxford
{mbudd, bruno, nickh}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The metareasoning framework aims to enable autonomous
agents to factor in planning costs when making decisions. In
this work, we develop the first non-myopic metareasoning
algorithm for planning with Markov decision processes. Our
method learns the behaviour of anytime probabilistic planning
algorithms from performance data. Specifically, we propose
a novel model for metareasoning, based on contextual performance profiles that predict the value of the planner’s current
solution given the time spent planning, the state of the planning algorithm’s internal parameters, and the difficulty of the
planning problem being solved. This model removes the need
to assume that the current solution quality is always known,
broadening the class of metareasoning problems that can be
addressed. We then employ deep reinforcement learning to
learn a policy that decides, at each timestep, whether to continue planning or start executing the current plan, and how to
set hyperparameters of the planner to enhance its performance.
We demonstrate our algorithm’s ability to perform effective
metareasoning in two domains.

Figure 1: A deep sea treasure problem. Each policy represents
the results of planning for a longer duration, and achieves reward indicated by the number of coins. πt2 would be optimal
overall if the extra reward gained by πt3 is less than the cost
(duration) of the additional planning time.

Introduction
Rational agents should reason about the consequences of
their actions. However, this reasoning process itself has its
own consequences: thinking is a physical process that requires time and energy. In many systems this issue can be
ignored, in particular where the costs of any computation are
negligible compared to the costs of actions. In other systems,
the real-world effects of reasoning cannot be discounted. As
an example, for mobile robots thinking and acting are often
closely coupled. An autonomous vehicle can use its finite battery capacity on its on-board computer or its motors. To what
extent is the energy saved by executing a better motion plan
offset by the energy cost of additional computation? This
scenario is illustrated in Figure 1. Of course, this assumes
that the agent is reasoning online. If it is able to pre-plan all
of its tasks offline, planning effort is negligible at runtime
and no metareasoning tradeoff exists.
Over the last 40 years, the field of rational metareasoning has developed bounded optimal algorithms for reasoning
about these tradeoffs (Russell and Wefald 1991; Cox and
Raja 2011; Hay et al. 2012). Recent problem settings have
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20053

included motion planning and heuristic search (Burns, Ruml,
and Do 2013; Sung, Kaelbling, and Lozano-Pérez 2021; Bhatia et al. 2022). Optimal exact metareasoning is polynomially
harder than reasoning (Lin et al. 2015), so all practical algorithms carry out approximate metareasoning. A common
simplification is to only consider the immediate effects of a
single reasoning step: this is known as the meta-greedy or
meta-myopic assumption (Russell and Wefald 1989, 1991).
Under the umbrella of metareasoning problems, we focus
specifically on metalevel control of anytime algorithms (Cox
and Raja 2011). In this setting, reasoning is carried out by an
object-level process, which is an anytime interruptible algorithm. This class of algorithms provides its current solution
at any time during computation, but the longer the algorithm
runs the better the solution will be. The object-level process
is supervised by a meta-level process, which observes the
object-level algorithm’s state. Metalevel actions consist of
allowing object-level computation to continue, or terminating
the algorithm and acting using its current solution.
We wish to apply metareasoning to probabilistic planning
with Markov decision processes (MDPs). Recent works have
used deep reinforcement learning (RL) to learn non-myopic
metalevel policies (Sung, Kaelbling, and Lozano-Pérez 2021;
Bhatia et al. 2022). However, these works apply only to
object-level algorithms where the current solution quality
is known exactly, for example the current minimum path
length in RRT*. Relaxing the solution quality observability

