The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Sketched Newton Value Iteration for Large-Scale Markov Decision Processes
Jinsong Liu1 , Chenghan Xie2 , Qi Deng1 , Dongdong Ge1 , Yinyu Ye3
1

Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
2
Fudan University
3
Stanford University
liujinsong@163.sufe.edu.cn, 20307130043@fudan.edu.cn, qideng@sufe.edu.cn,
ge.dongdong@mail.shufe.edu.cn, yyye@stanford.edu
Abstract

Nesterov’s acceleration and Polyak’s momentum (Nesterov
2003). Furthermore, viewing traditional MDP algorithms,
such as value iteration and policy iteration, from the optimization perspective, has been a source of inspiration, leading to significant improvements (Goyal and Grand-Clement
2023). An intriguing viewpoint is to consider value iteration and policy iteration as first-order and second-order optimization algorithms, respectively (Bertsekas 2012; KALABA 1957; Pollatschek and Avi-Itzhak 1969; Puterman
and Brumelle 1979). Among the classic second-order algorithms, Newton’s method stands out as it is invariant
to rescaling and coordinate transformations, which means
Newton’s method needs little or no tuning of hyperparameters. However, for large-scale problems, Newton’s method
becomes computationally expensive. A recent work by Kamanchi, Diddigi, and Bhatnagar (2021) applies the NewtonRaphson method to the Q-Bellman operator and proposes
the G-SOVI algorithm. Nevertheless, due to its computational cost of O(|S|3 |A|3 ), G-SOVI becomes impractical for
large MDPs. Consequently, our objective is to investigate
the Newton value iteration algorithm, incorporating dimension reduction techniques to strike a balance between computational cost and solution quality. By doing so, we aim to
develop a more efficient approach for solving MDPs on a
larger scale.

Value Iteration (VI) is one of the most classic algorithms for
solving Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), which lays the
foundations for various more advanced reinforcement learning algorithms, such as Q-learning. VI may take a large number of iterations to converge as it is a first-order method. In
this paper, we introduce the Newton Value Iteration (NVI)
algorithm, which eliminates the impact of action space dimension compared to some previous second-order methods.
Consequently, NVI can efficiently handle MDPs with large
action spaces. Building upon NVI, we propose a novel approach called Sketched Newton Value Iteration (SNVI) to
tackle MDPs with both large state and action spaces. SNVI
not only inherits the stability and fast convergence advantages of second-order algorithms, but also significantly reduces computational complexity, making it highly scalable.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our algorithms over traditional VI and previously proposed secondorder VI algorithms.

Introduction
The Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Puterman 2014) is a
classical approach used to model sequential decision problems and finds wide application in various fields such as finance (Hambly, Xu, and Yang 2023), automatic driving (Kiran et al. 2021), and more. In scenarios where the the parameters of MDP model is unknown, Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms sample trajectories to estimate the optimal value function and policy. Many RL algorithms either directly originate from or can be perceived as stochastic approximation variants of the Bellman equation (Bellman 1966). For instance, the Q-learning (Watkins and Dayan
1992) algorithm can be viewed as a stochastic fixed-point iteration for solving the Q-Bellman equation (Kamanchi, Diddigi, and Bhatnagar 2021).
This motivates us to delve into algorithms for solving
MDPs with full model information, as they can offer valuable insights and theoretical support for the design of new
RL algorithms. The Bellman equation, being interpretable as
a fixed-point iteration, has prompted the application of several acceleration techniques to solve MDPs, including Anderson acceleration (Zhang, O’Donoghue, and Boyd 2020),

Initially, we introduce the Newton Value Iteration (NVI)
algorithm, wherein we apply the Newton-Raphson method
to the smooth V-Bellman operator instead of the Q-Bellman
operator (Kamanchi, Diddigi, and Bhatnagar 2021). This
modification reduces the computational cost significantly,
from O(|S|3 |A|3 ) to O(|S|3 ). Additionally, we demonstrate
that the approximate error of the smooth Bellman operator
approaches zero as the soft-max parameter β → ∞. Despite these advancements, the computational cost of NVI
remains prohibitive for MDPs with large state spaces. To
address this, we aim to leverage dimension reduction techniques from second-order optimization methods (Gower
et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2022; Hanzely et al. 2020). However, the Jacobian matrix of the smooth Bellman operator
poses challenges due to its asymmetry, making it difficult to
analyze the convergence of general second-order dimension
reduction algorithms like those proposed in (Gower et al.
2019). Hence, we explore the application of the recently proposed Sketched Newton-Raphson method (Yuan, Lazaric,

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13936

