The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Personalized LoRA for Human-Centered Text Understanding
You Zhang1 , Jin Wang1 * , Liang-Chih Yu2 * , Dan Xu1 , Xuejie Zhang1
1

School of Information Science and Engineering, Yunnan University, Yunnan, P.R.China
2
Department of Information Management, Yuan Ze University, Taiwan
{yzhang0202, wangjin}@ynu.edu.cn, lcyu@saturn.yzu.edu.tw

Abstract

(FFT) and sophisticated structures to couple task-specific
transferring and personalized injecting, which is not suitable for adapting large-scale PLMs to personalized sentiment analysis.
To address the problem, parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) techniques such as the adapter, prompt-tuning, and
low-rank adaptation (LoRA) (Wu et al. 2018; Zhang, Wang,
and Zhang 2021) have been proposed. These techniques
only require adding and fine-tuning a few parameters in
PLMs, and thus can effectively and efficiently fine-tune
large-scale PLMs for downstream tasks. To use PEFT for
personalized sentiment analysis, as shown in Fig. 1(b), the
user attributes/preferences can be considered as an adapter
(dashed rectangles) to fine-tune large-scale PLMs through,
for example, LoRA, thus avoiding fine-tuning the whole
model parameters. However, each user is associated with
an adapter and a full model copy is not practicable because
user tokens are always million-level in real-world applications (e.g., Amazon). In addition, this may also suffer from
the under-fitting problem due to limited training examples
for each user. To leverage the advantage of both PKI and
PEFT, this study proposes a personalized low-rank adaptation (PLoRA) mechanism by combining PKI and LoRA, as
shown in Fig. 1(c). The PKI is used to embed all user attributes/preferences into a unified embedding, followed by
LoRA to adapt large-scale PLMs to the HCTU task without
FFT.
Moreover, we further use the Plug-and-Play (PnP) framework (Sun et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023b) to extend the
proposed PLoRA mechanism so that it can be more flexible
and easier to be deployed for the cold-start issue including
both zero-shot and few-shot learning scenarios (Wu et al.
2023; Dathathri et al. 2020), as shown in Fig. 1(d). The
zero-shot learning scenario occurs when new and anonymous users due to privacy considerations request a service.
In this circumstance, directly applying personalized models to such a zero-shot learning scenario may degrade the
prediction performance because the models have no idea
about the new users (Zhang et al. 2023a). Conversely, the
extended PLoRA can use personalized dropout (PDropout)
(Srivastava et al. 2014) and mutual information maximization (MIM) (Krause, Perona, and Gomes 2010) to remove
personalized information such that the model’s generalization ability can be increased to handle anonymous new users.

Effectively and efficiently adapting a pre-trained language model (PLM) for human-centered text understanding
(HCTU) is challenging since user tokens are million-level
in most personalized applications and do not have concrete
explicit semantics. A standard and parameter-efficient approach (e.g., LoRA) necessitates memorizing numerous suits
of adapters for each user. In this work, we introduce a personalized LoRA (PLoRA) with a plug-and-play (PnP) framework for the HCTU task. PLoRA is effective, parameterefficient, and dynamically deploying in PLMs. Moreover, a
personalized dropout and a mutual information maximizing
strategies are adopted and hence the proposed PLoRA can
be well adapted to few/zero-shot learning scenarios for the
cold-start issue. Experiments conducted on four benchmark
datasets show that the proposed method outperforms existing methods in full/few/zero-shot learning scenarios for the
HCTU task, even though it has fewer trainable parameters.
For reproducibility, the code for this paper is available at:
https://github.com/yoyo-yun/PLoRA.

Introduction
Human-centered text understanding (HCTU) aims to capture potential mental states in texts according to user preferences where user historical written texts are informative
sources for user understanding (Crisan et al. 2022; Lynn
et al. 2017; Capel and Brereton 2023). For users with different preferences and unique needs, similar texts might express various and diverse understandings, e.g., in personalized sentiment analysis (Zhang et al. 2021; Tang, Qin,
and Liu 2015; Chen et al. 2016). With the thriving of pretrained language models (PLMs) in natural language processing (NLP), the importance of personalization has been
highlighted in recent works (Wu et al. 2023; Min et al. 2021;
Liu, Zhang, and Gulla 2023).
Traditional personalized sentiment analysis methods typically use personalized knowledge injection (PKI) techniques
(Zhong et al. 2021; Houlsby et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2021) to
embed user attributes/preferences into dense representations
and then inject them into neural networks, as shown in Fig.
1(a). However, these models require full-model fine-tuning
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19588

