The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploiting Auxiliary Caption for Video Grounding
Hongxiang Li1 , Meng Cao2 , Xuxin Cheng1 , Yaowei Li1 , Zhihong Zhu1 , Yuexian Zou1†
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
{lihongxiang, chengxx, ywl, zhihongzhu}@stu.pku.edu.cn; {mengcao, zouyx}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Q1: A woman braids her hair slowly.
0.0s

Video grounding aims to locate a moment of interest matching the given query sentence from an untrimmed video. Previous works ignore the sparsity dilemma in video annotations, which fails to provide the context information between
potential events and query sentences in the dataset. In this
paper, we contend that exploiting easily available captions
which describe general actions, i.e., auxiliary captions defined in our paper, will significantly boost the performance.
To this end, we propose an Auxiliary Caption Network (ACNet) for video grounding. Specifically, we first introduce
dense video captioning to generate dense captions and then
obtain auxiliary captions by Non-Auxiliary Caption Suppression (NACS). To capture the potential information in auxiliary captions, we propose Caption Guided Attention (CGA)
project the semantic relations between auxiliary captions and
query sentences into temporal space and fuse them into visual
representations. Considering the gap between auxiliary captions and ground truth, we propose Asymmetric Cross-modal
Contrastive Learning (ACCL) for constructing more negative
pairs to maximize cross-modal mutual information. Extensive experiments on three public datasets (i.e., ActivityNet
Captions, TACoS and ActivityNet-CG) demonstrate that our
method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

D1: She holds a bottle.

Q2: She then ties the braids together
and ties the end together.

77.31s

113.25s

217.78s

D3: She takes out a rubber band.

D2: She then ties the braid on the side of
the hair and ends by looking away.

D4: The woman finishes
and smiles at the end.

Figure 1: The sparse annotation dilemma in video grounding. The annotated captions (marked by green) in the dataset
are sparse while there still exist many uncovered captions
(marked by red). This 218-second video from ActivityNet
Captions with 2 annotations.

and only 2 moment-sentence pairs (marked by green) are
annotated. Previous methods ignore the presence of these
unlabeled action instances (marked by red) associated with
the query, which will facilitate the grounding. As shown in
Figure 1, the missing D3 contains the process of “take
out a rubber band”, which is preparatory for the action “tie the braids” in the queried sentence Q2 .
However, it is labor-intensive to manually annotate all actions in the video. Recently end-to-end dense video captioning (DVC) (Krishna et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018; Suin and Rajagopalan 2020; Wang et al. 2021), which combines event
localization and video captioning together, has achieved satisfactory advances. A straightforward solution is to resort
to dense video captioning for plausible caption generation.
Intuitively, we can incorporate the DVC generated captions
as a data augmentation (DA) strategy into the video grounding training. This simple solution, however, suffers from two
inherent weaknesses: (1) The generated dense captions of
timestamps and sentences may be rough and unreliable. (2)
There may be overlaps between dense captions and ground
truth. The incorrect caption of the ground truth moment will
cause the model to learn incorrect information from training
samples. Experimentally, we implement this data augmentation idea on two representative methods (i.e., MMN (Wang
et al. 2022b) and 2D-TAN (Zhang et al. 2020)). The experimental results on ActivityNet Captions dataset are shown
in Figure 2. We have seen that directly using such data augmentation leads to performance degradation. For example,

Introduction
Video grounding (Gao et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2022b; Cao et al. 2022a; Mun, Cho, and Han 2020;
Anne Hendricks et al. 2017; Cao et al. 2022b; Zhang et al.
2022; Cao et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023) aims to identify the
timestamps semantically corresponding to the given query
within the untrimmed videos. It remains a challenging task
since it needs to not only model complex cross-modal interactions, but also capture comprehensive contextual information for semantic alignment.
Currently, due to the costly labeling process, the annotations of existing video grounding datasets (Krishna et al.
2017; Regneri et al. 2013) are sparse, i.e., only a few actions are annotated despite the versatile actions within the
video. For example in Figure 1, the video from ActivityNet
Captions (Krishna et al. 2017) dataset lasts for 218 seconds
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Corresponding author.

18508

