The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Feature Distribution Matching by Optimal Transport for Effective and
Robust Coreset Selection
Weiwei Xiao1,2 , Yongyong Chen1 , Qiben Shan2 , Yaowei Wang2 , Jingyong Su1,2 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
2
Pengcheng laboratory, Shenzhen
xiaowwhit@gmail.com, YongyongChen.cn@gmail.com, {shanqb,wangyw}@pcl.ac.cn, sujingyong@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

Ganguli, and Dziugaite 2021) typically assess the contribution of individual samples according to gradient values
or gradient matching method (Killamsetty et al. 2021a)
finds the coreset that is closest to the gradients of the entire dataset. Although gradient-based methods offer sufficient theoretical proofs, robustness is rarely guaranteed
for datasets containing gradient-abnormal noise samples,
due to the reliance on gradient judgments. As a result,
gradient-based methods tend to exclude some samples with
a high gradient to minimize perturbations from noise samples (Paul, Ganguli, and Dziugaite 2021). If the diversity
of samples in coreset is not enough to represent the entire dataset or contains outlier samples that deviate from the
true distribution, the coreset exhibits distribution bias, also
known as sample selection bias (Cortes et al. 2008). Furthermore, the performance of the gradient-based method deteriorates significantly under extreme pruning conditions (such
as retaining less than 40% of training samples) due to insufficient diversity of samples (Killamsetty et al. 2021b; Paul,
Ganguli, and Dziugaite 2021).
In this paper, we delve into the distribution bias of coreset
selection, which refers to the bias of feature distribution in
feature embedding space. Intuitively, the coreset is a highly
condensed version of the entire dataset, and its distribution
should closely resemble that of the entire dataset. When the
distribution of the coreset deviates significantly from that of
the entire dataset, the generalization performance of the classifier may suffer. These phenomena are shown in Fig. 1(a).
The distribution bias of the coreset could cause the decision
boundary of the model to deviate, which in turn affects the
generalization ability of the model on testing samples.
To validate our intuition, we randomly choose 5 classes
from the MINIST (Lecun and Bottou 1998) as the same class
and train a binary classification network. Then we train the
network using two coresets : randomly sampling 10% and
skewed sampling 10% of the entire dataset. In Fig. 1(b), we
visualize the feature distribution of coresets and the entire
dataset, and then evaluate the accuracy of coresets with different feature distributions. As expected, the less distribution bias and the more similar distribution between the coreset and the entire dataset in feature embedding spaces, the
higher test accuracy of the coreset.
Our method is simple yet effective and exhibits strong robustness, especially when the entire dataset contains class-

Training neural networks with good generalization requires
large computational costs in many deep learning methods due
to large-scale datasets and over-parameterized models. Despite the emergence of a number of coreset selection methods
to reduce the computational costs, the problem of coreset distribution bias, i.e., the skewed distribution between the coreset and the entire dataset, has not been well studied. In this
paper, we find that the closer the feature distribution of the
coreset is to that of the entire dataset, the better the generalization performance of the coreset, particularly under extreme pruning. This motivates us to propose a simple yet effective method for coreset selection to alleviate the distribution bias between the coreset and the entire dataset, called feature distribution matching (FDMat). Unlike gradient-based
methods, which selects samples with larger gradient values
or approximates gradient values of the entire dataset, FDMat aims to select the coreset that is closest to the feature
distribution of the entire dataset. Specifically, FDMat transfers coreset selection as an optimal transport problem from
the coreset to the entire dataset in feature embedding spaces.
Moreover, our method shows strong robustness due to the
removal of samples far from the distribution, especially for
the entire dataset containing noisy and class-imbalanced samples. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks show
that FDMat can improve the performance of coreset selection than existing coreset methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/successhaha/FDMat.

Introduction
Recently, foundation models in the visual and multi-modal
domains have achieved unprecedented success (Ouyang
et al. 2022). However, these high-performing models rely on
hundreds of millions of data for training, resulting in significant computational costs. To explore the potential of achieving comparable performance for models on smaller dataset,
there has been a growing interest in coreset selection methods. The objective of the coreset selection is to identify a
subset of samples that serves as an effectively representative
of the entire dataset.
To identify samples that contribute to model learning,
gradient-based methods (Killamsetty et al. 2021b; Paul,
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9196

