The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Selective and Orthogonal Feature Activation for Pedestrian Attribute Recognition
Junyi Wu1,2,3 , Yan Huang4 * , Min Gao5 , Yuzhen Niu3 , Mingjing Yang5 ,
Zhipeng Gao1,2 , Jianqiang Zhao1,2
2

1
AI Research Center, Xiamen Meiya Pico Information Company Ltd., Xiamen, China
Xiamen Meiya Pico Information Security Research Institute Company Ltd., Xiamen, China
3
College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing China
5
College of Physics and Information Engineering, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China
{Junyi.Wu-1, huangyan.750, Min.Gao-1}@outlook.com, yuzhenniu@gmail.com

Abstract
Pedestrian Attribute Recognition (PAR) involves identifying
the attributes of individuals in person images. Existing PAR
methods typically rely on CNNs as the backbone network to
extract pedestrian features. However, CNNs process only one
adjacent region at a time, leading to the loss of long-range
inter-relations between different attribute-specific regions. To
address this limitation, we leverage the Vision Transformer
(ViT) instead of CNNs as the backbone for PAR, aiming to
model long-range relations and extract more robust features.
However, PAR suffers from an inherent attribute imbalance
issue, causing ViT to naturally focus more on attributes that
appear frequently in the training set and ignore some pedestrian attributes that appear less. The native features extracted
by ViT are not able to tolerate the imbalance attribute distribution issue. To tackle this issue, we propose two novel components: the Selective Feature Activation Method (SFAM)
and the Orthogonal Feature Activation Loss. SFAM smartly
suppresses the more informative attribute-specific features,
compelling the PAR model to capture discriminative features
from regions that are easily overlooked. The proposed loss
enforces an orthogonal constraint on the original feature extracted by ViT and the suppressed features from SFAM, promoting the complementarity of features in space. We conduct experiments on several benchmark PAR datasets, including PETA, PA100K, RAPv1, and RAPv2, demonstrating the
effectiveness of our method. Specifically, our method outperforms existing state-of-the-art approaches by GRL, IAACaps, ALM, and SSC in terms of mA on the four datasets,
respectively.

(a) (b)

(c)

(d)

(a) (b)

(c)

(d)

(a) (b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Visualization of heat maps: (a) Original Images,
(b) CNN-based method, (c) Transform-based method, and
(d) our SOFAFormer which captures more robust features.

et al. 2021), prompting numerous efforts in PAR (Sarfraz
et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2018; Xiang et al.
2019; Yang et al. 2021). These PAR works employ CNNbased architecture (e.g., the commonly used ResNet (He
et al. 2016) and InceptionNet (Szegedy et al. 2016)) to exploit attribute-related features from specific body regions.
Despite the promising performance achieved in PAR due
to the success of CNN architectures, the task is far from
being solved due to challenges posed by poor pedestrian
image quality (e.g., low resolution, human pose, and lighting changes). Furthermore, PAR differs from general singlelabel image classification as it involves predicting the presence of multiple attributes in a single image, making the
contextual relationship between different attributes crucial.
For instance, when the model determines a high probability of a person wearing a skirt, the contextual relation may
indicate a higher likelihood of attributes such as being female or having long hair, which are often associated with
wearing a skirt. However, exploiting the contextual relation
between attributes remains challenging for CNNs, as highlighted in existing works (He et al. 2021; Tan et al. 2020;
Zhao et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2021). This limitation primarily arises from the fact that the convolutional and downsampling operators process one adjacent region at a time (He
et al. 2021), hindering the learning of global context and
capturing the long-range dependencies between regions in
close proximity, even when they may contain attributes with
contextual relations.
Recently, the Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al.
2021) has gained popularity as a preferred choice for a variety of computer vision tasks due to its impressive performance and versatility. In contrast to CNNs, which rely
on convolutional and downsampling operators, ViT utilizes
multi-head self-attention modules to process different re-

Introduction
Pedestrian attribute recognition (PAR), as a multi-label classification problem, aims to predict a set of semantic attributes (e.g., age, gender, hair style, etc.) (Wu et al. 2022a;
Tan et al. 2020). Due to its ubiquitous applications in surveillance and public security, many efforts have been made to
promote its performance in real-world scenarios (Feris et al.
2014; Lin et al. 2019).
CNNs have demonstrated extraordinary capabilities in
various human-centric vision tasks (Wu et al. 2022b; Huang
et al. 2018, 2019b, 2021a; Zhang and Wang 2023; Zhang
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6039

