The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Approval-Based Committee Voting in Practice:
A Case Study of (over-)Representation in the Polkadot Blockchain
Niclas Boehmer1 , Markus Brill2 , Alfonso Cevallos3 , Jonas Gehrlein3 , Luis Sánchez-Fernández4 ,
Ulrike Schmidt-Kraepelin5
1
Harvard University
University of Warwick
3
Web3 Foundation
4
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
5
TU Eindhoven
nboehmer@g.harvard.edu, markus.brill@warwick.ac.uk, alfonso@web3.foundation, gehrlein.jonas@protonmail.com,
luiss@it.uc3m.es, u.schmidt.kraepelin@tue.nl
2

Abstract

criminative power in practice, the problem arises of how to
measure the proportionality of outcomes and how to quantify the differences between proportional rules in practice.
One reason for the shortage of empirical works might
be the lack of real-world data. Accordingly, previous empirical works often either resorted to synthetically generated data or converted data from other voting applications
such as ordinal elections or participatory budgeting to fit
the ABC voting setting. Despite the fact that previous research has named a multitude of potential applications of
ABC voting ranging from political elections (Brill, Laslier,
and Skowron 2018) to recommender systems (Streviniotis
and Chalkiadakis 2022a,b; Gawron and Faliszewski 2022)
to forest management (Pommerening et al. 2020), there
are only very few applications where ABC elections have
been implemented. A so-far mostly unexplored exception
are blockchain protocols that conduct ABC elections on
a day-to-day basis. Specifically, these elections occur in
blockchains using the Nominated Proof-of-Stake (NPoS)
protocol. In this system, a subset of stakeholders, called validators, are elected to run the consensus protocol, which
is crucial for the integrity of the blockchain. The problem
of selecting the validators can be modeled as an ABC voting problem, and, indeed, on the Polkadot network (https:
//polkadot.network), a proportional ABC voting rule is used
(Burdges et al. 2020; Cevallos and Stewart 2021).1

We provide the first large-scale data collection of real-world
approval-based committee elections. These elections have
been conducted on the Polkadot blockchain as part of their
Nominated Proof-of-Stake mechanism and contain around
one thousand candidates and tens of thousands of (weighted)
voters each. We conduct an in-depth study of applicationrelevant questions, including a quantitative and qualitative
analysis of the outcomes returned by different voting rules.
Besides considering proportionality measures that are standard in the multiwinner voting literature, we pay particular
attention to less-studied measures of overrepresentation, as
these are closely related to the security of the Polkadot network. We also analyze how different design decisions such as
the committee size affect the examined measures.

1

Introduction

Approval-based committee (ABC) voting describes the task
of selecting a subset of candidates based on approval-style
preferences of voters over candidates. A central concern in
such elections is to ensure that voters’ opinions are “proportionally” reflected in the selected set of candidates, i.e.,
in the committee. Formally capturing proportional representation in the form of axioms, and designing rules that are
guaranteed to satisfy these axioms, is a very active area of research; see the book by Lackner and Skowron (2022). While
this effort has resulted in a good theoretical understanding of
the axiomatic aspects of different voting rules, there are only
very few studies that examine the actual behavior of such
rules on specific real-world or synthetically generated voting
instances (Elkind et al. 2017; Szufa et al. 2022; Faliszewski
et al. 2023b; Mehra, Sreenivas, and Larson 2023). Nevertheless, these few empirical works have already proved useful,
as they found that different voting rules often produce similar outcomes and that most voting rules tend to significantly
outperform their worst-case proportionality guarantees. This
motivated the development of new proportionality axioms
(Skowron and Górecki 2022; Brill and Peters 2023). Nevertheless, as proportionality axioms seem to lose their dis-

Our Contributions. We complement the mostly theoretical literature on ABC voting in various directions, thereby
contributing tools and insights for future empirical works.
• We compile the first collection of real-world ABC elections, consisting of 496 elections from the Polkadot
blockchain. These elections contain between 18 202 and
48 025 voters and between 920 and 1080 candidates.
• We conduct an empirical in-depth study of different voting rules, with a particular focus on their application in
Polkadot. We analyze the similarities between rules and
whether their outcomes under- or overrepresent voters.
1

Polkadot currently uses Phragmén’s sequential rule but there
are considerations to switch to the Phragmms rule (Cevallos and
Stewart 2021).

Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9519

