The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Robust Rationales for Model Explainability:
A Guidance-Based Approach
Shuaibo Hu, Kui Yu*
School of Computer and Information, Hefei University of Technology
shuaibohu@mail.hfut.edu.cn, yukui@hfut.edu.cn

Abstract
Input

Selective rationalization can be regarded as a straightforward
self-explaining approach for enhancing model explainability
in natural language processing tasks. It aims to provide explanations that are more accessible and understandable to nontechnical users by first selecting subsets of input texts as rationales and then predicting based on chosen subsets. However,
existing methods that follow this select-then-predict framework may suffer from the rationalization degeneration problem, resulting in sub-optimal or unsatisfactory rationales that
do not align with human judgments. This problem may further lead to rationalization failure, resulting in meaningless
rationales that ultimately undermine people’s trust in the rationalization model. To address these challenges, we propose
a Guidance-based Rationalization method (G-RAT) that effectively improves robustness against failure situations and
the quality of rationales by using a guidance module to regularize selections and distributions. Experimental results on
two synthetic settings prove that our method is robust to the
rationalization degeneration and failure problems, while the
results on two real datasets show its effectiveness in providing rationales in line with human judgments. The source code
is available at https://github.com/shuaibo919/g-rat.

Selector

Mask

This beer poured out a
beautiful clear dark gold color.

Rationale

Predictor

This beer poured out a
beautiful clear dark gold color.

Prediction

Positive

Figure 1: The basic framework for selective rationalization.
X, M, R, Ŷ , ⊙ represent the input text, binary mask, rationale, prediction, and element-wise product, respectively.

ity of selected pieces is not good, and this problem is commonly referred to as rationalization degeneration (Yu et al.
2019; Liu et al. 2022). For example, the case of Figure 2
(Sub-optimal) given the right sentiment prediction but using
the rationale missed some critical context. Many approaches
(Huang et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2021; Yue et al. 2022; Sha,
Camburu, and Lukasiewicz 2022) have been proposed to address the above degeneration issue. The basic idea of these
approaches is to restrain the predictor using supplementary
modules that utilize full information of inputs such that the
predictor does not entirely rely on rationales at training time.
While these methods can partially alleviate the rationalization degeneration problem, they remain bound to the twostage framework during training. Consequently, they may be
unable to handle more intricate cases, which we named rationalization failure. Unlike the widespread concern about
rationalization degeneration, the failure problem of selective rationalization has been largely overlooked in previous
works (Zheng et al. 2022). This failure will make the rationale meaningless to users, thus damaging users’ trust. Ideally, the selector should determine which words to be selected based on the input semantic information and honestly perform its selection responsibility. However, when a
rationalization failure occurs (Zheng et al. 2022; Jacovi and
Goldberg 2021), the selector is able to predict and pass its
prediction through the binary mask M .
In Figure 2 (Failure), a broken selector always selects the
first token of the input when its prediction is positive or the
last token of the input when its prediction is negative. As a
result, the predictor will produce a lower prediction loss in
fitting the particular pattern than the semantics information
of rationales, although the pieces selected by this broken selector are meaningless. Can we consider the rationales in this

Introduction
Selective rationalization is a method for explaining the predictions of a machine learning model by selecting a short
and coherent part of the input that is sufficient for the prediction when yielding them (Gurrapu et al. 2023). Lei, Barzilay, and Jaakkola (2016) were the first to propose this selectthen-predict framework for rationalizing neural predictions
in that the selector first selects a rationale that is a subset of
the entire input sentence. Then the predictor makes the judge
only based on this rationale, as shown in Figure 1.
Based on the select-then-predict framework, many methods have been proposed (Bastings, Aziz, and Titov 2019;
Yu et al. 2019; Chang et al. 2020). The rationale learned by
these methods is the only available information to the predictor, leading to the predictor overfitting the rationale produced by the selector. That is to say, the whole model can
still produce a lower prediction loss even though the qual* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18243

