The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Dynamic Learning Method towards Realistic Compositional Zero-Shot
Learning
Xiaoming Hu, Zilei Wang*
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
cjdc@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
To tackle the challenge of recognizing images of unseen attribute-object compositions, Compositional Zero-Shot
Learning (CZSL) methods have been previously addressed.
However, test images in realistic scenarios may also incorporate other forms of unknown factors, such as novel semantic concepts or novel image styles. As previous CZSL
works have overlooked this critical issue, in this research, we
first propose the Realistic Compositional Zero-Shot Learning (RCZSL) task which considers the various types of unknown factors in an unified experimental setting. To achieve
this, we firstly conduct re-labelling on MIT-States and use
the pre-trained generative models to obtain images of various domains. Then the entire dataset is split into a training
set and a test set, with the latter containing images of unseen
concepts, unseen compositions, unseen domains as well as
their combinations. Following this, we show that the visualsemantic relationship changes on unseen images, leading us
to construct two dynamic modulators to adapt the visual features and composition prototypes in accordance with the input image. We believe that such a dynamic learning method
could effectively alleviate the domain shift problem caused
by various types of unknown factors. We conduct extensive
experiments on benchmark datasets for both the conventional
CZSL setting and the proposed RCZSL setting. The effectiveness of our method has been proven by empirical results,
which significantly outperformed both our baseline method
and state-of-the-art approaches.

Train: Valley Hill

Test: Ice shelf

Train: Photo of gray keyboard

Zero-Shot Learning

Train: Colorful car Old building Test: Colorful building

Compositional Zero-Shot Learning

Train: Sketch dog Cartoon dog Test: Photo dog

Domain Generalization

Train: Cartoon of yellow building

Test: Art of wood chair

Realistic Scenario: ZSL+CZSL+DG

Figure 1: Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL), Compositional ZeroShot Learning (CZSL) and Domain Generalization (DG)
tasks require to recognize unseen semantic categories, unseen compositional categories and unseen image styles respectively. In contrast, the goal of Realistic Compositional
Zero-Shot Learning (RCZSL) task is to identify images that
concurrently contain all the aforementioned types of unknown factors.

attibute and object concepts. Furthermore, previous studies have proposed the transductive CZSL setting (Xu, Kordjamshidi, and Chai 2021) and partial supervision CZSL
setting (Karthik, Mancini, and Akata 2022). These settings
consider a special circumstance of CZSL, when the unlabelled test images could be obtained or partial labels are absent during training. Actually, we assert that during training,
labels are typically intact and test data is unavailable, thus
restricting the practical applications of these settings.
While prior CZSL researches have made great progress,
we propose that a crucial issue has been overlooked. In previous CZSL settings, the unseen compositions are considered to be composed of seen attributes and seen objects. We
demonstrate that this is not often the case in real-world situations. The requirement for human annotations restricts the
capacity of training datasets, therefore test images may also
contain previously unseen attribute and object concepts or
unseen styles. To address this, Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL)
and Domain Generalization (DG) approaches have been pro-

Introduction
Current computer vision algorithms generally learn to recognize the object category of an given image. However, a
single object may be coupled with multiple attributes, making it difficult for computer vision systems to generalize
their object recognition capabilities to unseen images. For
instance, training dataset might include images of ”peeled
apple” and ”ripe apple”, while we may require to identify
”sliced apple” during test. Since gathering supervisions for
all available attributes is infeasible, researchers are committed to studying Compositional Zero-shot Learning (CZSL)
task which aims at recognizing novel compositions of seen
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2265

