The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Self-Interpretable Graph Learning with Sufficient and Necessary Explanations
Jiale Deng, Yanyan Shen*
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{jialedeng, shenyy}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

E1: sufficient & necessary:

Self-interpretable graph learning methods provide insights to
unveil the black-box nature of GNNs by providing predictions with built-in explanations. However, current works suffer from performance degradation compared to GNNs trained
without built-in explanations. We argue the main reason is
that they fail to generate explanations satisfying both sufficiency and necessity, and the biased explanations further hurt
GNNs’ performance. In this work, we propose a novel framework for generating SUfficient aNd NecessarY explanations
(S UNNY-GNN for short) that benefit GNNs’ predictions. The
key idea is to conduct augmentations by structurally perturbing given explanations and employ a contrastive loss to
guide the learning of explanations toward sufficiency and necessity directions. S UNNY-GNN introduces two coefficients
to generate hard and reliable contrastive samples. We further extend S UNNY-GNN to heterogeneous graphs. Empirical results on various GNNs and real-world graphs show
that S UNNY-GNN yields accurate predictions and faithful
explanations, outperforming the state-of-the-art methods by
improving 3.5% prediction accuracy and 13.1% explainability fidelity on average. Our code and data are available at
https://github.com/SJTU-Quant/SUNNY-GNN.

v

a

d
c
e

b
ML a
ML b

?
v

DB

SE

d

c
DB e

Original input

E2: sufficient:
a
v

d
c
e

b
E3: necessary:
a
v

ML DB SE

ML DB SE

d
c
e

b
Explanations

ML DB SE

Predictions

Figure 1: An example of predicting the label (research area)
of the author node v in a coauthor network. A sufficient and
necessary explanation needs to preserve crucial information
such that a GNN can make the correct prediction confidently.
To overcome the shortcomings of post-hoc GNN explainers, self-interpretable graph learning methods that simultaneously provide predictions and built-in explanations has
become a prominent solution. A self-interpretable graph
learning framework typically consists of (1) an explanation
generator that extracts substructure from the input graph as
the explanation, and (2) a GNN encoder that learns the representation of the generated explanation for the final prediction. While such a framework produces a distinct explanation for each prediction, the quality of the generated explanations is a crucial factor that determines the GNN performance. One line of works (Yu et al. 2020; Dai and Wang
2021; Miao, Liu, and Li 2022) seek explanations that contain sufficient information for the GNN to make correct predictions. Another line of works (Sui et al. 2022; Fan et al.
2022; Wu et al. 2022) focus on discovering necessary substructures, expecting that any corruption to the substructures
would prevent the GNN from predicting correctly. Nevertheless, a sufficient explanation may introduce noisy information and a necessary explanation may miss crucial patterns,
both hurting the GNN performance. In fact, existing selfinterpretable graph learning methods suffer from the degradation of the GNN performance, i.e., up to 15.2% lower accuracy than the original GNNs (see Table 2 for details).

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are widely employed for
learning representations of graph-structured data, such as
social networks (Xiao et al. 2023), co-purchase graphs (Li
et al. 2020), and paper citation networks (Luo et al. 2020a).
Despite their remarkable expressive power to model complex graph data, the black-box nature of GNNs poses a significant obstacle that hinders their usage in many application domains that require trust and accountability. Therefore,
exploring the explainability of GNNs is crucial since good
explanations can provide insights into the decision logic inside GNNs. There have been numerous works proposed for
explaining trained GNNs by extracting salient substructures
of input graphs as explanations in a post-hoc manner (Ying
et al. 2019; Luo et al. 2020b; Wang et al. 2021b; Li et al.
2023). However, post-hoc explanations are not directly generated from GNNs and they are recognized to be biased or
inconsistent (Dai and Wang 2021; Miao, Liu, and Li 2022).
* corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11749

