The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PC-Conv: Unifying Homophily and Heterophily with Two-Fold Filtering
Bingheng Li, Erlin Pan, Zhao Kang*
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan, China
{bingheng86,wujisixsix6}@gmail.com, zkang@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2020; Abu-El-Haija et al. 2019). To handle heterophilic
data, many researchers try to modify the original GNN or
even design new architectures and techniques (Zhu et al.
2020; Yan et al. 2022; Luan et al. 2022a, 2021; Li et al. 2022;
Mao et al. 2023; Pan and Kang 2023)
Despite respectable results in heterophilic graphs, many
heterophilic GNNs still struggle to maintain superiority on
homophilic graphs. The over-exploitation of heterophilic
nodes and carefully crafted designs often limit their performance on homophilic graphs. In fact, homophilic and
heterophilic graphs are not independent of each other, and
real graphs cannot easily be classified as homophilic or heterophilic. This is because the degree of heterophily is just
a statistical concept that measures the percentage of connected nodes from different classes. For example, in popular heterophilic datasets like Actor, Cornell, and Penn94,
more than 20% of connected nodes belong to the same class
(Li et al. 2022). This phenomenon is even more pronounced
on large datasets (Lim et al. 2021). Therefore, homophilic
and heterophilic graphs should not be treated separately, and
some graph-agnostic processing methods are desired. In particular, the homophily in heterophilic graphs should be deliberately explored, and vice versa. Thus, this boils down to
two questions:
Q1: how to deliberately design the information aggregation mechanism for homophilic and heterophilic
nodes?
Q2: how to design a plausible strategy to combine
them?
In response to the first question, we analyze information
aggregation from a local and global perspective. For homophilic nodes, the local topology helps to aggregate the
neighbors and preserve the local feature information to some
extent (Zhang et al. 2021). This operation can be achieved
by a simple low-pass filter. For heterophilic nodes, in contrast, the local topology could diversify the characteristics
of the nodes, deviating abnormally from the original features and making the nodes difficult to distinguish in downstream tasks (Zhu et al. 2020). Some methods enlarge the
node neighborhood to alleviate this problem. However, the
size of the neighborhood is hard to set and varies from node
to node. Therefore, we propose to use the global structure
information of heterophilic nodes for information aggregation. Unlike the complex model in (Li et al. 2022), we gener-

Recently, many carefully crafted graph representation learning methods have achieved impressive performance on either
strong heterophilic or homophilic graphs, but not both. Therefore, they are incapable of generalizing well across real-world
graphs with different levels of homophily. This is attributed
to their neglect of homophily in heterophilic graphs, and vice
versa. In this paper, we propose a two-fold filtering mechanism to extract homophily in heterophilic graphs and vice
versa. In particular, we extend the graph heat equation to
perform heterophilic aggregation of global information from
a long distance. The resultant filter can be exactly approximated by the Possion-Charlier (PC) polynomials. To further
exploit information at multiple orders, we introduce a powerful graph convolution PC-Conv and its instantiation PCNet
for the node classification task. Compared with state-of-theart GNNs, PCNet shows competitive performance on wellknown homophilic and heterophilic graphs. Our implementation is available at https://github.com/uestclbh/PC-Conv.

Introduction
Developing methods to handle graph data has received increasing attention in the past decade. Graph neural networks
(GNNs), which jointly leverage topological structure and
node attribute information, have achieved immense success
on numerous graph-related learning tasks. For each node,
GNNs recursively aggregate and transform attributes from
its neighbors. Due to this information aggregation mechanism, strong homophily of the graph is an implicit condition for GNNs to achieve good performance in downstream
tasks (McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook 2001). Basically,
homophily means that similar nodes are prone to connect
to each other. As a pioneering GNNs architecture, GCN
(Welling and Kipf 2016) and its variants (Wu et al. 2019;
Klicpera, Bojchevski, and Günnemann 2019) all adopt a
low-pass filter to achieve feature smoothing through information aggregation between neighboring nodes. We refer to
these models as homophilic GNNs.
Some recent works point out that GNNs are subject to
substantial performance degradation on heterophilic graphs,
where connected nodes tend to have different labels (Pei
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13437

