The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Cross-Modal Match for Language Conditioned 3D Object Grounding
Yachao Zhang1 , Runze Hu2 , Ronghui Li1 , Yanyun Qu 3 , Yuan Xie 4 , Xiu Li1 *
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, China
2
School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, 100081, China
3
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, 361000, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, 200062, China
{yachaozhang, li.xiu}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Language conditioned 3D object grounding aims to find the
object within the 3D scene mentioned by natural language descriptions, which mainly depends on the matching between
visual and natural language. Considerable improvement in
grounding performance is achieved by improving the multimodal fusion mechanism or bridging the gap between detection and matching. However, several mismatches are ignored,
i.e., mismatch in local visual representation and global sentence representation, and mismatch in visual space and corresponding label word space. In this paper, we propose crossmodal match for 3D grounding from mitigating these mismatches perspective. Specifically, to match local visual features with the global description sentence, we propose BEV
(Bird’s-eye-view) based global information embedding module. It projects multiple object proposal features into the BEV
and the relations of different objects are accessed by the visual transformer which can model both positions and features
with long-range dependencies. To circumvent the mismatch
in feature spaces of different modalities, we propose crossmodal consistency learning. It performs cross-modal consistency constraints to convert the visual feature space into the
label word feature space resulting in easier matching. Besides, we introduce label distillation loss and global distillation loss to drive these matches learning in a distillation way.
We evaluate our method in mainstream evaluation settings on
three datasets, and the results demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed method.

Figure 1: An overview of the traditional two-stage method
(the top part) and our xM Match (the bottom part).
denotes the cross-modal consistency constraint (xMCL).
natural language sentence. It can enhance the interaction between humans and machines by enabling more natural and
intuitive communication using natural language.
Existing 3D grounding methods can be divided into two
types: one-stage method and two-stage method. The former
focuses on bridging the gap between detection and matching
in the 3D visual grounding task, and thus achieving the target
localization at a single stage. However, these methods suffer
from the high training complexity compared to their twostage counterpart, because the multi-modal feature extraction (language sentences and the entire 3D scene) and target object regression are implemented simultaneously. Distinctly, the two-stage method primarily attempts to explore
relations between proposals and referred language sentences
to distinguish the target object. For this type of method,
there are mismatches between visual and linguistic modalities, mainly in two aspects. 1) Mismatch in local view and
global view. Since the visual features are extracted from
each proposal individually (local view representation) (Yang
et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022b; Bakr, Alsaedy, and Elhoseiny
2022), the visual features lack the interaction between every object while the representation of linguistic description
is based on the global view of the entire scene. Even some
fancy techniques, i.e., graph neural network (Huang et al.
2021), and attention mechanisms (Zhao et al. 2021), focus
on modeling the relations of two modalities to promote the

Introduction
3D scene understanding based on point cloud has attracted
a lot of attention and achieved great success along with the
development of deep learning (Guo et al. 2020; Yan et al.
2020). Most of the existing 3D scene understanding methods
focus on visual modality, i.e., point cloud modality (Graham, Engelcke, and Van Der Maaten 2018; Wang et al. 2019;
Zhang et al. 2021b), image (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell
2015; Olaf Ronneberger 2015) or the fusion of them (Jaritz
et al. 2020; Peng et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022).
Recently, language conditioned 3D grounding aims to discover and locate an object in the 3D scene referred to by the
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7359

