The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exact Inference for Continuous-Time Gaussian Process Dynamics
Katharina Ensinger 1,2 † , Nicholas Tagliapietra 1,†,* , Sebastian Ziesche 1 , Sebastian Trimpe 2
1

2

Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany
Institute for Data Science in Mechanical Engineering, RWTH Aachen University
katharina.ensinger@bosch.com

irregularly-sampled) discrete time points tn can be obtained
by sensors, where

Abstract
Many physical systems can be described as a continuous-time
dynamical system. In practice, the true system is often unknown and has to be learned from measurement data. Since
data is typically collected in discrete time, e.g. by sensors,
most methods in Gaussian process (GP) dynamics model
learning are trained on one-step ahead predictions. While this
scheme is mathematically tempting, it can become problematic in several scenarios, e.g. if measurements are provided at
irregularly-sampled time steps or physical system properties
have to be conserved. Thus, we aim for a GP model of the true
continuous-time dynamics. We tackle this task by leveraging
higher-order numerical integrators. These integrators provide
the necessary tools to discretize dynamical systems with arbitrary accuracy. However, most higher-order integrators require
dynamics evaluations at intermediate time steps, making exact
GP inference intractable. In previous work, this problem is
often addressed by approximate inference techniques. However, exact GP inference is preferable in many scenarios, e.g.
due to its mathematical guarantees. In order to enable direct
inference, we propose to leverage multistep and Taylor integrators. We demonstrate how exact inference schemes can
be derived for these types of integrators. Further, we derive
tailored sampling schemes that allow one to draw consistent
dynamics functions from the posterior. The learned model
can thus be integrated with arbitrary integrators, just like a
standard dynamical system. We show empirically and theoretically that our approach yields an accurate representation of
the continuous-time system.

1

x̂n,u = xn,u + νn,u ,

processes (GPs) are a powerful probabilistic framework and
can be interpreted as a distribution over functions. Hence,
training a GP is a popular approach in dynamics model learning, providing uncertainty estimates for the model. Typically, a GP model f˜ is trained on one-step ahead predictions
(Deisenroth and Rasmussen 2011; Doerr et al. 2018)
xn+1 = f˜(xn ).
(3)

Introduction

Many systems can be described by a continuous-time ordinary differential equation (ODE)
ẋ(t) = f (x(t)) with f : Rd → Rd .

(2)

νn,u ∼ N (0, σu2 ), n = 1 . . . N and u = 1 . . . d. Gaussian

(1)

Dynamics model learning deals with the problem of estimating the dynamics function f from data. Usually, it is
not possible to measure the states (xn )n=1...N in continuous time, but noisy measurements (x̂n )n=1...N at (potentially
†
Authors contributed equally to this work
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Work was conducted at Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
during master’s studies at University of Padova.

11883

Mathematically, this structure is tempting since it can be
addressed via standard GP regression, where input-output
pairs are given as neighboring points in the trajectory. Thus,
the GP can be directly conditioned on the data. However, the
approach can lead problems in various scenarios. Especially,
it is not suitable for irregularly-sampled or missing training
data or if predictions at intermediate time steps are required.
Further, physical structure of the true system, such as energy
or volume is typically not preserved (Ensinger et al. 2022).
We address this problem by learning GP dynamics that
represent f more accurately. To this end, we leverage numerical integrators, in particular higher-order multistep and
Taylor integrators. Numerical integrators provide the necessary tools to approximate the solution of system (1) with
arbitrary accuracy for known dynamics f . However, we can
leverage the approximation qualities of numerical integrators
in a learning-based scenario, where the true dynamics are
unknown. In particular, applying a higher-order integrator to
the unknown system Eq. (1) yields a more accurate approximation of the continuous-time dynamics f . From a numerical
perspective, one-step ahead predictions (3) correspond to the
explicit Euler method. This follows by identifying f˜(xn ) with
xn + (xn+1 − xn )f (x). Being a method of order one, this
indicates that the learned dynamics typically do not provide
an accurate representation of the continuous-time system.
Generalizing to higher-order integrators raises technical
difficulties. In particular, most integrators require dynamics
evaluations at intermediate time steps (Hairer, Nørsett, and
Wanner 1987) making standard GP inference intractable. In
previous works, this problem is often addressed by approximating the GP posterior with variational inference (Hegde

