The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Inspecting Prediction Confidence for Detecting Black-Box Backdoor Attacks
Tong Wang1 , Yuan Yao1 , Feng Xu1 , Miao Xu2 , Shengwei An3 , Ting Wang4
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
University of Queensland, Australia
3
Purdue University, USA
4
Stony Brook University, USA
mg20330065@smail.nju.edu.cn, y.yao@nju.edu.cn, xf@nju.edu.cn
miao.xu@uq.edu.au, an93@purdue.edu, twang@cs.stonybrook.edu
Abstract

neuron activation, based on the assumption that stimulating one inner neuron of a trojaned model can easily lead
to the target label. However, ABS falls short against advanced attacks involving multiple triggers or multiple target labels (Gao et al. 2020). ULP (Kolouri et al. 2020) and
MNTD (Xu et al. 2021) propose to train a meta-classifier
based on a number of clean and trojaned models. Although
the trained meta-classifier can well recognize the triggers
that share similar patterns to those within the training data, it
may not generalize well to unseen attacks or triggers. More
importantly, a recent backdoor attack F TROJAN (Wang et al.
2022) shows that the above defenses can be easily bypassed
by breaking their underline assumptions and implanting the
backdoor in the frequency domain.
In this work, we propose a new backdoor defense DTI N SPECTOR against black-box backdoor attacks. Different
from the existing defenses, our method is motivated by the
observation that an effective black-box backdoor attack usually needs to achieve high prediction confidence on the small
amount of poisoned data at the training stage, so as to ensure
a high attack success rate (ASR) on the poisoned inputs at
the inference stage. We show that this observation generally
holds for black-box attacks with both theoretical and empirical evidence. Moreover, this observation does not rely on
the trigger size, the neuron activation pattern, or the trigger
pattern, and thus has the potential to address the above limitations. DTI NSPECTOR then carefully examines the prediction confidences of data samples, and decides the existence
of backdoor using the shortcut nature (Geirhos et al. 2020;
Li et al. 2021c) of backdoor triggers.
We evaluate DTI NSPECTOR against six black-box backdoor attacks (from BAD N ET (Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg
2017) to F TROJAN (Wang et al. 2022)) and three advanced
attacking types on four datasets. The studied advanced attacks (Wang et al. 2019) include partial attack (poisoning
data from a specific label), MTOT attack (multiple triggers
for one target label), and MTMT attack (multiple triggers
for multiple target labels). The results show that our defense
can accurately detect the trojaned models as well as the infected labels. We also compare DTI NSPECTOR with four existing defenses (i.e., NC (Wang et al. 2019), ABS (Liu et al.
2019), ULP (Kolouri et al. 2020), and MNTD (Xu et al.
2021)). The results show that DTI NSPECTOR outperforms
these competitors: 1) it is less sensitive to the trigger size,

Backdoor attacks have been shown to be a serious security
threat against deep learning models, and various defenses
have been proposed to detect whether a model is backdoored
or not. However, as indicated by a recent black-box attack,
existing defenses can be easily bypassed by implanting the
backdoor in the frequency domain. To this end, we propose a
new defense DTI NSPECTOR against black-box backdoor attacks, based on a new observation related to the prediction
confidence of learning models. That is, to achieve a high attack success rate with a small amount of poisoned data, backdoor attacks usually render a model exhibiting statistically
higher prediction confidences on the poisoned samples. We
provide both theoretical and empirical evidence for the generality of this observation. DTI NSPECTOR then carefully examines the prediction confidences of data samples, and decides
the existence of backdoor using the shortcut nature of backdoor triggers. Extensive evaluations on six backdoor attacks,
four datasets, and three advanced attacking types demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed defense.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have been found to be vulnerable to
backdoor attacks (a.k.a. trojan attacks) (Gu, Dolan-Gavitt,
and Garg 2017). For example, by poisoning the training data,
a face recognition model can be easily manipulated to predict any person as the target person. Typically, a successful backdoor attack poisons a small set of training data, and
renders a trained model satisfying the following two requirements: 1) stealthiness, the trojaned model does not have significant accuracy degradation on benign inputs; 2) effectiveness, it classifies a poisoned input (e.g., input stamped with
a trigger) to a target label with a high probability.
Up to date, several defenses have been proposed to inspect
whether a given model has been trojaned or not. Among
them, Neural Cleanse (NC) (Wang et al. 2019) leverages the
intuition that a backdoor trigger is usually of small size, and
learns to search for such small areas to detect triggers. However, NC is observed to be sensitive to the trigger size, performing poorly when the trigger size is relatively large (Guo
et al. 2020). ABS (Liu et al. 2019) proposes to analyze the
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

274

