The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FashionERN: Enhance-and-Refine Network for
Composed Fashion Image Retrieval
Yanzhe Chen1 , Huasong Zhong2 , Xiangteng He1 , Yuxin Peng1 * , Jiahuan Zhou1 , Lele Cheng2
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
Kuaishou Technology
chenyanzhe@stu.pku.edu.cn, {hexiangteng, pengyuxin, jiahuanzhou}@pku.edu.cn,
{zhonghuasong, chenglele}@kuaishou.com
Abstract
The goal of composed fashion image retrieval is to locate a
target image based on a reference image and modified text.
Recent methods utilize symmetric encoders (e.g., CLIP) pretrained on large-scale non-fashion datasets. However, the input for this task exhibits an asymmetric nature, where the
reference image contains rich content while the modified
text is often brief. Therefore, methods employing symmetric encoders encounter a severe phenomenon: retrieval results dominated by reference images, leading to the oversight of modified text. We propose a Fashion Enhance-andRefine Network (FashionERN) centered around two aspects:
enhancing the text encoder and refining visual semantics.
We introduce a Triple-branch Modifier Enhancement model,
which injects relevant information from the reference image
and aligns the modified text modality with the target image modality. Furthermore, we propose a Dual-guided Vision Refinement model that retains critical visual information
through text-guided refinement and self-guided refinement
processes. The combination of these two models significantly
mitigates the reference dominance phenomenon, ensuring accurate fulfillment of modifier requirements. Comprehensive
experiments demonstrate our approach’s state-of-the-art performance on four commonly used datasets.

Task Definition

Mod

asymmetric
input

weakly
associated

⊕

Ref

weak results

(a). Weakly associated encoders
Mod
Reference(Ref)

+

imbalanced
embedding

Blue
with
Mario

Ref

Modifier(Mod)

Enhance
Mod

reference dominance

(b). Pre-trained symmetric encoders (e.g. CLIP)

balanced
embedding
Refine
Ref
Target

⊕

⊕
(c). Our proposed FashionERN

Figure 1: We propose a Fashion Enhance-and-Refine Network (FashionERN) to address the relatively weak results in
(a) and reference dominance in (b).

Introduction

get retrieval (Lee, Kim, and Han 2021; Kim et al. 2021;
Chen et al. 2022). However, these methods without using
pre-trained encoders naturally face the issue of insufficient
performance: aligning two modalities with limited fashion
data is challenging, especially for image regions or modifiers that are difficult to cover within the limited data. For
instance, as illustrated in Figure 1(a), it is challenging to associate ”Mario” with the logo region in the image due to limited data. To address the issue above, recent methods (Baldrati et al. 2022; Han et al. 2023a) incorporate pre-trained
symmetric encoders on larger-scale non-fashion datasets.
Nevertheless, the data in this task significantly differ from
the data used for pre-training symmetric encoders. The reference image contains rich contextual information, while
the modifier is often more concise than the one used in
the pre-training symmetric encoders (Goel et al. 2022). Furthermore, the visual and textual inputs for this task are
asymmetric. And the semantics of the modifier are aimed
at modifying reference images, which is distinct from the
consistent text-visual semantics in symmetric models like

Fashion image retrieval has garnered considerable attention
as an important e-commerce application (Gajic and Baldrich
2018; Chen et al. 2023a). However, relying solely on fashion images may not meet practical needs, users may modify
these images specifically to better match the retrieval target (Chen, Gong, and Bazzani 2020; Guo et al. 2018). To
address this, composed fashion image retrieval has emerged
as a promising task, jointly retrieving target images with reference images (called reference) and modified text (called
modifier) (Kim et al. 2016; Perez et al. 2018; Dodds et al.
2020; Gu et al. 2023), as illustrated in Figure 1.
Existing methods can be categorized into two main categories based on the association between visual and text
encoders. The first category involves utilizing two weakly
associated encoders to represent the textual and visual information, and then combining these representations for tar* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1228

