The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Patched Line Segment Learning for Vector Road Mapping
Jiakun Xu1 , Bowen Xu1 , Gui-Song Xia1 , Liang Dong2 , Nan Xue* 1,3
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
Google Inc.
3
Ant Group
{jiakun.xu, xbw, guisong.xia}@whu.edu.cn, lidong@google.com, xuenan@ieee.org

Abstract
This paper presents a novel approach to computing vector
road maps from satellite remotely sensed images, building
upon a well-defined Patched Line Segment (PaLiS) representation for road graphs that holds geometric significance.
Unlike prevailing methods that derive road vector representations from satellite images using binary masks or keypoints, our method employs line segments. These segments
not only convey road locations but also capture their orientations, making them a robust choice for representation.
More precisely, given an input image, we divide it into
non-overlapping patches and predict a suitable line segment
within each patch. This strategy enables us to capture spatial and structural cues from these patch-based line segments,
simplifying the process of constructing the road network
graph without the necessity of additional neural networks
for connectivity. In our experiments, we demonstrate how
an effective representation of a road graph significantly enhances the performance of vector road mapping on established benchmarks, without requiring extensive modifications
to the neural network architecture. Furthermore, our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance with just 6 GPU hours
of training, leading to a substantial 32-fold reduction in training costs in terms of GPU hours.

1

(a) Input image

(b) Ground truth

(c) Dense GT

(d) Road graph learned from Keypoints (Xu et al. 2023b)

Introduction

(e) Road graph learned via PaLiS (Ours)

By “vector road mapping”, it refers to a process of converting the road features presented in satellite-borne remote
sensing images into vector-based and symbolic graph representations, which is also known as road graph extraction
or road network extraction within the community of remote
sensing and plays a fundamental role in numerous downstream tasks including navigation (Zhang et al. 2021; Cai
et al. 2023), urban planning (Shi et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2023a),
and autonomous driving (Xu, Sun, and Liu 2021; He and
Balakrishnan 2022; Büchner et al. 2023).
The state-of-the-art methods for vector road mapping primarily rely on the strong representation capabilities of deep
neural networks. These approaches formulate the problem
as a supervised learning task, utilizing paired satellite images and annotated road graphs that use vertices and edges
to depict the line and curve structures of roads. As the input

Figure 1: Illustration of graphs constructed by different representations. The predicted representations (keypoints and
line segments) are denoted in yellow marks and the connectivities are denoted in orange marks.

images are in pixel form, it becomes crucial to establish an
appropriate representation for facilitating the learning from
the pixels of satellite images to the vector representation of
roads. In the state-of-the-art methods (Batra et al. 2019; He
et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2023b), the “appropriate representation” of vector road annotations were initially come down to
mask-based representation (i.e., road masks) and were then
upgraded to the keypoint-based graph representation as the
main representation in the pursuit of end-to-end learning.
While keypoint-based graph representations have demonstrated remarkable performance, many of these methods encounter a significant drawback: the substantial training cost

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6288

