The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Automated Defect Report Generation for Enhanced Industrial Quality Control
Jiayuan Xie1 , Zhiping Zhou2 , Zihan Wu2 , Xinting Zhang4 , Jiexin Wang2,3 , Yi Cai2,3 * , Qing Li1
1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China
School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
3
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot (SCUT), MOE of China
4
Department of Mathematics, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
jiayuan.xie@polyu.edu.hk, ycai@scut.edu.cn

2

Abstract
Defect detection is a pivotal aspect ensuring product quality
and production efficiency in industrial manufacturing. Existing studies on defect detection predominantly focus on locating defects through bounding boxes and classifying defect
types. However, their methods can only provide limited information and fail to meet the requirements for further processing after detecting defects. To this end, we propose a novel
task called defect detection report generation, which aims to
provide more comprehensive and informative insights into
detected defects in the form of text reports. For this task, we
propose some new datasets, which contain 16 different materials and each defect contains a detailed report of human
constructs. In addition, we propose a knowledge-aware report generation model as a baseline for future research, which
aims to incorporate additional knowledge to generate detailed
analysis and subsequent processing related to defects in images. By constructing defect report datasets and proposing
corresponding baselines, we chart new directions for future
research and practical applications of this task.

Introduction

Figure 1: A case of defect detection in Hazelnut. The defect
results are displayed in two forms of bounding box and text
report, in which the report includes the effect and solution.

Industrial defect detection aims to automatically identify and
locate defects or anomalies in products of different materials, e.g., glass or steel, etc (Zhang et al. 2023a). These defects or anomalies may include surface defects, cuts, cracks,
deformations, size deviations, and other issues that could impact the quality and safety of the materials. Teaching a machine to automatically detect defects has become an emerging task in the computer vision area due to its vast potential
applications in industrial production scenarios (Zhang et al.
2023b; Lan and Huang 2023). Specifically, effective defect
detection contributes to enhancing monitoring and control
of product quality on the production line, which plays a crucial role in ensuring the products meet quality standards and
reducing the rate of defective items.
Existing studies (Yang et al. 2023; Qiu, Wu, and Yu 2019;
Di et al. 2019) predominantly divide defect detection into
two consecutive subtasks, i.e., localization followed by classification. Defect localization refers to identifying the position of the defects within an image and framing it with

bounding boxes. Defect classification involves matching the
defect in the framed bounding box with known candidate
defect types to determine the type of defect, e.g., cracks,
scratches, and blemishes, etc. Despite these methods are
capable of locating and classifying defects, they can only
provide limited information about the defects. This makes
it challenging to assist producers in gaining a comprehensive understanding of the defect situation and devising solutions. To overcome this limitation, we are inspired by research in natural language processing areas such as medical
report generation (Kisilev et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2021a) and
attempt to describe the defects in the form of text. Specifically, text can provide detailed descriptions and explanations
of defects, offering a more intuitive expression of the causes
or solutions to the defects. As shown in Figure 1, the text
(i.e., Report (hard)) contains two main contents, i.e., defect
description of a hazelnut and comprehensive information of

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19306

