The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Expediting Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining
via Self-Distilled Encoders
Bumsoo Kim* , Jinhyung Kim, Yeonsik Jo, Seung Hwan Kim
LG AI Research

Abstract
Recent advances in vision language pretraining (VLP) have
been largely attributed to the large-scale data collected from
the web. However, uncurated dataset contains weakly correlated image-text pairs, causing data inefficiency. To address
the issue, knowledge distillation have been explored at the
expense of extra image and text momentum encoders to generate teaching signals for misaligned image-text pairs. In this
paper, our goal is to resolve the misalignment problem with
an efficient distillation framework. To this end, we propose
ECLIPSE: Expediting Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining with Self-distilled Encoders. ECLIPSE features a distinctive distillation architecture wherein a shared text encoder is
utilized between an online image encoder and a momentum
image encoder. This strategic design choice enables the distillation to operate within a unified projected space of text embedding, resulting in better performance. Based on the unified
text embedding space, ECLIPSE compensates for the additional computational cost of the momentum image encoder by
expediting the online image encoder. Through our extensive
experiments, we validate that there is a sweet spot between
expedition and distillation where the partial view from the expedited online image encoder interacts complementarily with
the momentum teacher. As a result, ECLIPSE outperforms its
counterparts while achieving substantial acceleration in inference speed.

Figure 1: Time vs. ImageNet zero-shot performance analysis
for Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining with existing
ViT accleration framework (EViT). We compare the results
between EViT directly applied on CLIP and EViT trained
with our proposed meta-architecture, ECLIPSE. Our proposed framework enables even streamlined ViTs with 101%
faster throughputs to outperform the full ViT of CLIP. Model
performance and inference time are measured with ViT-B/16
backbone.

However, the large scale image-text pairs for VLP are usually collected from the web; thus they are often noisy, i.e.,
having weak correlation between the image and its corresponding text description. To alleviate the image-text misalignment problem, previous works (Li et al. 2021a; Lu
et al. 2022) have proposed knowledge distillation framework (Hinton et al. 2015) with a momentum encoder for
both image and text. However, adopting two additional momentum encoders and calculating soft alignments for distillation loss inevitably increase the computational cost for
training, which hinders training for large-scale VLP.
In this work, we propose a efficient formulation for distilling soft image-text alignment matrix without text momentum encoder for contrastive language-image pretraining (Jia et al. 2021; Radford et al. 2021). Inspired from SimSiam (Chen and He 2021), we simply replace the text momentum encoder with stop-gradient operation. This design
not only eliminates the computational cost for an additional
text momentum encoder, but also enables the distillation

Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) have achieved significant progress across various challenging vision tasks such
as image classification (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; Touvron
et al. 2021; Jiang et al. 2021; Graham et al. 2021), object
detection (Carion et al. 2020), semantic segmentation (Xie
et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021b; Wang et al. 2021) and visual relationship detection (Kim et al. 2021, 2022). Following this success in vision tasks, recent studies demonstrated
that large-scale vision-language pretraining (VLP) (Li et al.
2019; Chen et al. 2020c; Huang et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020,
2021b; Lu et al. 2019; Tan and Bansal 2019; Jia et al. 2021;
Radford et al. 2021) with ViTs is scalable to large uncurated
datasets and transferable to various downstream tasks.
* correspondence to: bumsoo.kim@lgresearch.ai
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2732

