The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Curvature-Invariant Adversarial Attacks for 3D Point Clouds
Jianping Zhang1 , Wenwei Gu1 , Yizhan Huang1 , Zhihan Jiang1 , Weibin Wu2 * , Michael R. Lyu1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
{jpzhang, wwgu21, yzhuang22, zhjiang22, lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, wuwb36@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Imperceptibility is one of the crucial requirements for adversarial examples. Previous adversarial attacks on 3D point
cloud recognition suffer from noticeable outliers, resulting in
low imperceptibility. We think that the drawbacks can be alleviated via taking the local curvature of the point cloud into
consideration. Existing approaches introduce the local geometry distance into the attack objective function. However, their
definition of the local geometry distance neglects different
perceptibility of distortions along different directions. In this
paper, we aim to enhance the imperceptibility of adversarial
attacks on 3D point cloud recognition by better preserving the
local curvature of the original 3D point clouds. To this end,
we propose the Curvature-Invariant Method (CIM), which
directly regularizes the back-propagated gradient during the
generation of adversarial point clouds based on two assumptions. Specifically, we first decompose the back-propagated
gradients into the tangent plane and the normal direction.
Then we directly reduce the gradient along the large curvature direction on the tangent plane and only keep the gradient
along the negative normal direction. Comprehensive experimental comparisons confirm the superiority of our approach.
Notably, our strategy can achieve 7.2% and 14.5% improvements in Hausdorff distance and Gaussian curvature measurements of the imperceptibility.

Figure 1: Visualization of generated adversarial point cloud
by various attacking algorithms on randomly selected five
classes. The adversarial examples are generated on the
PointNet model.

is indispensable to design adversarial attack approaches to
detect the deficiencies inside the 3D point cloud recognition
models before their deployment in real-world applications.
3D point cloud adversarial attacks work by adding, deleting, or shifting points in the point clouds (Xiang, Qi, and
Li 2019). Among the schemes of 3D point cloud adversarial
attacks, shifting points, i.e., changing the coordinates of the
points, attracts more attention from researchers (Hamdi et al.
2020). Similar to 2D adversarial images (Wu et al. 2021,
2020b), 3D adversarial point clouds are also usually crafted
with the guidance of the back-propagated gradients. For example, attackers can adapt the Fast Gradient Sign Method
(FGSM) to generate 3D adversarial point clouds (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014).
Similar to adversarial attacks on 2D images, one of the
core challenges of 3D point cloud adversarial attacks is imperceptibility, which requires that the modification of the
point cloud is unnoticeable for humans. Inspired from the Lp
constraint of 2D image adversarial attacks that the p norm
of the perturbation is constrained by a budget of ϵ (Deng
et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2020a), 3D point cloud adversarial attacks also adopt the similar idea. That is, the modification
of the point’s coordinates should satisfy the Lp constraints.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) dominate state-of-the-art solutions for a variety of computer vision tasks, comprised
of image classification (Russakovsky et al. 2015; Wu et al.
2019), object detection (Lin et al. 2014) and 3D point cloud
recognition (Yi et al. 2016). 3D point cloud recognition
models are widely deployed in lots of safety-critical realworld systems, such as autonomous driving and medical diagnosis systems (Dong, Wang, and Abbas 2021). However,
recent research shows that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Zhang et al. 2023b,a, 2022), which inject imperceptible noise into the original input to mislead the DNN
models. It raises security issues on the deployment of DNN
applications (Zhang et al. 2023c,d; Wu et al. 2023). Similarly, 3D point cloud recognition models are also susceptible
to adversarial attacks (Xiang, Qi, and Li 2019). Therefore, it
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7142

