The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

M-BEV: Masked BEV Perception for Robust Autonomous Driving
Siran Chen1,2 , Yue Ma 4 , Yu Qiao1, 3 , Yali Wang1, 3, *
1
2

Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Science, Shenzhen, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
4
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
Chensiran17@mails.ucas.ac.cn, y-ma21@mails.Tsinghua.edu.cn,
{yu.qiao, yl.wang}@siat.ac.cn
BEV-Based Paradigm
Train

Abstract
3D perception is a critical problem in autonomous driving.
Recently, the Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) approach has attracted
extensive attention, due to low-cost deployment and desirable
vision detection capacity. However, the existing models ignore a realistic scenario during the driving procedure, i.e., one
or more view cameras may be failed, which largely deteriorates the performance. To tackle this problem, we propose
a generic Masked BEV (M-BEV) perception framework,
which can effectively improve robustness to this challenging scenario, by random masking and reconstructing camera views in the end-to-end training. More specifically, we
develop a novel Masked View Reconstruction (MVR) module for M-BEV. It mimics various missing cases by randomly masking features of different camera views, then leverages the original features of these views as self-supervision,
and reconstructs the masked ones with the distinct spatiotemporal context across views. Via such a plug-and-play
MVR, our M-BEV is capable of learning the missing views
from the resting ones, and thus well generalized for robust
view recovery and accurate perception in the testing. We perform extensive experiments on the popular NuScenes benchmark, where our framework can significantly boost 3D perception performance of the state-of-the-art models on various
missing view cases, e.g., for the absence of back view, our
M-BEV promotes the PETRv2 model with 10.3% mAP gain.

E

46

D

SOTA Comparison
PETRv2
Our MVR

36
26

Test

Camera Failure
E

16

D

NDS
mAP
Missing back view

Train

Feature Copy for Rest Views
E

MVR

D

Self-Supervision for Masked Views

Camera Failure
Test

RVM

E

MVR

D

Our Masked BEV (M-BEV) Paradigm

Figure 1: Motivation. In cases where cameras crash, the existing BEV-based approaches would be largely deteriorated.
We design a self-supervised Masked View Reconstruction
(MVR) module which can significantly boost the state-ofthe-art models for various missing camera cases. E: Encoder,
D: Decoder, RVM: Random View Masking.

six distinct views to encode a unified 3D representation of
visible scenes, and then decode it to accurately capture the
size and location of objects in the surrounding. However,
these approaches work on the ideal case in which six cameras always work well, while one or more cameras may be
failed or broken down during the realistic driving procedure.
In such an emergency, the existing BEV-based approaches
would be largely deteriorated, due to the lack of the corresponding visual clues from the missing views. For example,
the NDS and mAP of PETRv2 (Liu et al. 2023) have a decrease of 12.4% and 18.0% respectively when the back camera view is missing, which severely affects the safety and
reliability of autonomous driving system.
To alleviate this problem, we propose a concise Masked
BEV (M-BEV) perception framework, which can effectively
boost model’s robustness to missing camera views, by randomly masking and recovering view features in the endto-end training procedure. Specifically, we design a selfsupervised Masked View Reconstruction (MVR) module in
our M-BEV, we randomly mask the features of different
camera views in the training epochs, then leverage the features of the rest views as spatio-temporal context, and re-

Introduction
3D perception of surrounding scenes is the key for autonomous driving. Compared to LiDAR-based methods
(Mohapatra et al. 2021; Barrera et al. 2020; Ma et al. 2022a;
Zhou et al. 2020), camera-based approaches has attracted increasing attention(Li et al. 2022d; Philion and Fidler 2020;
Roddick, Kendall, and Cipolla 2018; Wang et al. 2019)
since they are easy and cheap for deployment. In particular,
the Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) based methods have been highlighted by learning the holistic representation from multicamera images (Roddick, Kendall, and Cipolla 2018; Wang
et al. 2019; Philion and Fidler 2020; Li et al. 2022d,c, 2023;
Wang et al. 2022b; Liu et al. 2022a; Chen et al. 2023). Basically, these approaches integrate 2D image information from
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1183

