The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CamoDiffusion: Camouflaged Object Detection via Conditional Diffusion Models
Zhongxi Chen, Ke Sun, Xianming Lin*
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China
{chenzhongxi, skjack}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, linxm@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Camouflaged Object Detection (COD) is a challenging task
in computer vision due to the high similarity between camouflaged objects and their surroundings. Existing COD methods struggle with nuanced object boundaries and overconfident incorrect predictions. In response, we propose
a new paradigm that treats COD as a conditional maskgeneration task leveraging diffusion models. Our method,
dubbed CamoDiffusion, employs the denoising process to
progressively refine predictions while incorporating image
conditions. Due to the stochastic sampling process of diffusion, our model is capable of sampling multiple possible predictions, avoiding the problem of overconfident point
estimation. Moreover, we develop specialized network architecture, training, and sampling strategies, to enhance the
model’s expressive power, refinement capabilities and suppress overconfident mis-segmentations, thus aptly tailoring
the diffusion model to the demands of COD. Extensive experiments on three COD datasets attest to the superior performance of our model compared to existing state-of-theart methods, particularly on the most challenging COD10K
dataset, where our approach achieves 0.019 in terms of
MAE. Codes and models are available at https://github.com/
Rapisurazurite/CamoDiffusion.

(a) Image

(b) GT

(c) SINet-V2 (d) FSPNet

(e) Ours

(f) Variance

Figure 1: Current COD methods blur the boundary-context
distinction of camouflaged objects (rows 1, 2) and occasionally yield overconfident mis-segmentations (rows 3,
4). We introduce diffusion models into COD, which enhance the edge discrimination, suppress overconfident missegmentations (Ours) and enable uncertainty assessment
through variance calculation (Variance).

multi-source representations. 2) Bottom-up and top-down
frameworks (Fan et al. 2021a) that harness deeper features
to progressively enhance shallower ones in a single feedforward pass. 3) Branched frameworks (Ji et al. 2023), constituting a single-input multiple-output architecture, comprising both segmentation and auxiliary task branches. Such
techniques mainly build upon the foundational semantic segmentation paradigm, which capitalizes on a learning-based
backbone for feature extraction, subsequently employing a
decoder head to yield a segmentation mask. However, in the
absence of intricately designed strategies, such a paradigm
is prone to confuse the subtle deviation between boundaries
and surroundings of camouflaged objects due to body outline disguising (Sun et al. 2022). Furthermore, identifying
the main subject in COD is challenging, which can lead to
overconfident but incorrect predictions based on pixel probabilities, which amplifies the potential for misjudgments. Examples of these situations are presented in Fig. 1.
Given such specific challenges posed by COD, we adopt
the diffusion model paradigm (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020)
as a fitting solution. Diffusion models possess impressive
generative capabilities with a good awareness of conditions. Their iterative noise reduction mechanism obviates

Introduction
Camouflage, a pervasive defense strategy in nature, endows
organisms with the capacity to meld seamlessly into their
surroundings, thereby allowing them to elude predators or
approach prey surreptitiously (Fan et al. 2021a). As a result,
Camouflaged Object Detection (COD) has materialized as a
rapidly expanding research field, focusing on the identification of hidden objects or organisms in their natural habitats.
This area boasts applications across a multitude of sectors,
including species conservation (Nafus et al. 2015), medical
image segmentation (Dong et al. 2021), and industrial flaw
detection (Bhajantri and Nagabhushan 2006).
To address the camouflaged properties of the foreground
object, numerous strategies have been proposed for this
task, predominantly encompassing three perspectives (Fan
et al. 2023): 1) Multi-stream frameworks (Pang et al. 2022),
which exploit multiple input streams to explicitly learn
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1272

