The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MotionMix: Weakly-Supervised Diffusion for Controllable Motion Generation
Nhat M. Hoang1,2 * , Kehong Gong1† , Chuan Guo1 * , Michael Bi Mi1
1

Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.,
Nanyang Technological University
nhat005@e.ntu.edu.sg, gongkehong@u.nus.edu, cguo2@ualberta.ca, michaelbimi@yahoo.com
2

Abstract
Controllable generation of 3D human motions becomes an
important topic as the world embraces digital transformation. Existing works, though making promising progress with
the advent of diffusion models, heavily rely on meticulously
captured and annotated (e.g., text) high-quality motion corpus, a resource-intensive endeavor in the real world. This
motivates our proposed MotionMix, a simple yet effective
weakly-supervised diffusion model that leverages both noisy
and unannotated motion sequences. Specifically, we separate the denoising objectives of a diffusion model into two
stages: obtaining conditional rough motion approximations
in the initial T − T ∗ steps by learning the noisy annotated
motions, followed by the unconditional refinement of these
preliminary motions during the last T ∗ steps using unannotated motions. Notably, though learning from two sources of
imperfect data, our model does not compromise motion generation quality compared to fully supervised approaches that
access gold data. Extensive experiments on several benchmarks demonstrate that our MotionMix, as a versatile framework, consistently achieves state-of-the-art performances on
text-to-motion, action-to-motion, and music-to-dance tasks.

1

[Noisy Annotated Data]

[Clean Unannotated Data]

“a person walks forward
and then up stairs”

<empty_string>

[Training]
[Inference]

“a man who is
throwing something
with his left hand.”

Introduction

The rapidly arising attention and interest in digital humans
bring up the great demand for human motion generation, in
a wide range of fields such as industrial game and movie animation (Ling et al. 2020), human-machine interaction (Koppula and Saxena 2013), VR/AR and metaverse development
(Lee et al. 2021). Over the years, automated generation
of human motions that align with user preferences, spanning aspects such as prefix poses (Ruiz, Gall, and MorenoNoguer 2018; Guo et al. 2022c), action classes (Petrovich,
Black, and Varol 2021; Cervantes et al. 2022), textual descriptions (Petrovich, Black, and Varol 2022; Ahuja and
Morency 2019; Tevet et al. 2022), or music (Aristidou et al.
2021; Siyao et al. 2022; Gong et al. 2023), has been a focal
point of research. Recently, building upon the advancement
of diffusion models, human motion generation has experienced a notable improvement in quality and controllability.

MotionMix

“a person who has his hands by
his sides slowly creeps forward
while looking around.”

Figure 1: Example of applying MotionMix on text-tomotion task. Unlike prior works, our training data are comprised of noisy annotated motions and unannotated motions.

However, these prior diffusion models are commonly trained
on well-crafted motions that come with explicit annotations
like textual descriptions. While capturing motions from the
real world is a laborious effort, annotating these motion sequences further urges the matter.
In contrast, motions with lower fidelity or fewer annotations are more accessible in the real world. For example, 3D
human motions are readily extracted from monocular videos
through video-based pose estimation (Kanazawa et al. 2017;
Kocabas, Athanasiou, and Black 2019; Choutas et al. 2020).
Meanwhile, a wealth of unannotated motion sequences, such
as those from Mixamo (Inc. 2021) and AMASS (Mahmood
et al. 2019), remains largely untapped. This brings up the

* Work done during an internship at Huawei
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2157

