The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Maximizing the Success Probability of Policy Allocations in Online Systems
Artem Betlei1 , Mariia Vladimirova1 , Mehdi Sebbar2 ,
Nicolas Urien2 , Thibaud Rahier1 , Benjamin Heymann1
1
Criteo AI Lab, France
Criteo Ad Landscape, France
{a.betlei, m.vladimirova, m.sebbar, n.urien, t.rahier, b.heymann}@criteo.com
2

Abstract

with the objective to select at most one item (bid policy)
from each user such that the sum of the weights (expected
cost) of selected items does not exceed the capacity (budget) while the total reward (expected revenue) is maximized.
This problem is known to be NP-hard, although it can be
tackled with mixed integer linear programming or through
Lagrangian relaxation (Sinha and Zoltners 1979).
From a causal perspective, it is classical to consider every individual ad as a treatment, and the optimization problem goal is to maximize the total causal effect of these treatments by correctly assigning treatments to users. There exist
various approaches for individual treatment assignment that
differ by the objective function they optimize: learning models to predict either outcomes, causal effects or directly the
optimal treatment assignment. Fernández-Lorı́a et al. (2022)
compare these approaches analytically and show that the assignment learners optimize the bias-variance tradeoff with
respect to decision-making errors.
Optimization at the opportunity –or bid –level, which we
refer as bid by bid optimization, requires to attribute each
observed reward to the action that actually caused it, e.g.
each conversion must be attributed to a shown ad. This attribution problem is very complex as there usually are several ads displayed in the few hours preceding each conversion (Bompaire, Gilotte, and Heymann 2021; Bompaire,
Désir, and Heymann 2021; Ji and Wang 2017; Dalessandro
et al. 2012). It causes fundamental problems in the estimation of the causal effects and makes the bid by bid optimization extremely difficult in practice.
Furthermore, display advertising campaigns, like many
other online systems, are operated under several business
and technical constraints. In particular, it is typical for an
advertising campaign to have a budget constraint. Several algorithms allow adapting bid by bid optimization techniques
to such constraints (Castiglioni et al. 2022; Conitzer et al.
2022). While these algorithms have their merits and are
largely deployed in practice, they are, however, poorly suited
for causal bid by bid methods. This is because (a) typical
causal methods inherently suppose the absence of causal interaction between the treatment units — such assumption is
in general violated when mixing causal method for bid by
bid optimization and budget pacing; (b) the overall methodology needs to trade off marginal value and marginal future
total cost (Bompaire, Gilotte, and Heymann 2021), which is

The effectiveness of advertising in e-commerce largely depends on the ability of merchants to bid on and win impressions for their targeted users. The bidding procedure is
highly complex due to various factors such as market competition, user behavior, and the diverse objectives of advertisers. In this paper we consider the problem at the level of user
timelines instead of individual bid requests, manipulating full
policies (i.e. pre-defined bidding strategies) and not bid values. In order to optimally allocate policies to users, typical
multiple treatments allocation methods solve knapsack-like
problems which aim at maximizing an expected value under
constraints. In the industrial contexts such as online advertising, we argue that optimizing for the probability of success
is a more suited objective than expected value maximization,
and we introduce the SuccessProbaMax algorithm that
aims at finding the policy allocation which is the most likely
to outperform a fixed reference policy. Finally, we conduct
comprehensive experiments both on synthetic and real-world
data to evaluate its performance. The results demonstrate that
our proposed algorithm outperforms conventional expectedvalue maximization algorithms in terms of success rate.

Introduction
Optimizing marketing effectiveness relies on using individualized bidding policies, exploiting the fact that each user
responds differently. A policy may include a set of rules or
actions over an extended period of time, e.g., cash bonuses,
promotion and display ad shown to consumers on online
platforms. Without loss of generality, we take the narrow
view of bidding for display advertising in order to ground
our research into a real life application. In this context, the
task at hand is to specify a full bidding strategy (the policy) on the future advertisement opportunities for each given
users during a given time period.
In practice, it is typical to have a fixed budget allocated
to a campaign. From an advertising perspective, a bidding
strategy must maximize the total expected revenue while ensuring that the expected total cost does not exceed a specified
budget.
Usually, this problem is modeled as a multiple choice
knapsack problem (Demirović et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2023)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11061

