The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Focus Stacking with High Fidelity and Superior Visual Effects
Bo Liu, Bin Hu, Xiuli Bi* , Weisheng Li, Bin Xiao*
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Chongqing 400065, China
{boliu, bixl, liws, xiaobin}@cqupt.edu.cn, s210201036@stu.cqupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Focus stacking is a technique in computational photography,
and it synthesizes a single all-in-focus image from different
focal plane images. It is difficult for previous works to produce a high-quality all-in-focus image that meets two goals:
high-fidelity to its source images and good visual effects
without defects or abnormalities. This paper proposes a novel
method based on optical imaging process analysis and modeling. Based on a foreground segmentation - diffusion elimination architecture, the foreground segmentation makes most of
the areas in full-focus images heritage information from the
source images to achieve high fidelity; diffusion elimination
models the physical imaging process and is specially used
to solve the transition region (TR) problem that is a longterm neglected issue and degrades visual effects of synthesized images. Based on extensive experiments on simulated
dataset, existing realistic dataset and our proposed BetaFusion dataset, the results show that our proposed method can
generate high-quality all-in-focus images by achieving two
goals simultaneously, especially can successfully solve the
TR problem and eliminate the visual effect degradation of
synthesized images caused by the TR problem.

(a) Source image A (b) By reconstruction

(c) By decision
GEU-Net
DTMNet
Wang et al.

DRPL

Fidelity

Ours
Liu et al.
MFFNet

DeFusion
ZMFF

Visual Effects

(d) Source image B

(e) Ours

(f) SOTA comparison

Figure 1: Focus stacking from source images (a) and (d) by a
reconstruction-based method in (b), which shows color bias;
by a decision-based method in (c), which produces visual
defects indicated by white arrows; by ours in (e). Comparisons of methods in high fidelity (QM I ) and visual effects
(QCV ) are shown in (f).

Introduction
Subject to optical limitations, cameras cannot simultaneously capture objects at different focal planes in focus. As
a result, the foreground and background objects in one image cannot be clear at the same time. This problem arises
frequently in microscopic imaging and general photography.
With the help of focus stacking technique in computational
photography, an all-in-focus image can be synthesized using
several images in different focusing planes of a same scene.
Users expect synthetic all-in-focus images will not change
the information of source images and will be similar to them
as much as possible, namely achieving high fidelity. Besides,
the all-in-focus images should maintain superior visual effects without showing visual defects or abnormalities, such
as color bias (Fig.1b) and the TR problem (Fig.1c). Many focus stacking algorithms have been proposed to achieve the
above two goals, and can be divided into two approaches:
the reconstruction-based approaches aim at improving vi-

sual effects, and the decision-based approaches pursue high
fidelity.
The reconstruction-based approaches (Li et al. 2019)
(Deng and Dragotti 2021) (Liang et al. 2022) convert source
images to a transform domain and synthesize an all-in-focus
image by inversely transforming the synthesized features.
The advantage of this strategy is that the processing of
source images is continuous, thus generated images usually
have better visual effects. The disadvantage is that most of
the undisputed focused area will be affected by the corresponding defocused area, producing a certain degree of color
bias as shown in Fig.1b. In some scenarios such as microscopic imaging, color bias is not acceptable.
The decision-based approaches (Wang et al. 2022) (Liu
et al. 2022) (Hu et al. 2023) generate a binary decision map
using preset criteria to indicate which pixels, blocks, or regions of source images will be included in a synthetic image.

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3540

