The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Traffic Flow Optimisation for Lifelong Multi-Agent Path Finding
Zhe Chen1 , Daniel Harabor1 , Jiaoyang Li2 , Peter J. Stuckey1,3
1

Department of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
2
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
3
OPTIMA Australian Research Council ITTC, Melbourne, Australia
{zhe.chen,daniel.harabor,peter.stuckey}@monash.edu, jiaoyangli@cmu.edu

Abstract

thousands of simultaneous agents, and at this scale, only unbounded suboptimal approaches are currently applicable.
Two leading frameworks for unbounded suboptimal
MAPF are Large Neighbourhood Search (LNS) (Li et al.
2021a, 2022, 2021b) and Priority Inheritance with Back
Tracking (PIBT) (Okumura et al. 2022; Okumura 2023). Approaches based on LNS modify an existing (potentially infeasible) MAPF plan by iteratively changing the paths for a
few agents to reduce the number of collisions or their travel
times. A main drawback of LNS-based methods is that the
performance of the single-agent path planner significantly
degrades as map size and number of agents increase. This
restricts the applicability of LNS as, when paired with an aggressive timeout (often required for real applications), timeout failure can occur before any iterations are completed.
Meanwhile, PIBT-based approaches use rule-based collision
avoidance to plan paths. They compute paths timestep by
timestep, which is extremely efficient. For this reason, PIBTbased methods usually scale to substantially more agents
than LNS-based methods. However, this type of planners
guides agents toward their goals using individually optimal
free-flow heuristics (i.e., considering only travel distance
while ignoring other agents), a strategy known to create high
levels of congestion. Moreover, its computed solutions tend
to have higher costs than those computed by LNS-based
methods (Shen et al. 2023).
A related body of work on the Traffic Assignment Problem (TAP) (Patriksson 2015) from the transportation community considers similar issues. Like MAPF, TAP approaches compute optimised paths for agents moving across
a shared map. In TAP, multiple agents can use the same
edge at the same time, but travel time increases with the
number of agents. TAP algorithms thus try to compute a
User Equilibrium (UE) solution, where no agent can improve their arrival time by switching to a different path with
lower cost. Inspired by such ideas, we propose to compute
time-independent routes for MAPF agents, which take into
account expected congestion due to other agents following
similar trajectories. We use the resulting guide paths as improved heuristics for PIBT, which allows fast planning for
large numbers of agents. Yet we also continuously improve
the guide paths, like LNS, which serves to further increase
the quality of computed plans. Experimental results show
convincing improvements for one-shot and lifelong MAPF

Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is a fundamental problem in robotics that asks us to compute collision-free paths
for a team of agents, all moving across a shared map. Although many works appear on this topic, all current algorithms struggle as the number of agents grows. The principal reason is that existing approaches typically plan free-flow
optimal paths, which creates congestion. To tackle this issue, we propose a new approach for MAPF where agents are
guided to their destination by following congestion-avoiding
paths. We evaluate the idea in two large-scale settings: oneshot MAPF, where each agent has a single destination, and
lifelong MAPF, where agents are continuously assigned new
destinations. Empirically, we report large improvements in
solution quality for one-short MAPF and in overall throughput for lifelong MAPF.

Introduction
Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) (Stern et al. 2019) is a
fundamental coordination problem in robotics and also at
the heart of many industrial applications. For example, in automated fulfilment (Wurman, D’Andrea, and Mountz 2008)
and sortation centres (Kou et al. 2020), a team of robots must
work together to deliver packages. To complete such tasks,
robots must navigate across a shared map to reach their goal
locations. Robots must arrive at their goals as quickly as possible, and they must do so while avoiding collisions with
static obstacles in the environment as well as with other
moving robots. In the classical, sometimes called one-shot,
MAPF problem (Stern et al. 2019), robots are modelled as
simplified agents, with each being assigned a single goal location. A related setup, known as lifelong MAPF (Ma et al.
2017; Li et al. 2021d), continuously assigns new goal locations to agents as they arrive at their current goal locations.
Both one-shot and lifelong MAPF problems have been
intensely studied, with a variety of substantial advancements reported in the literature. For example, leading optimal (Sharon et al. 2015; Li et al. 2021c, 2019; Lam et al.
2022; Gange, Harabor, and Stuckey 2019) and boundedsuboptimal (Li, Ruml, and Koenig 2021) MAPF algorithms
now scale to hundreds of agents, while providing solution
quality guarantees. Yet some real applications require up to
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20674

