The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ConcaveQ: Non-monotonic Value Function Factorization via Concave
Representations in Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Huiqun Li1 , Hanhan Zhou2 , Yifei Zou1 * , Dongxiao Yu1 , Tian Lan2∗
1

Shandong University
The George Washington University
hqleee@outlook.com, {yfzou, dxyu}@sdu.edu.cn, {hanhan, tlan}@gwu.edu
2

Abstract
Value function factorization has achieved great success in
multi-agent reinforcement learning by optimizing joint actionvalue functions through the maximization of factorized peragent utilities. To ensure Individual-Global-Maximum property, existing works often focus on value factorization using
monotonic functions, which are known to result in restricted
representation expressiveness. In this paper, we analyze the
limitations of monotonic factorization and present ConcaveQ,
a novel non-monotonic value function factorization approach
that goes beyond monotonic mixing functions and employs
neural network representations of concave mixing functions.
Leveraging the concave property in factorization, an iterative action selection scheme is developed to obtain optimal
joint actions during training. It is used to update agents’ local
policy networks, enabling fully decentralized execution. The
effectiveness of the proposed ConcaveQ is validated across
scenarios involving multi-agent predator-prey environment
and StarCraft II micromanagement tasks. Empirical results
exhibit significant improvement of ConcaveQ over state-ofthe-art multi-agent reinforcement learning approaches.

Introduction
Joint decision-making in multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) often requires dealing with an exponential expansion of the joint state-action space as the number of agents
increases. To this end, recent MARL algorithms (Sunehag
et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2021a; Rashid et al. 2018; Zhang
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021b) often leverage value-function
factorization techniques – which optimize joint action-value
functions through the maximization of factorized, per-agent
utilities – to improve learning and sampling efficiency.
Current value factorization methods mostly adhere to the
Individual-Global-Max (IGM) (Rashid et al. 2018) principle,
which asserts the coherence between joint and individual
greedy action selections. It requires value function factorization to be strictly monotonic, i.e., if local agents maximize
their local utilities, the joint value function can attain the
global maximum. While such monotonic factorization facilitates efficient maximization during training and simplifies
the decentralization of the learned policies, it is restricted to
*Yifei Zou and Tian Lan are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17461

monotonic value function representations and may lead to
poor performance in situations that exhibit non-monotonic
characteristics (Rashid et al. 2020). In response to the limited
representation expressiveness due to monotonic factorization,
recent works have considered a number of mitigation strategies, e.g., WQMIX (Rashid et al. 2020) that formulates a
weighted projection toward monotonic functions, QTRAN
(Son et al. 2019) that utilizes an additional advantage value
estimator, QPLEX (Wang et al. 2021a) that leverages a dueling structure, and ResQ (Shen et al. 2022) that introduces an
additional residual function network. However, these methods tend to compensate for the representation gap caused
by monotonic factorization, subject to the IGM principle.
QTRAN exhibits low sample efficiency and QPLEX may
obtain suboptimal results, while WQMIX tends to possess
high approximation errors in non-optimal actions, and it is
difficult for ResQ to find the optimal actions for a scenario
requiring highly-coordinated agent exploration (Shen et al.
2022). Going beyond monotonicity and IGM while ensuring
decentralized action selection is still an open question.
The pivotal insight in this paper is that monotonic valuefunction factorization may not be necessary for enabling local
action selections in MARL. Indeed, we show that monotonic
factorization under IGM may lead to suboptimal policies
that only recover an arbitrarily small fraction of optimal
global actions that are achievable through an ideal policy
with full observability. Instead, we propose a novel approach
of concave value-function factorization for high representation expressiveness, called ConcaveQ. It employs a deep
neural network representation of concave mixing networks
for value-function decomposition. The concave mixing network estimates the joint action-value output Qtot through
a concave function fconcave of the input local utilities Qi
conditioned on agent i’s local observation and action choice,
that is, Qtot = fconcave (Q1 , ..., Qn ). We propose a deep neural network representation of the concave mixing function
fconcave . It enables a novel concave value-function factorization in MARL.
Due to the lack of IGM under concave mixing functions,
the global optimal joint actions are not necessarily consistent
with the optimal actions of local agents. ConcaveQ tackles
this problem through an iterative action-selection algorithm
during training, which attains optimality using the concavity
property of the proposed value-function factorization. To sup-

