The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Inducing Point Operator Transformer: A Flexible and Scalable Architecture for
Solving PDEs
Seungjun Lee, Taeil Oh
Alsemy, South Korea
seungjun.lee@alsemy.com, taeil.oh@alsemy.com

Abstract

Observational data in solving PDEs often comes in much
more diverse measurement formats, making it challenging
to handle. These formats may include sparse and irregular
measurements, different input and output domains, and complex geometries due to environmental conditions (BelbutePeres, Economon, and Kolter 2020; Lienen and Günnemann
2022; Li et al. 2022; Tran et al. 2023). In addition, adaptive
remeshing schemes are often deployed when different regions require different resolutions (Brenner, Scott, and Scott
2008; Huang and Russell 2010). However, most existing operator learners have their own restrictions. For instance, some
require fixed discretization for the input function (Lu, Jin,
and Karniadakis 2019; Lu et al. 2021), assume that input
and output discretizations are the same (Lu et al. 2022; Li
et al. 2020b, 2021b; Brandstetter, Worrall, and Welling 2022),
assume local connectivity (Li et al. 2020a,b), or have uniform regular grids (Li et al. 2021b; Gupta, Xiao, and Bogdan
2021; Cao 2021). They can be limited when the observations
have discrepancies between their own settings and given
measurements. In order to be flexible to handle a variety of
discretization schemes, the model should impose minimal
assumptions on locality or data structure.
Our approach aims to address the challenges of handling
arbitrary input and output formats by developing a meshagnostic architecture that treats observations as individual
elements without problem-specific modifications. As flexible
in processing data (Jaegle et al. 2021) and efficient in modeling long-range dependencies (Tsai et al. 2019), Transformer
(Vaswani et al. 2017) can be an appropriate starting point for
our approach. A core building block of the Transformers, the
attention mechanism corresponds to and even outperforms
the kernel integral operation of the existing operator learners
due to its nature of capturing long-range interactions (Cao
2021; Liu, Xu, and Zhang 2022; Guo, Cao, and Chen 2023).
However, their quadratic growth in computational complexity with input size can make it impractical for real-world
applications, high-fidelity modeling, or long-term forecasting
without imposing problem-specific locality.
To address the issue, we took inspiration from inducingpoint methods which aim to reduce the effective number of
input data points for computational efficiency (QuiñoneroCandela and Rasmussen 2005; Snelson and Ghahramani
2005; Titsias 2009; Li et al. 2020b), and from the extension of the methods to Transformer by cross-attention with a

Solving partial differential equations (PDEs) by learning the
solution operators has emerged as an attractive alternative to
traditional numerical methods. However, implementing such
architectures presents two main challenges: flexibility in handling irregular and arbitrary input and output formats and
scalability to large discretizations. Most existing architectures
are limited by their desired structure or infeasible to scale large
inputs and outputs. To address these issues, we introduce an
attention-based model called an inducing point operator transformer (IPOT). Inspired by inducing points methods, IPOT
is designed to handle any input function and output query
while capturing global interactions in a computationally efficient way. By detaching the inputs/outputs discretizations
from the processor with a smaller latent bottleneck, IPOT offers flexibility in processing arbitrary discretizations and scales
linearly with the size of inputs/outputs. Our experimental results demonstrate that IPOT achieves strong performances
with manageable computational complexity on an extensive
range of PDE benchmarks and real-world weather forecasting
scenarios, compared to state-of-the-art methods. Our code is
publicly available at https://github.com/7tl7qns7ch/IPOT.

Introduction
Partial differential equations (PDEs) are widely used for
mathematically modeling physical phenomena by representing pairwise interactions between infinitesimal segments.
Once formulated, PDEs allow us to analyze and predict
the physical system, making them essential tools in various scientific fields (Strauss 2007). However, formulating
accurate PDEs can be a daunting task without domain expertise where there remain numerous unknown processes
for many complex systems. Moreover, traditional numerical
methods for solving PDEs can require significant computational costs and may sometimes be intractable. In recent
years, data-driven approaches have emerged as an alternative
to the conventional procedures for solving PDEs, since they
provide much faster predictions and only require observational data. In particular, operator learning, learning mapping
between infinite-dimensional function spaces, generalizes
well to unseen system inputs with their own flexibility in a
discretization-invariant way (Lu et al. 2021, 2022; Kovachki
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2020a,b, 2021b).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

153

