The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DR-Label: Label Deconstruction and Reconstruction
of GNN Models for Catalysis Systems
Bowen Wang1 * , Chen Liang2 * , Jiaze Wang1 , Jiezhong Qiu3 , Furui Liu3 , Shaogang Hao4 , Dong Li5 ,
Guangyong Chen3 † , Xiaolong Zou2 , Pheng-Ann Heng1,3
2

1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shenzhen Geim Graphene Center, Institute of Materials Research, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School,
Tsinghua University,
3
Zhejiang Lab,
4
Tencent,
5
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab,
bowenwang@link.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

catalyst-adsorbate system (Chanussot et al. 2021; Tran and
Ulissi 2018; Peterson and Nørskov 2012). Density functional theory (DFT) is a widely used first-principles calculation method of calculating adsorption energies, uncovering potentially high-performance catalysts for further experimental research(Sholl and Steckel 2022; Kresse and Joubert 1999; Kresse and Furthmüller 1996). However, the high
computational cost renders exploring the entire configuration space impractical (Matera et al. 2019; Medford et al.
2018). With their fast inference capabilities and the growing
availability of databases, machine learning methods such as
graph neural network (GNN) models have gained continuing
popularity for assessing adsorption energies of catalysis systems. By constructing a graph that treating atoms as nodes
and interatomic relation as edges, GNNs excel at automatically extracting interatomic interactions and formulating
effective features for property prediction using a physicsmotivated multi-step message aggregation.

Attaining the equilibrium geometry of a catalyst-adsorbate
system is key to fundamentally assessing its effective properties, such as adsorption energy. While machine learning
methods with advanced representation or supervision strategies have been applied to boost and guide the relaxation processes of catalysis systems, existing methods that produce linearly aggregated geometry predictions are susceptible to edge
representations ambiguity, and are therefore vulnerable to
graph variations. In this paper, we present a novel graph neural network (GNN) supervision and prediction strategy DRLabel. Our approach mitigates the multiplicity of solutions
in edge representation and encourages model predictions that
are independent of graph structural variations. DR-Label first
Deconstructs finer-grained equilibrium state information to
the model by projecting the node-level supervision signal to
each edge. Reversely, the model Reconstructs a more robust
equilibrium state prediction by converting edge-level predictions to node-level via a sphere-fitting algorithm. When applied to three fundamentally different models, DR-Label consistently enhanced performance. Leveraging the graph structure invariance of the DR-Label strategy, we further propose
DRFormer, which applied explicit intermediate positional update and achieves a new state-of-the-art performance on the
Open Catalyst 2020 (OC20) dataset and the Cu-based singleatom alloys CO adsorption (SAA) dataset. We expect our
work to highlight vital principles for advancing geometric
GNN models for catalysis systems and beyond. Our code is
available at https://github.com/bowenwang77/DR-Label

Researchers have increasingly focused on developing
more elaborate message passing and representations during a model’s forward pass to preserve physical symmetries. Some incorporate additional neighborhood information in each message-passing step (Schütt et al. 2017;
Gasteiger, Groß, and Günnemann 2020; Gasteiger, Becker,
and Günnemann 2021), while others employ advanced
representations to maintain group equivariance/invariance
properties (Thomas et al. 2018; Zitnick et al. 2022; Jing
et al. 2021). In contrast to early efforts that directly predict the targeted graph-level properties for atomic systems
(Gilmer et al. 2017; Xie and Grossman 2018), another
trend involves adding auxiliary geometric supervision signals at the equilibrium states to improve model performance.
More specifically, (Godwin et al. 2022; Liao and Smidt
2023; Satorras, Hoogeboom, and Welling 2021) incorporate
atomic level supervision signals of equilibrium configurations, while (Liang et al. 2022; Méndez-Lucio et al. 2021;
Yuan et al. 2023) extend supervision signals to the interatomic level. However, the former commonly employ linearly aggregated node predictions from edges. As shown in
Fig. 1 (c) and (d), linear aggregation leads to a multiplic-

Introduction
Discovering efficient catalysts is a pressing issue in contemporary research (Newell et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2017; Appel et al. 2013). The effectiveness of a catalyst for optimizing a chemical reaction is closely related to its adsorption
energy towards specific adsorbates participating in the reaction, a property inherent to the equilibrium state of the
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Guangyong Chen
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15456

