The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Labels Need Prompts Too: Mask Matching for Natural Language
Understanding Tasks
Bo Li1,2 , Wei Ye1 * , Quansen Wang3 , Wen Zhao1 , Shikun Zhang1
1

National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University
2
School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University
3
Boston University
deepblue.lb@stu.pku.edu.cn, wye@pku.edu.cn,
quansenw@bu.edu, {zhaowen, zhangsk}@pku.edu.cn
Classification Head

Abstract
Textual label names (descriptions) are typically semantically
rich in many natural language understanding (NLU) tasks.
In this paper, we incorporate the prompting methodology,
which is widely used to enrich model input, into the label side
for the first time. Specifically, we propose a Mask Matching
method, which equips an input with a prompt and its label
with another, and then makes predictions by matching their
mask representations. We evaluate our method extensively on
8 NLU tasks with 14 datasets. The experimental results show
that Mask Matching significantly outperforms its counterparts
of fine-tuning and conventional prompt-tuning, setting up stateof-the-art performances in several datasets. Mask Matching
is particularly good at handling NLU tasks with large label
counts and informative label names. As pioneering efforts that
investigate the label-side prompt, we also discuss open issues
for future study.

1

Predefined Classes

[CLS] Avatar 2 is interesting,
I love this movie. [SEP]
(a) Conventional Classification
Label Words
Good
Bad
Ordinary

Predefined Classes
Mapping

Positive
Negative
Neutral

[CLS] Avatar 2 is interesting, I love
this movie. It is [MASK]. [SEP]

(c) Prompt-tuning

[CLS] Avatar 2
is interesting, I
love this movie.
[SEP]

Positive

Matching

Negative
Neutral

(b) Semantic Matching
[CLS] Avatar 2 is
Positive is [MASK]
interesting, I love Matching
Negative is [MASK]
this movie. The
movie is [MASK].
Neutral is [MASK]
[SEP]

Input-prompt

Label-prompt

(d) Mask Matching (Ours)

Figure 1: Conceptual illustration of our Mask Matching
method and other popular paradigms. We use sentiment analysis as the example task.

Introduction

Large-scale pre-trained language models (PLMs) such as
BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) and RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019)
have achieved impressive performances on a wide range of
natural language understanding (NLU) tasks, e.g., topic classification (Xu, Liu, and Abbasnejad 2022; Wu et al. 2022),
sentiment analysis (Zhang et al. 2022), information extraction
(Li et al. 2020; Lu et al. 2022), natural language inference
(Dawkins 2021; Nighojkar and Licato 2021), and stance detection (Liu et al. 2021c; Jiang et al. 2022b).
In general, fine-tuning PLMs with a classification head on
the downstream dataset is the dominant solution for most
NLU tasks, as shown in Figure 1 (a). While this paradigm
achieves impressive performances, it can not utilize textual
semantics implied in label descriptions, which, however, have
been proven to be beneficial for many downstream tasks (Xu,
Liu, and Abbasnejad 2022; del Arco, Valdivia, and Klinger
2022; Jiang et al. 2022b; Liang et al. 2022; Obeidat et al.
2019; Huang et al. 2022; Sainz et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022). In
this case, two other paradigms of NLU tasks can come to the
rescue to some extent.
Semantic matching (Sainz et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2022;
del Arco, Valdivia, and Klinger 2022) involves generating
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18453

representations of inputs and labels, and making predictions
based on their semantic distances, as illustrated in Figure 1
(b). This paradigm can naturally exploit semantic information
from labels, e.g., utilizing representations of label names
generated by PLMs. However, this paradigm heavily relies
on label representations, and conventional modeling (e.g.,
with max-pooling or average-pooling) of label-related texts
might not yield optimal ones.
Prompt-tuning (Liu et al. 2021a; Han et al. 2021; Chen
et al. 2022) naturally exploits textual semantics of labels
by manually designing proper label verbalizer (Schick and
Schütze 2021; Gao, Fisch, and Chen 2021; Lee et al. 2022), as
shown in Figure 1 (c). Nevertheless, selecting label words is
non-trivial and labor-intensive for many tasks, such as entity
typing (Ding et al. 2021b) and relation extraction (Zhang et al.
2017). Some researchers explore utilizing trainable virtual
label words instead (Wang et al. 2022b; Chen et al. 2022; Han
et al. 2021; Park et al. 2022). Though avoiding cumbersome
verbalizer engineering, they completely discard label-related
text information.
In this research, we present a new paradigm called Mask
Matching that mines label semantic information using the
prompting methodology on the label side. To capture the
semantics of inputs and labels, we introduce a label-prompt
in addition to the input-prompt, which results in effective predictions based on a simple matching strategy. In this way, the

