The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hawkes-Enhanced Spatial-Temporal Hypergraph Contrastive Learning Based on
Criminal Correlations
Ke Liang1 , Sihang Zhou2 * , Meng Liu1 Yue Liu1 , Wenxuan Tu1 ,
Yi Zhang1 , Liming Fang3 , Zhe Liu4 , Xinwang Liu1 *
1

2

School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
3
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
4
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
Abstract

Zheng, and Qi 2017). Later on, recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) are adopted to capture the temporal information
(Huang et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2020a). After that, graph neural
networks (GNNs) have shown their promising capacities for
spatial dependency modeling among different locations. For
example, DCRNN (Li et al. 2017) and STGCN (Yu, Yin, and
Zhu 2017) leverage spectral graph-based message-passing
for information aggregation. Besides, GMAN (Zheng et al.
2020) and ST-MetaNet (Pan et al. 2019) adopt the graph attention network (GAT) for spatial feature aggregation between different region blocks. More recently, hypergraph
models, i.e., ST-HSL (Li et al. 2022), ST-SHN (Xia et al.
2022c), have shown their huge advantages on crime prediction, relying on more accurate and sufficient spatialtemporal modeling. However, they are still at an early stage.
Specifically, they fail to leverage three correlations within
crime data, including two spatial and one temporal correlation, thus hindering their capacity.
At first, we will introduce two spatial correlations, i.e.,
type spatial correlations and neighbor spatial correlations,
as follows. (1) Type Spatial Correlation. Different types of
crimes may co-occur in the same region block, which is indicated in Fig. 1 (b). For example, robbery usually occurs
along with the assault simultaneously. There are two main
reasons for it. (i) Criminals often commit various crimes simultaneously unconsciously due to poor moral character and
lack of legal awareness. (ii) Regions with poor law and order provide fertile soil for all kinds of crimes. (2) Neighbor Spatial Correlation. When crimes occur in a block,
the government will usually warn the people to be careful
when passing by its neighborhood areas. It reveals a typical
characteristic of crime data, i.e., the farther from the crime
center, the safer the region is; the closer, the more dangerous. Previous hypergraph crime prediction models ignore
the spatial information underlying the aforementioned correlations. Motivated by the promising ability of CL techniques
on mining information underlying data itself, especially for
graph data (Thakoor et al. 2021; Lee, Lee, and Park 2022;
Liang et al. 2023a), specific contrastive learning (CL) strategies are designed in this work to leverage the spatial correlations for better prediction performance.
Besides the spatial correlations, temporal characteristics

Crime prediction is a crucial yet challenging task within urban computing, which benefits public safety and resource optimization. Over the years, various models have been proposed, and spatial-temporal hypergraph learning models have
recently shown outstanding performances. However, three
correlations underlying crime are ignored, thus hindering the
performance of previous models. Specifically, there are two
spatial correlations and one temporal correlation, i.e., (1) cooccurrence of different types of crimes (type spatial correlation), (2) the closer to the crime center, the more dangerous
it is around the neighborhood area (neighbor spatial correlation), and (3) the closer between two timestamps, the more
relevant events are (hawkes temporal correlation). To this end,
we propose Hawkes-enhanced Spatial-Temporal Hypergraph
Contrastive Learning framework (HCL), which mines the
aforementioned correlations via two specific strategies. Concretely, contrastive learning strategies are designed for two
spatial correlations, and hawkes process modeling is adopted
for temporal correlations. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the promising capacities of HCL from four aspects, i.e., superiority, transferability, effectiveness, and sensitivity.

Introduction
Crimes, as a crucial social problem, are seen worldwide.
If poorly managed, such activities will lead to severe adverse effects on urban safety (Wortley and Townsley 2016).
Thus, the government has put forward higher requirements
for effective crime prevention and combat. With the development of artificial intelligence (AI) technologies (Liu et al.
2023d,c; Chen et al. 2022a,b; Li et al. 2023; Tian et al. 2020;
Peng et al. 2023; Luo et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023b,a; Liu
and Liu 2021; Liu, Wu, and Liu 2022) and the availability
of crime data (Wang et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2019), various crime prediction models have emerged, which will assist
governments in allocating police resources rationally based
on spatial-temporal characteristics of different crimes and
further contribute to the construction of the smart city in the
future (Su, Li, and Fu 2011; Angelidou 2014).
Early attempts for crime prediction leverage convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to model the region-wise correlations and temporal properties (Feng et al. 2020; Zhang,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8733

www.nyc.gov/site/nypd/stats/crime-statistics/historical.page

