The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

From GARCH to Neural Network for Volatility Forecast
Pengfei Zhao* 1 , Haoren Zhu* 2 , Wilfred Siu Hung NG2 , Dik Lun Lee 2
1

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research and Application for Data Science, BNU-HKBU United
International College,
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
ericpfzhao@uic.edu.cn, {hzhual, wilfred, dlee}@cse.ust.hk,

Abstract

variables must be stationary), which may not align with the
highly dynamic, nonlinear, and complex market reality.
Recently, ML approaches have been increasingly used in
volatility forecast (Ge et al. 2022). However, ML approaches
are mostly uninterpretable and lack support from financial
domain knowledge. While ML models have the power to
approximate nonlinear functions and fewer restrictions, they
have several limitations: (1) The complexity of NN models poses challenges in explaining the model’s outputs, thus
reducing confidence in the model’s reliability. The issue is
magnified in the financial sector where risks and responsibilities are at stake, compelling practitioners to understand
how forecasts and decisions are made to build up trust in
the model. (2) There are a large number of models that
fit the training data well, but few generalize well (Giles,
Lawrence, and Tsoi 2001). The challenge mainly comes
from the non-stationarity and noisiness of real-world financial time series data. A small training timeframe may induce overfitting in NN models due to the presence of noise.
Conversely, an excessively large timeframe can introduce
inconsistency between the temporal relationship of inputs,
confusing NN models during the learning process due to
data non-stationarity. Recent work (Zeng et al. 2022) shows
that simple one-layer linear models outperform sophisticated Transformer-based models on long-term time series
forecasting. (3) Well-established NN models are often general ML solutions and the network structure is not designed
to capture the characteristics of the volatility time series.
Thus, statistical models like GARCH are still the dominant
volatility forecast models until now due to their simplicity,
high interpretability, and satisfactory performance.
Stochastic and NN solutions have complementary
strengths, but existing studies treat them as separate research
directions without much interaction in between. This paper aims to develop an approach that can exploit the wellestablished foundation of the GARCH family of volatility models in NN-based volatility models to improve prediction accuracy as well as enhance the interpretability of
the NN models. In particular, econometricians have discovered the fact that volatility, unlike most market variables
that remain largely unpredictable, has specific characteristics named “stylized facts” (SFs) (Masset 2011) (also referred to as “volatility characteristics” in the literature) that
can increase the accuracy of volatility forecast. Examples of

Volatility, as a measure of uncertainty, plays a crucial role in
numerous financial activities such as risk management. The
Econometrics and Machine Learning communities have developed two distinct approaches for financial volatility forecasting: the stochastic approach and the neural network (NN)
approach. Despite their individual strengths, these methodologies have conventionally evolved in separate research trajectories with little interaction between them. This study endeavors to bridge this gap by establishing an equivalence relationship between models of the GARCH family and their
corresponding NN counterparts. With the equivalence relationship established, we introduce an innovative approach,
named GARCH-NN, for constructing NN-based volatility
models. It obtains the NN counterparts of GARCH models
and integrates them as components into an established NN
architecture, thereby seamlessly infusing volatility stylized
facts (SFs) inherent in the GARCH models into the neural
network. We develop the GARCH-LSTM model to showcase the power of the GARCH-NN approach. Experiment results validate that amalgamating the NN counterparts of the
GARCH family models into established NN models leads
to enhanced outcomes compared to employing the stochastic and NN models in isolation.

Introduction
In empirical finance, the volatility of asset returns is a measure of risk, which helps investors decide if the returns of
assets justify the risks. Further, volatility is used by financial institutions to assess their risks using value-at-risk (VaR)
models. The ability to forecast the volatility or variance of
asset returns can help investors to anticipate risks and to reduce loss, which is important for risk management. Financial forecasting can be categorized into stochastic and machine learning (ML) approaches. Existing econometrics solutions fall into the stochastic category. For example, the famous generalized autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity (GARCH) family models for volatility modeling have
been widely used in risk modeling for decades. Stochastic econometric time series models have the advantage that
they can be theoretically described based on statistical logic.
However, they rely on many assumptions (e.g., explanatory
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16998

