The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Long-Term Safe Reinforcement Learning with Binary Feedback
Akifumi Wachi1 , Wataru Hashimoto2 , Kazumune Hashimoto2
1

LINE Corporation
Osaka University
akifumi.wachi@linecorp.com, hashimoto@is.eei.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp, hashimoto@eei.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp
2

Binary safety feedback

Abstract
Safety is an indispensable requirement for applying reinforcement learning (RL) to real problems. Although there
has been a surge of safe RL algorithms proposed in recent
years, most existing work typically 1) relies on receiving numeric safety feedback; 2) does not guarantee safety during
the learning process; 3) limits the problem to a priori known,
deterministic transition dynamics; and/or 4) assume the existence of a known safe policy for any states. Addressing the
issues mentioned above, we thus propose Long-term Binaryfeedback Safe RL (LoBiSaRL), a safe RL algorithm for constrained Markov decision processes (CMDPs) with binary
safety feedback and an unknown, stochastic state transition
function. LoBiSaRL optimizes a policy to maximize rewards
while guaranteeing a long-term safety that an agent executes
only safe state-action pairs throughout each episode with high
probability. Specifically, LoBiSaRL models the binary safety
function via a generalized linear model (GLM) and conservatively takes only a safe action at every time step while inferring its effect on future safety under proper assumptions.
Our theoretical results show that LoBiSaRL guarantees the
long-term safety constraint, with high probability. Finally, our
empirical results demonstrate that our algorithm is safer than
existing methods without significantly compromising performance in terms of reward.

1

Safe Unsafe

Instantaneous

Long-term

(Future trajectory)
Time

Figure 1: Even if safety is guaranteed at time t based on
the instantaneous evaluation, safe behavior may not exist a
few steps ahead. This paper requires an agent to guarantee
long-term safety (i.e., constraint satisfaction from the time
the current time step t to the terminal time step T ) in CMDPs
with stochastic state transition and binary safety feedback.

(1999)). While there are various types of constraint representations, most of the existing studies formulated constraints using either expected cumulative safety-cost (Altman 1999) or conditional value at risk (CVaR, Rockafellar,
Uryasev et al. (2000)); thus, satisfying safety constraints almost surely or with high probability received less attention
to date. Imagine highly safety-critical applications (e.g., autonomous driving, healthcare, robotics) where even a single constraint violation may result in catastrophic failure. In
such cases, RL agents need to ensure safety at every time
step at least with high probability; thus, constraint satisfaction “on average” does not fit the purpose due to a large number of unsafe actions during the learning process (Stooke,
Achiam, and Abbeel 2020).
Several previous work on safe RL aimed to guarantee
safety at every time step with high probability, even during the learning process. Unfortunately, however, existing
work has room for improvement. First, most of the previous work (Wachi and Sui 2020; Amani, Thrampoulidis, and
Yang 2021; Roderick, Nagarajan, and Kolter 2021) assumes
numeric safety feedback. In many cases, however, the safety
feedback can only take binary values indicating whether a
state-action pair is safe or unsafe, which is particularly true
when feedback comes from humans. As existing studies on
safe RL with binary safety feedback, Wachi, Wei, and Sui
(2021) modeled the safety function via a generalized lin-

Introduction

Safe reinforcement learning (RL) is a promising paradigm
for applying RL algorithms to real-world applications
(Garcıa and Fernández 2015). Safe RL is beneficial
in safety-critical decision-making problems, such as autonomous driving, healthcare, and robotics, where safety
requirements must be incorporated to prevent RL policies
from posing risks to humans or objects (Dulac-Arnold et al.
2021). As a result, safe RL has received significant attention in recent years as a crucial issue of RL during both the
learning and execution phases (Amodei et al. 2016).
Safe RL is typically formulated as constrained policy
optimization problems where the expected cumulative reward is maximized while guaranteeing or encouraging the
satisfaction of safety constraints, which are modeled as
constrained Markov decision processes (CMDPs, Altman
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21656

