The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Relative Policy-Transition Optimization for Fast Policy Transfer
Jiawei Xu1,2 * , Cheng Zhou1 , Yizheng Zhang1 , Baoxiang Wang2 , Lei Han1 *
1
Tencent Robotics X
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
jiaweixu1@link.cuhk.edu.cn, {mikechzhou,yizhenzhang}@tencent.com
bxiangwang@cuhk.edu.cn, lxhan@tencent.com
2

Abstract

tremely expensive and slow. Even if parallel data collection
is possible, for example, by deploying multiple robots or vehicles running simultaneously, the scale of collected data is
still far below that in virtual games. Worse still, exploration
in these environments is considerably limited for safety reasons, which further reduces the effectiveness of the generated data. Due to the above challenges, similar significant
advances like in solving virtual games have not been witnessed in these applications yet.
Generally, there are three tracks of approaches targeting to alleviate the aforementioned situation to promote the
widespread application of RL. They are improving the data
efficiency, transfer learning and simulator engineering.
To improve data efficiency, many recent efforts have been
paid on investigating offline RL algorithms (Rosete-Beas
et al. 2023; Zhan et al. 2022; Lyu et al. 2022; Siegel et al.
2020; Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup 2019). Compared to
standard on-policy or off-policy RL, offline RL aims to effectively use previously collected experiences stored in a
given dataset, like supervised learning, without online interactions with the environment. The stored experiences may
not be generated by a fixed or known policy, so offline RL
algorithms can leverage any previously collected data and
learn a provably better policy than those who generated the
experiences in the dataset. Although offline RL can effectively take advantage of finite data samples, solving a complex real-world task still requires a huge amount of highquality offline experiences. Another way to increase data efficiency is to adopt model-based RL. Compared to modelfree methods, model-based RL (Bakker 2001; Schaefer, Udluft, and Zimmermann 2007; Kaiser et al. 2019; Janner et al.
2019; Delecki, Corso, and Kochenderfer 2023) learns a dynamics model that mimics the transitions in the true environment, and then the policy is free to interact with the learned
dynamics. It has been proved that the true return can be
improved by interacting with the learned dynamics model
when the model error is bounded (Janner et al. 2019). However, learning an accurate dynamics model still requires sufficient transition by interacting with the true environment.
Transfer learning in RL (Taylor and Stone 2009; Zhu et al.
2023) is practically useful to adapt a policy learned in a
source environment to solve another task in the target environment. In the context of this paper, we consider the case
where the policy is free to explore in the source environment,

We consider the problem of policy transfer between two
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). We introduce a lemma
based on existing theoretical results in reinforcement learning
to measure the relativity gap between two arbitrary MDPs,
that is the difference between any two cumulative expected
returns defined on different policies and environment dynamics. Based on this lemma, we propose two new algorithms referred to as Relative Policy Optimization (RPO) and Relative
Transition Optimization (RTO), which offer fast policy transfer and dynamics modelling, respectively. RPO transfers the
policy evaluated in one environment to maximize the return
in another, while RTO updates the parameterized dynamics
model to reduce the gap between the dynamics of the two environments. Integrating the two algorithms results in the complete Relative Policy-Transition Optimization (RPTO) algorithm, in which the policy interacts with the two environments
simultaneously, such that data collections from two environments, policy and transition updates are completed in one
closed loop to form a principled learning framework for policy transfer. We demonstrate the effectiveness of RPTO on
a set of MuJoCo continuous control tasks by creating policy
transfer problems via variant dynamics.

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated great
successes in recent years, in solving a number of challenging problems like Atari (Mnih et al. 2015), GO (Silver et al.
2016, 2017), StarCraft II (Vinyals et al. 2019; Han et al.
2020), ViZDoom (Li et al. 2023) and legged robotics (Han
et al. 2023). These successes demonstrate that current deep
RL methods are capable to explore and exploit sufficiently in
huge observation and action spaces, as long as sufficient and
effective data samples can be generated for training, such
as the cases in games. For example, AlphaGo Zero (Silver
et al. 2017) costs 3 days of training over 4.9 million self-play
games, and OpenAI Five (Berner et al. 2019) and AlphaStar (Vinyals et al. 2019) spend months of training using thousands of GPUs/TPUs over billions of generated matches.
However, for environments that prohibit infinite interactions,
e.g., robotics, real life traffic control and autopilot, etc., applying general RL is difficult because generating data is ex* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16164

