The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Optimizing the Optimization of Planning Domains by Automatic Action Schema
Splitting
Mojtaba Elahi, Jussi Rintanen
Aalto University
mojtaba.elahi@aalto.fi, jussi.rintanen@aalto.fi

Abstract

FF (Hoffmann and Nebel 2001) heuristic functions to the
schematic representation (Corrêa et al. 2021, 2022).
Another approach to tackle this issue is to manually reformulate the problems so that the number of ground actions stays feasible. Essentially, schematic actions corresponding to a large number of ground actions are broken
down into sequences of smaller actions, thus reducing the
number of ground actions substantially. This requires an expert familiar with domain knowledge and AI Planning. The
formalizations of the Pipesworld domain (Milidiú, dos Santos Liporace, and de Lucena 2003) in the International Planning Competition (IPC) 2004 and Genome Edit Distance
(Haslum et al. 2011) are examples of this approach.
Finally, Areces et al. (2014) have proposed to perform the
aforementioned reformulation fully automatically. However,
they split each action separately and only based on structural information about the action itself. This limits the effectiveness of the approach and the generalization of its hyperparameters. Thus, its hyperparameters need to be tuned
for each problem, otherwise it might have an adverse effect
on planner performance.
In this work, we take the ideas of Areces et al. further to
make them better applicable to planners targeting a broad
range of problems, not only hard-to-ground ones. Our goal
is to exploit information explicitly expressed in the problem definition or derivable from it, such as the domain size
of each type, the problem’s invariants, and estimates of the
numbers of applicable ground actions of action schemas. Using this information, not only can we provide a more effective splitting approach, but also our hyperparameters can be
more generalized so that our approach can be applied to a
wide range of problems without further tuning or a noticeable deterioration of performance.
To achieve our goals, we propose improvements on three
components of the Areces et al. approach. Specifically, we
consider improving the dependency graph, the objective
function, and the search algorithm. We encode some invariant information about the problem into the dependency
graph. We also take an additional criterion into account in
converting the graph into a sequence of smaller actions. We
also provide a more meaningful objective function as a priority list of features; the highest priority one is the most important but coarsest feature, and the lowest priority feature
is the least important but the finest feature. Finally, we pro-

Most planners are based on grounding, that is, generating all
instances of a parameterized action during a preprocessing
phase. For some problems the number of ground actions is
too high, causing a performance bottleneck. Building upon
an existing approach, we present an enhanced method to split
action schemas automatically during the grounding phase, to
reduce the number of ground actions. First, we propose to exploit the structural knowledge of the problems to have a more
informative dependency graph. Then, we suggest a better objective function to define and choose the best split. Finally,
we present a more effective search to find it. We experimentally measure the impact of each of these improvements, and
show that our approach significantly outperforms the state of
the art.

Introduction
Planning is a branch of Artificial Intelligence (AI) that studies the problem of choosing a sequence of actions to reach
a given goal from a given initial state. Actions are usually
specified in a schematic form (by parameterizing it) in languages such as PDDL (Ghallab et al. 1998), and most planners ground actions in their preprocessing step by instantiating the parameters with all possible value combinations. The
resulting non-parametric ground actions are easier to handle
computationally: all parameter-related decisions are made
simultaneously by selecting a single ground action, without the need for explicit parameterization consideration during the search process. However, this simplification comes
with a price: when the number of parameter combinations
becomes impractically high, grounding-based planners stall
in their preprocessing step.
There are multiple approaches to address this issue. First,
planning problems can be solved without grounding (Penberthy and Weld 1992; Ernst, Millstein, and Weld 1997;
Robinson et al. 2008; Ridder and Fox 2014; Wichlacz,
Höller, and Hoffmann 2022). In this way, they are directly
handled in their schematic representation. The state-of-theart approach in this category, Powerlifted, efficiently finds
the successors of a state by using relational algebra query
evaluation techniques (Corrêa et al. 2020), and also extends the delete relaxation (Bonet and Geffner 2001) and
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20096

