The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dirichlet-Based Prediction Calibration for Learning with Noisy Labels
Chen-Chen Zong, Ye-Wen Wang, Ming-Kun Xie, Sheng-Jun Huang*
College of Computer Science and Technology/Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Nanjing, China
{chencz, linuswangg, mkxie, huangsj}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract

Existing methods can be broadly classified into two categories: loss correction (Patrini et al. 2017; Ma et al. 2018;
Zhang and Sabuncu 2018; Shu et al. 2019; Ma et al. 2020)
and example selection (Garcia, de Carvalho, and Lorena
2016; Malach and Shalev-Shwartz 2017; Huang et al. 2019;
Li, Socher, and Hoi 2020; Zhou, Wang, and Bilmes 2021;
Karim et al. 2022). The former aims to correct the loss by
estimating the noise transition matrix, adjusting the example labels or weights. The latter attempts to separate clean
examples from noisy ones based on the small-loss criterion
(Li, Socher, and Hoi 2020), where the examples with low
loss are assumed to have clean labels, and further consider
recognized mislabeled examples as unlabeled ones to perform semi-supervised learning. Despite these two kinds of
methods making great progress in dealing with noisy labels, most of them often suffer from the unreliability issue
since standard DNNs can easily produce over-confident but
incorrect predictions (Sensoy, Kaplan, and Kandemir 2018;
Wang, Feng, and Zhang 2021; Xie et al. 2023). For example,
to demonstrate the over-confidence issue of DNNs, Sensoy,
Kaplan, and Kandemir (2018) experimented on handwritten
digit recognition and observed that when the digit “1” is rotated at an angle greater than 60 degrees, the model tends to
output the digit “2” with very high confidence.
In this paper, we first disclose that the occurrence of the
over-confidence phenomenon is caused by the translation invariance of the softmax function, i.e., adding or subtracting
a constant from all logits does not alter the softmax values, and this actually elevates the probability of misclassifying mislabeled examples as clean ones in noisy label learning. Based on these findings, we develop a Dirichlet-based
Prediction Calibration (DPC) method to calibrate the softmax probabilities and thus solve the over-confidence issue.
Specifically, to obtain reliable confidence, a suitable constant is added to the exponent term of the softmax function to break its translation invariance. To solve the gradient
shrinking issue caused by the calibration, a Dirichlet training
scheme is developed to enforce the logits on the given label
and other labels to be as separated as possible. With more
distinguishable logits, we further design a large-margin criterion to achieve better performance on example selection.
The main contributions are summarized as follows:

Learning with noisy labels can significantly hinder the generalization performance of deep neural networks (DNNs). Existing approaches address this issue through loss correction
or example selection methods. However, these methods often
rely on the model’s predictions obtained from the softmax
function, which can be over-confident and unreliable. In this
study, we identify the translation invariance of the softmax
function as the underlying cause of this problem and propose
the Dirichlet-based Prediction Calibration (DPC) method as
a solution. Our method introduces a calibrated softmax function that breaks the translation invariance by incorporating a
suitable constant in the exponent term, enabling more reliable model predictions. To ensure stable model training, we
leverage a Dirichlet distribution to assign probabilities to predicted labels and introduce a novel evidence deep learning
(EDL) loss. The proposed loss function encourages positive
and sufficiently large logits for the given label, while penalizing negative and small logits for other labels, leading to
more distinct logits and facilitating better example selection
based on a large-margin criterion. Through extensive experiments on diverse benchmark datasets, we demonstrate that
DPC achieves state-of-the-art performance. The code is available at https://github.com/chenchenzong/DPC.

Introduction
Large-scale datasets with high-quality annotations are crucial for achieving remarkable performance in deep neural
networks (DNNs). However, collecting a large number of accurately annotated data is often costly and time-consuming.
Recently, crowdsourcing labeling has become a mainstream
solution to this problem due to its cost-effectiveness (Hossain and Kauranen 2015; Chen et al. 2014; Huang et al.
2021). While the labeling cost is significantly reduced, it often introduces noisy labels unavoidably due to the various
levels of expertise possessed by different labelers. Directly
learning with such noisy labels can easily degrade the generalization performance of DNNs (Zhang et al. 2021). Therefore, training robust DNNs with noisy labels has become a
challenge that attracted significant attention in recent years
(Han et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2019; Li, Socher, and Hoi
2020; Liu et al. 2020; Zong et al. 2022; Karim et al. 2022).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We disclose that softmax’s translation invariance leads to
over-confidence problems and may amplify the risk of

17254

