The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Superposed Atomic Representation for Robust High-Dimensional Data Recovery
of Multiple Low-Dimensional Structures
Yulong Wang1,2,3∗
1

College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, China
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Agriculture, Ministry of Education, China
3
Key Laboratory of Smart Farming Technology for Agricultural Animals, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, China
wangyulong6251@gmail.com
2

Abstract

and Ma 2022). We refer to such general high-dimensional
data recovery problem as Multiple Low-Dimensional Structure Recovery (MLDSR).
RPCA and Tensor RPCA (TRPCA). Robust Principal
Component Analysis (RPCA) (Candès et al. 2011) and its variants (Ding, He, and Carin 2011) belong to MLDSR
and assume that data is a superposition of a low-rank matrix and a sparse matrix and aim to recover them from their
sum. Since many real-data are often stored in tensors such
as color images and hyperspectral images, RPCA is extended for tensor data and the problem changes to recovering a
low-rank tensor and a sparse tensor from their sum. The resulting method is dubbed Tensor RPCA (TRPCA) (Lu et al.
2020). RPCA, TRPCA and their variants (Qiu et al. 2022)
have a wide range of applications, such as image recovery
and background substraction (Chang et al. 2020).
Robust Sparse Representation (RSR). As another example of MLDSR, RSR (Wright et al. 2009) assumes that
the observed corrupted data (e.g., a face image with sunglasses) is a superposition of the noiseless data lying in a
low-dimensional linear subspace and a sparse noise part.
RSR methods have also achieved great success in various
applications such as robust face recognition (Zhang et al.
2022), motion segmentation (Elhamifar and Vidal 2013) and
hyperspectral image classification (Chen, Nasrabadi, and
Tran 2011; Peng, Sun, and Du 2019).
Outlier Pursuit (OP). The OP problem (Xu, Caramanis,
and Sanghavi 2012; Zhou and Feng 2017) also belongs to
MLDSR and aims to identify the outliers from a mixture of
inliers and outliers. The data is modeled as a superposition
of a low-rank matrix (nonzero columns correspond to inliers
lying in a low-dimensional subspace) and a column-sparse
matrix (nonzero columns correspond to outliers out of the
subspace). More examples of MLDSR include the line spectral estimation problem (Yang and Xie 2015).
The problems above have the commonality that all of
them leverage the underlying multiple low-dimensional
structures of high-dimensional data to recover the original
data. However, in the literature these problems above are
tackled on a case-by-case basis. These limitations of existing works motivate us to consider an interesting question:
is it possible to propose a unified framework for the general
MLDSR problem? This work gives a positive answer.

This paper proposes a unified Superposed Atomic Representation (SAR) framework for high-dimensional data recovery
with multiple low-dimensional structures. The data can be
in various forms ranging from vectors to tensors. The goal
of SAR is to recover different components from their sum,
where each component has a low-dimensional structure, such
as sparsity, low-rankness or be lying a low-dimensional subspace. Examples of SAR include, but not limited to, Robust
Sparse Representation (RSR), Robust Principal Component
Analysis (RPCA), Tensor RPCA (TRPCA), and Outlier Pursuit (OP). We establish the theoretical guarantee for SAR.
To further improve SAR, we also develop a Weighted SAR
(WSAR) framework by paying more attention and penalizing less on significant atoms of each component. An effective
optimization algorithm is devised for WSAR and the convergence of the algorithm is rigorously proved. By leveraging
WSAR as a general platform, several new methods are proposed for high-dimensional data recovery. The experiments
on real data demonstrate the superiority of WSAR for various data recovery problems.

Introduction
In many real-world applications, high-dimensional data is
often a superposition of multiple components with different low-dimensional structures (Candès et al. 2011; Wright
et al. 2009). For instance, a grayscale video data with moving objects can be regarded as a superposition of the background part and the foreground part containing moving objects. Since the frames of the background are highly correlated in general, it can be modeled as a low-rank tensor.
While the foreground part can be modeled as a sparse tensor since the moving objects often occupy a small part of
each video frame (Lu et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2023). Analogously, a face image with disguise (e.g., sunglasses) can be
regarded as a superposition of a noiseless face image (lying in a low-dimensional subspace (Wright et al. 2009)) and
the occlusion part (deemed as a sparse matrix). To recover
the underlying components from the superposed data, a variety of data recovery methods have been proposed for distinct
problems and applications (Chen, Wu, and Wang 2019; Dutta, Hanzely, and Richtárik 2019; Zheng et al. 2022; Wright
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15735

