The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Outlier Ranking for Large-Scale Public Health Data
Ananya Joshi, Tina Townes, Nolan Gormley, Luke Neureiter, Roni Rosenfeld, Bryan Wilder
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Rd.
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 15213, USA
aajoshi, ttownes, ngormley, lneureiter, rrosenfeld, bwilder@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract

Existing Tied Maximum Outliers

Outshines Ranks Extreme Outliers

Score Indicator Region Date
0.98
A
7/09
0.95
B
6/16
0.89
C
6/18
0.76
D
7/09

Disease control experts inspect public health data streams
daily for outliers worth investigating, like those corresponding to data quality issues or disease outbreaks. However, they
can only examine a few of the thousands of maximally-tied
outliers returned by univariate outlier detection methods applied to large-scale public health data streams. To help experts distinguish the most important outliers from these thousands of tied outliers, we propose a new task for algorithms to
rank the outputs of any univariate method applied to each of
many streams. Our novel algorithm for this task, which leverages hierarchical networks and extreme value analysis, performed the best across traditional outlier detection metrics in
a human-expert evaluation using public health data streams.
Most importantly, experts have used our open-source Python
implementation since April 2023 and report identifying outliers worth investigating 9.1x faster than their prior baseline.
Other organizations can readily adapt this implementation to
create rankings from the outputs of their tailored univariate
methods across large-scale streams.

...

Figure 1: Existing methods identify 14-20k tied maximumpriority outliers (a subset shown here) from 3-4m points.
Outshines ranking enables experts to prioritize outliers.

public health data containing hundreds of thousands of data
streams updated daily, this approach returns an overwhelming number of tied maximum-priority outliers (e.g., 14-20k,
as shown in Fig. 1), of which many are false positives.
To address this challenge, we collaborated with the Delphi Group at Carnegie Mellon University. Delphi has curated
public health data for nearly a decade and maintains an API
used by various public health organizations 2 . In the past
three years, Delphi’s daily data intake increased over 1000x
to 3-4 million data points across 200-300k data streams due
to the availability of public health data indicators, including
official indicators, like cases or hospitalizations, and auxiliary indicators, like insurance claims and cellphone-based
mobility (WHO 2023; Kraemer et al. 2021). These indicators are also available at a higher resolution (e.g., from {U.S.
state×weekly} to {U.S. county×daily}), and with historical
data revisions (Reinhart et al. 2021), which may contain new
outliers. Existing univariate methods return false positives in
this data for three reasons:

Motivation
Disease control experts must analyze large volumes of timeseries population-level public health data (streams) for data
delays, errors, or changes in disease dynamics to mitigate
disease spread (WHO 2022a; UN 2021; CDC 2018). Because these streams are noisy, nonstationary, and subject to
different dynamics, experts can most clearly detect these
phenomena when they manifest as specific types of point
outliers (e.g., large spikes) in individual data streams 1 .
Thus, experts have relied on tailored univariate methods
(Blázquez-Garcı́a et al. 2021) applied independently per
stream to prioritize data points (outliers) corresponding to
important phenomena.
The rapid expansion of public health data since the start
of the COVID-19 pandemic (WHO 2022b) exposed a fundamental flaw in this approach. When public health organizations only curated a few thousand weekly-updated data
streams, the number of maximum-priority outliers identified this way was relatively small, and experts could examine all outliers manually. However, with modern volumes of

1. Because these methods operate independently per
stream, outputs should not be compared across streams.
More streams means more potential false positives because each stream has a different outlier threshold.
2. These methods may not account for temporal recency
and thus may not be able to appropriately rank outliers
in data streams that change rapidly (nonstationary).
3. Nonstationarity and historical data availability limit the
granularity of the output outlier scores (used for ranking).

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The joint relationships between streams are generally unstable
due to the statistical properties of public health data streams.

2
These organizations are generally in the United States (U.S.)
and include national and local organizations.

22176

