The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FMRNet: Image Deraining via Frequency Mutual Revision
Kui Jiang1 , Junjun Jiang1 * , Xianming Liu1 , Xin Xu2 , Xianzheng Ma3
2

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Wuhan University of Science and Technology Wuhan, China
3
Active Vision Lab, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
{jiangkui, jiangjunjun, csxm}@hit.edu.cn, xuxin@wust.edu.cn, maxianzheng@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
The wavelet transform has emerged as a powerful tool in
deciphering structural information within images. And now,
the latest research suggests that combining the prowess of
wavelet transform with neural networks can lead to unparalleled image deraining results. By harnessing the strengths
of both the spatial domain and frequency space, this innovative approach is poised to revolutionize the field of image
processing. The fascinating challenge of developing a comprehensive framework that takes into account the intrinsic
frequency property and the correlation between rain residue
and background is yet to be fully explored. In this work, we
propose to investigate the potential relationships among rainfree and residue components at the frequency domain, forming a frequency mutual revision network (FMRNet) for image
deraining. Specifically, we explore the mutual representation
of rain residue and background components at frequency domain, so as to better separate the rain layer from clean background while preserving structural textures of the degraded
images. Meanwhile, the rain distribution prediction from the
low-frequency coefficient, which can be seen as the degradation prior is used to refine the separation of rain residue and
background components. Inversely, the updated rain residue
is used to benefit the low-frequency rain distribution prediction, forming the multi-layer mutual learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed FMRNet delivers
significant performance gains for seven datasets on image deraining task, surpassing the state-of-the-art method ELFormer
by 1.14 dB in PSNR on the Rain100L dataset, while with similar computation cost. Code and retrained models are available at https://github.com/kuijiang94/FMRNet.

1

26.34 35.65
Approximation
Coefficient

35.72

36.51 PSNR 42.62
47.56
Horizontal
Coefficient

47.93

47.75

32.62 41.36
Vertical
Coefficient

41.75

42.96 PSNR 44.95 49.60
Diagonal
Coefficient

50.41

50.68

Input

MPRNet ELFormer

Ours

Input

MPRNet ELFormer Ours

Figure 1: Comparative results regarding PSNR plots on different wavelet coefficients on the R100L dataset. As expected, the wavelet-free based methods (MPRNet (Zamir
et al. 2021) and ELFormer (Jiang et al. 2022)) achieve considerable performance on the horizontal coefficient, which
suffers from the lightest degradation. By contrast, our proposed FMRNet still gains impressive scores on the vertical
and approximation coefficients, where the structure and textural information are seriously destroyed by the rain perturbation due to similar directions to rain streaks.

tioned intelligence systems. Conventional methods (Barnum, Narasimhan, and Kanade 2010; Garg and Nayar 2005)
provide available schemes, but behave poor generalization
to the highly complex and varied rainy scenes because of
the specific hand-crafted priors and assumptions.
To rectify this weakness, deep-learning based methods (Fu et al. 2017a; Li et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2020) promote further progress in innovative architectures and training practices for rain removal tasks, and show considerable
superiority over conventional algorithms in visual quality
improvement. However, due to aliasing effects between rain
residue and background details, existing CNN-based methods (Ren et al. 2019; Deng et al. 2020) struggle with generating consistent distributions with missing details (Liu et al.
2020). One reason lies in that the rain residue and back-

Introduction

Images captured under adverse weather conditions, such as
rain, snow, and fog, suffer from noticeable degradation of
scene visibility and clarity. It is harmful to many outdoor
computer vision systems, such as autonomous driving (Teichmann et al. 2018; Zhong et al. 2022) and video surveillance (Bae 2019; Huang et al. 2018).
Image deraining, aiming to produce a high-quality rainfree image from a given rain image, is a highly desirable component of intelligent decision-making in aforemen* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12892

