The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Direct Amortized Likelihood Ratio Estimation
Adam D. Cobb, Brian Matejek, Daniel Elenius, Anirban Roy, Susmit Jha
Neuro-Symbolic Computing and Intelligence (NuSCI) Research Group
Computer Science Laboratory, SRI International
adam.cobb@sri.com

Abstract

simulator that goes from fuselage parameters to hover time,
then this inversion can be challenging. Likelihood-free inference aims to solve this problem of performing inference
over simulators (or black-box models). This paradigm is often referred to as simulation-based inference (SBI) (Cranmer, Brehmer, and Louppe 2020).
Since one of the main objectives of SBI is to perform
Bayesian inference to learn the posterior over the parameters of a simulator, all solutions require accounting for a lack
of an analytical likelihood. They revolve around Bayes’ rule
and the corresponding Bayesian inference approaches that
currently exist in the literature. One approach is to directly
estimate the posterior using a density estimator, which is referred to as Neural Posterior Estimation (Papamakarios and
Murray 2016). NPE learns the posterior distribution using a
normalizing flow (Rezende and Mohamed 2015) in a way
that allows one to both evaluate and sample from p(✓|x).
Unlike NPE, an alternative is Neural Likelihood Estimation
(NLE) (Papamakarios, Sterratt, and Murray 2019), which
trains a neural density estimator to learn the likelihood directly. The result is the estimated p(x|✓) which can be used
with the prior, p(✓) to sample from the posterior through
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). Neural Ratio Estimation (NRE) is the third neural-based approach and is the one
explored in this paper. Unlike the other two estimation approaches, NRE does not use a density estimator and relies
on a standard neural network that aims to estimate the ratio of two likelihoods (Cranmer, Pavez, and Louppe 2015;
Thomas et al. 2016; Hermans, Begy, and Louppe 2020).
NRE is closely tied to MCMC in that it is used to estimate
the ratio in the MH step. While there have been many papers that have focused on comparison between all aforementioned approaches, including their sequential and amortized
variants (e.g. Lueckmann et al. (2021)), the focus of this paper is to explore within the existing range of available ratio
estimators.
Our paper is structured as follows. In the next section
we highlight related work. In Section 3 we provide preliminary theory on likelihood ratio estimation. We then introduce DNRE along with likelihood-free HMC in Section 4.
Finally we perform an empirical evaluation of the performance of DNRE compared to previous ratio estimators in
Section 5, leading up to a novel real-world example of designing a quadcopter. We conclude in Section 6.

We introduce a new amortized likelihood ratio estimator for
likelihood-free simulation-based inference (SBI). Our estimator is simple to train and estimates the likelihood ratio
using a single forward pass of the neural estimator. Our approach directly computes the likelihood ratio between two
competing parameter sets, which differs from the previous
approach of comparing two neural network output values.
We refer to our model as the direct neural ratio estimator
(DNRE). As part of introducing the DNRE, we derive a corresponding Monte Carlo estimate of the posterior. We benchmark our new ratio estimator and compare it to ratio estimators in the current literature. We show that our new ratio estimator often outperforms these previous approaches.
As a further contribution, we introduce a new derivative
estimator for likelihood ratio estimators that enables us to
compare likelihood-free Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC)
with random-walk Metropolis-Hastings (MH). We show that
HMC is equally competitive, which has not been previously
shown. Finally, we include a novel real-world application of
SBI using our neural ratio estimator to design a quadcopter.
Code is available at https://github.com/SRI-CSL/dnre.

1

Introduction

In many scientific applications, we rely on complex simulators to provide us with a set of observations, x, for a corresponding set of parameters, ✓. Common examples range
from simulating Computational Fluid Dynamics (or CFD),
to flight simulators and computational biology. Significant
domain expertise goes into building such simulators to determine the potential functional relationship between ✓ and
x. However, we often do not know the likelihood function,
p(x|✓), which is the probability of the output given the input. Without the analytical form of the likelihood, we cannot easily rely on the machinery of Bayesian inference to
perform model inversions. For example, given a certain desired output or observation, we might want to know which
distribution of parameters could give us this output. In particular, if one were designing a cyber-physical system such
as a quadcopter, then a reasonable question to ask could be:
“What size should I make the fuselage such that I achieve
a hover time of 20 seconds?” If we only have access to a
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20362

