The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploring One-Shot Semi-supervised Federated Learning
with Pre-trained Diffusion Models
Mingzhao Yang * , Shangchao Su * , Bin Li † , Xiangyang Xue †
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{mzyang20,scsu20,libin,xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, semi-supervised federated learning (semi-FL) has
been proposed to handle the commonly seen real-world scenarios with labeled data on the server and unlabeled data on
the clients. However, existing methods face several challenges
such as communication costs, data heterogeneity, and training
pressure on client devices. To address these challenges, we
introduce the powerful diffusion models (DM) into semi-FL
and propose FedDISC, a Federated Diffusion-Inspired Semisupervised Co-training method. Specifically, we first extract
prototypes of the labeled server data and use these prototypes
to predict pseudo-labels of the client data. For each category,
we compute the cluster centroids and domain-specific representations to signify the semantic and stylistic information of
their distributions. After adding noise, these representations
are sent back to the server, which uses the pre-trained DM to
generate synthetic datasets complying with the client distributions and train a global model on it. With the assistance of vast
knowledge within DM, the synthetic datasets have comparable
quality and diversity to the client images, subsequently enabling the training of global models that achieve performance
equivalent to or even surpassing the ceiling of supervised centralized training. FedDISC works within one communication
round, does not require any local training, and involves very
minimal information uploading, greatly enhancing its practicality. Extensive experiments on three large-scale datasets
demonstrate that FedDISC effectively addresses the semi-FL
problem on non-IID clients and outperforms the compared
SOTA methods. Sufficient visualization experiments also illustrate that the synthetic dataset generated by FedDISC exhibits
comparable diversity and quality to the original client dataset,
with a neglectable possibility of leaking privacy-sensitive information of the clients.

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017) is a new
paradigm of machine learning that allows multiple clients to
perform collaborative training without sharing private data.
Realistic FL scenarios, such as mobile album classification
and autonomous driving (Nguyen et al. 2022; Fantauzzo et al.
2022), often involve individual users who are unwilling or
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16325

unable to provide reliable annotations. This often results in
the client data being unlabeled in practice. Semi-supervised
FL (Semi-FL) (Zhang et al. 2021b; Diao, Ding, and Tarokh
2021; Jeong et al. 2021) has been proposed to address this
issue. In this setting, there are multiple clients with unlabeled
data and a server with labeled data. The goal of semi-FL is to
obtain a global model that adapts to all client distributions.
Due to its allowance for unlabeled client data, semi-FL
should be the most practically valuable topic within FL. However, existing semi-FL methods are unable to be practically
deployed in real-world scenarios due to the following reasons (Li et al. 2020a; Kairouz et al. 2021; Mammen 2021):
Firstly, the primary challenge lies in communication. Currently, all semi-FL methods heavily rely on multi-round communication, which significantly increases the burden on the
clients. Secondly, the challenge of data heterogeneity persists
in semi-FL. When there are distribution differences between
the server and the clients, the performance of the global
model significantly decreases. The third point pertains to
the diverse devices of clients in real-world scenarios. While
many FL methods do not restrict the computing power of
the clients, one of the greatest challenges in the practical
implementation of FL methods is that most clients cannot
support model training on their devices, such as a significant
portion of mobile terminals in scenarios like mobile album
classification and autonomous driving. Hence, to address
the aforementioned challenges, it is essential to establish a
one-shot semi-FL method without any client training.
Recently, the development of diffusion models (DM) (Radford et al. 2021; Rombach et al. 2022) offers fresh opportunities. These pre-trained DMs exhibit remarkable performance.
With proper guidance, these DMs can generate data with
sufficient variety in both categories and distributions. If there
is a method to generate guidance about the personalized distributions of the clients, it becomes possible to limitlessly
generate high-quality, large-scale realistic images that comply with various client distributions in semi-FL. With the
synthetic datasets, one can achieve one-shot semi-FL without
the need for any client training, even in scenarios with highly
non-IID clients. This approach simultaneously addresses the
aforementioned three challenges and significantly enhances
the practicality of semi-FL.
Furthermore, an additional pivotal advantage of applying
pre-trained DMs in semi-FL is the potential to surmount the

