The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DrFuse: Learning Disentangled Representation for Clinical Multi-Modal Fusion
with Missing Modality and Modal Inconsistency
Wenfang Yao* 1 , Kejing Yin* 2 , William K. Cheung2 , Jia Liu3 , Jing Qin1
1

School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
3
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
dorothy.yao@polyu.edu.hk, {cskjyin, william}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, jia.liu@siat.ac.cn, harry.qin@polyu.edu.hk
2

Abstract

The multi-modal data fusion, i.e., the process of combining different data modalities, plays a central role in the effective utilization of multi-modal clinical data. Despite the
recent effort, their applications to real-world data are still
hindered due to the complex and complementary nature of
multi-modal clinical data. Specifically, there are fundamentally challenging issues that need to be addressed:
Challenge 1: Missing modality in a highly heterogeneous
setting. Many existing work on clinical multi-modal learning assumes that both EHR and medical images are available for all training and testing samples, which is not practical in real-world clinical settings. For instance, the MIMICIV (Johnson et al. 2023), a real-world ICU dataset, has less
than 20% of patients with X-ray images. Many in-hospital
patients requiring X-ray scans cannot undergo the procedure
due to clinical or administrative reasons, resulting in a significant number of patients with missing modalities (Huang
et al. 2020a). Similar problems exist in other domains like
tumor segmentation on multi-modal MRI images (Zhao,
Yang, and Sun 2022), where generative machine learning
models are commonly used to synthesize the missing modality (Sharma and Hamarneh 2019). However, accurately generating missing medical images using EHR data is infeasible
because EHR contains information about a patient’s clinical
conditions, medical history, and treatments, but they do not
provide a detailed enough picture of the patient’s anatomy
to generate a missing modality of medical imaging, such as
a chest X-ray. Late fusion is a common approach to tackling missing modalities in the fusion of EHR and medical imaging, where separate prediction models are learned
for different modalities and the fusion happens only in the
decision level (Huang et al. 2020a). This approach fails to
fully utilize the interactions between modalities, leading to
undesirable suboptimal performance. Therefore, effectively
capturing the complex interactions between highly heterogeneous modalities while handling missing modalities remains
an open challenge.
Challenge 2: Modal inconsistency and patient-specific
modal significance. Even with fully observed data modalities, inconsistencies can arise when different modalities,
such as EHR and CXR, provide inconsistent or even contradictory information regarding the prediction targets. For example, in mortality prediction, patients with meningitis may
be identified as having a high risk of mortality based on EHR

The combination of electronic health records (EHR) and
medical images is crucial for clinicians in making diagnoses
and forecasting prognoses. Strategically fusing these two data
modalities has great potential to improve the accuracy of machine learning models in clinical prediction tasks. However,
the asynchronous and complementary nature of EHR and
medical images presents unique challenges. Missing modalities due to clinical and administrative factors are inevitable in
practice, and the significance of each data modality varies depending on the patient and the prediction target, resulting in
inconsistent predictions and suboptimal model performance.
To address these challenges, we propose DrFuse to achieve
effective clinical multi-modal fusion. It tackles the missing
modality issue by disentangling the features shared across
modalities and those unique within each modality. Furthermore, we address the modal inconsistency issue via a diseasewise attention layer that produces the patient- and diseasewise weighting for each modality to make the final prediction.
We validate the proposed method using real-world large-scale
datasets, MIMIC-IV and MIMIC-CXR. Experimental results
show that the proposed method significantly outperforms the
state-of-the-art models.

Introduction
Clinicians rely on data from various sources, including electronic health records (EHR) and medical imaging, to make
diagnoses and forecast prognoses (Aljondi and Alghamdi
2020). For instance, when diagnosing pneumonia, EHR data
like blood tests provides information about the patient’s infection status and immune response, while medical images
like Chest X-ray (CXR) can reveal the extent of inflammation in the lungs (Hoare and Lim 2006). Integrating these
data modalities could shed light on a more comprehensive
and accurate understanding of the patient’s health condition,
potentially leading to a better clinical outcome (Huang et al.
2020a). With the increasing availability of digital clinical
data, research efforts have recently been made to employ
multi-modal machine learning approaches to improve the
performance of clinical prediction tasks, including disease
prediction (Hayat, Geras, and Shamout 2022) and mortality
prediction (Lin et al. 2021).
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16416

