The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Understanding the Role of the Projector in Knowledge Distillation
Roy Miles, Krystian Mikolajczyk
Imperial College London
r.miles18@imperial.ac.uk, k.mikolajczyk@imperial.ac.uk

(c)

Abstract
bridge large capacity gaps

In this paper we revisit the efficacy of knowledge distillation
as a function matching and metric learning problem. In doing
so we verify three important design decisions, namely the
normalisation, soft maximum function, and projection layers
as key ingredients. We theoretically show that the projector
implicitly encodes information on past examples, enabling
relational gradients for the student. We then show that the
normalisation of representations is tightly coupled with the
training dynamics of this projector, which can have a large
impact on the students performance. Finally, we show that
a simple soft maximum function can be used to address any
significant capacity gap problems. Experimental results on various benchmark datasets demonstrate that using these insights
can lead to superior or comparable performance to state-ofthe-art knowledge distillation techniques, despite being much
more computationally efficient. In particular, we obtain these
results across image classification (CIFAR100 and ImageNet),
object detection (COCO2017), and on more difficult distillation objectives, such as training data efficient transformers,
whereby we attain a 77.2% top-1 accuracy with DeiT-Ti on
ImageNet. Code and models are publicly available.

LogSum distance

(b)

minimise projector collapse

batch norm

batch norm

(a)

linear projection
encode relational information
preserve alignment with backbone

student

teacher

Figure 1: Proposed feature distillation pipeline using three
distinct components: linear projection (a), batch norm (b),
and a LogSum distance (c). We provide an interpretable explanation for each each of these three components, which
results in a very cheap and effective recipe for distillation.
To overcome these limitations, we revisit knowledge distillation from both a function matching and metric learning
perspective. We perform an extensive ablation of three important components of knowledge distillation, namely the
distance metric, normalisation, and projector network. Alongside this ablation we provide a theoretical perspective and
unification of these design principles through exploring the
underlying training dynamics. Finally, we extend these principles to a few large scale vision tasks, whereby we achieve
comparable or improved performance over state-of-the-art.
The most significant result of which pertains to the dataefficient training of transformers, whereby a performance
gain of 2.2% is achieved over the best-performing distillation
methods that are designed explicitly for this task. Our main
contributions can be summarised as follows.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success in various applications, ranging from computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) to natural
language processing (Vaswani et al. 2017). However, the
high computational cost and memory requirements of deep
models have limited their deployment in resource-constrained
environments. Knowledge distillation is a popular technique
to address this problem through transferring the knowledge
of a large teacher model to that of a smaller student model.
This technique involves training the student to imitate the
output of the teacher, either by directly minimizing the difference between intermediate features or by minimizing the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between their soft predictions. Although knowledge distillation has shown to be
very effective, there are still some limitations related to the
computational and memory overheads in constructing and
evaluating the losses, as well as an insufficient theoretical
explanation for the underlying core principles.

• We explore three distinct design principles from knowledge distillation, namely the projection, normalisation,
and distance function. In doing so we demonstrate their
and coupling with each other, both through analytical
means and by observing the training dynamics.
• We show that a projection layer implicitly encodes relational information from previous samples. Using this
knowledge we can remove the need to explicitly construct
correlation matrices or memory banks that will inevitably
incur a significant memory overhead.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4233

