The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SA2 VP: Spatially Aligned-and-Adapted Visual Prompt
Wenjie Pei1 * , Tongqi Xia1 * , Fanglin Chen1 , Jinsong Li2 , Jiandong Tian3 , Guangming Lu1†
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
Shenzhen Jiang & Associates Creative Design Co., Ltd
3
Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
wenjiecoder@outlook.com, tongqixia325@gmail.com, chenfanglin@hit.edu.cn, as@jaid.cn, tianjd@sia.cn,
luguangm@hit.edu.cn
2

Abstract
As a prominent parameter-efficient fine-tuning technique in
NLP, prompt tuning is being explored its potential in computer vision. Typical methods for visual prompt tuning follow the sequential modeling paradigm stemming from NLP,
which represents an input image as a flattened sequence of
token embeddings and then learns a set of unordered parameterized tokens prefixed to the sequence representation as the
visual prompts for task adaptation of large vision models.
While such sequential modeling paradigm of visual prompt
has shown great promise, there are two potential limitations.
First, the learned visual prompts cannot model the underlying
spatial relations in the input image, which is crucial for image encoding. Second, since all prompt tokens play the same
role of prompting for all image tokens without distinction,
it lacks the fine-grained prompting capability, i.e., individual prompting for different image tokens. In this work, we
propose the Spatially Aligned-and-Adapted Visual Prompt
model (SA2 VP), which learns a two-dimensional prompt token map with equal (or scaled) size to the image token map,
thereby being able to spatially align with the image map. Each
prompt token is designated to prompt knowledge only for the
spatially corresponding image tokens. As a result, our model
can conduct individual prompting for different image tokens
in a fine-grained manner. Moreover, benefiting from the capability of preserving the spatial structure by the learned prompt
token map, our SA2 VP is able to model the spatial relations in
the input image, leading to more effective prompting. Extensive experiments on three challenging benchmarks for image
classification demonstrate the superiority of our model over
other state-of-the-art methods for visual prompt tuning. Code
is available at https://github.com/tommy-xq/SA2VP.

Figure 1: Typical methods for visual prompting tuning follow the sequential modeling paradigm which learns an unordered sequence of prompts prefixed to the image representation. All prompt tokens play the same role of prompting for all image tokens. In contrast, our SA2 VP learns a 2D
prompt token map, which aligns with the image token map
spatially. As a result, our SA2 VP is able to 1) conduct individual prompting for different image tokens in a fine-grained
manner and 2) model the spatial relations in the input image
by preserving the spatial structure in the prompt map.

efficiency by incurring only a small amount of parametertuning overhead. As a prominent PEFT method, prompt tuning has achieved remarkable success in NLP field and is being explored its potential in computer vision (Bahng et al.
2022; Huang et al. 2023; Jia et al. 2022; Das et al. 2023;
Han et al. 2023; Bar et al. 2022).
Most of existing methods for visual prompt tuning (Jia
et al. 2022; Das et al. 2023; Han et al. 2023) follow the sequential modeling paradigm, which stems from the learning
way of prompt in NLP, as shown in Figure 1. A prominent
example is VPT (Jia et al. 2022), which encodes an input
image as a sequential representation using pre-trained vision
Transformer models and then learns a set of prompt tokens
as auxiliary input prefixed to the image representation. The
learned vision prompts are expected to distill the relevant
knowledge from the pre-trained model, thereby adapting the
pre-trained model to the downstream target task. While such
sequential modeling paradigm of visual prompts has shown
great promise, it suffers from two potential limitations. First,

Introduction
Adapting large pre-trained vision models to a specific
downstream vision task via parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) has proven to be an effective and efficient strategy,
particularly in the scenarios where the training data is limited. It not only distills the prior knowledge relevant to the
downstream task from the pre-trained model to achieve better performance, but also substantially improves the training
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4450

