The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-View Dynamic Reflection Prior for Video Glass Surface Detection
Fang Liu* , Yuhao Liu* , Jiaying Lin† , Ke Xu† , Rynson W.H. Lau‡
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{fawnliu2333, yuhaoliu7456, csjylin, kkangwing}@gmail.com, Rynson.Lau@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Recent research has shown significant interest in image-based
glass surface detection (GSD). However, detecting glass surfaces in dynamic scenes remains largely unexplored due to
the lack of a high-quality dataset and an effective video glass
surface detection (VGSD) method. In this paper, we propose
the first VGSD approach. Our key observation is that reflections frequently appear on glass surfaces, but they change dynamically as the camera moves. Based on this observation,
we propose to offset the excessive dependence on a single uncertainty reflection via joint modeling of temporal and spatial
reflection cues. To this end, we propose the VGSD-Net with
two novel modules: a Location-aware Reflection Extraction
(LRE) module and a Context-enhanced Reflection Integration
(CRI) module, for the position-aware reflection feature extraction and the spatial-temporal reflection cues integration,
respectively. We have also created the first large-scale video
glass surface dataset (VGSD-D), consisting of 19,166 image frames with accurately-annotated glass masks extracted
from 297 videos. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
VGSD-Net outperforms state-of-the-art approaches adapted
from related fields. Code and dataset will be available at
https://github.com/fawnliu/VGSD.

Image

GlassNet

PGSNet

Ours

GT

Figure 1: Comparison of our VGSD-Net with the state-ofthe-art image-based glass detection methods, GlassNet (Lin,
He, and Lau 2021) and PGSNet (Yu et al. 2022). They
produce temporal-inconsistent results when applied to the
VGSD task, as they do not exploit any temporal information. In contrast, our method learns dynamic reflection cues
from the video, yielding more accurate and robust results.

Lau 2021), and context (Yu et al. 2022). Despite their success, none of them are tailored for video-based glass surface
detection. On the other hand, real-world computer vision applications such as autonomous driving and robotic navigation are video-centric rather than image-centric. Effectively
addressing the Video Glass Surface Detection (VGSD) problem can offer substantial benefits to them.
There are two main challenges for handling the VGSD
problem. First, as existing glass detection methods are predominantly designed for single-image input, their priors/assumptions may not hold true in dynamic scenes. As shown
in Fig. 1, GlassNet (Lin, He, and Lau 2021) fails to detect
glass surfaces in the third frame as they do not explore temporal reflections, and the insufficient contexts (e.g., the topleft region of the bottom image) fail PGSNet (Yu et al. 2022)
to produce complete glass maps. Second, there are currently
no datasets available for the VGSD problem.
In this paper, we aim to address the above two challenges.
First, we observe that glass surfaces often contain reflections
that exhibit a dynamic behavior across multiple frames of
the input video (i.e., the location and appearance of reflections on the glass surface change dynamically, as the camera
moves). Inspired by this observation, we propose a novel approach, named VGSD-Net, which integrates multi-view dynamic reflections across multiple frames for VGSD. VGSDNet contains two novel modules: a Location-aware Reflec-

Introduction
Glass surfaces, including glass windows / walls / doors, pervade our everyday lives. Their existence significantly impacts various computer vision tasks, such as depth estimation (Bhat, Alhashim, and Wonka 2021), 3D scene understanding (Ye et al. 2021, 2022b,a), and vision-language navigation (Anderson et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2023b,a). For example, undetected glass surfaces could lead to mishaps like
the crashing of drones and robots onto them. Thus, detecting
glass surfaces is an essential prerequisite for enhancing the
scene-understanding capabilities of vision systems.
Mei et al. (Mei et al. 2020) proposes the first imagebased glass surface detection method and utilizes the contrasted features to localize the glass regions. Subsequent
works leverage various priors for glass surface detection, including boundary (He et al. 2021), reflection (Lin, He, and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Jiaying Lin and Ke Xu are joint corresponding authors.
Rynson W.H. Lau leads this project.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

3594

