The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Frequency-Adaptive Pan-Sharpening with Mixture of Experts
Xuanhua He1,2 * , Keyu Yan1,2 * , Rui Li1 , Chengjun Xie1 , Jie Zhang1† , Man Zhou3†
1

Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Science and Technology of China
3
Nanyang Technological University
{hexuanhua,keyu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {lirui,cjxie,zhangjie}@iim.ac.cn,manzhountu@gmail.com

Abstract
Pan-sharpening involves reconstructing missing highfrequency information in multi-spectral images with low
spatial resolution, using a higher-resolution panchromatic
image as guidance. Although the inborn connection with
frequency domain, existing pan-sharpening research has not
almost investigated the potential solution upon frequency
domain. To this end, we propose a novel Frequency Adaptive Mixture of Experts (FAME) learning framework for
pan-sharpening, which consists of three key components:
the Adaptive Frequency Separation Prediction Module, the
Sub-Frequency Learning Expert Module, and the Expert
Mixture Module. In detail, the first leverages the discrete
cosine transform to perform frequency separation by predicting the frequency mask. On the basis of generated mask, the
second with low-frequency MOE and high-frequency MOE
takes account for enabling the effective low-frequency and
high-frequency information reconstruction. Followed by, the
final fusion module dynamically weights high-frequency
and low-frequency MOE knowledge to adapt to remote
sensing images with significant content variations. Quantitative and qualitative experiments over multiple datasets
demonstrate that our method performs the best against other
state-of-the-art ones and comprises a strong generalization
ability for real-world scenes. Code will be made publicly at
https://github.com/alexhe101/FAME-Net.

HRMS

Spectrum

Masked

Frequency mask

Figure 1: Generation process of frequency mask. Firstly, a
discrete cosine transform is applied to the image. Then, the
upper left part of the DCT spectrum is masked using manually selected thresholds. Finally, the frequency mask is generated through inverse transformation.

as a consequence of the rapid progress of deep learning technology. The PNN (Masi et al. 2016), which takes inspiration
from the SRCNN (Dong et al. 2016) and employs a similar network architecture, is one of the first deep learning
solutions in this field. Despite its simplicity, the PNN has
achieved remarkable improvements in various performance
metrics, showcasing the strong capabilities of deep learning.
Since then, explosive pan-sharpening networks have been
proposed, leveraging advanced network architectures to attain superior visual performance. However, existing pansharpening methods have overlooked the discrepancies between various frequency components of multi-spectral image and relied on a uniform approach across the entire image, limiting the potential for further spatial detail enhancement. As shown in the previous study (Fuoli, Van Gool,
and Timofte 2021), there is a significant correlation between super-resolution and frequency information. Considering that pan-sharpening is essentially a super-resolution
process, it is reasonable to investigate how the interaction
between various frequency components in two modal images can be utilized to improve the performance of pansharpening models.

Introduction
The demand for high-resolution multispectral (HRMS) images is increasing in various industries such as agriculture,
mapping services, and environmental protection. However,
direct acquisition of HRMS images using satellite sensors
is often not feasible due to technology and hardware limitations. Instead, a common approach is to use two distinct
sensors on satellites to capture high-resolution panchromatic
(PAN) and low-resolution multispectral (LRMS) images.
These images are then fused through the pan-sharpening
process to generate HRMS images suitable for specific applications.
Recent years have witnessed significant progress in maintaining both spectral and spatial details over pan-sharpening
* Co-first authors contributed equally. † Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2121

