The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

NodeMixup: Tackling Under-Reaching for Graph Neural Networks
Weigang Lu, Ziyu Guan, Wei Zhao* , Yaming Yang, Long Jin
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, China
{wglu@stu., zyguan@, ywzhao@mail., yym@, jin@stu.}xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

7

Avg. SP

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become mainstream
methods for solving the semi-supervised node classification
problem. However, due to the uneven location distribution
of labeled nodes in the graph, labeled nodes are only accessible to a small portion of unlabeled nodes, leading to the
under-reaching issue. In this study, we firstly reveal underreaching by conducting an empirical investigation on various well-known graphs. Then, we demonstrate that underreaching results in unsatisfactory distribution alignment between labeled and unlabeled nodes through systematic experimental analysis, significantly degrading GNNs’ performance. To tackle under-reaching for GNNs, we propose an
architecture-agnostic method dubbed NodeMixup. The fundamental idea is to (1) increase the reachability of labeled
nodes by labeled-unlabeled pairs mixup, (2) leverage graph
structures via fusing the neighbor connections of intra-class
node pairs to improve performance gains of mixup, and (3)
use neighbor label distribution similarity incorporating node
degrees to determine sampling weights for node mixup. Extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy of NodeMixup in
assisting GNNs in handling under-reaching. The source code
is available at https://github.com/WeigangLu/NodeMixup.

Dataset=Cora

Dataset=Pubmed

6
5
4

Avg. SP

7

Dataset=Coauthor CS Dataset=Coauthor Physics

6
5
4
20

40

Degree

60

20

40

Degree

60

Figure 1: Visual illustrations of under-reaching. Avg. SP is
the mean value of the average shortest path length from each
unlabeled node to all the labeled ones, where the mean is
taken over unlabeled nodes with the same degree. Lowerdegree nodes are farther away from labeled nodes while
higher-degree nodes tend to be closer to labeled nodes.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Velickovic et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020;
Klicpera, Bojchevski, and Günnemann 2019; Hamilton, Ying,
and Leskovec 2017), which are designed based on the
message-passing protocol (Gilmer et al. 2017), have become
the mainstream models for dealing with the semi-supervised
node classification problem. A recent work (Zheng et al.
2022) reveals the success of GNNs is that the propagation
on graphs narrows the distribution gap between labeled and
unlabeled data (distribution alignment), thereby benefiting
GNNs to make reasonable inferences over unlabeled data. At
the training stage, the model is optimized by minimizing the
supervised loss function which is defined on labeled nodes.
Then, at the inference stage, the well-trained model makes
predictions on unlabeled nodes. In other words, a K-layer
GNN helps labeled nodes to receive information from k-hop
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14175

neighbors (1 ≤ k ≤ K) and learns from these labeled nodes
to capture a better picture of unlabeled data.
However, by revisiting several commonly-used graphs, we
find that nodes with lower (higher) degrees usually stay farther away from (nearer to) labeled nodes, as illustrated in Figure 1. With the restriction of model depth, those lower-degree
nodes could hardly transmit information to far-off labeled
nodes. Thus, massive unlabeled nodes are hardly known by
labeled nodes in popular 2-layer GNN architectures. It leads
to incomplete knowledge about unlabeled nodes, hindering
distribution alignment. As a result, the trained GNN can
only recognize the nodes located near labeled nodes, whereas
other unseen-during-training nodes are difficult to be classified. However, in practical scenarios, labeled nodes tend to
distribute sparsely in the graph. This phenomenon, namely
under-reaching (Sun et al. 2022; Di Giovanni et al. 2023;
Brüel-Gabrielsson, Yurochkin, and Solomon 2022; Barceló
et al. 2020), will be discussed in detail.
There have been several methods attempting to alleviate
under-reaching. Intuitively, stacking more GNN layers to al-

