The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Efficient Online Crowdsourcing with Complex Annotations
Reshef Meir1, * , Viet-An Nguyen2 , Xu Chen2 , Jagdish Ramakrishnan2 , Udi Weinsberg2
1

Technion—Israel Institute of Technology
2
Central Applied Science, Meta
reshefm@dds.technion.ac.il, {vietan, xuchen2, jagram, udi}@meta.com

Abstract
Crowdsourcing platforms use various truth discovery algorithms to aggregate annotations from multiple labelers. In
an online setting, however, the main challenge is to decide
whether to ask for more annotations for each item to efficiently trade off cost (i.e., the number of annotations) for
quality of the aggregated annotations. In this paper, we propose a novel approach for general complex annotation (such
as bounding boxes and taxonomy paths), that works in an online crowdsourcing setting. We prove that the expected average similarity of a labeler is linear in their accuracy conditional on the reported label. This enables us to infer reported
label accuracy in a broad range of scenarios. We conduct extensive evaluations on real-world crowdsourcing data from
Meta and show the effectiveness of our proposed online algorithms in improving the cost-quality trade-off.

Figure 1: General online crowdsourcing process, in which
the components with green solid frame are this work’s focus.

across different types of complex annotations (Braylan et al.
2023; Meir et al. 2023). The assumption that good workers
are similar to one another in terms of their reported annotations (whereas poor workers do not) is referred to as the
Anna Karenina principle in Meir et al. (2023).

Introduction
Crowdsourcing refers to a broad collection of cost-efficient
methods to acquire information from a large population
of non-experts (Doan, Ramakrishnan, and Halevy 2011).
Within crowdsourcing, a common task is to ask workers (aka
reviewers or labelers) to provide a correct annotation (aka
label) to a piece of information.
The annotations can be simple such as a yes/no answer
to whether there is a car in a given photo, or a real number representing the future price of a commodity. However,
in many crowdsourcing tasks, the responses from labelers
may comprise of more complex annotations such as textual
spans, bounding boxes, taxonomy paths, or translations.
These annotations are then aggregated to obtain the best
possible estimation of some underlying correct answer. One
typical approach to aggregate multiple annotations is to
identify good labelers based on custom, domain-specific statistical models (see Related Work). While these specialized
models were shown to be effective for their respective tasks,
one key limitation for such approach is that a custom algorithm is needed for each type of complex annotation. Recent work has explored pairwise similarities between annotations as a general approach for identifying good labelers

Challenges and Contributions
The focus of this paper is on a prevalent and practical crowdsourcing scenario where on the one hand, annotations can
be complex, and on the other hand we must decide on-thefly whether we should get an additional annotation for each
item. In this setting, unfortunately, most of the truth discovery algorithms (mentioned above and surveyed in later sections) are inapplicable. We next briefly describe the online
crowdsourcing process of interest to articulate the challenge.
From offline to online crowdsourcing The stylized truth
discovery model often used in crowdsourcing literature assumes the existence of an a priori given set of questions/items to annotate and a fixed group of workers, each assigned to annotate all or some of the items. The designed
algorithm takes these observed annotations as offline input
and outputs the best aggregated annotation for each item.
However, practical real-time crowdsourcing processes exhibit a distinct setup. As illustrated in Fig. 1, items arrive sequentially and the system determines when to stop collecting
labels for each item. This decision can be informed by the
annotations collected so far for this item, and by the knowledge learned from previous annotations for other items used
as “training data”. The CLARA system developed at Meta

* Work done while visiting Meta’s Central Applied Science
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10119

