The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generalized Planning for the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus
Chao Lei, Nir Lipovetzky, Krista A. Ehinger
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia
clei1@student.unimelb.edu.au, {nir.lipovetzky, kris.ehinger}@unimelb.edu.au

Task 6e82a1ae

Abstract
The Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC) is a general artificial intelligence benchmark that poses difficulties
for pure machine learning methods due to its requirement
for fluid intelligence with a focus on reasoning and abstraction. In this work, we introduce an ARC solver, Generalized Planning for Abstract Reasoning (GPAR). It casts an
ARC problem as a generalized planning (GP) problem, where
a solution is formalized as a planning program with pointers. We express each ARC problem using the standard Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL) coupled with external functions representing object-centric abstractions. We
show how to scale up GP solvers via domain knowledge
specific to ARC in the form of restrictions over the actions
model, predicates, arguments and valid structure of planning
programs. Our experiments demonstrate that GPAR outperforms the state-of-the-art solvers on the object-centric tasks
of the ARC, showing the effectiveness of GP and the expressiveness of PDDL to model ARC problems. The challenges provided by the ARC benchmark motivate research
to advance existing GP solvers and understand new relations
with other planning computational models. Code is available
at github.com/you68681/GPAR.

?

Task 25ff71a9

?

Task 0ca9ddb6

?

Figure 1: Three example tasks from the ARC. For a given
task, each row contains an input-output image pair as a training instance, and the bottom row is the test instance. The
goal of the solver is to learn from the training instances how
to generate the output for the test instance.
Chollet (2019) suggested a hypothetical ARC solver that
includes a program synthesis engine for candidate solutions generation within a “human-like reasoning Domain
Specific Language (DSL)”. Few successful solvers have
followed this approach. Inspired by human strategies for
solving ARC tasks (Johnson et al. 2021; Acquaviva et al.
2022), Xu, Khalil, and Sanner (2023) proposed an objectcentric approach, Abstract Reasoning with Graph Abstractions (ARGA) that adopts a graph-based DSL representation
and performs a constraint-guided search to find programs in
the DSL solving the task. ARGA demonstrates considerable
generalization ability and efficient search. However, the limited expressiveness of the DSL weakens its performance in
some ARC tasks compared to the Kaggle competition’s firstplace solution (top quarks 2020). This algorithm searches
in a directed acyclic graph to synthesize program solutions
over a hand-crafted DSL, where each search node represents
an image transformation applied to its parent node.
Generalized planning (GP), a program synthesis approach
that studies the representation and generation of solutions
that are valid for a set of problems, is well suited to the
ARC (Srivastava, Immerman, and Zilberstein 2008; Hu
and De Giacomo 2011; Jiménez, Segovia-Aguas, and Jon-

Introduction
Abstract visual reasoning tasks have been used to understand and measure machine intelligence (Małkiński and
Mańdziuk 2023; Barrett et al. 2018; Moskvichev, Odouard,
and Mitchell 2023). One of these tasks, the Abstraction and
Reasoning Corpus (ARC) introduced by Chollet (2019), remains an open challenge. ARC tasks are challenging for
machines because they require object recognition, abstract
reasoning, and procedural analogies (Johnson et al. 2021;
Acquaviva et al. 2022). ARC comprises 1000 unique tasks
where each task consists of a small set (typically three) of
input-output image pairs for training, and generally one or
occasionally multiple test pairs for evaluation (Figure 1).
Each image is a 2D grid of pixels with 10 possible colors.
ARC tasks require inferring the underlying rules or procedures from a few examples based on core knowledge priors
including objectness, goal-directedness, numbers and counting, topology and geometry.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20168

