The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FairSIN: Achieving Fairness in Graph Neural Networks
through Sensitive Information Neutralization
Cheng Yang1 , Jixi Liu1 , Yunhe Yan1 , Chuan Shi1 *
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
{yangcheng, landon, yur1, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the remarkable success of graph neural networks
(GNNs) in modeling graph-structured data, like other machine learning models, GNNs are also susceptible to making biased predictions based on sensitive attributes, such as
race and gender. For fairness consideration, recent state-ofthe-art (SOTA) methods propose to filter out sensitive information from inputs or representations, e.g., edge dropping or
feature masking. However, we argue that such filtering-based
strategies may also filter out some non-sensitive feature information, leading to a sub-optimal trade-off between predictive performance and fairness. To address this issue, we unveil an innovative neutralization-based paradigm, where additional Fairness-facilitating Features (F3) are incorporated
into node features or representations before message passing. The F3 are expected to statistically neutralize the sensitive bias in node representations and provide additional nonsensitive information. We also provide theoretical explanations for our rationale, concluding that F3 can be realized
by emphasizing the features of each node’s heterogeneous
neighbors (neighbors with different sensitive attributes). We
name our method as FairSIN, and present three implementation variants from both data-centric and model-centric perspectives. Experimental results on five benchmark datasets
with three different GNN backbones show that FairSIN significantly improves fairness metrics while maintaining high
prediction accuracies. Codes and appendix can be found at
https://github.com/BUPT-GAMMA/FariSIN.

1

(a) Pokec-n

(b) Pokec-z

Figure 1: Motivation verification on Pokec datasets. Compared with vanilla GNN without fairness consideration,
filtering-based methods, either edge-dropping (Agarwal,
Lakkaraju, and Zitnik 2021) or feature-masking (Wang et al.
2022c), always have a trade-off between accuracy (ACC↑)
and fairness (DP↓). While our method can improve both.

and Lien 2009), the discriminatory predictions made by
GNNs may bring about severe societal concerns.
Generally, the biases in GNN predictions can be attributed
to both node features and graph topology: (1) The raw features of nodes could be statistically correlated to the sensitive attribute, and thus lead to sensitive information leakage
in encoded representations. (2) According to the homophily
effects (McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook 2001; La Fond
and Neville 2010), nodes with the same sensitive attribute
tend to link with each other, which will make the node representations in the same sensitive group more similar during
message passing.
To address the issue of sensitive biases, researchers have
introduced fairness considerations into GNNs (Agarwal,
Lakkaraju, and Zitnik 2021; Dai and Wang 2021; Bose and
Hamilton 2019; Wang et al. 2022c; Dong et al. 2022a). Recent state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods often attempt to mitigate the impact of sensitive information by applying heuristic or adversarial constraints to filter it out from inputs or
representations. For instance, NIFTY (Agarwal, Lakkaraju,
and Zitnik 2021) employs counterfactual regularizations to
perturb node features and drop edges. FairVGNN (Wang
et al. 2022c), aided by adversarial discriminators, learns
adaptive representation masks to exclude sensitive-relevant
information. Nevertheless, as depicted in Figure 1 and 2(b),
we contend that such filtering-based strategies may also fil-

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have shown their strong
ability in modeling structured data, and are widely used in
a variety of applications, e.g., e-commerce (Li et al. 2020;
Niu et al. 2020) and drug discovery (Xiong et al. 2021;
Bongini, Bianchini, and Scarselli 2021). Nevertheless, recent studies (Agarwal, Lakkaraju, and Zitnik 2021; Dai and
Wang 2021; Chen et al. 2021; Shumovskaia et al. 2021; Li
et al. 2021) show that the predictions of GNNs could be
biased towards some demographic groups defined by sensitive attributes, e.g., race (Agarwal, Lakkaraju, and Zitnik 2021) and gender (Lambrecht and Tucker 2019). In
decision-critical applications such as Credit evaluation (Yeh
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9241

