The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Inconsistency-Based Data-Centric Active Open-Set Annotation
Ruiyu Mao, Ouyang Xu, Yunhui Guo
University of Texas at Dallas
{ruiyu.mao, oxu, yunhui.guo}@utdallas.edu

Abstract
Active learning, a method to reduce labeling effort for training
deep neural networks, is often limited by the assumption that
all unlabeled data belong to known classes. This closed-world
assumption fails in practical scenarios with unknown classes
in the data, leading to active open-set annotation challenges.
Existing methods struggle with this uncertainty. We introduce
N EAT, a novel, computationally efficient, data-centric active
learning approach for open-set data. N EAT differentiates and
labels known classes from a mix of known and unknown
classes, using a clusterability criterion and a consistency measure that detects inconsistencies between model predictions
and feature distribution. In contrast to recent learning-centric
solutions, N EAT shows superior performance in active openset annotation, as our experiments confirm. Additional details
on the further evaluation metrics, implementation, and architecture of our method can be found in the public document at
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2401.04923.pdf.

Figure 1: Dataset consists of color images as known dog class
and gray-scale images as unknown wolf class. The objective
is to find and label examples from the known classes in unlabeled data pool. Prior work using learning-based approach
may identify some ambiguous unknown classes samples as
known classes samples. Our work focusing on local feature
distribution can find known classes samples more accurately.

remains relatively unexplored (Ning et al. 2022). Unlike in
closed-world active learning settings, where the unlabeled
data pool is assumed to consist only of known classes, the
open world introduces unknown classes into the unlabeled
data pool, making active open-set annotations a challenge.
For example, when collecting data to train a classifier to
distinguish between different dog breeds as known classes,
a large number of unlabeled images collected from online
sources may include images from unknown classes such
as wolves and coyotes. The task is to identify images with
known classes and select informative samples for labeling,
while avoiding samples from unknown classes. Existing active learning methods face a significant obstacle, as they tend
to select samples from unknown classes due to their high
uncertainty (Ning et al. 2022), which is undesirable.
Addressing the active open-set annotation problem requires specialized methods, and one such approach, called
L F OSA was recently proposed by Ning et al. (2022). L F OSA
is a learning-based active open-set annotation as it involves
training a detector network with an additional output for unknown classes. The predictions of the detector network on
unlabeled data are used for identifying known classes. While
this approach can achieve impressive performance, it has
two limitations: 1) training the additional detector network
is costly, 2) and it is difficult to identify informative samples
from the known classes as there is a contradiction in that
while excluding unknown classes is necessary, it is also easy

Introduction
The remarkable performance of modern deep neural networks
owes much to the availability of large-scale datasets such as
ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009). However, creating such datasets
is a challenging task that requires a significant amount of
effort to annotate data points (Sorokin and Forsyth 2008;
Snow et al. 2008; Raykar et al. 2010; Welinder et al. 2010).
Fortunately, active learning offers a solution by enabling us to
label only the most significant samples (Settles 2009; Cohn,
Ghahramani, and Jordan 1996; Settles 2011; Beygelzimer,
Dasgupta, and Langford 2009; Gal, Islam, and Ghahramani
2017). In active learning, a small set of labeled samples from
known classes is combined with unlabeled samples, with the
goal of selecting specific samples to label from the pool to
enhance model training. Typical active learning methods for
training deep neural networks involve selecting samples that
have high levels of uncertainty (Settles 2009; Cohn, Atlas,
and Ladner 1994; Balcan, Beygelzimer, and Langford 2006),
are in close proximity to the classification boundary (Ducoffe
and Precioso 2018), or reveal cluster structures from the data
(Sener and Savarese 2017; Ash et al. 2019).
Despite the considerable body of research on active learning, its practical implementation in an open-world context
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4180

