The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Block-Level Goal Recognition Design
Tsz-Chiu Au
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology
chiu@unist.ac.kr

A B C D E

Abstract

6

Existing works on goal recognition design (GRD) consider
the underlying domain as a classical planning domain and
apply modifications to the domain to minimize the worst case
distinctiveness. In this paper, we propose replacing existing
modifications with blocks, which group several closely related modifications together such that a block can modify a
region in a search space with respect to some design constraints. Moreover, there could be blocks within blocks such
that the design space becomes hierarchical for modifications
at different levels of granularity. We present 1) a new version of pruned-reduce, a successful pruning rule for GRD,
for block-level GRD, and 2) a new pruning rule for pruning
some branches in both hierarchical and non-hierarchical design space. Our experiments show that searching in hierarchical design spaces greatly speeds up the redesign process.

5
4
3
2
1

Figure 1: An example of block-level GRD. An agent can
choose one of the four legal paths (the red lines) to reach
either g1 or g2 . The blue lines are the walls.

example, Figure 1 extends the example in (Keren, Gal, and
Karpas 2014) by including all the walls such that an agent is
not allowed to deviate from the given paths (the red lines).
We can substitute one of the three yellow blocks for the red
region in the grid to prevent an agent from choosing some of
the given paths. All walls in a yellow block must be added to
the red region simultaneously; otherwise, an agent could deviate from the given paths via some missing walls in the red
region. Action removals and action conditioning ignore this
design constraint, causing the GRD algorithms to enumerate
all combinations of the modifications for adding these walls.
In this paper, we introduce block-level GRD that uses
blocks as the primary mean of environmental modifications.
A block is a group of closely related modifications that can
simultaneously modify multiple edges in the search space
of classical planning problems. In Figure 1, there are three
blocks, each of which modifies every edge in the red region
in the grid. A block-level GRD algorithm chooses one of
these blocks to minimize the WCD. If it chooses b1 , the remaining paths an agent can choose are p2 , p3 and p4 , and the
WCD is 6, which is the length of the longest common prefix
of p2 and p3 . If the algorithm chooses b2 , the WCD is also 6.
But if it chooses b3 , the remaining paths are p1 and p4 , and
the WCD is 3. Therefore, the algorithm should choose b3 .
We formulate a hierarchical design model that allows
blocks within blocks. The block at the top level of the hierarchy lays out the structure of the environment, whereas
the blocks at the bottom level implement the design. The
hierarchical design model resembles hierarchical task network (HTN) planning (Erol, Hendler, and Nau 1996; Nau

Introduction
In goal recognition, an observer infers the goal of an agent
acting in an environment from online observations of the
agent’s behavior (Kautz 1987; Carberry 2001; Ramirez and
Geffner 2010; Sukthankar et al. 2014; Vered and Kaminka
2017; Pereira, Oren, and Meneguzzi 2017). Goal recognition design (GRD) aims to redesign an environment such
that an observer can recognize an agent’s goal as early as
possible (Keren, Gal, and Karpas 2014, 2020). A popular
performance measure in GRD is the worst case distinctiveness (WCD), which is the number of observations an observer needs to ascertain an agent’s goal in the worst case.
Minimizing the WCD has practical usage in real-world applications. For example, in the airport security domain as
described in (Keren, Gal, and Karpas 2014, 2020), we want
to redesign the layout of an airport such that a security guard
can be one step ahead of an intruder by recognizing an inappropriate goal pursued by the intruder as soon as possible.
Existing works on GRD consider environments as classical planning domains and redesign environments by modifying the actions in the planning domains using action removals (Keren, Gal, and Karpas 2014) or action conditioning (Keren, Gal, and Karpas 2018). In some environments,
however, several modifications must be applied simultaneously to achieve the desired effect for goal recognition. For
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20020

