The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AnomalyDiffusion: Few-Shot Anomaly Image Generation with Diffusion Model
Teng Hu1 * , Jiangning Zhang2 * , Ran Yi1† , Yuzhen Du1 , Xu Chen2 ,
Liang Liu2 , Yabiao Wang2 , Chengjie Wang1,2
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent
{hu-teng, ranyi, Haaaaaaaaaa}@sjtu.edu.cn;
{vtzhang, cxxuchen, leoneliu, caseywang, jasoncjwang}@tencent.com;
Large Amount of Normal Samples

Abstract

Few Anomalies

Produce

Anomaly inspection plays an important role in industrial
manufacture. Existing anomaly inspection methods are limited in their performance due to insufficient anomaly data.
Although anomaly generation methods have been proposed to
augment the anomaly data, they either suffer from poor generation authenticity or inaccurate alignment between the generated anomalies and masks. To address the above problems, we
propose AnomalyDiffusion, a novel diffusion-based few-shot
anomaly generation model, which utilizes the strong prior
information of latent diffusion model learned from largescale dataset to enhance the generation authenticity under
few-shot training data. Firstly, we propose Spatial Anomaly
Embedding, which consists of a learnable anomaly embedding and a spatial embedding encoded from an anomaly
mask, disentangling the anomaly information into anomaly
appearance and location information. Moreover, to improve
the alignment between the generated anomalies and the
anomaly masks, we introduce a novel Adaptive Attention
Re-weighting Mechanism. Based on the disparities between
the generated anomaly image and normal sample, it dynamically guides the model to focus more on the areas with
less noticeable generated anomalies, enabling generation of
accurately-matched anomalous image-mask pairs. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our model significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in generation authenticity
and diversity, and effectively improves the performance of
downstream anomaly inspection tasks. The code and data are
available in https://github.com/sjtuplayer/anomalydiffusion.

Previous Methods
Unsupervised
Learning

(a)

Generated
Anomalies

Anomaly
Diffusion

Few-shot
Supervised
Learning

Factory

Apply

Anomaly Generation (Ours)

Normal
Samples

Good Performance

Task1: AD

Limited Performance

Task2: AL

Good Performance

Incapable

Task3: AC

Good Performance

DRAEM
ICCV’21

(b)

Crop&Paste
ICME’21

(c)

DFMGAN
AAAI’23

Good Performance

(d) Ours

Figure 1: Top: Our model generates extensive anomaly data,
which supports the downstream Anomaly Detection (AD),
Localization (AL) and Classification (AC) tasks, while previous methods mainly rely on unsupervised learning or fewshot supervised learning due to the limited anomaly data;
Bottom: Generated anomaly results on hazelnut-crack and
capsule-squeeze of our model and existing anomaly generation methods, where our results are the most authentic.

Introduction
In recent years, industrial anomaly inspection algorithms,
i.e., anomaly detection, localization, and classification, play
a crucial role in industrial manufacture (Duan et al. 2023).
However, in real-world industrial production, the anomaly
samples are very few, posing a significant challenge for
anomaly inspection (Fig. 1-top). To mitigate the issue of few
anomaly data, existing anomaly inspection mostly relies on
unsupervised learning methods that only use normal samples (Zavrtanik, Kristan, and Skočaj 2021; Li et al. 2021), or
few-shot supervised learning methods (Zhang et al. 2023a).

Although these methods perform well in anomaly detection,
they have limited performance in anomaly localization and
cannot handle anomaly classification.
To cope with the problem of scarce anomaly samples, researchers propose anomaly generation methods to supplement the anomaly data, which can be divided into two types:
1) The model-free methods randomly crop and paste patches
from existing anomalies or anomaly texture dataset onto normal samples (Li et al. 2021; Lin et al. 2021; Zavrtanik, Kristan, and Skočaj 2021). But such methods exhibit poor authenticity in the synthesized data (Fig. 1-bottom-a/b). 2) The

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8526

