The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Revealing the Proximate Long-Tail Distribution in Compositional Zero-Shot
Learning
Chenyi Jiang, Haofeng Zhang *
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
{jiangchenyi, zhanghf}@njust.edu.cn,

Abstract

jects (Misra, Gupta, and Hebert 2017; Li et al. 2020; Purushwalkam et al. 2019; Li et al. 2022). The second method
involved training a common embedding space where semantic and visual features could be projected to reduce the distance between them (Naeem et al. 2021; Mancini et al. 2021,
2022). Commonly, these studies concentrate on improving
the structure of classifiers and investigating alternative architectures. However, minimal research has been conducted
considering the problem in terms of data distribution.
We analyze the prior and posterior probabilities associated with attributes (states or objects) and compositions to
determine a more suitable solution. Fig. 1 illustrates that the
class prior follows a distinct trend differing from the posterior probabilities. For instance, even though the model is
trained on a comparable number of samples, it demonstrates
a low probability of predicting the object labeled as O5. This
issue also extends to making inferences about compositions,
which reminds us of the long-tail distribution or class imbalance (Menon et al. 2020; Tang et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2020).
We consider that certain samples are infected by the intricate interplay between objects and states within compositions (Atzmon et al. 2020), leading to significant bias from
the ideal class prototype. Consequently, these samples with
large visual bias make it difficult for the classifier to fit their
intrinsic patterns, results in the inability to form effective
classification boundaries. In contrast to class imbalance, we
refer to this phenomenon as ‘attribute imbalance’ below.
The recent methods for CZSL (Saini, Pham, and Shrivastava
2022; Wang et al. 2023) synchronize the prediction of visual
features to states and objects with the prediction of compositions in the common embedding space, which works as a
model ensemble approach. While this design addresses the
capability to categorize some classes, the non-interaction
among the independent classifiers may lead to incomplete
mutual compensation due to potential information gaps.
The identified shortcomings prompted a redesign of the
model using the model ensemble approach. Building on the
success of logit adjustment in addressing long-tail learning
(Menon et al. 2020), this study treats attribute imbalance information as special prior knowledge (In the following we
denote by ‘attribute prior’) that approximates the class prior.
This attribute prior is derived from the estimation of available samples by two independent classifiers for states and
objects. In other words, we construct this prior by modelling

Compositional Zero-Shot Learning (CZSL) aims to transfer
knowledge from seen state-object pairs to novel unseen pairs.
In this process, visual bias caused by the diverse interrelationship of state-object combinations blurs their visual features, hindering the learning of distinguishable class prototypes. Prevailing methods concentrate on disentangling states
and objects directly from visual features, disregarding potential enhancements that could arise from a data viewpoint. Experimentally, we unveil the results caused by the above problem closely approximate the long-tailed distribution. As a solution, we transform CZSL into a proximate class imbalance
problem. We mathematically deduce the role of class prior
within the long-tailed distribution in CZSL. Building upon
this insight, we incorporate visual bias caused by compositions into the classifier’s training and inference by estimating
it as a proximate class prior. This enhancement encourages
the classifier to acquire more discernible class prototypes for
each composition, thereby achieving more balanced predictions. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach elevates the model’s performance to the state-of-the-art level,
without introducing additional parameters.

Introduction
Objects in the world often exhibit diverse states of existence; an apple can be sliced or unripe, while a building can
be ancient or huge. Humans have the ability to recognize
the composition of the unseen based on their knowledge of
seen elements. Even if people have never seen a green apple before, they can infer the characteristics of a green apple
from a red apple and a green lemon. To empower the machine with this capability, previous work (Misra, Gupta, and
Hebert 2017; Purushwalkam et al. 2019) propose Compositional Zero-Shot Learning (CZSL), a task aims to identify
unseen compositions from seen state-object compositions.
However, the combination of state-objects creates a visual
bias for a attribute (state or object) in it, hindering the learning of distinguishable class prototypes. In the face of above
challenge, early approaches in the domain of CZSL can be
categorized into two distinct methods. The first method utilized two independent classifiers to categorize states and ob* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2498

