The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CORECODE: A Common Sense Annotated Dialogue Dataset with Benchmark
Tasks for Chinese Large Language Models
Dan Shi1 , Chaobin You1 , Jiantao Huang2 , Taihao Li2 , Deyi Xiong1 *
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
{shidan, chaobinyou, dyxiong}@tju.edu.cn, {jthuang, lith}@zhejianglab.com

Abstract

attracting growing interest, leading to extensive research in
this field (Lv et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022).
It is widely acknowledged that LLMs, trained on a huge
amount of data, are able to obtain broad knowledge covering
a wide range of domains (Rae et al. 2021; Hoffmann et al.
2022; Touvron et al. 2023; Du et al. 2022a; Guo et al. 2023),
including commonsense knowledge (West et al. 2022; Bian
et al. 2023; Bang et al. 2023). However, commonsense reasoning is still regarded as a major challenge for LLMs (Zhou
et al. 2020; Bhargava and Ng 2022). Studies disclose that
LLMs fall short in performing adequate commonsense reasoning (Wei et al. 2022). For example, ChatGPT1 does not
precisely know what the needed commonsense knowledge
for answering a specific question is (e.g., questions in social
and temporal domains) (Bian et al. 2023).
To mitigate this issue, we propose CORECODE
(Commonsense Reasoning and Conflict Detection in dialogues), a dataset that contains abundant commonsense
knowledge manually annotated on Chinese dyadic dialogues, to assess how much commonsense knowledge the
LLMs have gained and how well they can be improved in
commonsense reasoning and conflict detection with the annotated knowledge in CORECODE.
Specifically, we focus on annotating fine-grained commonsense knowledge in multi-turn dyadic dialogues. The
knowledge annotated in a dialogue is context-sensitive and
grounded exclusively in that particular dialogue. Inspired by
the annotation convention used in task-oriented dialogue,
in which dialogue states are denoted in the form of “domain: slot = value”, e.g. “hotel: price range = moderate”
(Budzianowski et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2020; Quan et al.
2020), we standardize the representation of commonsense
knowledge in open-domain dialogues also in the form of
“domain: slot = value”. We categorize commonsense knowledge into three dimensions, namely entity, event, and social interaction, and then construct an ontology over these
dimensions, which defines all possible domains for each
dimension and all possible slots for each domain. Thanks
to the guidance of this ontology, crowdsourcing annotators
are able to conveniently annotate fine-grained commonsense
knowledge in a consistent way.
Over the curated dataset, we develop six benchmark tasks:

As an indispensable ingredient of intelligence, commonsense reasoning is crucial for large language models (LLMs)
in real-world scenarios. In this paper, we propose CORECODE, a dataset that contains abundant commonsense
knowledge manually annotated on dyadic dialogues, to evaluate the commonsense reasoning and commonsense conflict
detection capabilities of Chinese LLMs. We categorize commonsense knowledge in everyday conversations into three
dimensions: entity, event, and social interaction. For easy
and consistent annotation, we standardize the form of commonsense knowledge annotation in open-domain dialogues
as “domain: slot = value”. A total of 9 domains and 37
slots are defined to capture diverse commonsense knowledge. With these pre-defined domains and slots, we collect
76,787 commonsense knowledge annotations from 19,700
dialogues through crowdsourcing. To evaluate and enhance
the commonsense reasoning capability for LLMs on the curated dataset, we establish a series of dialogue-level reasoning and detection tasks, including commonsense knowledge
filling, commonsense knowledge generation, commonsense
conflict phrase detection, domain identification, slot identification, and event causal inference. A wide variety of existing open-source Chinese LLMs are evaluated with these
tasks on our dataset. Experimental results demonstrate that
these models are not competent to predict CORECODE’s
plentiful reasoning content, and even ChatGPT could only
achieve 0.275 and 0.084 accuracy on the domain identification and slot identification tasks under the zero-shot setting. We release the data and codes of CORECODE at
https://github.com/danshi777/CORECODE to promote commonsense reasoning evaluation and study of LLMs in the
context of daily conversations.

Introduction
Commonsense reasoning is a crucial component of intelligence(Liu and Singh 2004; Cambria et al. 2011), which involves the ability to make logical deductions, infer implicit
information and apply background knowledge to solve problems as well as understand the world. In recent years, exploring and improving the ability of NLP models for the acquisition and application of commonsense knowledge has been
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

18952

https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt

