The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MetaCARD: Meta-Reinforcement Learning with Task Uncertainty Feedback via
Decoupled Context-Aware Reward and Dynamics Components
Min Wang1 , Xin Li1 * , Leiji Zhang1 , Mingzhong Wang2
1

Beijing Institute of Technology
University of the Sunshine Coast
{minwangcs, xinli, ljzhang}@bit.edu.cn, mwang@usc.edu.au
2

Abstract

is referred to as Markov Decision Process (MDP) ambiguity (Li et al. 2019), in which the context encoder mistakenly
establishes a spurious correlation between task representations and history data. Consequently, this leads to a latent
context-conditioned policy that struggles to distinguish between distinct tasks.
To alleviate this problem, recent advanced methods primarily center around improving the representation of latent
context. For example, Probabilistic Embeddings for Actorcritic meta-RL (PEARL) (Rakelly et al. 2019) adopts an
amortized variational inference method to learn a probabilistic latent representation of prior experiences. Leveraging from the recent advance of representation learning, (Fu
et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021; Yuan and Lu 2022) employs
contrastive learning to train a compact context encoder so as
to capture the distribution of tasks. However, a major limitation of these methods is their entangled latent contexts, making it difficult for the agent to distinguish between changes in
dynamics or/and reward functions, thus hampering its adaptability in complex environments.
In contrast, (Lee et al. 2020) proposes to bifurcate context
encoding and dynamics prediction to ensure that the context encoder effectively captures local dynamics and predicts
both forward and backward dynamics. Variational BayesAdaptive Deep RL (variBAD) (Zintgraf et al. 2019) trains
the posterior distribution of task embeddings through a decoder to predict the subsequent state and reward separately.
(Han and Wu 2022) first proposes to leverage Successor Features (SFs) to enhance the identification ability of the context encoder in meta-RL. These methods improve the agent’s
perception of changing dynamics or rewards when inferring
tasks with a context encoder. However, in practice, they only
rely on generating additional trajectory data by the policy
to self-correct inaccurate task inference. Nevertheless, the
collected trajectory data may be biased, and as a result, the
context encoder’s learning process may only correlate with
the low-quality trajectory data to minimize the loss function,
leading to mistakenly identifying the specific task. Besides,
the aforementioned methods also neglect the fact that decoupling dynamics and rewards in the policy space could
directly convey the information about accurately capturing
various MDP structures back to the context encoder. This
oversight often culminates in misaligned adaptation amid
current changes in dynamics and rewards. As a result, their

Meta-Reinforcement Learning (Meta-RL) aims to reveal
shared characteristics in dynamics and reward functions
across diverse training tasks. This objective is achieved by
meta-learning a policy that is conditioned on task representations with encoded trajectory data or context, thus allowing
rapid adaptation to new tasks from a known task distribution.
However, since the trajectory data generated by the policy
may be biased, the task inference module tends to form spurious correlations between trajectory data and specific tasks,
thereby leading to poor adaptation to new tasks. To address
this issue, we propose the Meta-RL with task unCertAinty
feedback through decoupled context-aware Reward and Dynamics components (MetaCARD). MetaCARD distinctly decouples the dynamics and rewards when inferring tasks and
learning the policy, and integrates task uncertainty feedback
from policy evaluation into the task inference module. This
design effectively reduces uncertainty in tasks with changes
in dynamics or/and reward functions, thereby enabling accurate task identification and adaptation. The experiment results
on both Meta-World and classical MuJoCo benchmarks show
that MetaCARD significantly outperforms prevailing MetaRL baselines, demonstrating its remarkable adaptation ability
in sophisticated environments that involve changes in both reward functions and dynamics.

Introduction
Real-world scenarios often feature multiple tasks sharing
similar foundational structures. For instance, both closing
curtains and opening drawers share a pulling action. MetaReinforcement Learning (Meta-RL) (Duan et al. 2016; Beck
et al. 2023) is formulated to discern this shared structure,
which can be viewed as dynamics and reward functions
among various training tasks. The ultimate goal is to metalearn a flexible policy that can quickly adapt to new tasks.
Context-based Meta-RL approaches are regarded as
promising for achieving such a goal. These approaches
leverage a context encoder to infer task-specific information from past experiences and train a policy conditioned
on this derived latent context to ensure smooth adaptation
to new tasks. A critical challenge in context-based Meta-RL
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15555

