The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Efficient Representation Learning of Satellite Image Time Series and their Fusion
for Spatiotemporal Applications
Poonam Goyal, Arshveer Kaur, Arvind Ram, Navneet Goyal
ADAPT Lab, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani
[poonam,p20170432,f20201210,goel]@pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in

Abstract

temporal resolution satellite images. However, due to budgetary and technological constraints, it is not possible to capture satellite images with required high spatial and temporal
resolutions using a single satellite system. This necessitates
the development of efficient fusion algorithms that combine
satellite image time series (SITS) from two satellites.
Many applications predicting crop yield, forest cover, forest fire (Gupta et al. 2023), etc. require SITS at high resolution along both spatial and temporal dimensions. Publicly available data from satellites like LANDSAT 8/9,
SENTINEL-2, MODIS, etc. have high resolution only along
one dimension, e.g., LANDSAT 8 has a spatial resolution
of 30m and a 16-day revisit cycle whereas, MODIS has a
spatial resolution of 250-500m and a revisit time of 8 days.
For high spatial resolution SITS, the amount of data we
need to process increases manifolds, leading to a computing
bottleneck. The amount of 7 years’ data processed for 2000
counties considered in the paper is approximately 2.1 TB for
MODIS and 10.0 TB for Landsat 8, respectively after applying the bits compression technique (Hubara et al. 2016).
The huge amount of data processing required seriously
impedes the democratization of the use of satellite images
for various applications. In this paper, we are addressing two
major problems- 1) impractical computational requirements
for processing high spatial resolution SITS & 2) dealing with
coarse temporal resolution of high spatial resolution SITS.
For 1), we propose PatchNet which learns prominent patterns in a SITS by doing a spatial patch-based partial traversal, e.g., (1/p)th spatial processing of SITS using the idea of
beam search and attention mechanism for learnable patch selection. The learnable patch selection mechanism eliminates
the need for full spatial processing of SITS, thereby reducing the amount of processing by a factor of p with some
additional overheads and still achieves SOTA results for end
tasks. Existing methods deal with the processing challenges
by transforming the images into histograms (Sun et al.; You
et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2020; Kaur et al. 2022). A few researchers have also tried to transform images into singlevalue numeric vegetation indices (Sakamoto 2020; Skakun
et al. 2021; Ji et al. 2022; Choudhary et al. 2019). Both these
approaches suffer from information loss.
For 2), we propose FuSITSNet, a twofold feature-based
fusion model which can be used to fuse any two SITS. We
applied it for Landsat-8 and MODIS SITS. FuSITSNet im-

Satellite data bolstered by their increasing accessibility is
leading to many endeavors of automated monitoring of the
earth’s surface for various applications. Such applications demand high spatial resolution images at a temporal resolution
of a few days which entails the challenge of processing a huge
volume of image time series data. To overcome this computing bottleneck, we present PatchNet, a bespoke adaptation of
beam search and attention mechanism. PatchNet is an automated patch selection neural network that requires only a partial spatial traversal of an image time series and yet achieves
impressive results. Satellite systems face a trade-off between
spatial and temporal resolutions due to budget/technical constraints e.g., Landsat-8/9 or Sentinel-2 have high spatial resolution whereas, MODIS has high temporal resolution. To
deal with the limitation of coarse temporal resolution, we
propose FuSITSNet, a twofold feature-based generic fusion
model with multimodal learning in a contrastive setting. It
produces a learned representation after fusion of two satellite
image time series leveraging finer spatial resolution of Landsat and finer temporal resolution of MODIS. The patch alignment module of FuSITSNet aligns the PatchNet processed
patches of Landsat-8 with the corresponding MODIS regions
to incorporate its finer resolution temporal features. The untraversed patches are handled by the cross-modality attention
which highlights additional hot spot features from the two
modalities. We conduct extensive experiments on more than
2000 counties of US for crop yield, snow cover, and solar
energy prediction and show that even one-fourth spatial processing of image time series produces state-of-the-art results.
FuSITSNet outperforms the predictions of single modality
and data obtained using existing generative fusion models and
allows for monitoring of dynamic phenomena using freely accessible images, thereby unlocking new opportunities.

Introduction
Satellite technology is extensively used to monitor the
Earth’s surface for different applications. Popular satellite
systems that make their data publicly available include
Landsat-8/9 (NASA 2016), Sentinel-2 (European Space
Agency Signature 2017), and MODIS (NASA 2015). The
last decade has witnessed a significant improvement in sensor technology leading to availability of higher spatial and
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8436

