The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning to Unlearn: Instance-Wise Unlearning for Pre-trained Classifiers
Sungmin Cha1 * , Sungjun Cho2 * , Dasol Hwang2 * ,
Honglak Lee2 , Taesup Moon3 and Moontae Lee2, 4
1

New York University
2
LG AI Research
3
ASRI / INMC / Seoul National University
4
University of Illinois Chicago
sungmin.cha@nyu.edu, sungjun.cho@lgresearch.ai, dasol.hwang@lgresearch.ai,
honglak@lgresearch.ai, tsmoon@snu.ac.kr, moontae.lee@lgresearch.ai
Abstract

A naı̈ve solution is to retrain these models from scratch after refining or reweighting their training datasets (Lison et al.
2021; Zemel et al. 2013; Lahoti et al. 2020). However, such
post-hoc processing is impractical due to growing volumes
of data and substantial cost of large-scale training: while exercising the Right to be Forgotten (Rosen 2011; Villaronga,
Kieseberg, and Li 2018) may be straightforward to humans,
it is not so straightforward in the context of machine learning. This has sparked the field of machine unlearning, in
which the main goal is to efficiently delete information while
preserving information on the remaining data.

Since the recent advent of regulations for data protection
(e.g., the General Data Protection Regulation), there has been
increasing demand in deleting information learned from sensitive data in pre-trained models without retraining from
scratch. The inherent vulnerability of neural networks towards adversarial attacks and unfairness also calls for a robust
method to remove or correct information in an instance-wise
fashion, while retaining the predictive performance across
remaining data. To this end, we consider instance-wise unlearning, of which the goal is to delete information on a set
of instances from a pre-trained model, by either misclassifying each instance away from its original prediction or relabeling the instance to a different label. We also propose
two methods that reduce forgetting on the remaining data:
1) utilizing adversarial examples to overcome forgetting at
the representation-level and 2) leveraging weight importance
metrics to pinpoint network parameters guilty of propagating
unwanted information. Both methods only require the pretrained model and data instances to forget, allowing painless
application to real-life settings where the entire training set
is unavailable. Through extensive experimentation on various
image classification benchmarks, we show that our approach
effectively preserves knowledge of remaining data while unlearning given instances in both single-task and continual unlearning scenarios.

While several machine unlearning approaches have
shown promising results deleting data from traditional machine learning algorithms (Mahadevan and Mathioudakis
2021; Ginart et al. 2019; Brophy and Lowd 2021) as well as
DNN-based classifiers (Tarun et al. 2021; Chundawat et al.
2022; Ye et al. 2022; Yoon et al. 2022; Golatkar, Achille,
and Soatto 2020; Kim and Woo 2022; Mehta et al. 2022),
existing work are built upon assumptions far too restrictive
compared to real-life scenarios. First off, many approaches
assume a class-wise unlearning setup, where the task is to
delete information from all data points that belong to a particular class or set of classes. However, data deletion requests are practically received on a per-instance basis, potentially resulting in a set of data points with a mixture of
class labels (Heikkilä 2022; Mehrabi et al. 2021). Another
widely used assumption is that at least a subset of the original training data is available at the time of unlearning (Tarun
et al. 2021; Golatkar, Achille, and Soatto 2020; Kim and
Woo 2022; Mehta et al. 2022). Unfortunately, loading the
original dataset may not be a practical option due to data
expiration policies or lack of storage for large data. Lastly,
many approaches consider the main objective as undoing
the previous effect of deleting data during training. However, previous work has shown that fulfilling this objective
can still lead to information leakage (Graves, Nagisetty, and
Ganesh 2021).

Introduction
Humans remember and forget: efficiently learning useful
knowledge yet regulating privately sensitive information and
protecting from malicious attacks. Recent advances in largescale pre-training enable models to memorize massive information for intelligent operations (Radford et al. 2019),
but this strength comes at a cost. In computer vision, models trained on numerous image data often misclassify naturally adversarial or adversarially attacked examples with
high-confidence (Hendrycks et al. 2021). In natural language processing, models trained on indiscriminately collected data often disclose private information such as occupations, phone numbers, and family background during text
generation (Heikkilä 2022).

The aforementioned limitations are also reflected in a recently initialized unlearning challenge (Eleni Triantafillou
2023), centered around a scenario where an age classification model trained on facial images is required to forget
specific images to uphold privacy rights. This marks a de-

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11186

