The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Using Stratified Sampling to Improve LIME Image Explanations
Muhammad Rashid1 , Elvio G. Amparore1 , Enrico Ferrari2 , Damiano Verda2
1

University of Torino, Computer Science Department, C.so Svizzera 185, 10149 Torino, Italy
2
Rulex Innovation Labs, Via Felice Romani 9, 16122 Genova, Italy
{muhammad.rashid, elviogilberto.amparore}@unito.it, {enrico.ferrari, damiano.verda}@rulex.ai

Abstract

on the limitation of using a Monte Carlo sampling for the
synthetic neighborhood generation.

We investigate the use of a stratified sampling approach
for LIME Image, a popular model-agnostic explainable AI
method for computer vision tasks, in order to reduce the artifacts generated by typical Monte Carlo sampling. Such artifacts are due to the undersampling of the dependent variable in the synthetic neighborhood around the image being
explained, which may result in inadequate explanations due
to the impossibility of fitting a linear regressor on the sampled data. We then highlight a connection with the Shapley
theory, where similar arguments about undersampling and
sample relevance were suggested in the past. We derive all
the formulas and adjustment factors required for an unbiased
stratified sampling estimator. Experiments show the efficacy
of the proposed approach.

Paper Contributions. In this paper we:
• investigate the distribution of the dependent variable in
the sampled synthetic neighborhood of LIME Image,
identifying in the undersampling a cause that results in
inadequate explanations;
• delve into the causes of the synthetic neighborhood inadequacy, recognizing a link with the Shapley theory;
• reformulate the synthetic neighborhood generation using
an unbiased stratified sampling strategy;
• provide empirical proofs of the advantage of using stratified sampling for LIME Image on a popular dataset.

Introduction
The efficacy of explainable AI techniques for computer vision tasks has seen several important advancements in the
recent years. Several methods to interpret model predictions
have emerged, as surveyed for instance by (Liang et al.
2021) or (Guidotti et al. 2018). In this paper we inspect
the sampling strategy of one of these methods known as
LIME Image (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016), which is a
model-agnostic method (i.e. it is not tied to a particular type
of black box model being explained) that produces feature
attributions as explanations. As the name suggests, LIME
Image is a method specialized for image classification tasks,
and the “feature attribution” are importance scores assigned
to regions of an input image measuring how much each region contributes to the model classification.
Feature attributions are the regression coefficients that
solve a weighted least squares problem on a sampled population denoted as synthetic neighborhood. Since the sampling process is inherently stochastic, the synthetic neighborhood may be inadequate for LIME Image to fit the regressor, resulting in slow convergence (Visani et al. 2022)
or instability (Sevillano-Garcı́a et al. 2022). Sometimes, the
explanation produced by LIME Image fails to identify any
relevant region, resulting in regression coefficients with very
small and almost uniform values (i.e. with low variation, as
we shall see). We review the LIME Image process, focusing

Previous Work
A relevant theoretical study of LIME Image is (Garreau
and Mardaoui 2021), which we partially summarize in the
Preliminaries section for the sake of self-containment, that
also focuses on connections with integrated gradients. Discretization of the synthetic neighborhood for tabular data has
been studied in (Garreau and Luxburg 2020), and for text
data by (Mardaoui and Garreau 2021). However, the setting
for image data is significantly different, since the sample
space is Boolean and not continuous. Sampling strategies
received more attention in the context of the Shapley theory (Lundberg and Lee 2017), as in (Mitchell et al. 2022).
We recast some of the intuitions of these previous works in
the context of LIME, particularly from the multilinear extensions (Owen 1972).
Several alternative sampling strategies for LIME have
been studied. A clique-based sampling was considered
in (Shi, Du, and Fan 2020). Moreover, sampling variance has
been considered in several articles like (Zhang et al. 2019)
or in (Shankaranarayana and Runje 2019), where standard
deviations of Ridge coefficients are compared. A complementary study about region flipping analysis in LIME explanations is (Ng, Abuwala, and Lim 2022), which could also
be used to improve the approach proposed in this paper. To
the best of our knowledge, we are not aware of a consistent
framework that adds unbiased stratified sampling to LIME.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14785

