The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Distribution-Conditioned Adversarial Variational Autoencoder
for Valid Instrumental Variable Generation
Xinshu Li1 * , Lina Yao1, 2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, The University of New South Wales
2
CSIRO’s Data 61
xinshu.li@unsw.edu.au, lina.yao@data61.csiro.au

Instrumental variable (IV) plays a crucial role in addressing counterfactual prediction in the presence of unobserved confounders. The core concept behind IVs is to incorporate a powerful exogenous variable that correlates with
the treatment but remains independent of the hidden confounders, thereby eliminating endogeneity issues and obtaining more accurate and consistent estimates. To ensure its
effectiveness and applicability, a valid IV is supposed to satisfy three conditions: 1) Relevance: IV must be correlated
with the treatment variable; 2) Exclusivity: there should be
no direct causal relationship between the IV and the outcome
variable; 3) Exogeneity: IV should have no correlation with
the unobserved confounders to ensure their influence on the
outcome variable is solely through the treatment variable.
For example, as shown in Figure 1, Hoxby (2000) investigated whether competition among public schools (Treatment
T) enhances educational quality within districts (Outcome
Y). The potential endogeneity of the regional school counts
arises as it and the outcome might be simultaneously influenced by long-term factors (Confounders) specific to that
area. Some confounders (observed Confounders C) can be
quantified, such as the local economic development level.
More confounding variables (Unobserved Confounders U),
however, cannot be quantified and exhaustively enumerated,
such as certain historical factors. River counts here can serve
as a persuasive IV: 1) more rivers can lead to more schools
due to transportation (Relevance); 2) yet they are unrelated
to teaching quality directly (Exclusivity); 3) the natural attributes of river formation render the counts of the rivers unrelated to the confounders caused by historical factors (Exogeneity).
Two-stage least squares (2SLS) regression method (Angrist and Imbens 1995) is a typical IV-based algorithm for
counterfactual prediction with hidden confounders under a
linear setting. Recently, some works (Singh, Sahani, and
Gretton 2019; Wu et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2020; Hartford et al.
2017; Lin et al. 2019) have introduced deep learning techniques into this area and outperformed classical 2SLS methods in the nonlinear scenario. However, the prerequisite for
these methods is to access valid IVs, which remains challenging in real-world scenarios.
Extensive literature (Hartford et al. 2021; Yuan et al.
2022; Davies et al. 2015; Burgess, Dudbridge, and Thompson 2016) has attempted to resolve this problem by generat-

Abstract
Instrumental variables (IVs), widely applied in economics
and healthcare, enable consistent counterfactual prediction in
the presence of hidden confounding factors, effectively addressing endogeneity issues. The prevailing IV-based counterfactual prediction methods typically rely on the availability of valid IVs (satisfying Relevance, Exclusivity, and Exogeneity), a requirement which often proves elusive in realworld scenarios. Various data-driven techniques are being developed to create valid IVs (or representations of IVs) from a
pool of IV candidates. However, most of these techniques still
necessitate the inclusion of valid IVs within the set of candidates. This paper proposes a distribution-conditioned adversarial variational autoencoder to tackle this challenge. Specifically: 1) for Relevance and Exclusivity, we deduce the corresponding evidence lower bound following the Bayesian network structure and build the variational autoencoder accordingly; 2) for Exogeneity, we design an adversarial game to
encourage latent factors originating from the marginal distribution, compelling the independence between IVs and other
outcome-related factors. Extensive experimental results validate the effectiveness, stability and generality of our proposed
model in generating valid IV factors in the absence of valid
IV candidates.

Introduction
Counterfactual prediction has attracted increasing attention
(Alaa and van der Schaar 2017; Li et al. 2016; Chernozhukov, Fernández-Val, and Melly 2013; Glass et al.
2013) in recent years due to the rising demands for robust and trustworthy artificial intelligence. Confounders, the
common causes of treatments and effects, induce spurious
relations between different variables, resulting in famous endogeneity issues in causal inference. Quantities of related
work (Li and Yao 2022; Yao et al. 2018; Yoon, Jordon, and
Van Der Schaar 2018; Shalit, Johansson, and Sontag 2017)
try to mitigate the bias caused by confounders under the “no
hidden confounders” assumption, which is untestable and
impractical in the real world. Therefore, recent research interests have switched the focus to counterfactual prediction
with unobserved confounders.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13664

