The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

An Eager Satisfiability Modulo Theories Solver for Algebraic Datatypes
Amar Shah, Federico Mora, Sanjit A. Seshia
University of California, Berkeley
amarshah1000@berkeley.edu, fmora@berkeley.edu, sseshia@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract

the interest in ADTs has exploded with a number of mainstream languages being released with support for ADTs,
e.g., Rust (Jung et al. 2021), or have added support, e.g.,
Python (Salgado 2023) and Java (Goetz 2022).
Automated reasoning about ADTs is important because
this construct appears in many different software applications. As the popularity of ADTs grows, the demand for efficient SMT solvers will continue to increase. Unfortunately,
the state-of-the-art tools in this space are already struggling
to keep up. We demonstrate this empirically by generating a
new benchmark set and showing that existing solvers, working together, are only able to solve 56.2% of the new queries
in under 20 minutes per query (Sec. 5.2).
This imbalance between programming languages and
SMT solvers is due to a gap in the SMT solving literature.
Oppen (1980) was the first to give a decision procedure for
the quantifier-free theory but ADTs do not seem to have permeated the community much further. In 2003, a consorted
effort to unify the SMT community began with the first official input standard and competition, called SMT-LIB and
SMT-COMP (Barrett et al. 2011), respectively. ADTs were
not officially integrated into the standard until 2017, as part
of version 2.6 (Barrett, Fontaine, and Tinelli 2017). In the
most recent iteration of SMT-COMP, only two solvers participated in the ADT track, the least of any track, and both
solvers use a variation of the same solving approach: a lazy
SMT architecture combined with theory-specific reasoning
based on the work by Oppen from 1980 (see Sec. 6).
We propose a new solving technique that departs from the
standard approach in the community. Instead of a lazy approach, we take an eager approach (Barrett et al. 2021) that
translates the original SMT formula into an equi-satisfiable
formula without ADT elements. Our work fills the gap in the
literature on SMT solving for ADT queries, and, by doing
so, solves more queries than existing solvers (see Sec. 5.1).
More importantly, we make the largest empirical contribution to the solving community on SMT-COMP benchmarks,
solving different queries than existing tools (see Sec. 5.2).

Algebraic data types (ADTs) are a construct classically found
in functional programming languages that capture data structures like enumerated types, lists, and trees. In recent years,
interest in ADTs has increased. For example, popular programming languages, like Python, have added support for
ADTs. Automated reasoning about ADTs can be done using
satisfiability modulo theories (SMT) solving, an extension of
the Boolean satisfiability problem with first-order logic and
associated background theories. Unfortunately, SMT solvers
that support ADTs do not scale as state-of-the-art approaches
all use variations of the same lazy approach. In this paper, we
present an SMT solver that takes a fundamentally different
approach, an eager approach. Specifically, our solver reduces
ADT queries to a simpler logical theory, uninterpreted functions (UF), and then uses an existing solver on the reduced
query. We prove the soundness and completeness of our approach and demonstrate that it outperforms the state of the art
on existing benchmarks, as well as a new, more challenging
benchmark set from the planning domain.

1

Introduction

Boolean satisfiability (SAT) solvers have been shown to
efficiently solve a number of NP-hard problems in areas
such as AI planning (Kautz, Selman et al. 1992), verification (Clarke et al. 2001), and software testing (Cadar et al.
2008). Satisfiability modulo theories (SMT) solvers are a
natural extension to SAT solvers that can reason about firstorder structures with background theories (Barrett et al.
2021), allowing them to tackle more general problems or
to accept more succinct inputs. For example, SMT solvers
can reason about bit-vectors (Brummayer and Biere 2009),
floating-point numbers (Rümmer and Wahl 2010), strings
(Bjørner et al. 2012), and algebraic data types (ADTs) (Barrett, Fontaine, and Tinelli 2017).
The power behind ADTs lies in how they can succinctly
express complex structures at a high-level of abstraction
while avoiding common programming pitfalls, like null
pointer dereferencing (Hoare 1975). For most of their history, ADTs lived exclusively inside functional programming
languages, like NPL (Burstall 1977), Standard ML (Milner
1997), and Haskell (Hudak et al. 2007). Recently, however,

1.1

Overview and Contributions

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2 we
describe ADTs, satisfiability, and our approach through an
example planning problem called blocks world. In Sec. 3 we
formally define ADTs and give the necessary background

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8099

