The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Spatial Voting with Incomplete Voter Information
Aviram Imber1 , Jonas Israel2 , Markus Brill2,3 , Hadas Shachnai1 , Benny Kimelfeld1
1
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
Research Group Efficient Algorithms, TU Berlin, Germany
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, UK
aviram.imber@cs.technion.ac.il, j.israel@tu-berlin.de, markus.brill@warwick.ac.uk, hadas@cs.technion.ac.il,
bennyk@technion.ac.il
2

Abstract

2020). A prominent manifestation of this idea is the seminal framework of Konczak and Lang (2005), in which voter
preferences are specified as partial orders and a possible profile is obtained by extending each partial order into a total
preference order. A thorough picture of the complexity of
the possible and necessary winner problems has been established in a series of studies (Betzler and Dorn 2010; Xia and
Conitzer 2011; Baumeister and Rothe 2012). For example,
under every positional scoring rule in the setting of partial
orders, the necessary winners can be found in polynomial
time, yet it is NP-complete to decide whether a candidate is
a possible winner (assuming a regularity condition), except
for the tractable cases of the plurality and veto rules.
We study the complexity of the computational problems
PWhdi and NWhdi, where the goal is to find the possible
and necessary winners, respectively, when we have incomplete information about voters’ ideal points in spatial voting with d dimensions. More precisely, instead of the ideal
points, we are given — for each voter and dimension — an
interval of possible values for the voter’s opinion. Hence,
each voter is associated with a space of possible ideal points.
Different points in this space may induce different preference orders over the candidates (whose locations are assumed to be known precisely). We thus get a mechanism
for defining a space of possible total orders that is different1
from the classical partial-order setting (Konczak and Lang
2005). We refer to our setting as partial spatial voting.
We first focus on the class of positional scoring rules
and compare the computational complexity of the possible
and necessary winner problems to the classic model of partial orders. We investigate the following questions: (1) Is
the necessary-winner problem still tractable for all positional scoring rules? (2) Is the possible-winner problem still
tractable for plurality and veto? (3) Are there positional scoring rules where the possible-winner problem is tractable for
partial spatial voting but not for partial orders? We answer
all three questions positively. For some of our results, we
uncover and exploit an interesting relationship between the
possible-winner problem and scheduling.
We then consider spatial approval voting with incomplete
information. We provide an efficient algorithm for computing necessary winners in one and two dimensions and prove

We consider spatial voting where candidates are located in
the Euclidean d-dimensional space, and each voter ranks candidates based on their distance from the voter’s ideal point.
We explore the case where information about the location of
voters’ ideal points is incomplete: for each dimension, we
are given an interval of possible values. We study the computational complexity of finding the possible and necessary
winners for positional scoring rules. Our results show that
we retain tractable cases of the classic model where voters
have partial-order preferences. Moreover, we show that there
are positional scoring rules under which the possible-winner
problem is intractable for partial orders, but tractable in the
one-dimensional spatial setting. We also consider approval
voting in this setting. We show that for up to two dimensions,
the necessary-winner problem is tractable, while the possiblewinner problem is hard for any number of dimensions.

1

Introduction

In the spatial model of voting (Enelow and Hinich 1984;
Miller 1995), both candidates and voters are associated with
points in the d-dimensional Euclidean space Rd . It is assumed that the locations of candidates and voters correspond
to their “ideal points” and that each voter’s preferences over
the candidates can be inferred from the Euclidean distance
between the candidates’ and the voter’s ideal points. For example, the location of a candidate or voter in Rd could reflect
the stance (or opinion) of the candidate or voter regarding d
different issues that are relevant for the election. In the social choice literature, preferences with this structure are often referred to as (d-)Euclidean preferences (Bogomolnaia
and Laslier 2007; Elkind, Lackner, and Peters 2022).
We consider a setting where only partial information
about the preferences of voters is available. In such a setting, the exact preference order of a voter is unknown but
assumed to come from a known space of possible preference orders. Each combination of possible preference orders
is a possible voting profile that may result in different sets of
winners (given a fixed voting rule). Natural computational
tasks that arise in such scenarios ask about the possible winners (who win in at least one possible profile) and the necessary winners (who win in every possible profile) (Lang
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9790

In Section 3, we show that the two settings are incomparable.

