The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Project-Fair and Truthful Mechanisms for Budget Aggregation
Rupert Freeman1 , Ulrike Schmidt-Kraepelin2
1

University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA
2
TU Eindhoven, The Netherlands
freemanr@darden.virginia.edu, u.schmidt.kraepelin@tue.nl

Abstract

a high-dimensional generalization of the well-known class
of generalized median mechanisms for strategyproof aggregation in one dimension (Moulin 1980). Moving phantom
mechanisms are strategyproof when voters have disutilities
given by the ℓ1 distance between their vote and the aggregate
division. One particularly natural mechanism, which turns
out to be a member of this class, is the one that minimizes
the sum of disutilities of the voters (Lindner, Nehring, and
Puppe 2008; Goel et al. 2019). Although this rule can be
effective, it can also produce outcomes that differ significantly from the mean (for intuition, consider the median in
one dimension). If the mean is considered a desirable outcome, then it would be beneficial to discover strategyproof
mechanisms that are more aligned with it.
Freeman et al. (2021) introduced the Independent Markets mechanism, which is guaranteed to agree with the mean
when all voters want to fund only a single project (a mechanism with this property is said to be proportional). However, as Caragiannis, Christodoulou, and Protopapas (2022)
showed in subsequent work, on other inputs it may produce
outcomes that are far from the mean according to the ℓ1
distance. They propose a different moving phantom mechanism, the Piecewise Uniform mechanism, which never outputs budget divisions that have an ℓ1 distance from the mean
larger than 23 when there are only three projects.2 No positive results are known for higher numbers of projects.
Caragiannis, Christodoulou, and Protopapas (2022) measure the quality of an outcome by its ℓ1 distance to the
mean. However, this measure does not capture how the deviation from the mean is distributed over the projects. For
instance, suppose that the mean division over four projects
is given by (70%, 10%, 10%, 10%) and consider two potential aggregate divisions: a = (50%, 30%, 10%, 10%) and
b = (60%, 20%, 0%, 20%). For both aggregates, the ℓ1 distance to the mean is 40%. However, while in division a, the
first project is being underfunded relative to the mean by
20% of the budget, in division b, no project is over or underfunded by more than 10% of the budget. In this paper,
we complement Caragiannis, Christodoulou, and Protopapas’s approach by studying the ℓ∞ distance to the mean,
which can be interpreted as a measure of fairness between

We study the budget aggregation problem in which a set of
strategic voters must split a finite divisible resource (such as
money or time) among a set of competing projects. Our goal
is twofold: We seek truthful mechanisms that provide fairness
guarantees to the projects. For the first objective, we focus on
the class of moving phantom mechanisms, which are – to this
day – essentially the only known truthful mechanisms in this
setting. For project fairness, we consider the mean division as
a fair baseline, and bound the maximum difference between
the funding received by any project and this baseline. We propose a novel and simple moving phantom mechanism that
provides optimal project fairness guarantees. As a corollary
of our results, we show that our new mechanism minimizes
the ℓ1 distance to the mean for three projects and gives the
first non-trivial bounds on this quantity for more than three
projects.

1

Introduction

In the budget aggregation problem, a fixed amount of a divisible resource (such as money or time) must be allocated
among m competing projects based on the divisions proposed by a set of n voters. For example, in participatory budgeting (Cabannes 2004; Aziz and Shah 2021), citizens vote
directly on how a public budget should be divided between
a set of public projects. Other examples might include a university department allocating discretionary funding among
different initiatives or a group of conference organizers deciding how to divide time among activities such as talks,
posters, and social events.
A common and natural solution to this problem is to divide the resource according to the (arithmetic) mean of the
votes, guaranteeing that the funding received by each project
is proportional to the total support that project receives from
the voters. However, using the mean as a budget aggregation
rule is not strategyproof.1 For example, voters can overstate
their preference for their favorite projects to bring the funding for that project towards the voter’s true preference.
In pursuit of strategyproof mechanisms, Freeman et al.
(2021) defined the class of moving phantom mechanisms,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We use the terms “strategyproof” and “truthful” interchangeably.

2
The proof relies on solving a nonlinear program, so this bound
is subject to a small error.

9704

