The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ConsistentEE: A Consistent and Hardness-Guided Early Exiting Method for
Accelerating Language Models Inference
Ziqian Zeng* 1 , Yihuai Hong* 1 , Hongliang Dai2 , Huiping Zhuang1 , Cen Chen1,3

†

1
South China University of Technology, China
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, China
3
Pazhou Laboratory, China
{zqzeng, hpzhuang, chencen}@scut.edu.cn, yihuaihong@gmail.com, hongldai@nuaa.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Input

Early Exiting is one of the most popular methods to achieve
efficient inference. Current early exiting methods adopt the
(weighted) sum of the cross entropy loss of all internal classifiers as the objective function during training, imposing all
these classifiers to predict all instances correctly. However,
during inference, as long as one internal classifier predicts
an instance correctly, it can accelerate without losing accuracy. Thus, there is a notable gap between training and inference. We propose ConsistentEE, an early exiting method
that is consistent in training and inference. ConsistentEE formulates the early exiting process as a reinforcement learning problem. A policy network is added to decide whether
an instance should exit or continue. The training objective of
ConsistentEE only requires each instance to be predicted correctly by one internal classifier. Additionally, we introduce
the concept “Memorized Layer” to measure the hardness of
an instance. We incorporate the memorized layer into reward
function design, which allows “easy” instances to focus more
on acceleration while “hard” instances to focus more on accuracy. Experimental results show that our method outperforms
other baselines on various classification and generation tasks
using PLMs and LLMs as backbones respectively.

Transformer Layer
Policy Network
Classifier

Continue

Exit

Inference
Training
Saved Computation
Prediction

Loss

Figure 1: The training and inference procedure of ConsistentEE which formulates the early exiting process as a reinforcement learning problem. A policy network can make
two possible actions, i.e., to exit, or to continue. If it exits,
the corresponding internal classifier is required to predict the
instance correctly, otherwise, no loss is incurred by the corresponding internal classifier.

2023), and knowledge distillation (Sanh et al. 2019; Sun
et al. 2019; Jiao et al. 2020). Dynamic approaches (Xu and
McAuley 2023) include token skipping (Goyal et al. 2020;
Kim and Cho 2021; Ye et al. 2021; Kim et al. 2022; Guan
et al. 2022; Sun et al. 2022), and early exiting (Zhou et al.
2020; Xin et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022).
As one of the most popular methods, early exiting adds
an internal classifier to each intermediate layer, allowing instances to stop model inference in an early layer instead of
going through the entire model, thus accelerating the inference time. Early Exiting can be useful, especially in the era
of LLMs. Although the scale of LLMs continues to increase
to deal with challenging tasks like reasoning, planning, etc.,
in the real-world scenario, they may not always encounter
such challenging tasks (Schuster et al. 2022). A small sized
LLM has been good at handling “easy” tasks such as paraphrasing, translation, etc. When LLMs encounter “easy”
tasks, early exiting can avoid going through the entire model,
thus saving inference time.
Current early exiting methods typically adopt the
(weighted) sum of the cross entropy (CE) loss of all internal classifiers as the training loss, which imposes that all internal classifiers should predict all instances correctly. How-

Introduction
Recently, pre-trained language models (PLMs) (Devlin et al.
2019; Liu et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019; Brown et al. 2020)
and large language models (LLMs) (Ouyang et al. 2022)
have become fundamental building blocks in the field of natural language processing (NLP). As the scales of these models continue to grow, their performance improves but their
inference speed slows down. This hinders their application
in resource-limited scenarios. To address this problem, many
efforts have been made to achieve efficient inference. There
are two lines of work: static and dynamic approaches (Zhou
et al. 2020). Static approaches design lightweight architectures or compress the models while dynamic approaches
aim to make adaptive inference for each instance. Static approaches include weights pruning (Michel, Levy, and Neubig 2019; Voita et al. 2019; Fan, Grave, and Joulin 2020),
quantization (Kim et al. 2021; Yao et al. 2022; Xiao et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19506

