The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Transformer-Based Selective Super-resolution for Efficient Image Refinement
Tianyi Zhang1 , Kishore Kasichainula2 , Yaoxin Zhuo2 , Baoxin Li2 , Jae-Sun Seo3 , Yu Cao1
1

University of Minnesota
Arizona State University
3
Cornell Tech
zhan9167@umn.edu, {kkasicha, yzhuo6, baoxin.li}@asu.edu, js3528@cornell.edu, yucao@umn.edu
2

Abstract
Conventional super-resolution methods suffer from two
drawbacks: substantial computational cost in upscaling an entire large image, and the introduction of extraneous or potentially detrimental information for downstream computer
vision tasks during the refinement of the background. To
solve these issues, we propose a novel transformer-based algorithm, Selective Super-Resolution (SSR), which partitions
images into non-overlapping tiles, selects tiles of interest at
various scales with a pyramid architecture, and exclusively
reconstructs these selected tiles with deep features. Experimental results on three datasets demonstrate the efficiency
and robust performance of our approach for super-resolution.
Compared to the state-of-the-art methods, the FID score is
reduced from 26.78 to 10.41 with 40% reduction in computation cost for the BDD100K dataset.

Figure 1: The reconstruction of high-frequency background
information in conventional SR methods (e.g., HAT) often
results in discrepancies in features compared to ground truth
high-resolution (HR) images. SSR effectively resolves this
issue by exclusively enhancing foreground pixels.

Introduction
Super-resolution (SR) is a fundamental task aimed at enhancing image resolution by producing intricate details
from low-resolution (LR) images. It supplies high-resolution
(HR) images that are pivotal for downstream computer vision tasks, such as object detection and image classification, with wide-ranging applications in the real world.
For instance, in the context of autonomous driving, higherresolution images facilitate more precise and early object
detection, particularly for diminutive objects. Although various super-resolution methods based on convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) have been proposed, which enhance highfrequency information through low-resolution image reconstruction, their efficacy is impeded by a lack of long-range
dependency integration.
Recently, leveraging transformer-based architectures to
capture the extended contextual information, pioneering efforts like SwinIR (Liang et al. 2021) and HAT (Chen
et al. 2023), have achieved notable advancements in
super-resolution. Nevertheless, two key issues persist with
these algorithms. Firstly, due to the substantial scale of
transformer-based networks, the computational demand becomes exceedingly high when reconstructing entire images,
particularly when input low-resolution image sizes are not

small, such as 256×256. Secondly, even in state-of-theart super-resolution approaches, the refined images fail to
match the performance of ground truth HR images for typical downstream tasks. To delve into the cause of this degradation, we conduct a comparison between features generated by the Inception model from refined images and original HR images. This analysis unveils that features derived
from background pixels exhibit markedly different details
compared to the ground truth feature map, as depicted in
Figure 1. This divergence suggests that overemphasizing
background pixel details can introduce erroneous information and impede feature generation for downstream tasks.
This paper introduces a novel algorithm, Selective SuperResolution (SSR), designed to address these challenges.
Specifically, leveraging object location information, we partition images into non-overlapping tiles and employ a costefficient transformer-based network for tile selection. To ensure comprehensive coverage of objects, a pyramid structure
is devised for tile selection across multiple scales. In the final layer of this selection network, we integrate a Gumbel-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7305

