The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

HACDR-Net: Heterogeneous-Aware Convolutional Network for
Diabetic Retinopathy Multi-Lesion Segmentation
QiHao Xu1, 2 , Xiaoling Luo1, 2 * , Chao Huang3 , Chengliang Liu2 , Jie Wen 2 , Jialei Wang2 , Yong Xu2
1

2

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Visual Object Detection and Recognition, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen 518107, China
xqh51199597@outlook.com, xiaolingluoo@outlook.com, huangch253@mail.sysu.edu.cn, liucl1996@163.com,
jiewenpr@126.com, 380468802@qq.com, laterfall@hit.edu.cn
Abstract

Diabetic Retinopathy (DR), the leading cause of blindness in
diabetic patients, is diagnosed by the condition of retinal multiple lesions. As a difficult task in medical image segmentation, DR multi-lesion segmentation faces the main concerns
as follows. On the one hand, retinal lesions vary in location,
shape, and size. On the other hand, because some lesions occupy only a very small part of the entire fundus image, the
high proportion of background leads to difficulties in lesion
segmentation. To solve the above problems, we propose a
heterogeneous-aware convolutional network (HACDR-Net)
that composes heterogeneous cross-convolution, heterogeneous modulated deformable convolution, and optional nearfar-aware convolution. Our network introduces an adaptive
aggregation module to summarize the heterogeneous feature
maps and get diverse lesion areas in the heterogeneous receptive field along the channels and space. In addition, to solve
the problem of the highly imbalanced proportion of focal areas, we design a new medical image segmentation loss function, Noise Adjusted Loss (NALoss). NALoss balances the
predictive feature distribution of background and lesion by
jointing Gaussian noise and hard example mining, thus enhancing awareness of lesions. We conduct the experiments
on the public datasets IDRiD and DDR, and the experimental
results show that the proposed method achieves better performance than other state-of-the-art methods. The code is opensourced on github.com/xqh180110910537/HACDR-Net.

Figure 1: Comparison of our model and other attention patterns. (a) is a convolutional attention mechanism with very
large kernels. (b) is ViT’s (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) global
attention mechanism. (c) is our heterogeneous convolutional
attention mechanism.

the lesions in the fundus picture is small. As a result, model
training is more likely to be biased toward the background
rather than the lesions. Existing methods improve segmentation accuracy in DR multi-lesion segmentation by obtaining
global position relationships through large receptive fields,
but small lesion features are negatively affected by large irrelevant areas.
In this paper, we propose a heterogeneous-aware convolutional network for DR multi-lesion segmentation (HACDRNet). Heterogeneous convolution aims to aggregate the convolution features of different structures to obtain heterogeneous receptive fields. Compared with previous DR multilesion segmentation methods, the heterogeneous receptive
field extracts the heterogeneous features of lesions, thereby
having a good segmentation effect on lesions of various sizes
and shapes. Furthermore, the heterogeneous convolutional
structure has space-adaptive capabilities to reduce perturbance in large irrelevant regions.
Aggregating heterogeneous convolution information is
difficult, because features may conflict under heterogeneous receptive fields. To this end, inspired by Visual Attention Network (Guo et al. 2023) (VAN), we design a
heterogeneous-aware attention aggregation (HAAA) module to summarize the heterogeneous feature maps. Different from VAN, we aggregate the features of heterogeneous
convolution instead of a single large kernel convolution. In

Introduction
Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is one of the most common microvascular complications of diabetes, which can cause a
series of fundus lesions. Therefore, DR multi-lesion segmentation is crucial to diabetes diagnosis. Over the past few
years, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Transformer Networks (Liu et al. 2023a,b) have greatly promoted
the development of DR multi-lesion segmentation (Wang
et al. 2022; Cui et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2022; Ling et al. 2023).
However, existing segmentation methods still face limitations that hinder their performance in DR multi-lesion segmentation. First, each type of lesion has a variable shape and
size in the fundus image. Secondly, the area occupied by
* Corresponding Author: Xiaoling Luo
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6342

