The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

End-to-End Learning of LTLf Formulae by Faithful LTLf Encoding
Hai Wan1 , Pingjia Liang1 , Jianfeng Du2,3 * , Weilin Luo1 , Rongzhen Ye1 , Bo Peng1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, P.R.China
2
Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou 510006, P.R.China
3
Bigmath Technology, Shenzhen 518063, P.R.China
wanhai@mail.sysu.edu.cn, liangpj3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, jfdu@gdufs.edu.cn, luowlin3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
yerzh@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, pengb8@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract

applied in apprenticeship learning (Kasenberg and Scheutz
2017), behavior classification (Camacho and McIlraith 2019),
and explainable artificial intelligence (Kim et al. 2019).
Learning LTLf formulae is a challenging problem. The
core challenge is to bridge the gap between the concise treestructured syntax and the complex LTLf semantics. Besides,
a formula with arbitrary form has only semantic constraints
and no syntactic constraints. Finding such a formula probably
leads to explosion of the search space. On the other hand,
imperfect data, e.g., incorrect labels (Kim et al. 2019), tend to
introduce wrong search bias far away from the target formula.
To tackle the above challenges, some approaches (Camacho and McIlraith 2019; Luo et al. 2022) modeled the relation
between syntax and semantics by introducing an intermediate representation, but they need to pay additional costs
from learning the over-expressive intermediate representation.
There are also some approaches (Neider and Gavran 2018;
Gaglione et al. 2021) that uniformly encoded syntactic and
semantic constraints as Boolean satisfiability problem (SAT)
or maximum satisfiability problem (MaxSAT), but they suffer
from the high computational complexity of SAT or MaxSAT.
Other approaches (Lemieux, Park, and Beschastnikh 2015;
Shah et al. 2018; Kim et al. 2019) directly encoded syntactic constraints, exploiting well-designed heuristics to search
for formulae satisfying semantic constraints. However, the
heuristics are limited in scope and are time-consuming. In
confront of imperfect data, some approaches (Neider and
Gavran 2018; Camacho and McIlraith 2019) directly ignored
them, and others (Lemieux, Park, and Beschastnikh 2015;
Shah et al. 2018; Kim et al. 2019) limited the hypothesis
space by templates.
In this paper, we propose an LTLf encoding method for
faithfully bridging the neural network inference and the LTLf
inference. An LTLf encoding is a parameter assignment of
the target neural network ensuring that, under certain simple
conditions, an LTLf formula is able to be directly interpreted
from the neural network. We identify the conditions where
LTLf encodings and LTLf formulae are one-to-one corresponding, and refer to the encoding under these conditions
as faithful LTLf encoding, which provides a compact encoding of the LTLf syntax. We model the LTLf semantics
via designing an inference process with LTLf encoding; in
other words, inference with LTLf encoding simulates the
inference of LTLf formulae. Based on this theoretical re-

It is important to automatically discover the underlying treestructured formulae from large amounts of data. In this paper,
we examine learning linear temporal logic on finite traces
(LTLf ) formulae, which is a tree structure syntactically and
characterizes temporal properties semantically. Its core challenge is to bridge the gap between the concise tree-structured
syntax and the complex LTLf semantics. Besides, the learning
quality is endangered by explosion of the search space and
wrong search bias guided by imperfect data. We tackle these
challenges by proposing an LTLf encoding method to parameterize a neural network so that the neural computation is able
to simulate the inference of LTLf formulae. We first identify
faithful LTLf encoding, a subclass of LTLf encoding, which
has a one-to-one correspondence to LTLf formulae. Faithful
encoding guarantees that the learned parameter assignment
of the neural network can directly be interpreted to an LTLf
formula. With such an encoding method, we then propose an
end-to-end approach, TLTLf, to learn LTLf formulae through
neural networks parameterized by our LTLf encoding method.
Experimental results demonstrate that our approach achieves
state-of-the-art performance with up to 7% improvement in
accuracy, highlighting the benefits of introducing the faithful
LTLf encoding.

Introduction
Formulae with tree structures widely exist in data mining
and knowledge management, e.g., linear temporal logic
(LTL) (Luo et al. 2022) and regular expression (Ye et al.
2023). Therefore, it is important to automatically discover
the underlying tree structured formulae from large amounts
of data. In this paper, we focus on linear temporal logic on
finite traces (LTLf ) formulae (Baier and McIlraith 2006; Giacomo and Vardi 2013), which are tree-structured formulae
characterizing temporal properties. LTLf has been successfully used in many applications, typically, characterizing the
high-level behaviors of a system based on observed traces
in planning (Neider and Gavran 2018). For example, LTLf
can specify that an agent keeps walking forward until (U) it
encounters a block (p1 U p2 ), where p1 and p2 express “agent
walking forward” and “agent encountering a block”, respectively. Besides planning, learning LTLf formulae can also be
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9071

