The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Cycle Self-Refinement for Multi-Source Domain Adaptation
Chaoyang Zhou1 , Zengmao Wang* 1,2,3,4,5 , Bo Du1,2,3,4,5 , Yong Luo1,2,3,4,5
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Wuhan University
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University
4
Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University
5
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, China
zhoucy,wangzengmao,dubo,luoyong@whu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Multi-source domain adaptation (MSDA) aims to transfer knowledge from multiple source domains to the unlabeled target domain. In this paper, we propose a cycle selfrefinement domain adaptation method, which progressively
attempts to learn the dominant transferable knowledge in
each source domain in a cycle manner. Specifically, several
source-specific networks and a domain-ensemble network
are adopted in the proposed method. The source-specific
networks are adopted to provide the dominant transferable
knowledge in each source domain for instance-level ensemble on predictions of the samples in target domain. Then
these samples with high-confidence ensemble predictions are
adopted to refine the domain-ensemble network. Meanwhile,
to guide each source-specific network to learn more dominant
transferable knowledge, we force the features of the target domain from the domain-ensemble network and the features of
each source domain from the corresponding source-specific
network to be aligned with their predictions from the corresponding networks. Thus the adaptation ability of sourcespecific networks and the domain-ensemble network can be
improved progressively. Extensive experiments on Office-31,
Office-Home and DomainNet show that the proposed method
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods for most tasks.

Figure 1: Comparison of previous and the proposed method.
S1 , S2 are two source domains and T is the target domain.
Light and dark blocks represent small and large values, respectively. wik and pki are the weight and prediction probability of ith source domain on xtk , respectively.
multiple source domains to guarantee the adaptation performance on the target domain, which is a popular learning
strategy called Multi-Source Domain Adaptation (MSDA).
To take full advantage of the knowledge from multisource domains, many strategies have been developed by
aggregating the source domains or source models for target adaptation (Li et al. 2021a; Wilson, Doppa, and Cook
2023). For the methods to aggregate the source domains,
they usually ensure that the target-relevant source domains
are given more importance for feature alignment and classification in a single shared adaptation network (Wen, Greiner,
and Schuurmans 2020; Turrisi et al. 2022). Another mainstream paradigm attempts to aggregate multiple source models. These methods adapt each source domain to the target
domain separately and then weigh the predictions of multiple source models for inference (Venkat et al. 2020; Shen,
Bu, and Wornell 2023). Although previous methods have already achieved competitive results on MSDA, they mainly
focus on measuring the importance of each source domain to
the samples in the target domain at the domain level, resulting in the partial dominant transferable knowledge of source
domains with poorer adaptation ability to the whole target

Introduction
Recently, deep learning has achieved great success in multiple applications, such as image recognition (He et al. 2016),
sentiment analysis (Vaswani et al. 2017), and audio processing (Purwins et al. 2019). However, powerful deep-learning
techniques typically depend on abundant labeled data. Acquiring such data often involves significant costs, making it
inefficient to gather new labeled data for each new scenario.
Unsupervised domain adaptation addresses the problem by
transferring knowledge from the labeled source domain to
the unlabeled target domain. At present, many unsupervised
domain adaptation methods (Ganin et al. 2016; Saito et al.
2018; Yang et al. 2023a) that adapt a single source domain
to a single target domain have been proposed and achieved
great success. Generally, the source domains usually can be
collected from multiple environments or sources (Ren et al.
2022). Hence, it is necessary to consider the diversity of
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17096

