The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Catalyst for Clustering-Based Unsupervised Object
Re-identification: Feature Calibration
Huafeng Li1 * , Qingsong Hu1 * , Zhanxuan Hu2†
1

School of Information Engineering and Automation, Kunming University of Science and Technology,
Kunming 650504, China
2
School of Information Science and Technology, Yunnan Normal University, Kunming 650500, China
hfchina99@163.com, qingsonghu08@gmail.com, zhanxuanhu@gmail.com
Abstract

Previous

Clustering-based methods are emerging as a ubiquitous
technology in unsupervised object Re-Identification (ReID),
which alternate between pseudo-label generation and representation learning. Recent advances in this field mainly
fall into two groups: pseudo-label correction and robust representation learning. Differently, in this work, we improve
unsupervised object ReID from feature calibration, a completely different but complementary insight from the current
approaches. Specifically, we propose to insert a conceptually
simple yet empirically powerful Feature Calibration Module (FCM) before pseudo-label generation. In practice, FCM
calibrates the features using a nonparametric graph attention network, enforcing similar instances to move together
in the feature space while allowing dissimilar instances to
separate. As a result, we can generate more reliable pseudolabels using the calibrated features and further improve subsequent representation learning. FCM is simple, effective,
parameter-free, training-free, plug-and-play, and can be considered as a catalyst, increasing the ’chemical reaction’ between pseudo-label generation and representation learning.
Moreover, it maintains the efficiency of testing time with
negligible impact on training time. In this paper, we insert
FCM into a simple baseline. Experiments across different
scenarios and benchmarks show that FCM consistently improves the baseline (e.g., 8.2% mAP gain on MSMT17), and
achieves the new state-of-the-art results. Code is available at:
https://github.com/lhf12278/FCM-ReID.

Clustering

Encoder
Representation
Learning
Our

Feature
Calibration

Clustering

Encoder
Representation
Learning

Figure 1: Conceptual illustration of our proposed learning
paradigm for unsupervised object ReID. We improve the
previous methods by introducing a nonparametric feature
calibration module.

As shown in Figure1 (top), a general pipeline for previous clustering-based ReID methods is to alternate between
clustering-based pseudo-label generation and pseudo-labelbased representation learning. Essentially, these two steps
are interdependent. On the one hand, pseudo-labels provide
weakly supervised information that guides the representation learning model to extract discriminative features. On
the other hand, discriminative features enable the clustering to generate more reliable pseudo labels. Recent studies improve unsupervised ReID mainly along the following
two lines: pseudo-label correction and robust representation
learning. The former aims to improve the pseudo-label quality using additional information, such as neighbor information (Yan et al. 2022) or part information (Cho et al. 2022).
While the latter focuses on designing robust representation
learning algorithms to mitigate the effect of noisy labels,
such as LP (Lan et al. 2023) and ISE (Zhang et al. 2022c).
Differently, in this work, we enhance unsupervised ReID
through feature calibration, a completely different but complementary insight from the current methods. As shown in
Figure 1 (bottom), we propose to insert a Feature Calibration Module (FCM) before clustering-based pseudo-label
generation. The main goal of FCM is to refine the features extracted from the model and further improve the
clustering quality. In practice, we realize FCM by explor-

Introduction
Object Re-identification (ReID) aims to retrieve the same
object across different time stamps, locations, and cameras (Ye et al. 2021). Although supervised object ReID has
achieved tremendous success in multiple different scenarios (Luo et al. 2019; Jiang and Ye 2023), the requirement of
enormous labels limits its practicality in the real world. An
alternative solution to alleviate the need for labeled data is
unsupervised object ReID which trains the feature extraction
network using only unlabeled data. Particularly, clusteringbased methods are emerging as a ubiquitous technology in
recent years.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3091

