The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Emotion Rendering for Conversational Speech Synthesis with
Heterogeneous Graph-Based Context Modeling
Rui Liu1 * , Yifan Hu1 , Yi Ren2 , Xiang Yin2 , Haizhou Li3,4
1

Inner Mongolian University, China
2
ByteDance
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
4
National University of Singapore, Singapore
liurui imu@163.com, hyfwalker@163.com, ren.yi@bytedance.com, yinxiang.stephen@bytedance.com,
haizhouli@cuhk.edu.cn
Abstract

Dialogue History (Multi-Modal)
: Is this your trophy?

Conversational Speech Synthesis (CSS) aims to accurately
express an utterance with the appropriate prosody and emotional inflection within a conversational setting. While recognising the significance of CSS task, the prior studies have not
thoroughly investigated the emotional expressiveness problems due to the scarcity of emotional conversational datasets
and the difficulty of stateful emotion modeling. In this paper,
we propose a novel emotional CSS model, termed ECSS, that
includes two main components: 1) to enhance emotion understanding, we introduce a heterogeneous graph-based emotional context modeling mechanism, which takes the multisource dialogue history as input to model the dialogue context
and learn the emotion cues from the context; 2) to achieve
emotion rendering, we employ a contrastive learning-based
emotion renderer module to infer the accurate emotion style
for the target utterance. To address the issue of data scarcity,
we meticulously create emotional labels in terms of category
and intensity, and annotate additional emotional information
on the existing conversational dataset (DailyTalk). Both objective and subjective evaluations suggest that our model
outperforms the baseline models in understanding and rendering emotions. These evaluations also underscore the importance of comprehensive emotional annotations. Code and
audio samples can be found at: https://github.com/walkerhyf/ECSS.

Intensity: weak

: Yeah, I won it in a competition last month.

Intensity: medium

: I don't believe it !

Intensity: medium

Intensity: strong

: It's true! It's a singing competition!

Current Utterance (Text only)
: You're really great.

Intensity: strong

(a) The current utterance performs "surprise" emotion with "strong" intensity
Dialogue History (Multi-Modal)
: Is this your trophy?
Intensity: medium

Intensity: medium

: Yeah, I won it in a competition last month.

: I don't believe it !

Intensity: strong

Intensity: strong

: It's true! It's a singing competition !

Current Utterance (Text only)
: You're really great !

Intensity: medium

(b) The current utterance performs "disgust" emotion with "medium" intensity

Introduction

Figure 1: Graphical depiction of spoken conversation, where
different emotion cues in the dialogue history perform a direct impact on the emotion expression for the current utterance.

Conversational speech synthesis (CSS) aims to express a target utterance with the proper linguistic and affective prosody
in a conversational context (Guo et al. 2020). With the development of human-machine conversations, CSS has become an integral part of intelligent interactive systems (Zhou
et al. 2020; Seaborn et al. 2021; McTear 2022) and plays an
important role in areas such as virtual assistants and voice
agents, etc.
Unlike the speech synthesis technology for single utterance that just predicts the speaking style according to its linguistic content (Wang et al. 2017; Ren et al. 2021; Liu et al.
2021a,b, 2022a, 2024) or attempt to transfer the style information from an additional reference speech (Wang et al.
2018; Li et al. 2022c; Huang et al. 2022), CSS methods

usually infer the speaking style of the target utterance according to the dialogue interaction history between two interlocutors. Traditional CSS works attempt to acquire the
speaking style information from various aspects, such as inter and intra-speaker (Li et al. 2022a), and multi-modal context (Li et al. 2022a,b; Xue et al. 2023) dependencies modeling, etc. For example, Guo et al. (2020) construct a coarsegrained context encoder at the sentence level and use the
recurrent neural network (RNN) for dialogue history encoding. Li et al. (2022a) model inter-speaker and intra-speaker
dependencies in a conversation by a dialog graph convolu-

* Corrposending Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18698

