The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AdapEdit: Spatio-Temporal Guided Adaptive Editing Algorithm for Text-Based
Continuity-Sensitive Image Editing
Zhiyuan Ma1,2 * , Guoli Jia3 * , Bowen Zhou1†
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
College of Computer Science, Nankai University
{mzyth, zhoubowen}@tsinghua.edu.cn, exped1230@gmail.com
Distribution
hamburger

Abstract
With the great success of text-conditioned diffusion models in creative text-to-image generation, various text-driven
image editing approaches have attracted the attention of
many researchers. However, previous works mainly focus
on discreteness-sensitive instructions such as adding, removing or replacing specific objects, background elements or
global styles (i.e., “hard editing”), while generally ignoring
subject-binding but semantically fine-changing continuitysensitive instructions such as actions, poses or adjectives,
and so on (i.e., “soft editing”), which hampers generative
AI from generating user-customized visual contents. To mitigate this predicament, we propose a spatio-temporal guided
adaptive editing algorithm AdapEdit, which realizes adaptive image editing by introducing a soft-attention strategy to
dynamically vary the guiding degree from the editing conditions to visual pixels from both temporal and spatial perspectives. Note our approach has a significant advantage in
preserving model priors and does not require model training,
fine-tuning, extra data, or optimization. We present our results over a wide variety of raw images and editing instructions, demonstrating competitive performance and showing
it significantly outperforms the previous approaches. Code is
available: https://github.com/AnonymousPony/adap-edit.

1

cake

"A hamburger on the table"

Hard Editing
Distribution
standing dog

cake

[hard editing]

"A

cake on the table"

chocolate [hard editing]

sitting dog

Soft Editing

“A dog standing on the grass ”
sitting

[soft editing]

"A standing bird "

[soft editing]

, with spreading wings"

Figure 1: Example of image editing to show discretenesssensitive image manipulations (i.e., hard editing) and
continuity-sensitive image manipulations (i.e., soft editing).

methods (Hertz et al. 2022; Ruiz et al. 2023; Wallace, Gokul,
and Naik 2023; Kawar et al. 2023; Mokady et al. 2023) have
been proposed, which achieve user-customized image output by editing or modifying the original image given the
human-written instructions, and have witnessed a huge improvement in terms of controllability.
Though achieving remarkable progress, existing textbased image editing methods still suffer from the following
three limitations. (1) Soft editing dilemma. Firstly, as illustrated in Figure 1, we notice that the previous approaches
mainly focus on relatively simple editing instructions such
as adding, removing or replacing specific objects, background elements or global styles (i.e., hard editing), while
generally ignoring subject-binding but semantically finechanging complex instructions such as actions, poses or adjectives, and so on (i.e., soft editing), which hampers generative AI from generating user-customized images. (2) Spatiotemporal continuity dilemma. Secondly, we notice that the
previous methods generally adopt the same guide degree
during the text-to-image diffusion process for each pixel of
the original image (i.e., guided target) and each word of
the textual condition (i.e., guiding source), which may result in artifacts emerged in the unexpected areas, as well
as may also cause semantic discontinuities with surrounding pixels to appear around the edited objects. (3) Training
dilemma. Thirdly, to improve model’s controllable generation ability under given editing-instructions, most of the
previous methods need to feed a large number of labeled

Introduction

Text-conditioned image synthesis has recently received
tremendous success with various magnificent and creative
text-to-image cases being produced, where diffusion probability models (DPMs) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Nichol
and Dhariwal 2021), as the backbone network that plays an
important role, has been developed into a variety of text-toimage generation applications (Saharia et al. 2022; Ramesh
et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2023a). However, the controllability
of image synthesis and the support for user-customization
are still challenging issues and have received more and
more researchers’ attention. To solve these problems, Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022) and ControlNet (Zhang
and Agrawala 2023), as two leading studies, have proposed
two efficient text-conditioned learning frameworks for training, and subsequently, a series of text-guided image editing
* Equal contributions.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4154

