The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CSL: Class-Agnostic Structure-Constrained Learning for
Segmentation Including the Unseen
Hao Zhang1 , Fang Li1 , Lu Qi2 , Ming-Hsuan Yang2, 3 , Narendra Ahuja1
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
University of California Merced
3
Google Research
{haoz19, fangli3}@illinois.edu, {lqi5, mhyang}@ucmerced.edu, n-ahuja@illinois.edu
Abstract

SAM (Kirillov et al. 2023) to generate region proposals.
Such expansion-based approaches are not of great interest
in this paper since we aim to solve the general problem of
OOD segmentation without having access to any OOD images for training. We propose to learn models of objects that
extend to classes beyond those in the ID set.
Existing segmentation methods typically infer OOD if
some properties of the outputs are sufficiently different from
those seen on ID images. An example of properties used
is the uncertainty in pixel label prediction, as in the SML
methods (Figure 2). Other examples of properties used are
errors in image reconstruction (Lis et al. 2019), and the similarity to which results are perturbed by adversarial attacks
(Liang, Li, and Srikant 2017; Besnier et al. 2021). However,
these methods result in noisy predictions due to a lack of
structured knowledge. Current techniques, such as those in
(Nayal et al. 2023; Grcić, Šarić, and Šegvić 2023), tackle
this issue using the region-based framework, Mask2Former
(M2F) (Cheng et al. 2021). However, to achieve optimal performance, they necessitate OOD data and complete train the
model from scratch. For ZS3 or open-word semantic segmentation, existing methods (Ding et al. 2022; Xu et al.
2022) typically leverage CA-M2F, trained on the ID set, as
a region generator and utilize CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) to
identify the semantic class for each region. Some works (Qi
et al. 2022) empirically demonstrate that CA training benefits the performance on OOD data and since M2F decouples the per-pixel prediction task into 2 sub-tasks: (1)
mask prediction and (2) per-mask class prediction optimized
by the mask loss and class loss, a straightforward way is
removing the class loss and leverage hard assignment as
post-processing during inference. However, our observations reveal that such adjustments are insufficient in eliminating class information. The process of hard assignment
frequently results in unanticipated outcomes. For instance,
certain objects might not have corresponding masks, and
in certain situations, multiple objects may be erroneously
blended into a single mask.
In this paper, we present Class-Agnostic StructureConstrained Learning (CSL) framework for seamless integration with existing methodologies, including OOD, ZS3,
and DA segmentation, to improve their performance by incorporating structure constraints. CSL offers two plug-in integration schemes: (1) Knowledge distillation from a base

Addressing Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) Segmentation and
Zero-Shot Semantic Segmentation (ZS3) is challenging, necessitating segmenting unseen classes. Existing strategies
adapt the class-agnostic Mask2Former (CA-M2F) tailored
to specific tasks. However, these methods cater to singular
tasks, demand training from scratch, and we demonstrate certain deficiencies in CA-M2F, which affect performance. We
propose the Class-Agnostic Structure-Constrained Learning
(CSL), a plug-in framework that can integrate with existing methods, thereby embedding structural constraints and
achieving performance gain, including the unseen, specifically OOD, ZS3, and domain adaptation (DA) tasks. There
are two schemes for CSL to integrate with existing methods (1) by distilling knowledge from a base teacher network,
enforcing constraints across training and inference phrases,
or (2) by leveraging established models to obtain per-pixel
distributions without retraining, appending constraints during
the inference phase. We propose soft assignment and mask
split methodologies that enhance OOD object segmentation.
Empirical evaluations demonstrate CSL’s prowess in boosting the performance of existing algorithms spanning OOD
segmentation, ZS3, and DA segmentation, consistently transcending the state-of-art across all three tasks.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in computer
vision, which associates with each pixel in a given image probabilities of belonging to different classes. Recent
approaches have achieved remarkable results on several
closed-set benchmarks that contain images from known
classes, called In-Distribution (ID) images. However, the
segmentation with the unseen, e.g., Out-Of-Distribution
(OOD), Zero-shot-semantic (ZS3) segmentation, is always
challenging because it requires segmentation and discrimination based on training on only ID images.
The existing methods for such tasks can be distinguished
by whether they use OOD data for training. Some methods
expand the training set to include OOD images from other
datasets (Hendrycks, Mazeika, and Dietterich 2018a; Chan,
Rottmann, and Gottschalk 2021a; Kang, Kwak, and Kang
2022; Tian et al. 2022), or utilize large-scale models, e.g.,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7078

