The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Bayesian Spatial Model To Correct Under-Reporting
in Urban Crowdsourcing
Gabriel Agostini, Emma Pierson†, Nikhil Garg†
Cornell Tech, New York, United States
gsagostini@infosci.cornell.edu, emma.pierson@cornell.edu, ngarg@cornell.edu

Abstract

such as race, ethnicity, and income. If agencies primarily address incidents that are reported, then under-reporting leads
to downstream disparities. This mistargeting of resources,
especially when it results in inequity, is a substantial concern
and is a stated priority research area for the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the United States
(Federal Emergency Management Agency 2023).
While previous work has quantified the magnitude of reporting disparities, they do not estimate the probability that
an event truly occurred at each location, which is essential
for resource allocation. A challenge in estimation is that,
without further assumptions, unreported incidents cannot be
distinguished from incidents which did not occur. This is
analogous to positive-unlabeled (PU) machine learning (Liu
et al. 2003; Shanmugam and Pierson 2021), where datapoints are either labeled positive or unlabeled, and the latter
group consists of both true positives and negatives.
PU learning problems are unsolvable without further assumptions on the data generating process (Bekker and Davis
2020). How do we make progress? Our insight is that many
urban phenomena are spatially correlated, and we can use
this correlation to distinguish under-reporting from true lack
of event occurrence. For example, in our empirical application, we use reporting data for flooding after a storm. If an
area does not report flooding but all of its spatial neighbors
do, that area is likely to have experienced flooding (but not
reported it); conversely, if no neighbors report flooding, that
area is not likely to have experienced flooding. Spatial correlation departs from the standard PU learning setup, where
the data points are assumed to be independent.
To encode spatial correlations, we build on top of a spatial
Bayesian model developed in the ecology literature (Spezia,
Friel, and Gimona 2018). The model uses a latent indicator
variable at each location to encode whether an event truly occurs there; latent variables at adjacent locations are spatially
correlated according to an Ising model (Onsager 1944). If
an event does occur, the probability it generates an (observed) report varies as a function of location demographics. In semi-synthetic simulations, we show that the model
infers where events have truly occurred more accurately than
baseline models. For example, the model significantly outperforms a Gaussian Process (GP) in terms of AUC with an
improvement of 0.14.
Using this model, we develop a novel framework to iden-

Decision-makers often observe the occurrence of events
through a reporting process. City governments, for example,
rely on resident reports to find and then resolve urban infrastructural problems such as fallen street trees, flooded basements, or rat infestations. Without additional assumptions,
there is no way to distinguish events that occur but are not
reported from events that truly did not occur–a fundamental
problem in settings with positive-unlabeled data. Because disparities in reporting rates correlate with resident demographics, addressing incidents only on the basis of reports leads
to systematic neglect in neighborhoods that are less likely to
report events. We show how to overcome this challenge by
leveraging the fact that events are spatially correlated. Our
framework uses a Bayesian spatial latent variable model to
infer event occurrence probabilities and applies it to storminduced flooding reports in New York City, further pooling
results across multiple storms. We show that a model accounting for under-reporting and spatial correlation predicts
future reports more accurately than other models, and further
induces a more equitable set of inspections: its allocations
better reflect the population and provide equitable service to
non-white, less traditionally educated, and lower-income residents. This finding reflects heterogeneous reporting behavior learned by the model: reporting rates are higher in Census tracts with higher populations, proportions of white residents, and proportions of owner-occupied households. Our
work lays the groundwork for more equitable proactive government services, even with disparate reporting behavior.

1

Introduction

Urban crowdsourcing is key to identifying and resolving
problems such as fallen street trees and flooded basements,
in both emergency and daily contexts. For example, New
York City’s 311 system received over 3 million service requests in 2021 (NYC Open Data 2023). However, reporting is heterogeneous – different neighborhoods, even when
facing similar problems, report problems at different rates
(Liu, Bhandaram, and Garg 2023; Kontokosta, Hong, and
Korsberg 2017; Minkoff 2016; O’Brien et al. 2017), and
under-reporting often correlates with socioeconomic factors
* †Co-senior author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21888

