The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Resource Democratization: Is Compute the Binding Constraint on AI Research?
Rebecca Gelles, Veronica Kinoshita, Micah Musser, James Dunham
Center for Security and Emerging Technology, Georgetown University
{rebecca.gelles, ronnie.kinoshita, mrm311, james.dunham}@georgetown.edu

Abstract

researcher behavior. We also find little evidence that industry researchers even use significantly more compute than researchers in academia or that academic researchers are more
concerned about their access to compute. Our participants’
observations regarding the concept of a NAIRR are generally supportive, especially with regard to grant funding, but
they cite concerns about ineffective implementation.

Access to compute is widely viewed as a primary barrier to
AI research progress. Compute resource disparities between
academic and industry researchers is therefore a source of
concern. Yet the experiences of researchers who might encounter resource constraints in their work have received no
direct study. We addressed this gap by conducting a large survey of U.S. AI researchers that posed questions about project
inputs, outcomes, and challenges. Contrary to popular narratives, responses from more than 500 participants revealed
more concern about talent and data limitations than compute
access. There were few differences between academic and
industry researchers in this regard. The exception were researchers who already use large amounts of compute, and expressed a need for more. These findings suggest that interventions to subsidize compute without addressing the limitations
on talent and data availability reported by our respondents
might cause or exacerbate commonly cited resource inequalities, with unknown impact on the future of equitable research.

Background
Inequity in access to computing resources for AI research
is a growing concern. Previous researchers have warned
that an increased concentration of computational resources
in the hands of a few organizations, mostly industry firms
and elite universities, may decrease the overall diversity of
the field, in terms of researcher participation, topics studied (Ahmed and Wahed 2020), and worldwide involvement
(Depp 2022). Recent research has claimed that publications
from elite universities in top AI venues have crowded out
researchers from less prestigious universities since 2012, in
part due to disparities in compute access (Ahmed and Wahed 2020). Indications of less diversity and increased technical concentration have been observed in the academic literature (Klinger, Mateos-Garcia, and Stathoulopoulos 2020),
and AI researchers’ career paths: the propensity of top deep
learning talents in academia to transition to industry (Jurowetzki et al. 2021). Fields of study like large generative
models have a particularly high computational barrier to entry (Ganguli et al. 2022), although in a number of cases researchers have later been able to reproduce work by industry
labs at lower cost or using fewer parameters (Izsak, Berchansky, and Levy 2021; Ahdritz et al. 2022; Du et al. 2022; Ding
et al. 2022; Dey et al. 2023). Even top generative-AI labs
have suggested that expanding computational resources may
not be the path to future progress (Knight 2023).
Previous literature review (Paleyes, Urma, and Lawrence
2022) and interview studies (Merhi 2023; Westenberger,
Schuler, and Schlegel 2022; Baier, Jöhren, and Seebacher
2019; Shankar et al. 2022) have focused on AI project’s
success or failure in practice. These studies have unearthed
many barriers, both technical and non-technical (e.g., organizational buy-in, ethics, bureaucratic constraints). In the
technical realm, lack of quality data and talented practitioners are consistent themes. Compute resources were mentioned much less frequently, although the high cost of AI

Introduction
Inequitable access to compute could throw trustworthy and
innovative artificial intelligence development off balance.
Recent proposals for a National AI Research Resource
(NAIRR) in the United States stake $2.25 billion on the
belief that compute access is of paramount importance to
AI progress. However, an essential voice has been left out
of the conversation of the relative importance of data, talent, and compute in AI progress: AI researchers themselves.
Compute-heavy development advocates frequently emphasize inequities around large “cutting-edge” deep learning
models’ compute demands, but do these barriers and compute restraints reflect the concerns of a vocal minority or the
experience of the broader community of AI researchers?
Our research contributes evidence to answer these questions by asking AI researchers in the U.S. about their compute usage, concern about future compute access, and the
extent to which compute—as compared to factors like data
or talent—affects their projects. We find that compute is not
the primary constraint faced by most AI researchers, and access to data or talent more directly limits research plans and
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19840

