The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learn How to See: Collaborative Embodied Learning for Object Detection
and Camera Adjusting
Lingdong Shen1,2 , Chunlei Huo1,3,4 * , Nuo Xu5 , Chaowei Han1,2 , Zichen Wang1,2
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Information Engineering, Capital Normal University
4
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Zhejiang Lab
{shenlingdong,hanchaowei,wangzichen}2022@ia.ac.cn,
clhuo@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, nuo.xu@zhejianglab.com
Abstract

data and ignore the importance of camera in learning how
to see before detection. Specifically, taking a car counting
task as an example. Based on conventional object detectors,
precise counting of cars from any view-point is challenging
due to impacts caused by factors like occlusion. This situation is illustrated by the dialogue with mini-gpt4 (Zhu et al.
2023) depicted in Figure 1. A straightforward counting task
is difficult for conventional object detectors as they can not
dynamically adjust the camera for the detector. This issue
stimulated the exploration of active vision (Blake and Yuille
1993) and embodied intelligence (Gupta et al. 2021), which
urges an agent to learn to see objects through interactions
with the environment. Unfortunately, expensive interactive
data annotation is required by active vision and embodied
intelligence, and they exhibit limited adaptability when confronted with new scenarios.
To address the above limitations, a Student-Teacher object detection Framework (STF) is proposed in this paper.
Inspired by human learning and offline learning (Agarwal,
Schuurmans, and Norouzi 2020), STF treats object detection
as a collaborative embodied learning process where an agent
(the student) learns from an offline dataset of object detection transformations (exercises) using an object detector (the
tool) and aims to perform well in test scenarios (exams). In
Figure 1, the STF framework demonstrates the above learning process. To leverage large amounts of unlabeled data
and improve the adaptability to new scenarios, a teacher
network is introduced to evaluate the student’s performance
during inference. This enables student network self-tuning
on a large amount of unlabeled trajectory data. In short, the
contributions of this paper are as follows:
• An embodied object detection replay buffer is constructed, which contains 220,000 trajectory transformations from 10 different agent configurations in 76 diverse
scenarios, aiming to facilitate research in embodied vision for outdoor scenarios.
• STF addresses the issue of insufficient detection performance in specific scenarios of traditional object detection, achieving better results with shallower image features and shorter inference steps.
• STF models embodied object detection as a sequence

Passive object detectors, trained on large-scale static datasets,
often overlook the feedback from object detection to image
acquisition. Embodied vision and active detection mitigate
this issue by interacting with the environment. Nevertheless,
the materialization of activeness hinges on resource-intensive
data collection and annotation. To tackle these challenges,
we propose a collaborative student-teacher framework. Technically, a replay buffer is built based on the trajectory data
to encapsulate the relationship of state, action, and reward.
In addition, the student network diverges from reinforcement
learning by redefining sequential decision pathways using a
GPT structure enriched with causal self-attention. Moreover,
the teacher network establishes a subtle state-reward mapping based on adjacent benefit differences, providing reliable rewards for student adaptively self-tuning with the vast
unlabeled replay buffer data. Additionally, an innovative yet
straightforward benefit reference value is proposed within the
teacher network, adding to its effectiveness and simplicity.
Leveraging a flexible replay buffer and embodied collaboration between teacher and student, the framework learns to see
before detection with shallower features and shorter inference
steps. Experiments highlight significant advantages of our algorithm over state-of-the-art detectors. The code is released
at https://github.com/lydonShen/STF.

Introduction
Object detection is a hot topic common to various domains.
In recent years, due to the increased training data (Lin
et al. 2014; Shao et al. 2019; Kuznetsova et al. 2020) and
GPU capability, the performance of object detectors has significantly improved. From CNN-based two-stage detectors
(Girshick et al. 2014; Ren et al. 2017; Cai and Vasconcelos 2018) and one-stage detectors (Redmon et al. 2016; Lin
et al. 2017; Tian et al. 2019), to the latest transformer-based
detectors (Carion et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2021a; Zhang et al.
2023), and large visual models (Liu et al. 2023), the accuracy and speed have been continuously enhanced. However, above methods focus on training model on the given
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4793

