The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Low-Distortion Clustering with Ordinal and Limited Cardinal Information
Jakob Burkhardt1 , Ioannis Caragiannis1 , Karl Fehrs1 , Matteo Russo2
Chris Schwiegelshohn1 , Sudarshan Shyam1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Aarhus University, Åbogade 34, 8200 Aarhus N, Denmark,
Department of Computer, Control, Management Engineering, Sapienza University of Rome, Via Ariosto 25, 00185, Rome, Italy
{jakob, iannis, karl, schwiegelshohn, shyam}@cs.au.dk, russo.matteo0801@gmail.com

corresponds to solving the classic k-median problem. But
this example already illustrates the difficulty of implementing
any voting mechanism: Even if the representation scores are
assumed to be distances, they might be unknown even to the
participating voters. However, we may readily know if a voter
prefers alternative a over alternative b.
Such examples have given rise to ordinal algorithms. An
ordinal algorithm mainly allows for comparisons between
distances in the underlying metric. That is, given three points
a, b, c, we are freely given information whether d(a, b) ≤
d(a, c), but we are not given the exact numerical values of
d(a, b) and d(a, c). The objective is to solve a given problem
relying primarily on the ordinal information, while using as
few (ideally zero) distance queries as possible. The goodness
of such an algorithm is measured in terms of the quality of the
computed solution C compared to the quality of the optimal
solution OPT that is given full information, commonly known
as the metric distortion.
Finding the median is arguably the most important problem
in this field. Given a set of points X and a distance function
d, the median m is defined to be the point minimizing the
sum of distances. Following a long line of work (Anshelevich
et al. 2021; Anshelevich, Filos-Ratsikas, and Voudouris 2022;
Feldman, Fiat, and Golomb 2016; Goel, Krishnaswamy, and
Munagala 2017; Kempe 2020; Munagala and Wang 2019),
there now exists a deterministic algorithm with optimal metric distortion 3 (Gkatzelis, Halpern, and Shah 2020), which
is also optimal (Anshelevich, Bhardwaj, and Postl 2015; Anshelevich et al. 2018). Using randomization, Charikar et al.
(2023) recently achieved an important breakthrough, achieving a metric distortion of 2.753. The best known lower bound
is at least 2.1126 (Charikar and Ramakrishnan 2022).
Extensions to more general clustering objectives such as
(k, z)-clustering and facility location are comparatively much
harder, see Anshelevich and Zhu (2017); Caragiannis, Shah,
and Voudouris (2022). In facility location, we ask for a set of
centers C such that
X
min d(x, c) + f · |C|

Abstract
Motivated by recent work in computational social choice, we
extend the metric distortion framework to clustering problems.
Given a set of n agents located in an underlying metric space,
our goal is to partition them into k clusters, optimizing some
social cost objective. The metric space is defined by a distance
function d between the agent locations. Information about
d is available only implicitly via n rankings, through which
each agent ranks all other agents in terms of their distance
from her. Still, even though no cardinal information (i.e., the
exact distance values) is available, we would like to evaluate
clustering algorithms in terms of social cost objectives that are
defined using d. This is done using the notion of distortion,
which measures how far from optimality a clustering can be,
taking into account all underlying metrics that are consistent
with the ordinal information available.
Unfortunately, the most important clustering objectives (e.g.,
those used in the well-known k-median and k-center problems) do not admit algorithms with finite distortion. To
sidestep this disappointing fact, we follow two alternative
approaches: We first explore whether resource augmentation
can be beneficial. We consider algorithms that use more than
k clusters but compare their social cost to that of the optimal
k-clusterings. We show that using exponentially (in terms of
k) many clusters, we can get low (constant or logarithmic) distortion for the k-center and k-median objectives. Interestingly,
such an exponential blowup is shown to be necessary. More
importantly, we explore whether limited cardinal information
can be used to obtain better results. Somewhat surprisingly, for
k-median and k-center, we show that a number of queries that
is polynomial in k and only logarithmic in n (i.e., only sublinear in the number of agents for the most relevant scenarios in
practice) is enough to get constant distortion.

1

Introduction

The typical computational social choice problem consists of
optimizing a function over alternatives, each with a different
associated cost or value. A classic example is given by representative election. Each voter has a different representation
score for every candidate, which we assume to correspond to
the distance in some underlying metric. Ideally, the representation minimizes the sum of distances of each voter to their
closest representative. In the full information setting, this

x∈X

c∈C

is minimized, where f is the cost of opening a center. For
(k, z)-clustering, we instead consider the objective
sX
min d(x, c)z ,
z

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

x∈X

9555

c∈C

