The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ViTEraser: Harnessing the Power of Vision Transformers for Scene Text Removal
with SegMIM Pretraining
Dezhi Peng1,3 , Chongyu Liu1 , Yuliang Liu4 , Lianwen Jin1,2,3, *
1
South China University of Technology
SCUT-Zhuhai Institute of Modern Industrial Innovation
3
INTSIG-SCUT Joint Lab of Document Image Analysis and Recognition
4
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
pengdzscut@foxmail.com, eelwjin@scut.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Scene text removal (STR) aims at replacing text strokes in
natural scenes with visually coherent backgrounds. Recent
STR approaches rely on iterative refinements or explicit text
masks, resulting in high complexity and sensitivity to the
accuracy of text localization. Moreover, most existing STR
methods adopt convolutional architectures while the potential
of vision Transformers (ViTs) remains largely unexplored.
In this paper, we propose a simple-yet-effective ViT-based
text eraser, dubbed ViTEraser. Following a concise encoderdecoder framework, ViTEraser can easily incorporate various ViTs to enhance long-range modeling. Specifically, the
encoder hierarchically maps the input image into the hidden space through ViT blocks and patch embedding layers,
while the decoder gradually upsamples the hidden features
to the text-erased image with ViT blocks and patch splitting
layers. As ViTEraser implicitly integrates text localization
and inpainting, we propose a novel end-to-end pretraining
method, termed SegMIM, which focuses the encoder and decoder on the text box segmentation and masked image modeling tasks, respectively. Experimental results demonstrate
that ViTEraser with SegMIM achieves state-of-the-art performance on STR by a substantial margin and exhibits strong
generalization ability when extended to other tasks, e.g., tampered scene text detection. Furthermore, we comprehensively
explore the architecture, pretraining, and scalability of the
ViT-based encoder-decoder for STR, which provides deep insights into the application of ViT to the STR field. Code is
available at https://github.com/shannanyinxiang/ViTEraser.

(a) One stage

Image

Encoder

(b) Two stage
(End to end)

Image

Text Loc.

(c) Two stage
(Separate)

Image

Text Loc.
GT

(d) Multi-step

Image

STR Net

(e) Ours
(ViTEraser)

Image

Decoder

Output

Text
Mask

Inpaint

Output

Text
Mask

Inpaint

Output

STR Net

Output

...

Encoder

Decoder

ViT blocks

ViT blocks

Output

SegMIM Pretraining

Figure 1: Comparison of ViTEraser with existing STR
paradigms. Our method revisits the conventional single-step
one-stage framework and improves it with ViTs for feature
modeling and the proposed SegMIM pretraining. Dashed arrows indicate cutting off gradient flow. (Loc.: Localization)
masks to facilitate background inpainting (Tang et al. 2021;
Lee and Choi 2022; Wang et al. 2023; Du et al. 2023b).
Despite the great success achieved by previous methods, there still remain two critical issues. (1) The dominant
two-stage methods suffer from the complex system design
with two sub-tasks. The sequential text localizing and background inpainting pipeline introduces additional parameters,
decreases the inference speed, and, more importantly, breaks
the integrity of the entire model. The error of text localization can be easily propagated to the background inpainting,
especially for the methods that require pre-supplied text detectors (Tang et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022a; Lee and Choi
2022). (2) Recent advances (Liu et al. 2020; Lyu and Zhu
2022; Du et al. 2023b; Wang et al. 2023) tend to employ a
multi-step paradigm in a coarse-to-fine or progressive fashion, which significantly undermines efficiency and makes it
difficult to balance the parameters involved in multiple steps.
To this end, we revisit the one-stage paradigm and propose a novel simple-yet-effective ViT-based method for
STR, termed as ViTEraser. Fig. 1 compares our method with
existing STR approaches. The ViTEraser follows the conventional one-stage framework which comprises a singlestep encoder-decoder network and is free of text mask in-

Introduction
Scene text removal (STR) aims to realistically erase the text
strokes in the wild by replacing them with visually plausible
background, which has been widely applied to privacy protection (Inai et al. 2014), image editing (Wu et al. 2019), and
image retrieval (Tursun et al. 2019a). Existing approaches to
STR have evolved from the one-stage paradigm which implicitly integrates the text localization and background inpainting into a single network without the guidance of explicit text masks (Nakamura et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2019b;
Liu et al. 2020), to the two-stage framework which contains
explicit text localizing processes and uses the resulting text
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4468

