The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Discrete Cycle-Consistency Based Unsupervised Deep Graph Matching
Siddharth Tourani1,2 , Muhammad Haris Khan2 , Carsten Rother1 , Bogdan Savchynskyy1
1

Computer Vision and Learning Lab, IWR, Heidelberg University,
2
MBZUAI

Image A

Abstract
We contribute to the sparsely populated area of unsupervised
deep graph matching with application to keypoint matching
in images. Contrary to the standard supervised approach, our
method does not require ground truth correspondences between keypoint pairs. Instead, it is self-supervised by enforcing consistency of matchings between images of the same
object category. As the matching and the consistency loss are
discrete, their derivatives cannot be straightforwardly used for
learning. We address this issue in a principled way by building our method upon the recent results on black-box differentiation of combinatorial solvers. This makes our method exceptionally flexible, as it is compatible with arbitrary network
architectures and combinatorial solvers. Our experimental
evaluation suggests that our technique sets a new state-of-theart for unsupervised deep graph matching.

1

1

Image B
1
1

2

3

Image C

33

1

2
2

1

2

33

Figure 1: Illustration of cycle consistency in multi-graph
matching (best viewed in color). There are three nodes in
each image. They are labelled by both color (blue, green,
purple) and numbers (1, 2, 3). Matches between pairs of
nodes are shown by colored lines. A ↔ B, B ↔ C and
C ↔ A are color coded with yellow, light purple and
light pink lines. Correct matches are shown by solid, wrong
matches by dotted lines. Matching of the node 2 is cycle
consistent across the images, whereas nodes 1 and 3 are not.

Introduction

Graph matching (GM) is an important research topic in machine learning, computer vision, and related areas. It aims
at finding an optimal node correspondence between graphstructured data. It can be applied in tasks like shape matching (Sahillioğlu 2020), activity recognition (Brendel and
Todorovic 2011), point cloud registration (Fu et al. 2021),
and many others. One classical application of graph matching also considered in our work is keypoint matching, as illustrated in Figure 1.
A modern, learning-based approach to this problem tries
to estimate costs for the subsequent combinatorial matching
algorithm. The learning is usually supervised, i.e., ground
truth correspondences are given as training data. However,
obtaining ground truth is costly, which motivates development of unsupervised learning methods.
Our work proposes one such unsupervised technique. Instead of ground truth correspondences, our method utilizes
the cycle consistency constraint as a supervision signal, see
Fig. 1. Based on pairwise correspondences of multiple images, we iteratively update matching costs to improve consistency of the correspondences.

Related Work
Supervised Deep Graph Matching methods (Fey et al.
2020a; Rolı́nek et al. 2020) typically consist of two parts:
Feature extraction and combinatorial optimization. Whereas
the first part is nowadays carried out by neural networks,
the second is responsible for finding a one-to-one, possibly
incomplete, matching. As shown in (Vlastelica et al. 2019;
Battaglia et al. 2018), neural networks do not generalize
on combinatorial tasks and cannot substitute combinatorial
methods therefore.
The architecture of neural networks of recent deep
graph matching methods such as (Rolı́nek et al. 2020)
or (Wang, Yan, and Yang 2021) is very similar. As a backbone they use a VGG16 (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015) or
a similar convolutional network for visual feature generation
and a graph neural network for their refinement and combination with geometric information. Apart from specific parameters of the used networks, the key differences are the
type of combinatorial solvers used and how differentiation
through these solvers is dealt with.
A number of combinatorial techniques have been proposed to address the matching problem itself, see the re-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5252

