The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Subject-Aware Cropping by Outpainting Professional Photos
James Hong1 , Lu Yuan1 , Michaël Gharbi2 , Matthew Fisher2 , Kayvon Fatahalian1
1

Stanford University
2
Adobe Research
{james.hong, luyuan, kayvonf}@cs.stanford.edu, {mgharbi, matfishe}@adobe.com

Abstract
How to frame (or crop) a photo often depends on the image
subject and its context; e.g., a human portrait. Recent works
have defined the subject-aware image cropping task as a nuanced and practical version of image cropping. We propose a
weakly-supervised approach (GenCrop) to learn what makes
a high-quality, subject-aware crop from professional stock
images. Unlike supervised prior work, GenCrop requires no
new manual annotations beyond the existing stock image collection. The key challenge in learning from this data, however, is that the images are already cropped and we do not
know what regions were removed. Our insight is to combine
a library of stock images with a modern, pre-trained textto-image diffusion model. The stock image collection provides diversity, and its images serve as pseudo-labels for a
good crop. The text-image diffusion model is used to outpaint (i.e., outward inpainting) realistic uncropped images.
Using this procedure, we are able to automatically generate
a large dataset of cropped-uncropped training pairs to train a
cropping model. Despite being weakly-supervised, GenCrop
is competitive with state-of-the-art supervised methods and
significantly better than comparable weakly-supervised baselines on quantitative and qualitative evaluation metrics.

1

Synthetic plausible outpainting

Dataset of professional photos

(uncropped image and pseudo-label)

Figure 1: Generated training pairs. We outpaint professional
images (left) to obtain plausible, uncropped input images
(right). The original image is treated as a pseudo-label crop
(red). Since the images come from stock image collections,
each pseudo-label is an acceptable, professional crop.
these collections cover a wide range of subject-matter that
people want to capture — e.g., portraits of people. We then
ask, to crop better portraits, can one seek out a relevant set
of professional portraits from these collections and teach a
model to replicate that distribution? The key challenge is
that, although every professional image provides an expert
label (i.e., a good crop), the original uncropped photo is unknown and cannot be recovered from the crop. Unlike typical weakly-supervised computer vision tasks where input
images are plentiful but labels are scarce and/or unreliable,
in our setting this assumption is reversed.
Our proposed method, GenCrop, addresses this challenge
by combining a readily available dataset of stock images
with powerful, pre-trained image generation models to synthesize the required inputs. Specifically, we use text-toimage diffusion to “out-paint” (i.e., outward pixel generate or outward inpaint) stock images and generate plausible
uncropped-and-cropped pairs (Fig. 1). By scaling this automatic process, we can generate a large and diverse set of
images to train our subject-aware cropping model. The key
advantage of GenCrop is that it is weakly-supervised, requiring no new manual crop or scoring annotations beyond
access to the original professional image collection.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of GenCrop, we evaluate it on the human-centric (portrait) and the subject-aware
cropping tasks proposed by (Zhang et al. 2022) and (Yang
et al. 2023). We show that GenCrop yields competitive

Introduction

Framing a photo is compositional skill that professional photographers hone with years of experience, and cropping is
a key way to adjust framing or experiment with alternative compositions after capture. Framing and cropping decide what elements of a scene to include or exclude from
the image, and how to frame or crop an image is influenced by the subject that one wishes to portray. Subjectaware cropping takes a notion of a subject in addition to
pixels and has been studied in recent work on data-driven
approaches (Yang et al. 2023) and in the context of humancentric images (Zhang et al. 2022). High-quality solutions
to this problem are based on supervised learning, from large
datasets of manual annotations created specifically for cropping (Zeng et al. 2019; Wei et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2023).
We explore an alternative approach to the subject-aware
cropping problem that is only weakly-supervised. We observe that millions of professional images are easily accessible online in the form of stock image collections and that
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2175

