The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Friendly Attacks to Improve Channel Coding Reliability
Anastasiia Kurmukova and Deniz Gunduz
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London, London, UK
a.kurmukova22@imperial.ac.uk, d.gunduz@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel approach called ”friendly attack”
aimed at enhancing the performance of error correction channel codes. Inspired by the concept of adversarial attacks, our
method leverages the idea of introducing slight perturbations
to the neural network input, resulting in a substantial impact
on the network’s performance. By introducing small perturbations to fixed-point modulated codewords before transmission,
we effectively improve the decoder’s performance without
violating the input power constraint. The perturbation design
is accomplished by a modified iterative fast gradient method.
This study investigates various decoder architectures suitable
for computing gradients to obtain the desired perturbations.
Specifically, we consider belief propagation (BP) for LDPC
codes; the error correcting code transformer, BP and neural
BP (NBP) for polar codes, and neural BCJR for convolutional codes. We demonstrate that the proposed friendly attack
method can improve the reliability across different channels,
modulations, codes, and decoders. This method allows us to increase the reliability of communication with a legacy receiver
by simply modifying the transmitted codeword appropriately.

Introduction
Channel coding plays a crucial role in modern communication systems, ensuring reliable information transmission over
noisy channels. Over the past 70 years, remarkable progress
has fueled the continuous development of this field, yielding
robust and efficient communication protocols that employ a
wide range of hand-crafted codes. Contemporary standards
such as Long Term Evolution (LTE) and 5G (3GPP 2018)
have been significantly influenced by the development of
near-optimal channel codes, including linear block codes
such as polar codes (Arikan 2008) and low density parity
check (LDPC) codes (Gallager 1962), alongside linear codes
with memory, such as turbo codes (Berrou, Glavieux, and
Thitimajshima 1993) based on convolutional codes (Elias
1955). These codes demonstrate capacity-approaching performance (Shannon 1948) on additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN) channels; however, their optimal decoding is still a
challenging problem.
Despite progress, a gap persists between achievability
bounds based on random coding (Polyanskiy, Poor, and Verdú
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13292

2010) and the performance of hand-crafted codes in the short
block length regime. Maximum likelihood decoding of linear
codes is known to be NP-hard. Iterative algorithms, such
as belief propagation (BP) operating over the code Tanner
graph, present an efficient alternative. However, BP decoding
demonstrates near-capacity performance primarily for LDPC
codes with large block lengths (MacKay and Neal 1997). For
polar codes, BP decoding performance lags behind successive cancellation (SC) decoding (Arikan 2008) attributed to a
great number of short cycles in their Tanner graphs.
Decoding of channel codes can be considered as a classification problem, where the aim is to infer the transmitted
codeword from its noisy version. Therefore, the recent success of deep learning methods for a wide range of classification problems and their ability to capture complex patterns
have motivated exploring their applications to channel decoding. Neural BP (NBP), which introduces trainable weights to
conventional BP graphs, has gained popularity due to its simplicity and efficiency (Nachmani, Be’ery, and Burshtein 2016;
Nachmani et al. 2018; Lugosch and Gross 2017). Neural BP
decoding of polar code has enhanced the code performance
(Xu et al. 2017; Doan et al. 2018a). Recently, a significant
improvement is achieved in NBP decoding with two-stage
decimation (Buchberger et al. 2020).
There are other model-based neural decoding approaches
that leverage existing non-neural decoders’ structure to
enhance performance with trainable architectures. Notably, neural successive cancellation for polar codes (Doan,
Ali Hashemi, and Gross 2018), neural BCJR (NBCJR) for
convolutional codes (Kim et al. 2018), KO-codes for ReedMuller codes (Makkuva et al. 2021) have shown promising
results. Conversely, model-free deep learning decoding approaches, like (Gruber et al. 2017) and (O’Shea and Hoydis
2017), which do not use any existing decoding algorithm as
a baseline, are limited to short block lengths (k < 16) due to
the curse of dimensionality. Syndrome-based schemes (Bennatan, Choukroun, and Kisilev 2018) and the error correction
code transformer (ECCT) (Choukroun and Wolf 2022) have
recently achieved performance improvements by embedding
the code structure through the syndromes into the learnable
decoding architecture.
The improvement in transmission performance extends
beyond the enhancement of channel decoders. In real-world
transmission, fixed-constellation modulation is usually em-

