The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Spatio-Temporal Pivotal Graph Neural Networks for Traffic Flow Forecasting
Weiyang Kong1 , Ziyu Guo1 , Yubao Liu1, 2
1

Sun Yat-Sen University,Guangzhou, China
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou, China
kongwy3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, guozy28@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, liuyubao@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

1

HIGH

Traffic flow forecasting is a classical spatio-temporal data
mining problem with many real-world applications. Recently,
various methods based on Graph Neural Networks (GNN)
have been proposed for the problem and achieved impressive
prediction performance. However, we argue that the majority
of existing methods disregarding the importance of certain
nodes (referred to as pivotal nodes) that naturally exhibit extensive connections with multiple other nodes. Predicting on
pivotal nodes poses a challenge due to their complex spatiotemporal dependencies compared to other nodes. In this paper, we propose a novel GNN-based method called SpatioTemporal Pivotal Graph Neural Networks (STPGNN) to address the above limitation. We introduce a pivotal node identification module for identifying pivotal nodes. We propose
a novel pivotal graph convolution module, enabling precise
capture of spatio-temporal dependencies centered around pivotal nodes. Moreover, we propose a parallel framework capable of extracting spatio-temporal traffic features on both
pivotal and non-pivotal nodes. Experiments on seven realworld traffic datasets verify our proposed method’s effectiveness and efficiency compared to state-of-the-art baselines.

1

1
3

2

3

2

1

3

2

3
2

4
LOW

5
T1

4

5
T2

4

5

5

T3 Time

Figure 1: A toy traffic network example with 5 nodes. The
nodes with different colors denote their traffic flow changes.

the nodes signify the connections between the various sensors (Tedjopurnomo et al. 2022; Jin et al. 2023).
Although significant improvements have been made in
traffic forecasting with spatio-temporal data, we argue that
the majority of existing methods overlook a common phenomenon in traffic: certain nodes in traffic network, either
due to their geographical location (in the city center) or
characteristics (next to large interchanges), exhibit extensive connections with multiple other nodes, forming a complex spatio-temporal network centered around these nodes.
In this paper we refer to these nodes as pivotal nodes. For
example, a toy traffic network comprising five nodes (sensors) is given in Figure 1. The traffic flow is first aggregated
from nodes 1, 2, and 5 to node 3 during time interval [T1 ,T2 ].
Then, the traffic flow is subsequently distributed from node
3 to nodes 2 and 5 during time interval [T2 ,T3 ]. Compared to
other nodes, node 3 exhibits stronger abilities in both aggregating and distributing traffic flow. We can select the node
3 as a pivotal node. Such rich inter-node spatio-temporal
relationships endow the pivotal nodes with intricate interdependencies and potential multiplicity of roles within the
entire network structure, making them challenging to accurately predict. The existing methods fell short in accurately represent the spatio-temporal dependencies centered
around these pivotal nodes. Most existing methods learned
spatial and temporal dependencies separately, which fail to
effectively capture the accurate spatio-temporal dependencies. Few methods (Song et al. 2020; Li and Zhu 2021) tried
to synchronously capture spatio-temporal relationships. But
these methods are constrained to represent the simplified
spatio-temporal dependencies among all nodes since accurately considering the spatio-temporal dependencies among
all nodes leads to a high time and space complexity. For ex-

Introduction
Traffic flow forecasting is a classical spatio-temporal data
mining problem. The problem has been found useful in
many real-world applications such as intelligent route planning, dynamic traffic management, smart location-based applications, and so on (Wu and Tan 2016). The purpose of the
problem is to predict the traffic flows of several future times
based on the historical traffic observations (e.g. recorded by
sensors of traffic networks). The challenges of traffic prediction mainly stem from the intricate spatio-temporal correlations between sensors. With the rapid advancement of neural networks, deep learning methods have become capable
of capturing complex spatio-temporal features (Yu, Yin, and
Zhu 2018; Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018; Seo et al. 2018). Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown promising results in
modeling transportation networks (Li et al. 2018; Wu et al.
2019; Li and Zhu 2021; Han et al. 2021; Lan et al. 2022; Wu
et al. 2022). Typically, GNNs use graph nodes to represent
sensors in transportation networks, while the edges between
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8627

