The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robust Beamforming for Downlink Multi-Cell Systems:
A Bilevel Optimization Perspective
Xingdi Chen1 , Yu Xiong1 , Kai Yang1,2,3 *
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, China
Key Laboratory of Embedded System and Service Computing Ministry of Education at Tongji University
3
Shanghai Research Institute for Intelligent Autonomous Systems
xingdichen@tongji.edu.cn, septerxy@tongji.edu.cn, kaiyang@tongji.edu.cn
Abstract

are equipped with a small number of antennas. This configuration is commonly referred to as a multiple-input and
multiple-output (MIMO) system. Beamforming techniques
inherently necessitate channel state information (CSI) at
each BS to enable precoded transmissions.

Utilization of inter-base station cooperation for information
processing has shown great potential in enhancing the overall
quality of communication services (QoS) in wireless communication networks. Nevertheless, such cooperations require
the knowledge of channel state information (CSI) at base stations (BSs), which is assumed to be perfectly known. However, CSI errors are inevitable in practice which necessitates beamforming techniques that can achieve robust performance in the presence of channel estimation errors. Existing approaches relax the robust beamforming design problems into semidefinite programming (SDP), which can only
achieve a solution that is far from being optimal. To this end,
this paper views robust beamforming design problems from
a bilevel optimization perspective. In particular, we focus on
maximizing the worst-case weighted sum-rate (WSR) in the
downlink multi-cell multi-user multiple-input single-output
(MISO) system considering bounded CSI errors. We first reformulate this problem into a bilevel optimization problem
and then develop an efficient algorithm based on the cutting
plane method. A distributed optimization algorithm has also
been developed to facilitate the parallel processing in practical settings. Numerical results are provided to confirm the
effectiveness of the proposed algorithm in terms of performance and complexity, particularly in the presence of CSI
uncertainties.

Various quality of communication services (QoS) metrics are used in wireless networks, including maximum allowable mean square errors, minimum tolerated signal-tointerference-plus-noise ratios, and weighted sum rates. One
widely used QoS metric is the weighted sum-rate (WSR),
making it a fundamental and extensively studied problem to
design linear beamformers that maximize WSR under total
power constraints. Since the WSR maximization problem
is nonconvex and NP-hard even in the single-antenna case
(Luo and Zhang 2008), it is challenging to achieve the global
optimal solution and suboptimal solutions are of great interest. Assuming perfect CSI, (Björnson, Bengtsson, and Ottersten 2014) points out that the optimal beamforming vectors for the WSR maximization problem in single-cell downlink transmission have a simple structure. Several algorithms
have been proposed for single-cell downlink transmission
(Liu, Zhang, and Chua 2012; Joshi et al. 2012). However, extending the WSR maximization problem to multicell downlink transmission poses greater challenges. An iterative beamformer design based on iterative second-order
cone programming (SOCP) approximation is introduced in
(Tran et al. 2012). Additionally, there are also several distributed methods for multi-cell systems (Choi et al. 2012;
Weeraddana et al. 2013; Shi et al. 2011; Bogale and Vandendorpe 2012). Specifically, (Choi et al. 2012) presents a
fully distributed beamforming technique relying on the high
signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR) assumption.
This technique exclusively utilizes local CSI without requiring additional information exchange. (Weeraddana et al.
2013) splits the nonconvex problem into a master problem
that is addressed by a novel sequential convex approximation, and multiple subproblems that can be solved by BSs
in a fully asynchronous manner through the primal decomposition technique. Both methods in (Choi et al. 2012) and
(Weeraddana et al. 2013) are restricted to multiple-input
single-output (MISO) systems. The algorithms proposed in
(Shi et al. 2011) and (Bogale and Vandendorpe 2012) are
both based on iterative minimization of mean-square error
(MMSE) and can tackle the WSR maximization problem in

Introduction
In multi-cell multiuser wireless communication networks,
users, especially cell-edge users, may have low-rate data
service as a consequence of suffering from both intra-cell
interference and inter-cell interference. Beamforming, one
of the most promising multi-antenna techniques, harnesses
the spatial dimension to effectively alleviate interference in
downlink transmissions. This technique is extensively employed in the design of mobile communication systems.
However, such precoding technique is contingent upon hardware complexity, often rendering it impractical for mobile
terminals characterized by limited computational power and
storage capacity. Consequently, multiple transmit antennas
are only deployed at the base station (BS) where the issue
of computing power is less problematic, while mobile units
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7969

