The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CUDC: A Curiosity-Driven Unsupervised Data Collection Method with Adaptive
Temporal Distances for Offline Reinforcement Learning
Chenyu Sun1,2,3 , Hangwei Qian4 , Chunyan Miao1,2,3
1

Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, NTU, Singapore
3
Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly (LILY), NTU, Singapore
4
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
chenyu002@e.ntu.edu.sg, qian hangwei@cfar.a-star.edu.sg, ascymiao@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) aims to learn an effective
policy from a pre-collected dataset. Most existing works are
to develop sophisticated learning algorithms, with less emphasis on improving the data collection process. Moreover,
it is even challenging to extend the single-task setting and
collect a task-agnostic dataset that allows an agent to perform multiple downstream tasks. In this paper, we propose
a Curiosity-driven Unsupervised Data Collection (CUDC)
method to expand feature space using adaptive temporal distances for task-agnostic data collection in multi-task offline
RL. To achieve this, CUDC estimates the probability of the kstep future states being reachable from the current states, and
adapts how many steps into the future that the dynamics model
should predict. With this adaptive reachability mechanism in
place, the feature representation can be diversified, and the
agent can navigate itself to collect higher-quality data with
curiosity. Empirically, CUDC surpasses existing unsupervised
methods in efficiency and learning performance in various
downstream offline RL tasks of the DeepMind control suite.

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning has achieved remarkable breakthroughs in various fields, such as games, robotics, and navigation in virtual environments (Kiran et al. 2021; Singh,
Kumar, and Singh 2022; Sun, Qian, and Miao 2022a). However, real-time interaction with the environment under online
RL settings may not always be feasible due to cost, safety, or
ethical concerns (Kiran et al. 2021; Singh, Kumar, and Singh
2022). As a result, offline RL has gained popularity in recent
years to cope with limited interactions, where agents learn a
policy exclusively from a previously-collected dataset. The
popular offline RL benchmarks such as D4RL (Fu et al. 2020)
and RL Unplugged (Gulcehre et al. 2020) combine data from
supervised online RL training runs with expert demonstrations, exploratory agents, and hand-coded controllers. However, collecting expert data can be time-consuming and expensive, and it may not always be available. In such cases,
unsupervised methods, such as those described by ExORL
(Yarats et al. 2022), can be used to collect data as a distinct
contribution for offline RL (Prudencio, Maximo, and Colombini 2022). These methods aim to explore the environment
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15145

and learn from the intrinsic rewards generated by the agent,
without the need for supervision, to collect diverse data.
Despite the popularity of offline RL, existing works have
mainly focused on model-centric practices, continually developing new algorithms (Kumar et al. 2020, 2022). These
algorithms are typically evaluated on the same task for which
the dataset was collected, and the learned policy can be
pessimistic in out-of-distribution states and actions, leading to poor generalization in unseen downstream tasks. Recently, data-centric approaches have become emerging, emphasizing the importance of training data quality over algorithmic advances (Motamedi, Sakharnykh, and Kaldewey
2021; Patel et al. 2022). To improve training data quality,
researchers have explored selecting the most critical samples
or re-weighting (Wu et al. 2021) all samples in the offline
RL algorithms. However, these methods are restricted to a
single training data distribution and cannot be applied to
multi-task settings with distribution shifts. To address this
challenge, we propose to improve the data collection process
directly through feature space expansion, where the distributions naturally span during diverse exploration. This approach
is applicable to the multi-task setting, enabling us to obtain
more diverse and high-quality data for offline RL.
Upon analyzing the current challenges faced in offline RL,
the benchmark ExORL (Yarats et al. 2022) has shown that
unsupervised RL methods are more effective than supervised
methods in collecting datasets that allow the vanilla off-policy
RL algorithm to learn and acquire different skills as an offline
RL agent. However, we discovered that all these methods rely
on a fixed temporal distance k between current and future
states during data collection. This practice is sub-optimal and
restricts the diversity of the learned feature representation,
as illustrated in Figure 1 (left). To address this limitation,
we propose to adapt the temporal distance as a simple yet
effective way to enhance the feature representation, as it has
a direct connection with the feature space.
To facilitate adaptation, exploiting reachability to more
distant future states is desired. Reachability-based methods
in RL aim to learn safe and efficient policies by considering
reachable states under the current policy or value function
(Savinov et al. 2019; Péré et al. 2018; Ivanovic et al. 2019;
Yu et al. 2022), but these approaches are not directly applicable. For example, Savinov et al. (2019) only consider binary
reachability, and extensively compares to stored embeddings

