The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Synergistic Multiscale Detail Refinement via
Intrinsic Supervision for Underwater Image Enhancement
Dehuan Zhang1 * , Jingchun Zhou1 * † , Chunle Guo2 , Weishi Zhang1 , Chongyi Li2
1

College of Information Science and Technology, Dalian Maritime University
2
VCIP, CS, Nankai University
zhangdehuan97@gmail.com, zhoujingchun03@gmail.com, guochunle@nankai.edu.cn, teesiv@dlmu.edu.cn,
lichongyi@nankai.edu.cn
Abstract
Visually restoring underwater scenes primarily involves mitigating interference from underwater media. Existing methods ignore the inherent scale-related characteristics in underwater scenes. Therefore, we present the synergistic multiscale detail refinement via intrinsic supervision (SMDR-IS)
for enhancing underwater scene details, which contain multistages. The low-degradation stage from the original images
furnishes the original stage with multi-scale details, achieved
through feature propagation using the Adaptive Selective Intrinsic Supervised Feature (ASISF) module. By using intrinsic supervision, the ASISF module can precisely control and guide feature transmission across multi-degradation
stages, enhancing multi-scale detail refinement and minimizing the interference from irrelevant information in the
low-degradation stage. In multi-degradation encoder-decoder
framework of SMDR-IS, we introduce the Bifocal IntrinsicContext Attention Module (BICA). Based on the intrinsic
supervision principles, BICA efficiently exploits multi-scale
scene information in images. BICA directs higher-resolution
spaces by tapping into the insights of lower-resolution ones,
underscoring the pivotal role of spatial contextual relationships in underwater image restoration. Throughout training,
the inclusion of a multi-degradation loss function can enhance the network, allowing it to adeptly extract information across diverse scales. When benchmarked against stateof-the-art methods, SMDR-IS consistently showcases superior performance. The code is publicly available at: https:
//github.com/zhoujingchun03/SMDR-IS

Figure 1: Illustration of motivation. The figure showcases
similar scene information extracted from multi-resolution
images alongside transmission. Degradation patterns, consistent across different positions, are evident in both the original and the downscaled images.
ment technique empowers researchers and practitioners to
more effectively interpret and analyze underwater image
data (Kang et al. 2022).
Enhancing low-quality images poses significant challenges to the field of computer vision (Ma et al. 2023; Khan
et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2024). These challenges arise primarily from scattering and blurring effects unique to aquatic environments, which inherently manifest in a multi-scale manner (Zhou et al. 2023b). Particulate matter and water turbulence at different scales have different effects on different
scales have different effects on different parts of an image,
leading to the degradation of multi-scale correlated features.
The underwater image formation model (UIFM) (Zhou et al.
2023e) is represented as:

Introduction
In the complex dynamics of underwater environments, the
quality of optical images is primarily determined by the influence of dissolved and suspended substances on light absorption and scattering (Guo et al. 2023). Absorption effects
lead to challenges like reduced imaging distance and color
distortion, while scattering effects diminish image contrast
and detail. Our goal is to enhance the quality of underwater optical images, providing robust solutions for applications, such as underwater exploration, marine biology research, and surveillance (Liu et al. 2022b). Image enhance-

I = J × t + A(1 − t)

(1)

where I represents the clear image, J is the underwater image, t represents the transmission related to depth, and A
denotes the atmospheric light.
The core objective of underwater image enhancement
(UIE) is to accurately estimate I from Eq. (1) (Zhou et al.
2023a). This is crucial because degradation levels in underwater images can differ across pixels due to variations in

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7033

