The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning from Polar Representation: An Extreme-Adaptive Model
for Long-Term Time Series Forecasting
Yanhong Li1 , Jack Xu2 , David C. Anastasiu1
1

Santa Clara University, Santa Clara, CA, USA
Santa Clara Valley Water District, San Jose, CA, USA
yli20@scu.edu, JXu@valleywater.org, danastasiu@scu.edu
2

Abstract

with large variations in the streamflow values, while other
methods (Shortridge, Guikema, and Zaitchik 2016; Papacharalampous and Tyralis 2022; Cheng et al. 2020) are generally
designed for short future horizon forecasting.
A variety of neural network architectures have been investigated for hydrologic forecasting, including recurrent
neural networks (Lai et al. 2018; Siami-Namini, Tavakoli,
and Namin 2018), hybrid networks (Oreshkin et al. 2019)
and graph neural networks (Wu et al. 2020; Cao et al. 2020).
Some work employed Extreme Value Theory (EVT) to enhance the hydrologic time series performance (Li, Xu, and
Anastasiu 2023a; Zhang et al. 2021). However, these studies
primarily concentrate on short-term forecasting and their performance on longer time horizons is doubtful. While there
has been a surge in transformer-based forecasting models asserting their high-performance capabilities for long-horizon
time series tasks (Li et al. 2019; Qin et al. 2017; Zhou et al.
2021, 2022; Kitaev, Kaiser, and Levskaya 2020), recent research has raised questions about their efficacy, indicating
that simpler linear models can outperform them (Zeng et al.
2022; Das et al. 2023). Moreover, imbalanced data or severe events might hurt all these state-of-art deep learning
approaches when it comes to long-term predictions.
We focus on these challenges and innovatively address
them through representation learning (Fortuin et al. 2018;
Lei et al. 2017; Tonekaboni et al. 2022), a burgeoning field
in unsupervised learning. Our aim is to extract latent states
containing the extreme features in data for downstream tasks.
To achieve this, we explore the potential of multi-loss functions (Ma et al. 2021, 2018) in shaping our training objective.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
• We propose a Distance-weighted Auto-regularized Neural
network (DAN), which uses expandable blocks to dynamically facilitate long-term prediction.
• To improve the model’s robustness to severe events, DAN
innovatively uses a distance-weighted multi-loss method
to extract the polar representations from time series simultaneously.
• We introduce a Kruskal-Wallis sampling policy to handle
imbalanced extreme data and gate control vectors to boost
the discriminatory capacity of indicators to accommodate
imbalanced data.
• We evaluate DAN and competing methods on four separate datasets and find that DAN significantly outperforms

In the hydrology field, time series forecasting is crucial for
efficient water resource management, improving flood and
drought control and increasing the safety and quality of life
for the general population. However, predicting long-term
streamflow is a complex task due to the presence of extreme
events. It requires the capture of long-range dependencies and
the modeling of rare but important extreme values. Existing approaches often struggle to tackle these dual challenges simultaneously. In this paper, we specifically delve into these issues
and propose Distance-weighted Auto-regularized Neural network (DAN), a novel extreme-adaptive model for long-range
forecasting of stremflow enhanced by polar representation
learning. DAN utilizes a distance-weighted multi-loss mechanism and stackable blocks to dynamically refine indicator
sequences from exogenous data, while also being able to handle uni-variate time-series by employing Gaussian Mixture
probability modeling to improve robustness to severe events.
We also introduce Kruskal-Wallis sampling and gate control
vectors to handle imbalanced extreme data. On four real-life
hydrologic streamflow datasets, we demonstrate that DAN
significantly outperforms both state-of-the-art hydrologic time
series prediction methods and general methods designed for
long-term time series prediction.

Introduction
Time series forecasting has a critical role in diverse domains,
enabling effective resource management and informed policy
decisions. However, certain time series data pose a unique
problem because they contain sporadic but significant extreme events, such as unexpected flash floods or climate
change-induced droughts in the problem of streamflow prediction. The ability to forecast time series that include these
types of extreme occurrences is an important research direction which has seen much attention in recent years (Nguyen
and Chan 2004; Ding et al. 2019; Qi and Majda 2020; Chen
et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021; Li, Xu, and Anastasiu 2023a).
Traditionally, machine learning and statistics-based models were the basic foundation for time series prediction (Box
and Pierce 1970; Nielsen 2019). However, techniques like
Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) (Box
and Jenkins 1976) seem to perform badly when dealing
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

171

