The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Jointly Modeling Spatio-Temporal Features of Tactile Signals
for Action Classification
Jimmy Lin1,2 , Junkai Li1,2 , Jiasi Gao1 , Weizhi Ma1 * , Yang Liu1,2 *
1

2

Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
jimmy.lin9@gmail.com, li-jk23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, bnancy@sina.com,
{mawz, liuyang2011}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Tactile signals collected by wearable electronics are essential
in modeling and understanding human behavior. One of the
main applications of tactile signals is action classification, especially in healthcare and robotics. However, existing tactile
classification methods fail to capture the spatial and temporal features of tactile signals simultaneously, which results in
sub-optimal performances. In this paper, we design SpatioTemporal Aware tactility Transformer (STAT) to utilize continuous tactile signals for action classification. We propose
spatial and temporal embeddings along with a new temporal pretraining task in our model, which aims to enhance the
transformer in modeling the spatio-temporal features of tactile signals. Specially, the designed temporal pretraining task
is to differentiate the time order of tubelet inputs to model the
temporal properties explicitly. Experimental results on a public action classification dataset demonstrate that our model
outperforms state-of-the-art methods in all metrics.

Figure 1: An overview of action classification based on tactile signals collected by wearable electronic socks.

indicate distinct actions. For example, the same signals collected by sensors located in different positions should be
classified as standing on toes or heels, respectively. Secondly, tactile signals are temporally sensitive as they are collected regularly with high frequency, e.g., in 10HZ (10 data
points per second), and the time order of these signals is informative. For example, if ignoring the order of collected
signals, two signal sequences collected by the same sensor
from distinct actions may be seen as identical actions (i.e.,
same elements with different orders), which becomes useless in classification.
Furthermore, we want to point out that jointly modeling
spatial and temporal features is essential for tactile signals
in action classifications. We conduct an empirical study on
a real-scenario dataset (Luo et al. 2021), and draw the spatial and temporal features of different actions in Figure 2.
The heatmap of each action shows the averaged results of
all samples, which indicates spatial features. The temporal
change of a specific sensor shows the averaged sequence
data of all samples collected by this sensor, which indicates
temporal features. As shown in Figure 2(a), two actions,
stand on toes and lean left, have similar temporal features
but different spatial features. However, in Figure 2(b), two
actions, upstairs and walk fast, have similar spatial features
but different temporal features. These observations verify
tactile signals’ spatio-temporal features, and further indicate
that only using one of them is inadequate for classification.
However, existing tactile methods lack the ability to capture the mentioned temporal and spatial nature of tactile
signals simultaneously. On the one hand, most previous
tactile-related studies adopt CNN-based methods to model

Introduction
Similar to visual and acoustic signals, tactile signals are important for modeling and understanding humans. In recent
years, various wearable electronics have been designed to
collect tactile signals, which are widely used in multiple scenarios, especially in healthcare and robotics (Zhu et al. 2019;
Fan et al. 2020; Lou et al. 2020; Okunevich et al. 2021).
The collected tactile signals can be utilized for different
purposes, and one of their main applications is the action
classification task. Sundaram et al. (2019) propose to identify hand actions by tactile signals with sensors in gloves.
Luo et al. (2021) and Wicaksono et al. (2022) use wearable
electronic socks to collect tactile signals for feet action classification. Figure 1 is an example, where the continuous tactile signals are collected by e-textile sensors in socks, and
then used to classify the action (e.g., walking, etc.).
Tactile signals are spatially and temporally sensitive,
hence utilizing their spatio-temporal features is important
for action classification. Firstly, tactile signals are spatially
sensitive as they are not translation invariant. The same signals in different positions (i.e., collected by various sensors)
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13817

