The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Three Heads Are Better Than One:
Improving Cross-Domain NER with Progressive Decomposed Network
Xuming Hu1,2 , Zhaochen Hong2 , Yong Jiang3 * , Zhichao Lin3 ,
Xiaobin Wang3 , Pengjun Xie3 , Philip S. Yu4
1

AI Thrust, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou),
2
School of Software, Tsinghua University,
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group,
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Chicago
xuminghu@hotmail.com, jiangyong.ml@gmail.com

Abstract
Cross-domain named entity recognition (NER) tasks encourage NER models to transfer knowledge from data-rich source
domains to sparsely labeled target domains. Previous works
adopt the paradigms of pre-training on the source domain followed by fine-tuning on the target domain. However, these
works ignore that general labeled NER source domain data can
be easily retrieved in the real world, and soliciting more source
domains could bring more benefits. Unfortunately, previous
paradigms cannot efficiently transfer knowledge from multiple
source domains. In this work, to transfer multiple source domains’ knowledge, we decouple the NER task into the pipeline
tasks of mention detection and entity typing, where the mention detection unifies the training object across domains, thus
providing the entity typing with higher-quality entity mentions.
Additionally, we request multiple general source domain models to suggest the potential named entities for sentences in
the target domain explicitly, and transfer their knowledge to
the target domain models through the knowledge progressive
networks implicitly. Furthermore, we propose two methods to
analyze in which source domain knowledge transfer occurs,
thus helping us judge which source domain brings the greatest
benefit. In our experiment, we develop a Chinese cross-domain
NER dataset. Our model improved the F1 score by an average
of 12.50% across 8 Chinese and English datasets compared to
models without source domain data.

Introduction
Named Entity Recognition (NER) aims to infer a label for
each token in the sentence to determine whether it is a part of
an entity and classify entities into predefined types. Recent
NER models show decent performance when sufficient data
are available (Nasar, Jaffry, and Malik 2021; Liu et al. 2022).
However, in practice, we always focus on specific domains,
such as artificial intelligence, music, and culture, where labeled data are often difficult to obtain. A natural thought is
whether we can transfer knowledge from data-rich domains
to sparsely labeled domains to improve performance, which
motivates our research on the cross-domain NER.
Cross-domain NER tasks require the model to have sufficient knowledge transfer ability and to quickly adapt to the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18261

target domain with a few training samples. Existing studies
consider the CoNLL 2003 dataset (Sang and De Meulder
2003) from Reuters News as the source domain, and annotate
Wikipedia datasets about Politics, Natural Science, Music,
Literature, and Artificial Intelligence as target domains (Liu
et al. 2021). Following this setting, previous works (Yang,
Salakhutdinov, and Cohen 2017; Jia, Liang, and Zhang 2019;
Jia and Zhang 2020; Zheng, Chen, and Ma 2022) adopt the
paradigm of pre-training in the source domain and then finetuning in the target domain. Zhang et al. (2022b); Xu and Cai
(2023); Xu et al. (2023) jointly trains data from the source
and target domains. Although these methods have achieved
good performance, the training paradigms lose the scalability to expand to the real-world scenarios: In the real world,
the general labeled NER source domain data can be easily
retrieved (Li et al. 2020), and more source domains lead to
better results, which have been shown in other NLP tasks
(Imani et al. 2022; Fujinuma, Boyd-Graber, and Kann 2022).
Therefore, how to transfer knowledge from the multi-source
instead of the single-source domains to the target domain is
a more crucial problem. Simply pre-train models sequentially
on each source domain often leads to a catastrophic problem of forgetting source domain knowledge (French 1999).
Furthermore, the jointly training paradigm cannot handle
multiple source domains with different entity types (Hu et al.
2021c), and at the same time, ignores the diversity of each
source domain and its different contribution to the target
domain (Zhang et al. 2022b).
To leverage multi-source domain knowledge to benefit
the training of the target domain, we adopt the Progressive
Decomposed Networks to unify the training paradigms and
transfer knowledge across domains. As illustrated in Figure
1, the Decomposed Network decouples the NER task into the
pipeline tasks of mention detection and entity typing. The
mention detection task aims to infer a B, I, or O label for each
token to determine whether it is part of an entity, thus bridging
the gap between different domains through a unified training
paradigm. The entity typing task shares the same semantic encoder (Devlin et al. 2019) as the mention detection task, and
classifies the obtained higher-quality entity mentions into predefined entity types. To utilize knowledge from multiple different sources domain, we adopt two progressive methods: (1)
Explicitly. We solicit each general source domain model to

