The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Task-Driven Causal Feature Distillation: Towards Trustworthy Risk Prediction
Zhixuan Chu1 , Mengxuan Hu2 , Qing Cui1 , Longfei Li1 , Sheng Li2
1

Ant Group
University of Virginia
{chuzhixuan.czx,cuiqing.cq,longyao.llf}@antgroup.com, {qtq7su,shengli}@virginia.edu
2

Abstract

with experts in relevant fields (e.g., finance, climate science,
health care, etc.) could greatly facilitate risk prediction. In
addition, risk prediction is extremely sensitive to features.
For example, in the face recognition task, the result depends
on the joint contribution of most features, such as noses, eyes,
ears, etc. A few features cannot definitively change the recognition results, such as the face with a mask, makeup, etc.
However, an abnormal fluctuation of a single feature can lead
to a dramatic increase in the probability of risk occurrence.
The probability of risk always hinges on a few important
key features. Therefore, the expert needs to understand how
the AI model works, why the model can get the output, and
which feature contributes the most. Only in this way can the
prediction result be trusted and adopted.

Since artificial intelligence has seen tremendous recent successes in many areas, it has sparked great interest in its potential for trustworthy and interpretable risk prediction. However,
most models lack causal reasoning and struggle with class imbalance, leading to poor precision and recall. To address this,
we propose a Task-Driven Causal Feature Distillation model
(TDCFD) to transform original feature values into causal feature attributions for the specific risk prediction task. The causal
feature attribution helps describe how much contribution the
value of this feature can make to the risk prediction result.
After the causal feature distillation, a deep neural network is
applied to produce trustworthy prediction results with causal
interpretability and high precision/recall. We evaluate the performance of our TDCFD method on several synthetic and
real datasets, and the results demonstrate its superiority over
the state-of-the-art methods regarding precision, recall, interpretability, and causality.

Introduction
The rapid development of technology not only provides a
lot of convenience to people’s production and life, but also
brings a lot of potential risks (Li et al. 2022; Chakraborty
et al. 2018; Guan et al. 2023a,b; Chu et al. 2023b), such as
business risks, financial risks, medical risks, industry risks,
credit risks, and so on. To prevent risks, a better way is to
build an accurate risk prediction model before risks occur
instead of finding a solution after the risk outbreak. Although
artificial intelligence has seen tremendous recent successes in
many areas (Luan and Tsai 2021; Zhu et al. 2023; Wang et al.
2023; Shi et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023; Chen, Rezayi, and Li
2023), it is often unable to produce trustworthy results on risk
prediction tasks, mainly due to a lack of interpretability, no
insight into cause relationships, and low precision and recall.
In fact, today’s more sophisticated deep neural network
models are mostly “black boxes” without any knowledge of
their internal workings. “Black-box” models are characterized by high performance but low explainability. Therefore,
humans oftentimes cannot understand how machine-learned
models work. Compared to general deep learning-based classification and regression tasks, the interpretability of the risk
prediction model is more urgent and important. Collaborating
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11642

So far, most explainable AI models are based on correlation rather than causality. As shown in Fig. 1, let us consider
the case where we aim to utilize three variables, i.e., (1)
employment status such as unemployed or employed, (2) activity in job-hunting apps such as Facebook Jobs, LinkedIn
Job Search, Glassdoor, and so on, (3) gender, to predict the
risk of personal insolvency. It is not hard to know by common
sense that unemployed employment status can be the real
cause of an increase in personal insolvency risk among these
three predictors. Gender is also not directly related to the
personal insolvency risk. In addition, we also know that the
unemployed job status is more likely to increase the activity
in job-hunting apps. Therefore, we can observe a correlation
rather than a causal relationship between the risk of personal
insolvency and the activity in job-hunting apps. Based on
this dataset, if we run a general prediction model, it is not
difficult to observe this result that the employment status and
the activity in job-hunting apps are relatively important features for the risk of personal insolvency due to the spurious
correlation between the true cause “employment status” and
the fake cause “activity in job-hunting apps”. A post-hoc
explanation of this model “correctly” indicates that the most
important features of the model are the employment status
and the activity in job-hunting apps. This explanation may be
deemed incorrect if we compare it against the ground-truth
explanation of the underlying data. Therefore, this “correct”
explanation based on correlation is not trustworthy. Current
correlation-based approaches to explainable risk prediction
models are falling short. The model that can figure out the
causal effect may unlock trustworthy explainability.

