The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Entropic Open-Set Active Learning
Bardia Safaei1 , Vibashan VS1 , Celso M. de Melo2 , Vishal M. Patel1
1

Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD, USA
{bsafaei1, vvishnu2}@jhu.edu, celso.m.demelo.civ@army.mil, vpatel36@jhu.edu
2

Abstract
Active Learning (AL) aims to enhance the performance of
deep models by selecting the most informative samples for
annotation from a pool of unlabeled data. Despite impressive performance in closed-set settings, most AL methods
fail in real-world scenarios where the unlabeled data contains
unknown categories. Recently, a few studies have attempted
to tackle the AL problem for the open-set setting. However,
these methods focus more on selecting known samples and
do not efficiently utilize unknown samples obtained during
AL rounds. In this work, we propose an Entropic Open-set
AL (EOAL) framework which leverages both known and
unknown distributions effectively to select informative samples during AL rounds. Specifically, our approach employs
two different entropy scores. One measures the uncertainty
of a sample with respect to the known-class distributions.
The other measures the uncertainty of the sample with respect to the unknown-class distributions. By utilizing these
two entropy scores we effectively separate the known and unknown samples from the unlabeled data resulting in better
sampling. Through extensive experiments, we show that the
proposed method outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and TinyImageNet datasets.
Code is available at https://github.com/bardisafa/EOAL.

Figure 1: Left: At the 5-th AL round, we plot the difference
between the average entropy scores of known and unknown
samples using a closed-set classifier and our method. Our
method utilizes two entropy scores which enhance the separation between known and unknown samples resulting in
a better sampling of the knowns. Right: Active sampling
precision graph for a closed-set classifier and our method.
Because of better separation between known and unknown
samples, our method tends to have better precision in sampling known samples at each AL cycle. (CIFAR-10, 40%
mismatch ratio)

samples to select the most informative ones, while diversitybased methods (Nguyen and Smeulders 2004) focus on enhancing model learning by carefully choosing samples that
show maximal diversity.
In general, AL methods produce promising results in
closed-set settings where the unlabeled data contains only
known classes. However, in real-world scenarios, this assumption does not hold as the unlabeled data contains both
known and unknown samples. As a result, the performance
of these closed-set AL methods significantly declines (Ning
et al. 2022). One main reason for this phenomenon is that existing uncertainty- and diversity-based methods choose the
unknown samples as the most informative samples for human annotation, thereby wasting the annotation budget. Human annotators would disregard these unknown samples because they are unnecessary for the target task. Therefore, it
is important to address the problem of active learning under
an open-set scenario where unknown class samples might
appear in the unlabeled data during sampling.
A straightforward open-set AL approach is to train a
closed-set classifier and utilize entropy scores to separate

Introduction
In recent years, deep learning methods have shown remarkable performance in a large number of complex computer
vision tasks such as classification (He et al. 2016; Radford
et al. 2021), segmentation(Chen et al. 2017; Kirillov et al.
2023) and object detection (Ren et al. 2015; Redmon et al.
2016). However, the success of these deep learning models
in solving these complex tasks heavily relies on the availability of extensive labeled data (VS et al. 2023; Vs et al.
2022). Obtaining labeled data is generally labor-intensive,
and expensive (Wei, Iyer, and Bilmes 2015; VS, Oza, and
Patel 2023). Active Learning (AL) tackles this huge data
labeling issue by strategically selecting a subset of informative samples for annotation, rather than labeling the entire data. Primarily, there are two types of AL techniques:
a) uncertainty-based methods, and b) diversity-based methods. Uncertainty-based techniques (Seung, Opper, and Sompolinsky 1992) leverage model uncertainty on unlabeled
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4686

