The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Behavioral Recognition of Skeletal Data Based on Targeted Dual Fusion Strategy
Xiao Yun1 , Chenglong Xu1 , Kevin Riou2 , Kaiwen Dong1 * , Yanjing Sun1 , Song Li1 , Kevin Subrin2 ,
Patrick Le Callet2
1

School of Information and Control Engineering, China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, 221116, China
2
Nantes Université, Ecole Centrale Nantes, CNRS, LS2N, UMR 6004, Nantes, France
{xyun, clongxu, dongkaiwen, yjsun, lisong}@cumt.edu.cn, {kevin.riou, kevin.subrin, patrick.lecallet}@univ-nantes.fr

Abstract

The first is how the adjacency matrix in GCN can better
learn the relationship between joints to enhance the learning ability of the model. ST-GCN adopts the natural connections between human joints as the topological relations to be
learned, but is unable to establish new generative relations
as unnatural connections. 2S-AGCN (Shi et al. 2019b) proposes an adaptive adjacency matrix to solve this problem
in order to learn more information. Further, MS-AAGCN
(Shi et al. 2020) adds learnable coefficients to the adjacency
matrix to make it more flexible. It has also been argued
that more relations between joints do not always help action
learning, for example, STSF-GCN (Fang et al. 2022) has obtained relatively good performance using fewer relations on
a GCN model with joints as data input.
The second is different attention mechanisms are adopted
to better capture the spatio-temporal as well as the channel
attention scores. Numerous studies have explored the influence of attentional mechanisms on action judgments, which
is very reasonable from a biological point of view. All attention mechanisms are roughly divided into three categories:
temporal (Liu et al. 2020), spatial (Song et al. 2020), and
channel (Chen et al. 2021c). Many scholars have addressed
one or two of these, but more advanced models incorporate
all three, such as DC-GCN (Zhou et al. 2023), AM-GCN
(Sun et al. 2022).
The last is how multi-stream information can be better
fused. Different types of data often contain distinct feature
information, and the fusion of multiple streams of information generally achieves better results than using a single
stream. Currently, most behavior recognition models based
on skeleton data employ architectures that fuse multiple
streams of information (Hu et al. 2022; Qin et al. 2022;
Wu, Zhang, and Zou 2023; Zhang et al. 2023). The data fusion schemes used can be broadly classified into two categories: 1) Rear fusion of data (Chen et al. 2021d; Liu et al.
2022a; Xiong et al. 2022), where each stream of information
is processed by the same model to obtain behavior category
scores. These scores are then combined through weighted
fusion to produce a final behavior classification result. 2)
Front fusion of data (Song et al. 2020, 2022) where the input
data is fused prior to being processed by the model, followed
by feature extraction. We neutralized these two schemes in
FRF-GCN and obtained better fusion results.
We noticed 3 main limitations in these recent develop-

The deployment of multi-stream fusion strategy on behavioral recognition from skeletal data can extract complementary features from different information streams and improve
the recognition accuracy, but suffers from high model complexity and a large number of parameters. Besides, existing multi-stream methods using a fixed adjacency matrix
homogenizes the model’s discrimination process across diverse actions, causing reduction of the actual lift for the
multi-stream model. Finally, attention mechanisms are commonly applied to the multi-dimensional features, including
spatial, temporal and channel dimensions. But their attention
scores are typically fused in a concatenated manner, leading to the ignorance of the interrelation between joints in
complex actions. To alleviate these issues, the Front-Rear
dual Fusion Graph Convolutional Network (FRF-GCN) is
proposed to provide a lightweight model based on skeletal
data. Targeted adjacency matrices are also designed for different front fusion streams, allowing the model to focus on
actions of varying magnitudes. Simultaneously, the mechanism of Spatial-Temporal-Channel Parallel Attention (STCP), which processes attention in parallel and places greater
emphasis on useful information, is proposed to further improve model’s performance. FRF-GCN demonstrates significant competitiveness compared to the current state-of-theart methods on the NTU RGB+D, NTU RGB+D 120 and
Kinetics-Skeleton 400 datasets. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/sunbeam-kkt/FRF-GCN-master.

Introduction
Human action recognition (HAR) aims to determine the current behavior category of a person based on a series of welltrained recognition models, and it has wide range of applications, such as human-computer interaction (Liu and Wang
2020), video surveillance (Xin et al. 2023), and autonomous
driving (Saleh et al. 2022). In particular, after the introduction of skeleton-based HAR by ST-GCN (Yan, Xiong, and
Lin 2018), algorithms based on GCN for skeleton-based behavior recognition have emerged rapidly. Recent approaches
on GCN based behavior recognition mostly focused on 3
axis.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6917

