The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DSD2 : Can We Dodge Sparse Double Descent and Compress the Neural Network
Worry-Free?
Victor Quétu, Enzo Tartaglione
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
{name.surname}@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract
Vanilla training

Neoteric works have shown that modern deep learning models can exhibit a sparse double descent phenomenon. Indeed,
as the sparsity of the model increases, the test performance
first worsens since the model is overfitting the training data;
then, the overfitting reduces, leading to an improvement in
performance, and finally, the model begins to forget critical
information, resulting in underfitting. Such a behavior prevents using traditional early stop criteria.
In this work, we have three key contributions. First, we propose a learning framework that avoids such a phenomenon
and improves generalization. Second, we introduce an entropy measure providing more insights into the insurgence of
this phenomenon and enabling the use of traditional stop criteria. Third, we provide a comprehensive quantitative analysis of contingent factors such as re-initialization methods,
model width and depth, and dataset noise. The contributions
are supported by empirical evidence in typical setups. Our
code is available at https://github.com/VGCQ/DSD2.

Teacher Network

Best fit regime

Data
Data
Overfitting regime

Knowledge
Distillation

Student
StudentNetwork
Network
60
55
50
45

60
55
50
45

40
0

20

48.7 73.7 89.2 95.6

Sparsity [%]

Introduction

Dodging SDD

65

Test Accuracy

Test Accuracy

65

98.8

99.8

Vanilla

(Entropy
+Early Stop)

Vanilla

Vanilla

(No early Stop)

(Early Stop)

19.54

22.79

40.70

48.84

Training Complexity [PFLOPs]

Figure 1: Distilling knowledge from a sparse teacher grants
access to solutions (for the student model) where SDD is
dodged, also saving computation.

Nowadays, deep neural networks are one of the most employed algorithms when required to solve complex tasks.
In particular, their generalization capability allowed them
to establish new state-of-the-art performance in domains
like computer vision (He et al. 2016; Dosovitskiy et al.
2021) and natural language processing (Vaswani et al. 2017;
Brown et al. 2020), showing as well promising capability
in very complex hybrid tasks, like text-to-image generation (Ramesh et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022). The problem of optimally sizing these models is relevant to the vastly
distributed employment of deep neural networks on edge devices (Chen and Ran 2019; Lin et al. 2022), posing questions
about power consumption and hardware complexity (Goel
et al. 2020; Luo et al. 2022).
It was general knowledge that the more a model is overparametrized, the easier it will overfit the training set, entering the memorization phase: the model memorizes the single samples in the training set, learning also a wrong set
of features. Such a phenomenon harms the model’s generalization, worsening its performance on unseen data (Liu

et al. 2020). Recently, a new surprising phenomenon, double descent (DD) (Belkin et al. 2019), has been observed for
extremely over-parametrized models: beyond the traditional
over-fitting regime, while continuing to increase the size of
the model, the generalization gap between train and test performance inverts trend, and narrows the more, the larger the
model is (Nakkiran et al. 2020).
The DD phenomenon raises questions about how to optimally size the model to have the best performance (while
having the minimum size). Many approaches have indeed
proposed the use of regularization functions to relieve DD
in models for regression and classification tasks. However,
when moving to real applications, the complexity of optimally tuning the regularization hyper-parameters and learning optimal early-stop discourages their use (Kan, Nagy,
and Ruthotto 2020). While DD’s typical analysis concerns
moving from small models to big ones, a recent work observed a similar phenomenon also moving from an overparametrized model backward to a smaller one (He et al.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14749

