The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fractional Deep Reinforcement Learning for
Age-Minimal Mobile Edge Computing
Lyudong Jin* 1 , Ming Tang* 2 , Meng Zhang†1 , Hao Wang3
1

Zhejiang University, Haining, Zhejiang China
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong China
3
Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria Australia
lvdong.22@intl.zju.edu.cn,tangm3@sustech.edu.cn, mengzhang@intl.zju.edu.cn, hao.wang2@monash.edu
2

Abstract

systems) has significantly boosted the demand for information freshness (Yates et al. 2021; Kaul, Yates, and Gruteser
2012; Shisher and Sun 2022; Pan et al. 2023; Pan, Sun, and
Shroff 2023), in addition to low latency. For example, the
real-time velocity and location knowledge of the surrounding vehicles is crucial in achieving safe and efficient autonomous driving. Another emerging example is metaverse
applications, in which users anticipate real-time virtual reality services and real-time control over their avatars. In these
applications, users’ experience depends on how fresh the received information is rather than how long it takes to receive
that information. Such a requirement motivates a new network performance metric, namely Age of Information (AoI)
(Yates et al. 2021; Kaul, Yates, and Gruteser 2012; Shisher
and Sun 2022). It measures the time elapsed since the most
up-to-date data (computational results) was received.
While the majority of existing studies on MEC were concerned about delay reduction (e.g., (Wang et al. 2021; Tang
and Wong 2022)), most of real-time applications mentioned
above concern about fresh status updates, while delay itself
does not directly reflect timeliness. Here we highlight the
huge difference between delay and AoI. Specifically, task
delay takes into account only the duration between when the
task is generated and when the task output has been received
by the mobile device. Thus, under less frequent updates (i.e.,
when tasks are generated in a lower frequency), task delays
are naturally smaller. This is because infrequent updates lead
to empty queues and hence reduced queuing delays of the
tasks. In contrast, AoI takes into account both the task delay and the freshness of the task output. Thus, to minimize
the AoI with computational-intensive tasks, the update frequency needs to be neither too high nor too low in order
to reduce the delay of each task while ensuring the freshness of the most up-to-date task output. More importantly,
such a difference between delay and AoI leads to a counterintuitive important phenomenon in designing age-minimal
scheduling policy: upon the reception of each update, the
mobile device may need to wait for a certain amount of time
to generate the next new task (Sun et al. 2017).
Therefore, the age-minimal MEC systems necessitate
meticulous design of a scheduling policy for each mobile device, which should encompass two fundamental decisions.
The first decision is the updating decision, i.e., upon completion of a task, how long should a mobile device wait for

Mobile edge computing (MEC) is a promising paradigm
for real-time applications with intensive computational needs
(e.g., autonomous driving), as it can reduce the processing delay. In this work, we focus on the timeliness
of computational-intensive updates, measured by Age-ofInformation (AoI), and study how to jointly optimize the task
updating and offloading policies for AoI with fractional form.
Specifically, we consider edge load dynamics and formulate
a task scheduling problem to minimize the expected timeaverage AoI. The uncertain edge load dynamics, the nature
of the fractional objective, and hybrid continuous-discrete action space (due to the joint optimization) make this problem
challenging and existing approaches not directly applicable.
To this end, we propose a fractional reinforcement learning
(RL) framework and prove its convergence. We further design a model-free fractional deep RL (DRL) algorithm, where
each device makes scheduling decisions with the hybrid action space without knowing the system dynamics and decisions of other devices. Experimental results show that our
proposed algorithms reduce the average AoI by up to 57.6%
compared with several non-fractional benchmarks.

Introduction
Background and Motivations
The next-generation network demands mobile devices (e.g.,
smartphones and Internet-of-Things devices) to generate zillions of bytes of data and accomplish unprecedentedly computationally intensive tasks. Mobile devices, however, will
be unable to timely process all their tasks locally due to
their limited computational resources. To fulfill the low latency requirement, mobile edge computing (Mao et al. 2017)
(MEC), also known as multi-access edge computing (Porambage et al. 2018), has become an emerging paradigm distributing computational tasks and services from the network
core to the network edge. By enabling mobile devices to offload their computational tasks to nearby edge nodes, MEC
can reduce the task processing delay.
On the other hand, the proliferation of real-time and
computation-intensive applications (e.g., cyber-physical
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12947

