The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ExpeL: LLM Agents Are Experiential Learners
Andrew Zhao1 , Daniel Huang2 , Quentin Xu2 , Matthieu Lin2 , Yong-Jin Liu2 , Gao Huang1 *
2

1
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University
Department of Computer Science, BNRist, Tsinghua University
{zqc21,huang-jy22,xgd22,lyh21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{liuyongjin,gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

On the one hand, previous works investigated finetuning LLMs with a large number of environment interactions
(Yao et al. 2023c) or with a large amount of human-labeled
datasets (Nakano et al. 2021; Shaw et al. 2023). This class
of methods incurs high computational costs and needs access to the LLM’s parametric weights. Furthermore, finetuning an LLM restricts its functionalities and can hurt its
generalization abilities (Du et al. 2022). On the other hand,
prompting methods can augment an LLM with better sequential decision-making planning abilities with only a few
in-context examples (Hao et al. 2023; Lin et al. 2023b; Sun
et al. 2023). However, since current LLMs are bounded by
context window size (Tworkowski et al. 2023), these agents
have no recollections of what they have seen, and therefore
no learning can be done outside of a few demonstrations. So,
how can we strike a balance between these paradigms?
We present the Experiential Learning (ExpeL) agent as a
solution. Our agent autonomously gathers experiences from
a collection of training tasks through trial and error. From
these experiences, it derives natural language insights and
employs its own successful experiences as in-context examples during test time. Our agent’s learning process is analogous to a student studying for an exam and then taking it on
a single attempt, reflecting many real-world situations. Unlike self-improvement methods like Reflexion (Shinn et al.
2023), our approach emphasizes the importance of retaining
experiences across multiple tasks to enhance agent performance. Moreover, ExpeL learns without parameter updates,
making it compatible with powerful closed-source models
like GPT-4 or Claude. Lastly, the experience-gathering step
does not require a large amount of data or human labels.
We evaluated ExpeL on three vastly different domains and
consistently outperformed strong baselines. Additionally,
we showcased a transfer learning scenario where our agent
that accumulated knowledge from source tasks showed positive forward transfer to target tasks. Finally, we highlighted
some unexpected emerged abilities the ExpeL agent gained.
In summary, our key contributions are as follows: (1) we
introduced ExpeL, a novel LLM agent that autonomously
learns from experience without gradient updates; (2) We
evaluated ExpeL on a diverse set of tasks to showcase its
learning abilities and improvement on top of existing planning methods; (3) we showed a novel setting of transfer
learning for our LLM agent and demonstrated forward trans-

The recent surge in research interest in applying large language models (LLMs) to decision-making tasks has flourished by leveraging the extensive world knowledge embedded in LLMs. While there is a growing demand to tailor
LLMs for custom decision-making tasks, finetuning them
for specific tasks is resource-intensive and may diminish the
model’s generalization capabilities. Moreover, state-of-theart language models like GPT-4 and Claude are primarily accessible through API calls, with their parametric weights remaining proprietary and unavailable to the public. This scenario emphasizes the growing need for new methodologies
that allow learning from agent experiences without requiring parametric updates. To address these problems, we introduce the Experiential Learning (ExpeL) agent. Our agent autonomously gathers experiences and extracts knowledge using natural language from a collection of training tasks. At
inference, the agent recalls its extracted insights and past experiences to make informed decisions. Our empirical results
highlight the robust learning efficacy of the ExpeL agent, indicating a consistent enhancement in its performance as it accumulates experiences. We further explore the emerging capabilities and transfer learning potential of the ExpeL agent
through qualitative observations and additional experiments.

1

Introduction

A computer program is said to learn from experience
E with respect to some class of tasks T and
performance measure P , if its performance at tasks in
T , as measured by P , improves with experience E.
Tom Mitchell

Machine learning research has long been captivated by
the potential of autonomous agents and their capabilities.
In recent times, incorporating large language models into
these agents (Wang et al. 2023a; Xi et al. 2023) has unveiled
a broad spectrum of applications, even extending beyond
academia (Yang et al. 2023a; Significant-Gravitas 2023).
One of the significant advantages of LLMs lies in their world
knowledge, allowing them to be inherently versatile across
various scenarios (Zhao et al. 2023b).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19632

