The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Painterly Image Harmonization by Learning from Painterly Objects
Li Niu* , Junyan Cao, Yan Hong, Liqing Zhang
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{ustcnewly, joy c1, hy2628982280, lqzhang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Given a composite image with photographic object and
painterly background, painterly image harmonization targets
at stylizing the composite object to be compatible with the
background. Despite the competitive performance of existing painterly harmonization works, they did not fully leverage the painterly objects in artistic paintings. In this work, we
explore learning from painterly objects for painterly image
harmonization. In particular, we learn a mapping from background style and object information to object style based on
painterly objects in artistic paintings. With the learnt mapping, we can hallucinate the target style of composite object,
which is used to harmonize encoder feature maps to produce
the harmonized image. Extensive experiments on the benchmark dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
method.

1

Figure 1: (a) The background image with two marked query
patches (red and blue). We show the similarity maps of two
query patches based on VGG-19 (Simonyan and Zisserman
2015) features. (b) The composite image with two inserted
foreground objects. (c) The ideal harmonized image.

In contrast, feed-forward methods pass the composite image
through the network only once to produce a harmonized image, which is much more efficient than optimization-based
methods. To name a few, (Peng, Wang, and Wang 2019) introduced AdaIN (Huang and Belongie 2017) to adjust the
style of composite object. (Cao, Hong, and Niu 2023) explored harmonizing the composite image in both spatial domain and frequency domain. Some diffusion model based
methods (Meng et al. 2021; Hachnochi et al. 2023) for crossdomain image composition can also be applied to this task.
However, the harmonized objects may still look unnatural
on the painterly background.
One factor that hinders painterly image harmonization is
the absence of ground-truth harmonized objects, but we can
learn what an object in an artistic painting should be like
based on the existent painterly objects in the artistic paintings. Therefore, this work explores learning from painterly
objects, which is substantially overlooked by previous works
(Luan et al. 2018; Peng, Wang, and Wang 2019; Cao, Hong,
and Niu 2023; Yan et al. 2022). The key insight of our work
is hallucinating the target style of composite object. Previous
works (Peng, Wang, and Wang 2019; Cao, Hong, and Niu
2023) migrate the global style of painterly background to the
composite object using AdaIN (Huang and Belongie 2017),
during which the style is represented by the feature statistics (mean, variance) in pretrained VGG-19 (Simonyan and
Zisserman 2015) encoder. Nevertheless, the styles of different regions/objects in an artistic painting could vary considerably. As shown in Figure 1(a), we divide the whole im-

Introduction

Compositing multiple regions from different images is a fundamental photo editing technique. However, when pasting
the foreground object extracted from one image on another
background image, there may exist style inconsistency between foreground and background. To address such style inconsistency, myriads of image harmonization methods (Tsai
et al. 2017; Cong et al. 2020; Ling et al. 2021) have been
developed to match the illumination information between
foreground and background. Nevertheless, they are less effective when the foreground object is extracted from a photographic image and the background is an artistic painting,
because complex styles (color, texture, pattern, strokes) need
to be matched between foreground and background. Image
harmonization with photographic object and painterly background is called painterly image harmonization (Luan et al.
2018), which has only received limited attention.
The existing painterly image harmonization methods can
be roughly divided into optimization-based methods (Luan
et al. 2018; Zhang, Wen, and Shi 2020) and feed-forward
methods (Peng, Wang, and Wang 2019; Cao, Hong, and
Niu 2023; Yan et al. 2022). Optimization-based methods
update the composite object iteratively to minimize the designed losses, which is too slow for real-time application.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4343

