The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Byzantine-Robust Decentralized Learning via Remove-then-Clip Aggregation
Caiyi Yang, Javad Ghaderi
Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, USA
{cy2621, jghaderi}@columbia.edu

Abstract

ing several significant advantages over FL, such as faultresilience and self-scalability.
Despite the benefits of decentralized training approaches,
their performance can be significantly degraded due to vulnerability to malicious devices or data heterogeneity across
the devices. In particular, some devices can be faulty, referred to as Byzantine workers (Hegedűs, Danner, and Jelasity 2021), due to software/hardware errors or getting
hacked, and send arbitrary or malicious model updates to
other devices, thus severely degrading the overall performance. To address Byzantine attacks in the training process,
a few Byzantine-robust decentralized learning algorithms
have been introduced recently (Yang and Bajwa 2019; Guo
et al. 2022; Fang, Yang, and Bajwa 2022; He, Karimireddy,
and Jaggi 2022), where benign workers attempt to combine
the updates received from their neighbors by using robust
aggregation rules to mitigate the impact of potential Byzantine workers. Most current algorithms deal with Byzantine
attacks under independent and identically distributed (IID)
data across the devices; however, in reality, the data can
vary dramatically across the devices in terms of quantity,
label distribution, and feature distribution (Zhao et al. 2018;
Hsieh et al. 2020). Data heterogeneity makes the detection
of Byzantine workers more challenging compared to the
IID data setting, as the divergent local models might be attributed to either Byzantine workers or the heterogeneous
nature of the data. Most proposed Byzantine-robust decentralized learning algorithms cannot handle such non-IID data
settings and result in slow convergence or degraded accuracy
of the global model (Zhang and Yang 2021).
In this paper, we study the problem of decentralized learning in non-IID and Byzantine environments. We propose a
robust decentralized learning algorithm to address the deficiencies of the prior algorithms. Specifically, the main contributions of our work can be summarized as follows:
• We present a decentralized learning method by utilizing
the distributed stochastic gradient descent (DSGD) algorithm combined with a novel robust aggregator. The proposed robust aggregator, based on a Remove-then-Clip
(RTC) idea, enables the application of DSGD algorithm
to Byzantine non-IID settings.
• Given a general weighted network topology, we prove
the convergence to a neighborhood of a stationary point
for non-convex objectives in the Byzantine and non-IID

We consider decentralized learning over a network of workers with heterogeneous datasets, in the presence of Byzantine workers. Byzantine workers may transmit arbitrary or
malicious values to neighboring workers, leading to degradation in overall performance. The heterogeneous nature of
the training data across various workers complicates the identification and mitigation of Byzantine workers. To address
this complex problem, we introduce a resilient decentralized
learning approach that combines the gradient descent algorithm with a novel robust aggregator. Specifically, we propose
a remove-then-clip aggregator, whereby each benign worker
meticulously filters the neighbors’ values and subsequently
projects the remaining values to a sphere centered at its local value, with an appropriately selected radius. We prove
that our proposed method converges to a neighborhood of a
stationary point for non-convex objectives under standard assumptions. Furthermore, empirical evaluations are provided
to demonstrate the superior performance of our method in
comparison to existing algorithms, under various Byzantine
attack models.

Introduction
Modern machine learning (ML) applications rely on processing massive amounts of data, which are often generated
and held by devices and users worldwide. Training machine
learning models on distributed data provides many advantages over traditional centralized approaches in core aspects
such as data ownership, privacy and fault-tolerance (Kairouz
et al. 2021). In this direction, federated learning (FL) has
gained significant traction (Konečnỳ et al. 2016; McMahan
et al. 2017), where edge devices collaborate to train a model
without sharing their local data. In centralized FL, devices
send their model updates to a centralized server (called parameter server) which aggregates the updates and coordinates the devices during the learning process. The parameter
server poses a single point of failure and may cause a communication bottleneck as the number of devices increases.
This problem has motivated the design of decentralized machine learning methods (Lian et al. 2017; Lalitha et al. 2018;
Roy et al. 2019), that can achieve comparable model accuracy as the state-of-the-art FL approaches while boastCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21735

