The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Watch Your Head: Assembling Projection Heads to Save the Reliability of
Federated Models
Jinqian Chen1, 3 , Jihua Zhu1 * , 3 , Qinghai Zheng2 , Zhongyu Li1, 3 , Zhiqiang Tian1, 3
1

School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University
3
Shaanxi Joint Key Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence, China
chenjinqian@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, zhujh@xjtu.edu.cn, zhengqinghai@fzu.edu.cn
2

Federated Model

Centralized Model

Misclassification Sample

High confidence

Low confidence

Out-of-distribution Sample

Low entropy

High entropy

Abstract
Federated learning encounters substantial challenges with
heterogeneous data, leading to performance degradation and
convergence issues. While considerable progress has been
achieved in mitigating such an impact, the reliability aspect of
federated models has been largely disregarded. In this study,
we conduct extensive experiments to investigate the reliability of both generic and personalized federated models. Our
exploration uncovers a significant finding: federated models exhibit unreliability when faced with heterogeneous
data, demonstrating poor calibration on in-distribution test
data and low uncertainty levels on out-of-distribution data.
This unreliability is primarily attributed to the presence of
biased projection heads, which introduce miscalibration into
the federated models. Inspired by this observation, we propose the ”Assembled Projection Heads” (APH) method for
enhancing the reliability of federated models. By treating the
existing projection head parameters as priors, APH randomly
samples multiple initialized parameters of projection heads
from the prior and further performs targeted fine-tuning on
locally available data under varying learning rates. Such a
head ensemble introduces parameter diversity into the deterministic model, eliminating the bias and producing reliable
predictions via head averaging. We evaluate the effectiveness
of the proposed APH method across three prominent federated benchmarks. Experimental results validate the efficacy
of APH in model calibration and uncertainty estimation. Notably, APH can be seamlessly integrated into various federated approaches but only requires less than 30% additional
computation cost for 100× inferences within large models.

Figure 1: Generic Federated Models are Not Reliable. Compared with the centralized training models, the generic federated models tend to be more overconfident on misclassified samples and exhibit lower uncertainty (i.e. lower predictive entropy) on out-of-distribution samples (See Section
3), demonstrating the serious reliability issue.

et al. 2017). This issue is far from trivial, especially in classification networks, where overconfidence can lead to higher
predicted confidence in the sample than the actual probability of its assigned class. Even for the out-of-distribution
sample, the model will assign it to a specific class with high
confidence (i.e. low uncertainty) attached. Such discrepancies have grave implications for decision-making and significantly harms the model’s reliability, rendering softmax
outputs unsuitable as uncertainty indicators.
Privacy protection and reliability guarantees have a large
cross field in practical application scenarios. Taking smart
healthcare for example, it’s always impractical to collect the
private data of patients to a central server for the training of a
diagnostic classification model, and thus leads to the broad
application of federated learning. However, privacy is not
all we are after. In such important application scenarios, it
is natural to chase for the reliability of the model, expecting
it to output low confidence in misclassified diagnoses and
refuses to make decisions with unknown diagnoses. So here

Introduction
Federated learning is a training paradigm that holds promise
for privacy preservation (McMahan et al. 2017; Wei et al.
2020). This approach does not require the central server to
collect clients’ data. Instead, clients train their local models and upload the parameters to the server for aggregation.
In addition to privacy concerns, the reliability of neural networks has also garnered considerable attention, given their
deployment in numerous critical scenarios (Levinson et al.
2011; Miotto et al. 2016). Recent research has shown that
modern neural networks tend to exhibit overconfidence (Guo
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11329

