The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Abstraction of Situation Calculus Concurrent Game Structures
Yves Lespérance1 , Giuseppe De Giacomo2 , Maryam Rostamigiv3 , Shakil M. Khan3
1

York University, Toronto, ON, Canada
2
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
3
University of Regina, Regina, SK, Canada
lesperan@eecs.yorku.ca, giuseppe.degiacomo@cs.ox.ac.uk, maryam.rostamigiv@uregina.ca, shakil.khan@uregina.ca

Abstract

a refinement mapping between the two. The refinement mapping specifies how each high-level action is implemented by
a low-level ConGolog program and how each high-level fluent can be translated into a low-level formula. This work
defines notions of abstraction between such action theories
in terms of the existence of a suitable bisimulation relation (Milner 1971) between their respective models. Such
abstractions have many useful properties that ensure that
one can reason about the agent’s actions (e.g., executability, projection, and planning) at the abstract level, and refine
and concretely execute them at the low level. The framework can also be used to generate high-level explanations
of low-level behavior. More recently, (Banihashemi, De Giacomo, and Lespérance 2023), building upon (De Giacomo
and Lespérance 2021), extended their abstraction framework
to agents operating in nondeterministic environments, where
the agent does not fully control the outcome of its actions.
In this paper, we further generalize this abstraction framework to apply to multi-agent synchronous games. To represent such games, we follow (De Giacomo, Lespérance, and
Pearce 2016) and use action theories of a special form called
situation calculus synchronous game structures (SCSGSs),
where we have a single action tick whose effects depend
on the combination of moves selected by the players. The
SCSGS specifies the legal moves available to each agent in
each situation and how fluents change value when a tick
joint move by all the agents is performed. To express strategic properties on the abstract and concrete games we adopt
a first-order variant of alternating-time µ-calculus µATL - FO.
In our game abstraction framework, one specifies both an
abstract SCSGS and a concrete SCSGS, as well as a refinement mapping that specifies how each abstract move is implemented by a Golog (Levesque et al. 1997) program defined over the concrete SCSGS.
We show that we can exploit abstraction in verifying
µATL - FO properties of SCSGSs under the assumption that
agents can always execute abstract moves to completion
even if not fully controlling their outcomes. Our framework
is based on the situation calculus which provides a first-order
representation of the state, allowing us to model how system processes depend on the data and objects involved. Our
account is more general than (Banihashemi, De Giacomo,
and Lespérance 2023), as we support multiple agents that
act synchronously.

We present a general framework for abstracting agent behavior in multi-agent synchronous games in the situation calculus, which provides a first-order representation of the state
and allows us to model how plays depend on the data and
objects involved. We represent such games as action theories of a special form called situation calculus synchronous
game structures (SCSGSs), in which we have a single action
tick whose effects depend on the combination of moves selected by the players. In our framework, one specifies both
an abstract SCSGS and a concrete SCSGS, as well as a refinement mapping that specifies how each abstract move is
implemented by a Golog program defined over the concrete
SCSGS. We define notions of sound and complete abstraction with respect to a mapping over such SCSGS. To express strategic properties on the abstract and concrete games
we adopt a first-order variant of alternating-time µ-calculus
µATL - FO. We show that we can exploit abstraction in verifying µATL - FO properties of SCSGSs under the assumption
that agents can always execute abstract moves to completion
even if not fully controlling their outcomes.

Introduction
Many multi-agent applications can be viewed games where
some agents try to ensure that certain objectives hold no
matter how the environment and other agents behave. Logics such as Alternating-Time Temporal Logic (ATL) (Alur,
Henzinger, and Kupferman 2002), Coalition Logic (CL)
(Pauly 2002), and Strategy Logic (SL) (Chatterjee, Henzinger, and Piterman 2010; Mogavero et al. 2014) have
been defined to specify properties of such systems and verify them through techniques like model checking. However,
as the game/system becomes more complex, it becomes
very important to use abstraction to explain how the game
evolves and do strategic reasoning more effectively.
(Banihashemi, De Giacomo, and Lespérance 2017)
(BDL17) recently proposed a formal account of agent abstraction based on the situation calculus (McCarthy and
Hayes 1969; Reiter 2001) and the ConGolog agent programming language (De Giacomo, Lespérance, and Levesque
2000). They assume that one has a high-level/abstract action theory, a low-level/concrete action theory, both representing the agent’s behavior at different levels of detail, and
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10624

