The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

HARDVS: Revisiting Human Activity Recognition with Dynamic Vision Sensors
Xiao Wang1 , Zongzhen Wu1 , Bo Jiang1 * , Zhimin Bao2 , Lin Zhu3 ,
Guoqi Li4,5 , Yaowei Wang5 , Yonghong Tian5,6,7
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei 230601, China,
2
Tencent,
3
Beijing Institute of Technology,
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China,
6
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University, China,
7
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China.
wangxiaocvpr@foxmail.com, {17398389386, zeyiabc}@163.com, zhiminbao@tencent.com, {linzhu, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn,
guoqi.li@ia.ac.cn, wangyw@pcl.ac.cn
Abstract
The main streams of human activity recognition (HAR) algorithms are developed based on RGB cameras which usually
suffer from illumination, fast motion, privacy preservation,
and large energy consumption. Meanwhile, the biologically
inspired event cameras attracted great interest due to their
unique features, such as high dynamic range, dense temporal
but sparse spatial resolution, low latency, low power, etc. As it
is a newly arising sensor, even there is no realistic large-scale
dataset for HAR. Considering its great practical value, in this
paper, we propose a large-scale benchmark dataset to bridge
this gap, termed HARDVS, which contains 300 categories
and more than 100K event sequences. We evaluate and report
the performance of multiple popular HAR algorithms, which
provide extensive baselines for future works to compare.
More importantly, we propose a novel spatial-temporal feature learning and fusion framework, termed ESTF, for event
stream based human activity recognition. It first projects the
event streams into spatial and temporal embeddings using
StemNet, then, encodes and fuses the dual-view representations using Transformer networks. Finally, the dual features
are concatenated and fed into a classification head for activity
prediction. Extensive experiments on multiple datasets fully
validated the effectiveness of our model. Both the dataset
and source code will be released at https://github.com/EventAHU/HARDVS.

Figure 1: Comparison between existing datasets and our proposed HARDVS dataset for event based video classification.

standard RGB cameras have a limited frame rate (e.g., 30
FPS) which makes it hard to capture the fast-moving objects
and is easily influenced by motion blur. The low dynamic
range (60 dB) makes the RGB sensors work poorly in low
illumination. It also suffers from the high redundancy between nearby frames which needs more storage and energy
consumption. Privacy protection also greatly limits its development. Therefore, a natural question is do we have to
recognize human activities using the RGB sensors?
Recently, the biologically inspired sensors (called event
cameras), such as DAVIS (Brandli et al. 2014), CeleX (Chen
and Guo 2019), ATIS (Posch, Matolin, and Wohlgenannt
2010), and PROPHESEE 1 , drawing more and more researcher’s attention. Different from RGB cameras which
record light in a synchronous way (i.e., the video frame),
the event cameras output events (or spikes) asynchronously
which corresponds to the illumination variation. In another
word, each pixel of event cameras independently records a
binary value only when the light changes exceed a threshold. Events for the increase and decrease of illumination are
called ON and OFF events respectively. Due to the unique
sampling mechanism, the asynchronous events are spatially
sparse but temporally dense. It is less affected by motion
blur, therefore, is suitable for capturing fast-moving human

Introduction
With the rapid development of the smart city, recognizing
human behavior (i.e., Human Activity Recognition, HAR)
accurately and efficiently is becoming an extremely urgent
task. Most researchers develop the HAR algorithms (Kong
and Fu 2018; Ahmad et al. 2021) based on RGB cameras
which are widely deployed and easy to collect the data. With
the help of large-scale benchmark datasets and deep learning, HAR in regular scenarios has been studied to some
extent. However, the storage, transmission, and analysis of
surveillance video set limit the demands in the practical systems due to the usage of RGB sensors. More in detail, the
* Corresponding author: Bo Jiang
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5615

https://www.prophesee.ai

