The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FFT-Based Dynamic Token Mixer for Vision
Yuki Tatsunami1,2 , Masato Taki1
1

Rikkyo University
AnyTech Co., Ltd.
y.tatsunami@rikkyo.ac.jp, taki m@rikkyo.ac.jp
2

Abstract

This problem is not agonizing in ImageNet classification but
in dense tasks like semantic segmentation since we often
deal with high-resolution input images. This problem can
be tackled by using local attention design (Liu et al. 2021;
Zhang et al. 2021; Chu et al. 2021; Chen, Panda, and Fan
2022), but the token-to-token interaction is limited, which
means that one of the selling points of Transformers is mislaid.

Multi-head-self-attention (MHSA)-equipped models have
achieved notable performance in computer vision. Their computational complexity is proportional to quadratic numbers
of pixels in input feature maps, resulting in slow processing, especially when dealing with high-resolution images.
New types of token-mixer are proposed as an alternative
to MHSA to circumvent this problem: an FFT-based tokenmixer involves global operations similar to MHSA but with
lower computational complexity. However, despite its attractive properties, the FFT-based token-mixer has not been carefully examined in terms of its compatibility with the rapidly
evolving MetaFormer architecture. Here, we propose a novel
token-mixer called Dynamic Filter and novel image recognition models, DFFormer and CDFFormer, to close the gaps
above. The results of image classification and downstream
tasks, analysis, and visualization show that our models are
helpful. Notably, their throughput and memory efficiency
when dealing with high-resolution image recognition is remarkable. Our results indicate that Dynamic Filter is one of
the token-mixer options that should be seriously considered.
The code is available at https://github.com/okojoalg/dfformer

GFNet (Rao et al. 2021) is one of the architectures induced by ViT and has two charming properties: (1) Global
filter, the principal component in GFNet, multiplies features and complex parameters in frequency domains to
increase/decrease a specific frequency. It is similar to a
large kernel convolution (Ding et al. 2022b; Liu et al.
2023) but has the attractive aspect of reducing theoretical
computational costs (Rao et al. 2021). In addition, GFNet
has less difficulty training than a large kernel convolution,
whereas large kernel convolutions employ a tricky training
plan. Moreover, a computational complexity of GFNet is
O(HW C[log2 (HW )] + HW C), which is superior to of
self-attention O(HW C 2 + (HW )2 C) where H is height,
W is width, and C is channel. In other words, the higher the
resolution of the input image, the more complexity GFNet
has relative dominance. (2) A global filter is expected to
serve as a low-pass filter like MHSA because a global filter is a global operation with room to capture low-frequency
information. We follow (Park and Kim 2022) and compare
the relative log amplitudes of Fourier transformed between
ViT, and GFNet, which is a non-hierarchical architecture
similar to ViT, and show in Figure 1. The result demonstrates that GFNet retains the same low-frequency information near 0 as ViT. Thus, we need to address the potential for the global filter alternative to MHSA due to its
computational advantage when handling high-resolution input images and its similarity to MHSA. Global filters and
MHSA are different in certain respects, even though they
have low-pass filter characteristics like they are different in
certain respects. For example, MHSA is a data-dependent
operation generated from data and applied to data. In contrast, global filters multiply data and parameters and hence
are less data-dependent operations. In recent works, MLPbased models, which have been less data-dependent, employ data-dependent operations (Wang et al. 2022; Rao et al.
2022), achieved accuracy improvements. It is inferred from

Introduction
A transformer architecture was propelled to the forefront of
investigations in the computer vision field. The architecture
locates the center in various visual recognition tasks, including not only image classification (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021;
Touvron et al. 2021; Yuan et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2021; Beyer et al. 2023) but also action recognition (Neimark et al. 2021; Bertasius, Wang, and Torresani 2021), even point cloud understanding (Guo et al. 2021;
Zhao et al. 2021; Wei et al. 2022). Vision Transformer (ViT)
(Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) and its variants triggered this explosion. ViT was inspired by Transformer in NLP and is
equipped with a multi-head self-attention (MHSA) mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017) as a critical ingredient. MHSA
modules are low-pass filters (Park and Kim 2022). Hence
they are suitable for recognizing information about an entire image. While MHSA modules have been a success,
it has faced challenges, especially in aspects of quadratic
computational complexity due to global attention design.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15328

