The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DS-AL: A Dual-Stream Analytic Learning for Exemplar-Free Class-Incremental
Learning
Huiping Zhuang1 , Run He1 , Kai Tong1 , Ziqian Zeng1 , Cen Chen2,3 * , Zhiping Lin4
1

Shien-Ming Wu School of Intelligent Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
2
School of Future Technology, South China University of Technology, China
3
Pazhou Laboratory, China
4
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{hpzhuang, zqzeng, chencen}@scut.edu.cn, {wirh, wikaitong}@mail.scut.edu.cn, ezplin@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

CIL offers several benefits but can also lead to catastrophic forgetting (Belouadah, Popescu, and Kanellos 2021),
where models quickly lose previously learned knowledge
when acquiring new tasks. This issue is exacerbated under
an exemplar-free constraint, where previous experience cannot be stored or revisited. Researchers have proposed various solutions, including replay-based CIL and exemplar-free
CIL (EFCIL). Replay-based methods perform competitively
but violate the exemplar-free constraint. EFCIL techniques
honor data privacy but often yield inferior results.
The EFCIL family consists of a few sub-branches,
with regularization-based methods being the most prevalent branch. These methods reduce catastrophic forgetting
by imposing constraints to prevent the change of important weights or activations. However, they are usually inadequate as their performances cannot match those of replaybased counterparts (Liu, Schiele, and Sun 2021b). Recently,
a new branch of CIL, the analytic learning (AL) based CIL
(Zhuang et al. 2022), has shown promising results even
while adhering to the exemplar-free constraint.
The AL-based methods identify the iterative mechanism
as the primary cause of catastrophic forgetting and replace
it with linear recursive tools. For the first time, they provide
results on par with those of replay-based techniques. Additionally, the recursive operation allows the AL-based CIL to
give strong performance especially under large-phase scenarios (e.g., 50-phase). However, existing AL-based methods may suffer from an under-fitting dilemma because they
rely solely on one linear projection. This has motivated the
exploration of potential approaches to compensate for the
limited fitting power of vanilla linearity inherited from the
AL-based CIL.
In this paper, we introduce a Dual-Stream Analytic Learning (DS-AL). The DS-AL contains a main stream offering an
analytical (i.e., closed-form) linear solution, and a compensation stream that improves the inherent under-fitting limitation due to adopting linear mapping. The DS-AL develops
the AL-based CIL family by compensating the lack of fitting
power, without losing the basic benefits inherited from this
category. The key contributions are summarized as follows.
• We present the DS-AL, an exemplar-free technique that
offers an analytical solution to the CIL problem.
• The DS-AL’s main stream redefines the CIL problem

Class-incremental learning (CIL) under an exemplar-free
constraint has presented a significant challenge. Existing
methods adhering to this constraint are prone to catastrophic
forgetting, far more so than replay-based techniques that
retain access to past samples. In this paper, to solve the
exemplar-free CIL problem, we propose a Dual-Stream Analytic Learning (DS-AL) approach. The DS-AL contains a
main stream offering an analytical (i.e., closed-form) linear
solution, and a compensation stream improving the inherent
under-fitting limitation due to adopting linear mapping. The
main stream redefines the CIL problem into a Concatenated
Recursive Least Squares (C-RLS) task, allowing an equivalence between the CIL and its joint-learning counterpart. The
compensation stream is governed by a Dual-Activation Compensation (DAC) module. This module re-activates the embedding with a different activation function from the main
stream one, and seeks fitting compensation by projecting
the embedding to the null space of the main stream’s linear
mapping. Empirical results demonstrate that the DS-AL, despite being an exemplar-free technique, delivers performance
comparable with or better than that of replay-based methods across various datasets, including CIFAR-100, ImageNet100 and ImageNet-Full. Additionally, the C-RLS’ equivalent property allows the DS-AL to execute CIL in a phaseinvariant manner. This is evidenced by a never-before-seen
500-phase CIL ImageNet task, which performs on a level
identical to a 5-phase one. Our codes are available at https:
//github.com/ZHUANGHP/Analytic-continual-learning.

Introduction
Class-incremental learning (CIL) (Li and Hoiem 2018; Rebuffi et al. 2017) updates a network’s parameters in a phaseby-phase manner, with data arriving separately in each training phase. CIL has gained popularity for its ability to adapt
trained models to unseen data categories, reducing energy
consumption. Its development is emphasized by the fact that
data and target categories are often available at specific locations or time slots. Furthermore, CIL is intuitively inspired
by the human learning process, where individuals build upon
their existing knowledge by assimilating new information
continuously.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17237

