The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

One Self-Configurable Model to Solve Many Abstract Visual Reasoning Problems
Mikołaj Małkiński1 , Jacek Mańdziuk1,2
1

Faculty of Mathematics and Information Science, Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland
2
Faculty of Computer Science, AGH University of Krakow, Krakow, Poland
mikolaj.malkinski.dokt@pw.edu.pl, mandziuk@mini.pw.edu.pl

Abstract

is to complete the grid with one of the panels picked from a
separate set of answer panels that best fits the arrangement
of the image panels. Top-left part of Fig. 1 presents an RPM
with 9 image panels and 8 answer panels (A – H). Additional
examples are presented in Appendix B in the supplementary
material (Małkiński and Mańdziuk 2023a).
Recently, the AVR field has witnessed an increasing interest from the deep learning (DL) community (Małkiński
and Mańdziuk 2023b). While early works reported successful use of DL models to solve easier instances of AVR tasks,
e.g. certain RPMs (Hoshen and Werman 2017; Mańdziuk
and Żychowski 2019), soon after the effectiveness of DL
models in solving more demanding matrices has been questioned (Barrett et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019a). Concurrently, a wide suite of AVR benchmarks, extending beyond
the concept of RPMs, has been proposed. For instance, Visual Analogy Problems (VAPs) (Hill et al. 2019) present
a conceptual abstraction challenge similar to RPMs, but
with different numbers of context and answer panels. Another example are Odd One Out (O3) tests (Mańdziuk and
Żychowski 2019) that require the subject to identify the
panel that stands out from the remaining ones. Though all
the above AVR problems have abstract reasoning at their
core, they differ in the number of panels, task structure, and
the rules (visual patterns) that conceptually underlie their
matrix representations.
Due to the variety of AVR problems, numerous approaches to tackle them have been proposed (Małkiński and
Mańdziuk 2022). In effect, for the most popular AVR tasks
a steady research progress has been observed, and the performance of the methods reached, or even surpassed, the
human level (Wu et al. 2020). Despite impressive performance, contemporary methods largely focus on solving single tasks, often by embedding task-specific design choices
into the model’s architecture, and cannot be easily evaluated on other, even similar problems. Consequently, the
generality and wider applicability of these solution methods remains unclear. What is more, the mainstream research
commonly utilizes well-established benchmarks with large
amounts of available training instances, as the performance
of DL AVR methods, when evaluated in low-data regimes,
rapidly decreases (Zhuo and Kankanhalli 2021). On the contrary, human IQ tests which incorporate AVR tasks often assume that the solver has limited prior experience with the

Abstract Visual Reasoning (AVR) comprises a wide selection of various problems similar to those used in human IQ
tests. Recent years have brought dynamic progress in solving
particular AVR tasks, however, in the contemporary literature AVR problems are largely dealt with in isolation, leading
to highly specialized task-specific methods. With the aim of
developing universal learning systems in the AVR domain,
we propose the unified model for solving Single-Choice Abstract visual Reasoning tasks (SCAR), capable of solving various single-choice AVR tasks, without making any a priori
assumptions about the task structure, in particular the number and configuration of panels. The proposed model relies
on a novel Structure-Aware dynamic Layer (SAL), which
adapts its weights to the structure of the considered AVR
problem. Experiments conducted on Raven’s Progressive Matrices, Visual Analogy Problems, and Odd One Out problems show that SCAR (SAL-based models, in general) effectively solves diverse AVR tasks, and its performance is on par
with the state-of-the-art task-specific baselines. What is more,
SCAR demonstrates effective knowledge reuse in multi-task
and transfer learning settings. To our knowledge, this work
is the first successful attempt to construct a general singlechoice AVR solver relying on self-configurable architecture
and unified solving method. With this work we aim to stimulate and foster progress on task-independent research paths
in the AVR domain, with the long-term goal of development
of a general AVR solver.

Introduction
For many years, Abstract Visual Reasoning (AVR) has been
a highly challenging area of artificial intelligence (AI) research (Hernández-Orallo et al. 2016). In a typical AVR
task, the solver has to identify a set of rules (visual patterns)
that govern the distribution of a set of 2D shapes with certain attributes. The shapes are scattered across several image
panels, which are arranged in a specific 2D structure. Popularised by human IQ tests, the prevailing form of task representation is a single-choice matrix, where a test-taker has to
select one of the panels as a task answer. A common example are Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPMs) (Raven 1936;
Raven and Court 1998) that consist of a 3 × 3 grid of image
panels with the bottom-right panel being missing. The task
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14297

