The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DDDM-VC: Decoupled Denoising Diffusion Models with Disentangled
Representation and Prior Mixup for Verified Robust Voice Conversion
Ha-Yeong Choi1 * , Sang-Hoon Lee2,3 * , Seong-Whan Lee1†
1

Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Ajou University, South Korea
3
Department of Software and Computer Engineering, Ajou University, South Korea
1
{hayeong, sw.lee}@korea.ac.kr, 2,3 {sanghoonlee}@ajou.ac.kr
2

Reverse process

Abstract
Diffusion-based generative models have recently exhibited
powerful generative performance. However, as many attributes
exist in the data distribution and owing to several limitations
of sharing the model parameters across all levels of the generation process, it remains challenging to control specific styles
for each attribute. To address the above problem, we introduce decoupled denoising diffusion models (DDDMs) with
disentangled representations, which can enable effective style
transfers for each attribute in generative models. In particular,
we apply DDDMs for voice conversion (VC) tasks, tackling
the intricate challenge of disentangling and individually transferring each speech attributes such as linguistic information,
intonation, and timbre. First, we use a self-supervised representation to disentangle the speech representation. Subsequently,
the DDDMs are applied to resynthesize the speech from the
disentangled representations for style transfer with respect to
each attribute. Moreover, we also propose the prior mixup for
robust voice style transfer, which uses the converted representation of the mixed style as a prior distribution for the diffusion
models. The experimental results reveal that our method outperforms publicly available VC models. Furthermore, we show
that our method provides robust generative performance even
when using a smaller model size. Audio samples are available
at https://hayeong0.github.io/DDDM-VC-demo/.

1

Forward process
DDDM
(Ours)
Standard
Diffusion

Attribute 1
Denoiser

Attribute 1
Denoiser

Attribute 2
Denoiser

Attribute 2
Denoiser

Standard
Denoiser

Standard
Denoiser

…

…

Attribute 1
Denoiser
Attribute 2
Denoiser
Standard
Denoiser

Figure 1: Speech synthesis in DDDM and standard diffusion
model. Although a single denoiser with same parameter is
used for all denoising steps in standard diffusion models,
we subdivide the denoiser into multiple denoiser for each
attribute by utilizing self-supervised representation. For each
intermediate time step, each denoiser focuses on removing
the single noise from its own attribute.

Introduction

Denoising diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020;
Dhariwal and Nichol 2021; Song et al. 2021) have achieved
significant success in image generation tasks (Ramesh et al.
2022; Saharia et al. 2022b). Diffusion models have also attracted increasing interest in the audio domain in recent years,
owing to their ability to synthesize high-quality speech (e.g.,
Mel-spectrogram and audio). Various applications employ
diffusion models, such as text-to-speech (TTS) (Popov et al.
2021; Kim, Kim, and Yoon 2022a,b), neural vocoder (Kong
et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2022), speech enhancement (Han and Lee 2022), and voice conversion (VC)
(Liu et al. 2021; Popov et al. 2022).
Although diffusion models have achieved success in most
speech applications owing to their powerful generative perfor* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17862

mance, there remains room for improvement in conventional
methods. As data include many attributes, it is difficult to
control specific styles for each attribute with a single denoiser
that shares the model parameters across all levels of generation process. To reduce this burden in the image generation
domain, eDiff-i (Balaji et al. 2022) subdivides the single denoiser into multiple specialized denoisers that originate from
the single denoiser progressively according to specific iterative steps. However, a limitation still exists in controlling each
attribute within entirely the same conditioning framework for
every iteration, which results in a lack of controllability.
To address the above issues, we first present decoupled
denoising diffusion models (DDDMs) with disentangled representations. As illustrated in Figure 1, we disentangle the
denoiser into specific attribute-conditioned denoisers to improve the model controllability for each attribute. Subsequently, each denoiser focuses on the noise from its own
attribute at the same noise level and removes the noise at
each intermediate time step. To demonstrate the effectiveness
of DDDMs, we focus on the VC tasks that still face challenges in disentangling and controlling each speech attribute
(Choi et al. 2021). VC is a task for transferring or controlling

