The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Propagation Tree Is Not Deep: Adaptive Graph Contrastive Learning Approach
for Rumor Detection
Chaoqun Cui, Caiyan Jia*
School of Computer and Information Technology & Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China
{21120341,cyjia}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

and harnesses the collective intelligence of the crowd, is invaluable for debunking rumors. In general, rumor detection
models built upon rumor propagation structures glean discriminative features of rumors from the interrelation of comments, apprehending specific patterns of reply stances as the
basis for claim classification, given that clear disparities exist between the comment stances of rumor claims and those
of non-rumor claims. These models are adept at discerning
these differences, which constitute one of the fundamental
postulates of rumor detection methods based on rumor propagation trees (Ma, Gao, and Wong 2018). This supposition
relies, to a certain degree, on the deep structures of rumor
propagation trees (RPTs). But are RPTs really deep?
Bearing this question in mind, we undertook a statistical
analysis to explore the structural characteristics of RPTs.
The findings indicate that, in commonly employed rumor
detection datasets and real-world social media platforms,
the tree structures of claims are typically shallow. The vast
majority of a claim’s comments constitute 1-level replies,
with the remainder primarily consisting of 2-level replies,
and only a negligible number delve into deeper levels. This
essentially implies that RPTs are not characterized by deep
tree structures, but instead exhibit wide structures.
As per our statistical analysis, the majority of nodes in
RPTs are 1-level replies, all pointing directly to the root
node (i.e., the source post), which highlights the significance
of the root node. Further, it is plausible that the majority of
the 1-level replies, due to their lack of deeper engagement,
may contain less informational value in rumor identification compared to nodes with more extensive paths. Based on
these findings, we propose the Rumor Adaptive Graph Contrastive Learning (RAGCL) method. RAGCL utilizes node
centrality measures to generate augmented views of RPTs
and leverages graph contrastive learning methods to facilitate graph neural networks (GNNs) in learning crucial rumor discriminative features from the deep sections of RPTs.
Empirical studies demonstrate the effectiveness of RAGCL.
In summary, the contributions of this study are as follows.
• Our statistical survey has unveiled that RPTs primarily
exhibit a wide tree structure, breaking the stereotype of
a deep tree structure in previous studies. This shifts the
understanding of information propagation processes on
social media platforms.
• Informed by the structural characteristics of RPTs and in-

Rumor detection on social media has become increasingly
important. Most existing graph-based models presume rumor
propagation trees (RPTs) have deep structures and learn sequential stance features along branches. However, through
statistical analysis on real-world datasets, we find RPTs exhibit wide structures, with most nodes being shallow 1-level
replies. To focus learning on intensive substructures, we propose Rumor Adaptive Graph Contrastive Learning (RAGCL)
method with adaptive view augmentation guided by node
centralities. We summarize three principles for RPT augmentation: 1) exempt root nodes, 2) retain deep reply nodes, 3)
preserve lower-level nodes in deep sections. We employ node
dropping, attribute masking and edge dropping with probabilities from centrality-based importance scores to generate
views. A graph contrastive objective then learns robust rumor representations. Extensive experiments on four benchmark datasets demonstrate RAGCL outperforms state-of-theart methods. Our work reveals the wide-structure nature of
RPTs and contributes an effective graph contrastive learning approach tailored for rumor detection through principled
adaptive augmentation. The proposed principles and augmentation techniques can potentially benefit other applications involving tree-structured graphs.

Introduction
The unprecedented growth of the Internet in recent years
has promoted the widespread applications of social media.
Digital platforms like Weibo and Twitter have evolved into
critical conduits for users to garner information and interact with each other. These platforms, while facilitating information dissemination and diverse opinion expression on
a multitude of trending issues, are also breeding grounds for
various rumors. Given the massive user base and the ease of
use, rumors are disseminated extensively and swiftly via social media, wreaking substantial societal havoc. Therefore,
there is an urgent need to establish efficacious and efficient
strategies for automated rumor verification on social media.
Currently, a plethora of studies concerning rumor detection exist. Certain studies (Bian et al. 2020; Wei et al. 2021)
have demonstrated that the propagation structure of a claim,
which fully encapsulates the interrelationship between posts
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

73

