The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DOCTR: Disentangled Object-Centric Transformer for Point Scene
Understanding
Xiaoxuan Yu1 * , Hao Wang1 , Weiming Li1 , Qiang Wang1 , Soonyong Cho2 , Younghun Sung2
1

Samsung Research China – Beijing
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
xiaoxuan1.yu@samsung.com, hao1.wang@samsung.com, weiming.li@samsung.com, qiang.w@samsung.com,
soonyong.cho@samsung.com, younghun.sung@samsung.com
2

Abstract
Point scene understanding is a challenging task to process
real-world scene point cloud, which aims at segmenting each
object, estimating its pose, and reconstructing its mesh simultaneously. Recent state-of-the-art method first segments
each object and then processes them independently with
multiple stages for the different sub-tasks. This leads to a
complex pipeline to optimize and makes it hard to leverage the relationship constraints between multiple objects. In
this work, we propose a novel Disentangled Object-Centric
TRansformer (DOCTR) that explores object-centric representation to facilitate learning with multiple objects for the
multiple sub-tasks in a unified manner. Each object is represented as a query, and a Transformer decoder is adapted to
iteratively optimize all the queries involving their relationship. In particular, we introduce a semantic-geometry disentangled query (SGDQ) design that enables the query features to attend separately to semantic information and geometric information relevant to the corresponding sub-tasks.
A hybrid bipartite matching module is employed to well
use the supervisions from all the sub-tasks during training. Qualitative and quantitative experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance
on the challenging ScanNet dataset. Code is available at
https://github.com/SAITPublic/DOCTR.

Figure 1: Point Scene Understanding. With an incomplete
point cloud scene as input, our method learns to segment
each object instance and reconstruct its complete mesh.
Compared to the recent DIMR (Tang et al. 2022), our proposed DOCTR has a compact pipeline and achieves more
accurate results in challenging cases such as when multiple
objects are in close proximity.

For the point scene understanding task, an early method
RfD-Net(Nie et al. 2021) is among the first to learn object meshes at semantic-instance level directly from points.
RfD-Net proposes a reconstruction-from-detection framework that enables identification and reconstruction of object meshes at a high resolution. It confirms that object recognition and reconstruction are mutually reinforcing
tasks. Recently, DIMR (Tang et al. 2022) founds that the
reconstruction-from-detection pipeline tends to fail when reconstructing high fidelity objects. DIMR shows that replacing the detection backbone in RfD-Net by a segmentation
backbone and disentangling instance completion and mesh
generation contribute to improve object reconstruction quality. These designs empower DIMR to achieve state-of-theart (SOTA) performance. However, DIMR still relies on geometric clustering for object segmentation that requires tuning of hyper-parameters such as the radius for clustering.
Meanwhile, after object segmentation, DIMR treats each object instance independently to estimate its pose, shape latent
code, and reconstruct its mesh. DIMR’s pipeline is complex
to jointly optimize the segmentation and other sub-tasks.
Further, the separate processing for each object makes it
hard to leverage the relationship between multiple objects.
In test with real-world scenes, DIMR is prone to artifacts for

Introduction
Understanding 3D scene is important for various spatial
modeling and interaction applications such as augmented
reality (AR), autonomous driving, and robotics. With the
progress of 3D deep learning, recent real-world applications
seek more comprehensive understanding of rich and detailed
attributes for all objects of interests in a scene. This paper addresses a recent task of point scene understanding (Nie et al.
2021; Tang et al. 2022) that simultaneously involves several sub-tasks including object classification, instance segmentation, pose estimation, and object mesh reconstruction.
The input is point cloud of real-world scene that is obtained
by 3D scanning or reconstruction. Such data often contains
noisy and missing portions due to occlusions or sensor limitations, which make the task even more challenging.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6826

