The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

HyperEditor: Achieving Both Authenticity and Cross-Domain Capability
in Image Editing via Hypernetworks
Hai Zhang1,2 , Chunwei Wu1,2 , Guitao Cao1,2 * , Hailing Wang1,2 , Wenming Cao3
1

2

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing, East China Normal University, China
MoE Engineering Research Center of SW/HW Co-design Technology and Application, East China Normal University, China
3
College of Information Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
{hzhang22, 52215902005}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, gtcao@sei.ecnu.edu.cn, 52215902004@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, wmcao@szu.edu.cn
Abstract

cross-domain image editing purely through the manipulation of the latent codes. Thus, we pondered the question: “Is
it possible to achieve both authentic image attribute editing
and cross-domain image style transfer simultaneously?”
Recently, (Alaluf et al. 2022; Dinh et al. 2022) utilize hypernetworks to reassign the generator’s weights, achieving
a more precise image reconstruction by gradually compensating for the missing details of the source image in the reconstructed image. Inspired by this, we find that modulating the generator’s weights can achieve detailed attribute
changes in images. Therefore, we adopt the concept of
weight reassignment to the image editing task. In our work,
we propose a novel image editing method called HyperEditor, which directly conducts image editing by utilizing
weight factors generated by hypernetworks to reassign the
weights of StyleGAN2’s generator. Unlike traditional methods of model weight fine-tuning (Gal et al. 2022), which often involve retraining the pre-trained model, our approach
involves scaling and reassigning the weights of the generator using weight factors. As a result, our method offers
better controllability, allowing for authentic attribute editing (e.g., facial features, hair, etc.). Moreover, due to our
method’s capability to modify the generator’s weights, it can
effectively perform cross-domain editing operations, which
might be challenging to achieve solely by manipulating the
latent codes. To the best of our knowledge, our method is the
first to achieve authentic attribute editing and cross-domain
style editing simultaneously.
We pondered a question: must we reassign all layers
in StyleGAN2’s generator when editing a single attribute?
Based on experimental findings, we observed that only a few
layers’ weight factors undergo significant changes before
and after editing. Thus, we propose the adaptive layer selector, enabling hypernetworks to choose the layers that require
outputting weight factors autonomously. Consequently, we
can maximize the effect of weight factors while achieving
comparable results.
During model training, aligning the generated images
with the target conditions poses a challenge due to the lack
of paired datasets before and after editing in the real-world.
Recently, some methods (Wei et al. 2022; Kocasari et al.
2022) use CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) to convert image features into pseudo-text features and align them with genuinetext features. In our work, we leverage the self-supervised

Editing real images authentically while also achieving crossdomain editing remains a challenge. Recent studies have focused on converting real images into latent codes and accomplishing image editing by manipulating these codes. However, merely manipulating the latent codes would constrain
the edited images to the generator’s image domain, hindering the attainment of diverse editing goals. In response, we
propose an innovative image editing method called HyperEditor, which utilizes weight factors generated by hypernetworks to reassign the weights of the pre-trained StyleGAN2’s
generator. Guided by CLIP’s cross-modal image-text semantic alignment, this innovative approach enables us to simultaneously accomplish authentic attribute editing and crossdomain style transfer, a capability not realized in previous
methods. Additionally, we ascertain that modifying only the
weights of specific layers in the generator can yield an equivalent editing result. Therefore, we introduce an adaptive layer
selector, enabling our hypernetworks to autonomously identify the layers requiring output weight factors, which can further improve our hypernetworks’ efficiency. Extensive experiments on abundant challenging datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

Introduction
The primary objective of image editing is to modify specific properties of real images by leveraging conditions. In
recent years, image editing has emerged as one of the most
dynamic and vibrant research areas in academia and industry. Several studies (Shen et al. 2019; Härkönen et al. 2020;
Liu et al. 2023; Revanur et al. 2023; Liu, Song, and Chen
2023; Patashnik et al. 2021) have investigated the extensive
latent semantic representations in StyleGAN2 (Karras et al.
2020) and have successfully achieved diverse and authentic image editing through the manipulation of latent codes.
These methods share a common characteristic: finding the
optimal target latent codes for substituting the initial latent
codes, thereby advancing the source image to the target image. However, latent codes with high reconstructability often exhibit weak editability (Pehlivan, Dalva, and Dundar
2023). Additionally, if the target image falls outside the image domain of the generator, it becomes difficult to achieve
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7051

