The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Weakly Supervised Few-Shot Object Detection With DETR
Chenbo Zhang1 * , Yinglu Zhang1 * , Lu Zhang1 , Jiajia Zhao2 , Jihong Guan3 , Shuigeng Zhou1†
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
2
Science and Technology on Complex System Control and Intelligent Agent Cooperation Laboratory, Beijing
Electro-Mechanical Engineering Institute, China
3
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tongji University, China
{cbzhang21,yingluzhang21}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {l zhang19,sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn
zhaojiajia1982@gamil.com, jhguan@tongji.edu.cn
Abstract

Train

In recent years, Few-shot Object Detection (FSOD) has become an increasingly important research topic in computer
vision. However, existing FSOD methods require strong annotations including category labels and bounding boxes, and
their performance is heavily dependent on the quality of box
annotations. However, acquiring strong annotations is both
expensive and time-consuming. This inspires the study on
weakly supervised FSOD (WS-FSOD in short), which realizes FSOD with only image-level annotations, i.e., category labels. In this paper, we propose a new and effective
weakly supervised FSOD method named WFS-DETR. By a
well-designed pretraining process, WFS-DETR first acquires
general object localization and integrity judgment capabilities on large-scale pretraining data. Then, it introduces object integrity into multiple-instance learning to solve the common local optimum problem by comprehensively exploiting both semantic and visual information. Finally, with simple fine-tuning, it transfers the knowledge learned from the
base classes to the novel classes, which enables accurate detection of novel objects. Benefiting from this “pretrainingrefinement” mechanism, WSF-DETR can achieve good generalization on different datasets. Extensive experiments also
show that the proposed method clearly outperforms the existing counterparts in the WS-FSOD task.

[dog, cat]
Base Classes
dog

cat

Predict

dog
cat

(a) Weakly Supervised Object Detection
Novel Classes

＋

Train

Detector

Predict

motorcycle
(b) Few-shot Object Detection
Novel Classes

Base Classes

＋
[dog, cat]

Detector

Train

Detector

Predict

motorcycle

motorcycle

[motorcycle]
(c) Weakly Supervised Few-shot Object Detection

Figure 1: A conceptual comparison among general weakly
supervised object detection (WSOD), few-shot object detection (FSOD), and weakly supervised few-shot object detection (WS-FSOD). Here, on the left, red texts and boxes are
annotations; And on the right, yellow texts and boxes are detected results.

effective object detection using only a small amount of annotated data of novel classes. However, to train the FSOD
model (Chen et al. 2019), we still have to collect a large
amount of strongly annotated training data for the base
classes, including the category and the bounding box of each
object of each target class in each training image, which
incurs huge annotation cost. Moreover, the performance of
FSOD models heavily relies on the quality of box annotations. But, due to the complexity of images and the diversity
of object morphology, it is difficult to guarantee the quality
of the box annotations, which inevitably impacts the performance of the models.
To alleviate the annotation problem, recently a few works
have tried to incorporate weakly supervised learning into
FSOD (Karlinsky et al. 2021; Shaban et al. 2022; Gao et al.
2019). StarNet (Karlinsky et al. 2021) stands for the first
weakly supervised FSOD (WS-FSDO) effort that utilizes a
star model to perform non-parametric geometric matching
between support and query images. However, its computational complexity will significantly increase when handling

Instruction
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision
and has achieved great success in many practical scenarios. Currently, deep learning based techniques such as Faster
R-CNN (Ren et al. 2015), YOLO (Redmon and Farhadi
2018), and DETR (Carion et al. 2020) have become mainstream. Typically, these methods rely on substantial amounts
of well-annotated data to train models that can accurately
recognize and localize the objects. Nevertheless, collecting
and annotating such data is extremely expensive and timeconsuming, which limits their applications.
In recent years, few-shot object detection (FSOD) has
emerged as a promising direction, which aims to achieve
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7015

