The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Revisiting Gradient Pruning: A Dual Realization for Defending against Gradient
Attacks
Lulu Xue1 , Shengshan Hu1 * , Ruizhi Zhao1 , Leo Yu Zhang2 , Shengqing Hu3 , Lichao Sun4 , Dezhong
Yao5
1

School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University
3
Department of Nuclear Medicine, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Lehigh University
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{lluxue,hushengshan,zhaoruizhi,dyao}@hust.edu.cn, hsqha@126.com, leo.zhang@griffith.edu.au,
james.lichao.sun@gmail.com
Abstract

However, none of the existing defense methods could take
care of all privacy, utility, and efficiency difficulties in the
CL framework.
For example, traditional defenses such as DP and
cryptography-based methods strike a balance among privacy protection, model performance, and efficiency simultaneously (Dwork, Roth et al. 2014; Bonawitz et al. 2017;
Hardy et al. 2017; Gilad-Bachrach et al. 2019). To address
this challenge, various perturbations-based methods have
been proposed (Gao et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2021; Scheliga,
Mäder, and Seeland 2022). But they all rely on auxiliary
optimization modules to reduce certain privacy leakage and
cannot defend against all GIAs in practice (see Sec. 6.2 for
details). For instance, perturbation-based defense methods
(i.e., Precode (Scheliga, Mäder, and Seeland 2022), Soteria (Sun et al. 2021)) can effectively defend against passive
GIAs (Geiping et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020; Wei et al.
2020b), but fail to work against the active GIAs (Boenisch
et al. 2021; Pan et al. 2022), which is considered as the stateof-the-art attack method. On the contrary, the classic Topk based gradient pruning method (Lin et al. 2017; Alistarh
et al. 2018) is generally ineffective for enhancing privacy
against passive GIAs, and corresponding defenses (e.g., Outpost (Wang, Hugh, and Li 2023)) offer limited protection.
But we find that they significantly outperform recent defense methods under the active attack. Tab. 1 gives a detailed experimental result for this observation. The new findings inspire us to seek a more practical and effective defense
against both passive and active GIAs. In this paper, we propose a new gradient pruning-based method, Dual Gradient
Pruning (DGP). Dual gradient pruning is a novel gradient
pruning technique, which removes top-k1 largest gradient
parameters and the bottom-k2 smallest gradient parameters
from the local model. DGP leads to a strong privacy protection against both passive GIAs and active GIAs.
To measure the level of protection, we present the theoretical analysis of reconstruction error from pruned gradients,
showing that the error is proportional to gradient distance.
So removing larger gradient parameters can rapidly enlarge
the gradient distance, resulting in a significant reconstruction error. However, removing many larger parameters will

Collaborative learning (CL) is a distributed learning framework that aims to protect user privacy by allowing users to
jointly train a model by sharing their gradient updates only.
However, gradient inversion attacks (GIAs), which recover
users’ training data from shared gradients, impose severe privacy threats to CL. Existing defense methods adopt different techniques, e.g., differential privacy, cryptography, and
perturbation defenses, to defend against the GIAs. Nevertheless, all current defense methods suffer from a poor tradeoff between privacy, utility, and efficiency. To mitigate the
weaknesses of existing solutions, we propose a novel defense
method, Dual Gradient Pruning (DGP), based on gradient
pruning, which can improve communication efficiency while
preserving the utility and privacy of CL. Specifically, DGP
slightly changes gradient pruning with a stronger privacy
guarantee. And DGP can also significantly improve communication efficiency with a theoretical analysis of its convergence and generalization. Our extensive experiments show
that DGP can effectively defend against the most powerful
GIAs and reduce the communication cost without sacrificing
the model’s utility.

1

Introduction

Collaborative learning (CL) (Shokri and Shmatikov 2015)
is a distributed learning framework, where multiple users
train a model locally and share their gradients among the
peers or to a centralized server. CL claims to protect user
privacy since users do not need to share their local (private) data directly. However, recent studies reveal that gradients can be used to recover the original training data information via gradient inversion attacks (GIAs) (Zhu, Liu,
and Han 2019; Geiping et al. 2020). To against GIAs, a
large number of studies have been proposed, where they
leverage the advanced privacy protection techniques, such
as differential privacy (DP) (Dwork, Roth et al. 2014), cryptography (Bonawitz et al. 2017; Hardy et al. 2017; GiladBachrach et al. 2019) and perturbation defense (Gao et al.
2021; Sun et al. 2021; Scheliga, Mäder, and Seeland 2022).
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6404

