The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Dual-Way Enhanced Framework from Text Matching Point of View for
Multimodal Entity Linking
Shezheng Song1 , Shan Zhao* 1 , Chengyu Wang2 , Tianwei Yan2
Shasha Li∗2 , Xiaoguang Mao2 , Meng Wang1
1
Hefei University of Technology
National University of Defense Technology
betterszsong@gmail.com, zhaoshan@hfut.edu.cn, shashali@nudt.edu.cn
2

Abstract

- Mike Pompeo: He is an American politician,

lawyer, and businessma who served as
× former
director of the Central Intelligence Agency...

Multimodal Entity Linking (MEL) aims at linking ambiguous
mentions with multimodal information to entity in Knowledge Graph (KG) such as Wikipedia, which plays a key
role in many applications. However, existing methods suffer from shortcomings, including modality impurity such as
noise in raw image and ambiguous textual entity representation, which puts obstacles to MEL. We formulate multimodal entity linking as a neural text matching problem where
each multimodal information (text and image) is treated as a
query, and the model learns the mapping from each query to
the relevant entity from candidate entities. This paper introduces a dual-way enhanced (DWE) framework for MEL: (1)
our model refines queries with multimodal data and addresses
semantic gaps using cross-modal enhancers between text
and image information. Besides, DWE innovatively leverages
fine-grained image attributes, including facial characteristic
and scene feature, to enhance and refine visual features. (2)By
using Wikipedia descriptions, DWE enriches entity semantics and obtains more comprehensive textual representation,
which reduces between textual representation and the entities
in KG. Extensive experiments on three public benchmarks
demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance, indicating the superiority of our model. The
code is released on https://github.com/season1blue/DWE.

√
Trump and his wife
Melania at Liberty Ball
Multimodal Infomation

- Donald Trump: He (born June 14, 1946) is
an American politician, media personality, and
businessman who served as the 45th president
of the United States from 2017 to 2021...
- Ivanka Trump: She is an businesswoman.

was a senior advisor in his administration,
× She
and also was the director of the Office...

Entity Representation

Figure 1: Example of entity linking for the mention Trump.

Liberty Ball”. It is challenging to distinguish the entities because the short text is ambiguous, and several entities are
related to Trump. Thus, image is required for further disambiguation. Dozens of MEL studies have been conducted
in the past few years and achieved promising performances,
where delicate interaction and fusion mechanisms are designed for encoding the image and text features (Wang 2022;
Zhou et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022b). Nonetheless, existing
approaches still struggle to fully exploit the potential of the
feature sources from two distinct information perspectives,
which may hinder further task development.
Modality impurity: In MEL task, one of the challenges
lies in the fact that the image modality often contains less
information and more redundant features when compared to
the text modality. Indeed, not all the visual sources play positive roles. As revealed by Vempala and Preoţiuc-Pietro, as
high as 33.8% of visual information serves no context or
even noise in task. As shown in Figure 1, only the left person
is relevant while the right person is noise, causing redundant
visual elements and low information density for the entity.
However, for the existing MEL works, they may suffer from
ineffective and insufficient modeling of visual pivot features. The majority of MEL models perform vision-language
grounding by simultaneously considering the entire image
and text (Zhang et al. 2019; Fei et al. 2023). Unfortunately,
such coarse-grained representation learning often leads to
information mismatches and compromises the subtle semantic correlations between vision and language. We argue that
a fine-grained feature complementing between text features
and visual information is needed.
Ambiguous Entity Representation: Wang et al. (2022)

Introduction
Entity linking (EL) (Shen, Wang, and Han 2014; Ling,
Singh, and Weld 2015) has attracted increasing attention in
the natural language processing (NLP) domain, which aims
at linking ambiguous mentions to the referent unambiguous
entities in a given knowledge base (KB) (Auer et al. 2007).
It is crucial in many information retrieval applications, such
as information extraction (Al-Moslmi et al. 2020), question answering (Lu et al. 2016a), and Web query (Michel
et al. 2020). However, the ambiguity in mentions poses great
challenges to this task. Hence, Multimodal Entity Linking
(MEL) has been introduced recently (Sun et al. 2022a; Gan
et al. 2021), where multimodal information (e.g., visual information) is used to disambiguate the mention. Figure 1
shows an example of MEL, wherein the mention Trump is
associated with the text “Trump and his wife Melania at the
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19008

