The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Identifying Reasons for Bias: An Argumentation-Based Approach
Madeleine Waller, Odinaldo Rodrigues, Oana Cocarascu
King’s College London
{madeleine.waller, odinaldo.rodrigues, oana.cocarascu}@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract

and Foggo 2020)) and individual fairness (i.e. detecting bias
for an individual compared to similar individuals (Mukherjee et al. 2020)). Whilst several notions of evaluating fairness
have been proposed in the literature, there is no agreement as
to which fairness metric to apply in which scenario (Verma
and Rubin 2018). Furthermore, interpreting the meaning of
the values returned by a metric is not always intuitive; for example, simply reporting the percentage level of fairness of a
system (e.g., 80%) may not give full confidence for stakeholders in the system. Most existing group metrics also require the specification of protected attributes and can only
detect unwanted bias with respect to one binary protected
attribute (Waller, Rodrigues, and Cocarascu 2023b). Finally,
quantifying fairness requires full access to the training data
and protected attributes in order to measure the difference
in positive classifications across protected groups. In reality, this data may not be available and it may be difficult to
pre-define protected attributes before deploying the system
(Haeri and Zweig 2020).
Identifying a link between the input data and the final decision is key towards providing a fair and transparent explanation (Hamon et al. 2022). Computational argumentation has long been seen as a means for explaining reasoning
(see Vassiliades, Bassiliades, and Patkos (2021); Cyras et al.
(2021) for an overview). Specifically, abstract Argumentation Frameworks (AFs) were proposed as a way to represent
and reason with conflicting information (Dung 1995). Several types of semantics have been proposed to evaluate the
acceptability of arguments in AFs (Baroni et al. 2015) and
their extensions. AFs have been used for a variety of applications such as decision-making systems (Amgoud and Prade
2009; Brarda, Tamargo, and Garcı́a 2021), recommender
systems (Cocarascu, Rago, and Toni 2019; Rago, Cocarascu,
and Toni 2018), knowledge-based systems (Kökciyan et al.
2020), and planning and scheduling systems (Cyras et al.
2019). However, until now they have not been explored in
relation to individual fairness in decision-making systems.
In this paper, we propose a novel argumentation-based approach for identifying bias in relation to individual fairness
which does not require access to labelled data, the training
algorithm, or the specification of protected attributes before
deployment. We focus on individual fairness as individuals
impacted by decisions will mostly be concerned about their
personal treatment rather than any group. We move away

As algorithmic decision-making systems become more prevalent in society, ensuring the fairness of these systems is becoming increasingly important. Whilst there has been substantial research in building fair algorithmic decision-making
systems, the majority of these methods require access to
the training data, including personal characteristics, and are
not transparent regarding which individuals are classified
unfairly. In this paper, we propose a novel model-agnostic
argumentation-based method to determine why an individual
is classified differently in comparison to similar individuals.
Our method uses a quantitative argumentation framework to
represent attribute-value pairs of an individual and of those
similar to them, and uses a well-known semantics to identify
the attribute-value pairs in the individual contributing most to
their different classification. We evaluate our method on two
datasets commonly used in the fairness literature and illustrate its effectiveness in the identification of bias.

1

Introduction

As machine learning (ML) algorithms are increasingly used
in decision-making systems with high impact on individuals, there is a need to ensure not only that the decisions
made are fair, but also to explain the decision to the individual affected. A system is considered to be fair if it does
not discriminate based on protected personal characteristics
such as race, sex, religion, etc. There have been instances
where decision-making systems discriminated against individuals in domains such as criminal justice (The Partnership
on AI 2019), recruitment (Tilmes 2022), and social services
(Gillingham 2019). An analysis of COMPAS (Northpointe
2019), a popular tool used in the US to predict whether criminals will re-offend, found that black defendants were identified incorrectly as re-offending at a higher rate than white
defendants (Larson et al. 2016).
Research on fairness has received increased attention in
recent years and several fairness metrics have been developed to quantify the fairness of a system (see Mehrabi et al.
(2022) for an overview on bias and fairness in machine
learning). These metrics can be classified into group fairness
(i.e. detecting bias across different values of a protected attribute, e.g., male and female individuals (Garg, Villasenor,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21664

