The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Foundations of Reactive Synthesis for Declarative Process Specifications
Luca Geatti1 , Marco Montali2 , Andrey Rivkin3
1
University of Udine
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano
3
Technical University of Denmark
luca.geatti@uniud.it, montali@inf.unibz.it, ariv@dtu.dk
2

Abstract

are taken by Environment. This problem was originally proposed in (Church 1962) and solved in (Buchi and Landweber 1990) for specifications written in Sequential Calculus. It
was then shown to be 2EXPTIME-complete for LTL specifications (Rosner 1992). The high theoretical complexity and
practical infeasibility of the original approach, based on the
reduction to solving parity games on deterministic parity automata, inspired the scientific community to search for practically interesting fragments of LTL for which the synthesis
problem is computationally more amenable.
In a variety of application domains, the dynamics of the
system consist of unbounded, yet finite, traces (De Giacomo,
De Masellis, and Montali 2014). This has led to the introduction of LTLf (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013) – LTL interpreted over finite traces. LTLf has been extensively studied within AI, formal methods, and Business Process Management (BPM) (Pesic and van der Aalst 2006; Fionda and
Greco 2018; Maggi, Montali, and Peñaloza 2020; De Giacomo et al. 2022). In particular, extensive progress has
been recently made in LTLf-based synthesis (Camacho et al.
2018; Zhu, Pu, and Vardi 2019; Bansal et al. 2020; Zhu et al.
2020; Giacomo et al. 2022), where the synthesised program
always terminates (differently from the infinite-trace case).
While the finite-trace semantics makes the problem more
amenable to algorithmic optimization, it does not change
the theoretical complexity of the synthesis problem: LTLf
synthesis is 2EXPTIME-complete (De Giacomo and Vardi
2015). The classical LTLf synthesis algorithm requires to:
(i) encode the formula into a nondeterministic automaton
over finite words (NFA); (ii) turn the NFA into a deterministic automaton (DFA); (iii) solve a reachability game, in
which Controller tries to force the game to reach a final state
of the automaton. Each of the first two steps requires, in the
worst case, an exponential amount of time in the size of its
input.
In BPM, LTLf is employed to define the semantics of
one of the most well-studied declarative process modelling
languages, namely DECLARE (Pesic, Schonenberg, and
van der Aalst 2007; Montali et al. 2010). DECLARE is a
pattern-based language: constraints are defined based on a
pre-defined set of unary or binary templates, formalized in
LTLf, conjunctively related to each other. A flourishing line
of research focuses on a variety of reasoning and analysis
tasks for DECLARE, ranging from discovery of DECLARE

Given a specification of Linear-time Temporal Logic interpreted over finite traces (LTLf), the reactive synthesis problem asks to find a finitely-representable, terminating controller that reacts to the uncontrollable actions of an environment in order to enforce a desired system specification. In
this paper we study, for the first time, the foundations of reactive synthesis for DECLARE, a well-established declarative,
pattern-based business process modelling language grounded
in LTLf. We provide a threefold contribution. First, we define a reactive synthesis problem for DECLARE. Second, we
show how an arbitrary DECLARE specification can be polynomially encoded into an equivalent pure-past one in LTLf,
and exploit this to define an EXPTIME algorithm for DECLARE synthesis. Third, we derive a symbolic version of
this algorithm, by introducing a novel translation of purepast temporal formulas into symbolic deterministic finite automata.

Introduction
Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) is one of the most widely studied modal logics for time, and is interpreted over infinite
state sequences (or traces). Since its introduction (Pnueli
1977), LTL has been extensively employed in a variety of
verification and synthesis tasks. While verification aims at
checking the correctness of an LTL specification over a given
dynamic system, synthesis uses an LTL specification to derive a corresponding correct-by-construction program (in the
shape, e.g., of a Mealy or Moore machine, I/O-transducer, or
circuit) that realizes the specification. Extensive research has
been conducted on different synthesis settings, considering
in particular closed and open (also called reactive) systems,
starting from the seminal works in (Harel and Pnueli 1984)
and (Pnueli and Rosner 1989a). In the reactive setting, the
system (referred to as Controller) interacts with its environment, which, in turn, can affect the behavior of Controller.
Reactive synthesis is hence modeled as a two-player game
between Controller, whose aim is to satisfy the formula, and
Environment, who tries to violate it. The objective of the
synthesis task is then to generate a program indicating which
actions Controller should take to guarantee the satisfaction
of the LTL specification of interest, no matter which actions
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17416

