The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Compiler for Weak Decomposable Negation Normal Form
Petr Illner, Petr Kučera
Department of Theoretical Computer Science and Mathematical Logic, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Charles University, Czech Republic
illner3@gmail.com, kucerap@ktiml.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

Åkesson, and Ekstedt 2011; Zengler and Küchlin 2013),
MaxSAT (Pipatsrisawat and Darwiche 2007; Ramı́rez and
Geffner 2007), and planning (Bonet and Geffner 2006).
Because of its importance, decomposability has been intensively studied, and some restricted and generalised variants have been invented. For example, let us mention a restricted variant called structured decomposability (Pipatsrisawat and Darwiche 2008), which defines structured DNNF
(SDNNF) circuits. This circuit type has been included in the
knowledge compilation map. On the other hand, a generalised variant, which was utilised in Boolean functional synthesis, is called weak decomposability (Akshay et al. 2018).
In this case, it is allowed for a variable x to be shared among
the inputs of an AND node α if either only x or only ¬x appears in the subcircuit rooted at α. An NNF circuit in which
all AND nodes are weak decomposable is called a weak
DNNF (wDNNF) circuit. To our knowledge, this alluring
circuit type has not yet been studied in terms of the knowledge compilation map. For completeness, we remark that
weak decomposability (also known as consistency) combined with smoothness (also called completeness) was studied for sum-product networks (SPNs) (Peharz et al. 2015).
A crucial feature of a target language is whether we can
implement a (knowledge) compiler that compiles into that
language. We are unaware of any compiler that compiles
into wDNNF circuits. Because there is even no direct compiler for DNNF circuits, the most common way is to compile a CNF formula into a decision-DNNF circuit using a
compiler such as C 2 D (Darwiche 2004), D4 (Lagniez and
Marquis 2017), D SHARP (Muise et al. 2010), or SharpSATTD (Kiesel and Eiter 2023). Since wDNNF circuits are
strictly more succinct than decision-DNNF circuits, the full
potential of succinctness is not used by compiling them into
decision-DNNF circuits. For completeness, we note that Oztok and Darwiche (2017) described an indirect method of
compiling into DNNF circuits that uses a decision-DNNF
circuit as an intermediary. A disadvantage of this method is
that we still need to generate the decision-DNNF circuit in
the compilation process.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We study wDNNF circuits in terms of the knowledge
compilation map.
• We show that NNF circuits are strictly more succinct than
wDNNF circuits, even if P = N P.

This paper integrates weak decomposable negation normal
form (wDNNF) circuits, introduced by Akshay et al. in 2018,
into the knowledge compilation map. This circuit type generalises decomposable negation normal form (DNNF) circuits
in such a way that they allow a restricted form of sharing
variables among the inputs of a conjunction node. We show
that wDNNF circuits have the same properties as DNNF circuits regarding the queries and transformations presented in
the knowledge compilation map, whilst being strictly more
succinct than DNNF circuits (that is, they can represent
Boolean functions compactly). We also present and evaluate a
knowledge compiler, called Bella, for converting CNF formulae into wDNNF circuits. Our experiments demonstrate that
wDNNF circuits are suitable for configuration instances.

Introduction
Knowledge compilation (Darwiche and Marquis 2002; Marquis 2015) concerns transforming a given propositional theory into a target language for efficient query answering and
manipulation. Many target languages (circuit types) are defined as a restriction of negation normal form (NNF) circuits.
One of the most general languages considered in the knowledge compilation map (Darwiche and Marquis 2002) is the
language of decomposable NNF (DNNF) circuits (Darwiche
1999). A DNNF circuit is an NNF circuit in which every
AND node is decomposable, meaning no variable is shared
among its inputs. DNNF circuits form the most succinct
language within the knowledge compilation map that supports efficient answering of the following queries: Consistency check, clause entailment check, and model enumeration. Additional restrictions are often put on DNNF circuits
to support answering other queries efficiently. For example,
let us note deterministic DNNF (d-DNNF) circuits (Darwiche 2001b) that put additional restrictions on OR nodes
to allow model counting in linear time. For completeness,
we mention other languages, which are restricted variants of
d-DNNF circuits, such as decision-DNNF circuits (Huang
and Darwiche 2007), SDDs (Darwiche 2011), and OBDDs (Bryant 1986). DNNF circuits have many applications,
including diagnosis (Huang and Darwiche 2005; Siddiqi
and Huang 2007; Siddiqi 2011), configuration (Voronov,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10562

