The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Graph-Aware Contrasting for Multivariate Time-Series Classification
Yucheng Wang1,3 , Yuecong Xu1 , Jianfei Yang3 ,
Min Wu1 , Xiaoli Li1,2,3 , Lihua Xie3 , Zhenghua Chen1,2 *
1

Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
Centre for Frontier AI Research, A*STAR, Singapore
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{yucheng003, xuyu0014, yang0478, chen0832}@e.ntu.edu.sg, {wumin, xlli}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, elhxie@ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

tations, CL enhances encoder’s robustness to perturbations
and learns robust and effective representations.
Researchers have recently begun exploring CL for MTS
data (Eldele et al. 2021; Tonekaboni, Eytan, and Goldenberg
2021), with a primary focus on achieving temporal consistency by preserving temporal patterns robustly against perturbations. Specifically, temporal augmentations such as jittering or permutation are commonly used to create different
views for MTS data. Encoders are then employed to extract
temporal features, based on which CL is performed to make
the encoders robust to temporal disturbances, thus preserving temporal patterns within MTS data. To further enhance
temporal consistency, temporal contrasting is often achieved
with a predictive contrastive loss when predicting the future
timestamps with the past information (Choi and Kang 2023;
Eldele et al. 2021).
While the current methods have made progress with CL
for MTS data, they mainly focused on temporal consistency
while ignoring spatial consistency during the CL process.
Here, the spatial consistency refers to maintaining the stability of both the individual sensors and the correlations across
the different sensors. Specifically, the robustness of MTS
data relies on the stability of each individual sensor, i.e., any
disturbance in a sensor could have a significant impact on the
classification performance of an MTS sample. We take Fig.
1 for illustration. Amplitude disturbances, such as insensitivity, in foot signals can lead to the similar foot amplitude
in walking and running actions, potentially causing a classifier to misclassify running as walking. Thus, a robust algorithm should be able to identify disturbances within individual sensors. Moreover, correlations exist between sensors,
with certain sensors exhibiting stronger correlations across
each other than with others. For example, due to the physical
connection between the foot and knee, a foot sensor is more
correlated with a knee sensor than a hand sensor. Preserving the robustness of these relative sensor relationships can
further help learn robust sensor features (Yu, Yin, and Zhu
2017; Jia et al. 2020). As MTS data typically originate from
multiple sensors, it is crucial to ensure the spatial consistency to enhance the overall CL performance on MTS data.
The above discussion motivates us to propose a novel approach called Graph-Aware Contrasting for MTS data (TSGAC). To achieve spatial consistency, specific augmentation and contrasting methods tailored for MTS data are de-

Contrastive learning, as a self-supervised learning paradigm,
becomes popular for Multivariate Time-Series (MTS) classification. It ensures the consistency across different views
of unlabeled samples and then learns effective representations for these samples. Existing contrastive learning methods mainly focus on achieving temporal consistency with
temporal augmentation and contrasting techniques, aiming
to preserve temporal patterns against perturbations for MTS
data. However, they overlook spatial consistency that requires
the stability of individual sensors and their correlations. As
MTS data typically originate from multiple sensors, ensuring
spatial consistency becomes essential for the overall performance of contrastive learning on MTS data. Thus, we propose
Graph-Aware Contrasting for spatial consistency across MTS
data. Specifically, we propose graph augmentations including node and edge augmentations to preserve the stability of
sensors and their correlations, followed by graph contrasting
with both node- and graph-level contrasting to extract robust
sensor- and global-level features. We further introduce multiwindow temporal contrasting to ensure temporal consistency
in the data for each sensor. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance on various MTS classification tasks. The code is
available at https://github.com/Frank-Wang-oss/TS-GAC.

Introduction
Multivariate Time-Series (MTS) data are widely used in
areas such as healthcare and industrial manufacturing for
classification tasks, attracting significant research interests.
To improve the performance of MTS classification, deep
learning has gained popularity for learning effective representations (Craik, He, and Contreras-Vidal 2019; Chen
et al. 2021; Deng and Hooi 2021; Chen et al. 2020c; Zhao
et al. 2019). However, the need for substantial labeled samples poses challenges as large-scale manual labeling is impractical, limiting their applicability to real-world scenarios.
To address this challenge, Contrastive Learning (CL) has
emerged as a promising approach (Zhang et al. 2023a; Eldele et al. 2023). By contrasting the different views of unlabeled samples that are commonly generated by augmen* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15725

