The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Optimal Transport with Cyclic Symmetry
Shoichiro Takeda, Yasunori Akagi, Naoki Marumo, Kenta Niwa
NTT Corporation, 1-1 Hikari-no-oka, Yokosuka-Shi, Kanagawa, 239-0847, Japan
{shoichiro.takeda, yasunori.akagi, naoki.marumo, kenta.niwa}@ntt.com

Abstract
We propose novel fast algorithms for optimal transport (OT)
utilizing a cyclic symmetry structure of input data. Such
OT with cyclic symmetry appears universally in various
real-world examples: image processing, urban planning, and
graph processing. Our main idea is to reduce OT to a small
optimization problem that has significantly fewer variables
by utilizing cyclic symmetry and various optimization techniques. On the basis of this reduction, our algorithms solve
the small optimization problem instead of the original OT. As
a result, our algorithms obtain the optimal solution and the
objective function value of the original OT faster than solving
the original OT directly. In this paper, our focus is on two crucial OT formulations: the linear programming OT (LOT) and
the strongly convex-regularized OT, which includes the wellknown entropy-regularized OT (EROT). Experiments show
the effectiveness of our algorithms for LOT and EROT in
synthetic/real-world data that has a strict/approximate cyclic
symmetry structure. Through theoretical and experimental results, this paper successfully introduces the concept of symmetry into the OT research field for the first time.

Figure 1: A simple counter-example to the intuitive approach for OT with cyclic symmetry. Given the above two
gray images with 90◦ cyclic symmetry, it seems intuitively
sufficient to consider OT for only one of the symmetric areas (i.e., the red rectangular areas). However, when the cost
matrix is given by the pixel-wise Euclidean distance matrix,
the (0, 1)-th entry in the left image is optimally transported
toward the (0, 2)-th entry beyond the red rectangular area in
the right image. Thus, such an intuitive approach gives an
incorrect solution, so we must develop novel algorithms that
utilize cyclic symmetry appropriately in OT.

Many algorithms have been studied to solve OT. The network simplex algorithm (Ahuja, Magnanti, and Orlin 1993)
is a well-known classical algorithm for LOT and has been
widely used. The Sinkhorn algorithm (Cuturi 2013) and
primal-dual descent algorithms (Dvurechensky, Gasnikov,
and Kroshnin 2018; Guo, Ho, and Jordan 2020) have been
proposed to solve EROT faster. Recently, algorithms utilizing special structures of input data have been in the spotlight
for solving OT faster, e.g., algorithms that utilize the lowrankness of the input data (Tenetov, Wolansky, and Kimmel
2018; Altschuler et al. 2019). Besides, several algorithms
utilize the Gibbs kernel structure of the input cost matrix in
the Sinkhorn algorithm, such as separability (Solomon et al.
2015; Bonneel, Peyré, and Cuturi 2016) and translation invariance (Getreuer 2013; Peyré and Cuturi 2019).
In this paper, we propose novel fast algorithms for OT
utilizing a new special structure, cyclic symmetry, of input
data. Specifically, we assume n-order cyclic symmetry for
the input data; the input d-dimensional probability vector is
a concatenation of n copies of an m(:= d/n)-dimensional
vector, and the input d × d cost matrix is a block-circulant
matrix consisting of n matrices with size m × m (see Assumption 1). Such OT with cyclic symmetry appears universally in various real-world examples: image processing,

Introduction
Given two probability vectors and a cost matrix, the discrete
optimal transport (OT) problem seeks an optimal solution
to minimize the cost of transporting the probability vector
toward another one. Its total transportation cost is an effective tool that compares two probability vectors. Therefore,
OT has been studied in various research areas, e.g., text embedding (Kusner et al. 2015), image matching (Liu et al.
2020), domain adaptation (Courty et al. 2017), graph comparison (Nikolentzos, Meladianos, and Vazirgiannis 2017),
and interpolation (Solomon et al. 2015).
There are many formulations for OT. Kantorovich (1942)
was the first to formulate OT as the linear programming
problem, and the linear OT (LOT) made great progress toward solving OT. Recently, the strongly convex-regularized
OT (SROT) has attracted much attention, especially, the
entropy-regularized OT (EROT) (Cuturi 2013; Blondel,
Seguy, and Rolet 2018; Peyré and Cuturi 2019; Guo, Ho, and
Jordan 2020). SROT is superior to LOT in terms of guaranteeing a unique solution and computational stability.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15211

