The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Self-Distillation Regularized Connectionist Temporal Classification Loss for
Text Recognition: A Simple Yet Effective Approach
Ziyin Zhang* , Ning Lu* , Minghui Liao, Yongshuai Huang, Cheng Li, Min Wang, Wei Peng
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China
{zhangziyin1, luning12, liaominghui1, huangyongshuai1, licheng81, wangmin5, peng.wei1}@huawei.com

Abstract
Text recognition methods are gaining rapid development.
Some advanced techniques, e.g., powerful modules, language
models, and un- and semi-supervised learning schemes, consecutively push the performance on public benchmarks forward. However, the problem of how to better optimize a
text recognition model from the perspective of loss functions is largely overlooked. CTC-based methods, widely used
in practice due to their good balance between performance
and inference speed, still grapple with accuracy degradation.
This is because CTC loss emphasizes the optimization of the
entire sequence target while neglecting to learn individual
characters. We propose a self-distillation scheme for CTCbased model to address this issue. It incorporates a framewise regularization term in CTC loss to emphasize individual
supervision, and leverages the maximizing-a-posteriori of latent alignment to solve the inconsistency problem that arises
in distillation between CTC-based models. We refer to the
regularized CTC loss as Distillation Connectionist Temporal
Classification (DCTC) loss. DCTC loss is module-free, requiring no extra parameters, longer inference lag, or additional training data or phases. Extensive experiments on public benchmarks demonstrate that DCTC can boost text recognition model accuracy by up to 2.6%, without any of these
drawbacks.

Figure 1: An illustraion of optimization and distillation on
CTC- and attention-based models. Also shows the alignment
inconsistency problem

Introduction
Text Recognition (TR) is an indispensable technology that
facilitates intelligent auto-driving (Zhu et al. 2018), revealing precise semantic information (Chen et al. 2021b) for sensitive information auditing, saving labor forces for financial
processes, etc. Methods for scene text recognition (STR) are
blooming at a breathless pace these years. For example, (Du
et al. 2022; Da, Wang, and Yao 2022; Lu et al. 2021) focus
on designing sophisticated architectures by inventing powerful modules; (Wang et al. 2022a,b) integrate a language
model into a text recognition model to enable explicit language modeling; (Patel, Allebach, and Qiu 2023; Yang et al.
2022) learn better sequential features with an un-supervised
or semi-supervised learning scheme by leveraging a large
amount of label-free or partial labeled data; However, the
problem that how to better optimize a text recognition model

from a perspective of loss functions is out of in the cold. It
is also worth lots of effort since the dedicated designed loss
function may be free of extra parameters, extra inference latency, extra training data, or extra training phases.
Recent text recognition methods are often supervised by
two loss functions, the Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) loss and the Cross-Entropy (CE) loss, which correspond to CTC-based and attention-based models, respectively. As illustrated in Fig. 1, CTC loss and CE loss optimize models in a Prediction-Target non-Aligned (PTnA)
and Prediction-Target Aligned (PTA) mode respectively. Although much recent research empirically shows that CEbased models, which run in the PTA mode, can outperform
CTC-based models (Cong et al. 2019; Shi et al. 2016; Baek
et al. 2019), CTC-based models have three non-negligible
advantages: 1) The CTC decoder is more robust to varying input sequence lengths than the attention-based de-

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7441

