The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Learning and Explaining Indirect Causal Effects in Neural Networks
Abbavaram Gowtham Reddy1 , Saketh Bachu1 , Harsharaj Pathak1 , Benin L. Godfrey1 ,
Varshaneya V2 , Vineeth N. Balasubramanian1 , Satyanarayan Kar2
1

Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, India
2
Honeywell, Bengaluru, India

Abstract

S

Recently, there has been a growing interest in learning and explaining causal effects within Neural Network (NN) models.
By virtue of NN architectures, previous approaches consider
only direct and total causal effects assuming independence
among input variables. We view an NN as a structural causal
model (SCM) and extend our focus to include indirect causal
effects by introducing feedforward connections among input
neurons. We propose an ante-hoc method that captures and
maintains direct, indirect, and total causal effects during NN
model training. We also propose an algorithm for quantifying learned causal effects in an NN model and efficient approximation strategies for quantifying causal effects in highdimensional data. Extensive experiments conducted on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that the causal effects learned by our ante-hoc method better approximate the
ground truth effects compared to existing methods.

1

E

R

S

E

I

I

(a)

(b)

R

Figure 1: (a) A marginalized NN whose inputs S, E, R are
not causally related. (b) A marginalized NN whose inputs
are connected through feedforward connections (e.g., S →
E) to capture underlying causal relationships (e.g., S causes
E) to learn the indirect causal effects of inputs on output
(e.g. effect of S on I via E).

considering the NN as a Structural Causal Model (SCM),
representing the parametric causal relationships between the
features (Kocaoglu et al. 2018; Chattopadhyay et al. 2019;
Janzing, Minorics, and Bloebaum 2020). Given our focus on
input-output causal relationships in an NN, following (Kocaoglu et al. 2018; Chattopadhyay et al. 2019; Kancheti et al.
2022), we marginalize the hidden layers and view the output
as a function of inputs as shown in Fig 1 (a) (the motivating
example in the next paragraph describes the variables). It
becomes evident that the SCM embodied by a conventional
feedforward NN model lacks causal relationships among input features (neurons in the first layer, we use input features and input neurons interchangeably in this work). Consequently, the causal effects that are learned and quantified
are restricted solely to direct causal effects (viz. causal effects that do not propagate through other input features – see
Appendix §A for preliminaries). Hence, there is currently no
feasible approach for explaining indirect causal effects (viz.
causal effects that propagate through other input features).
We extend the basic architecture of an NN by adding feedforward connections among input neurons (Fig 1(b)) based
on domain knowledge of how features interact in the realworld, thus enabling the learning and explaining of indirect
causal effects.
To motivate the need for the study of indirect causal effects in NN models, consider the task of predicting an individual’s income (I) using the features: education (E), socioeconomic status (S), and job role (R). In the real world, S
causes E and R; E causes R; S, E, and R cause I (Fig 1(b)).
However, in an NN model, the relationships among input

Introduction

Neural network (NN) models enriched with causal knowledge have demonstrated their ability to achieve robustness (Schölkopf et al. 2021), invariance (Parascandolo et al.
2018; Goyal et al. 2021), and provide interpretable explanations for human understanding (Chattopadhyay et al. 2019;
O' Shaughnessy et al. 2020; Kancheti et al. 2022). In training such NN models imbued with causal knowledge, two
primary tasks emerge: (1) acquiring a comprehension of
causal relationships between input and output neurons (Janzing 2019; Kyono, Zhang, and van der Schaar 2020; Kancheti
et al. 2022), and (2) validating and explaining the acquired
causal relationships (Chattopadhyay et al. 2019; Janzing,
Minorics, and Bloebaum 2020; O' Shaughnessy et al. 2020).
Previous studies have tended to address these two tasks separately, despite their close interconnectedness. This separation of dependent tasks also makes it challenging to study
and model more nuanced aspects such as the indirect causal
effects of input neurons on the output of an NN. To address this limitation, in this work, we propose an Ante-Hoc
Causal Explanations (AHCE) approach that simultaneously
performs both these tasks.
Task 1 - Learning Causal Effects in NNs: A common
practice in learning causal effects in NN models involves
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14802

