The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Recall-Oriented Continual Learning with Generative Adversarial Meta-Model
Haneol Kang, Dong-Wan Choi*
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Inha University, South Korea
haneol0415@gmail.com, dchoi@inha.ac.kr

Abstract
The stability-plasticity dilemma is a major challenge in continual learning, as it involves balancing the conflicting objectives of maintaining performance on previous tasks while
learning new tasks. In this paper, we propose the recalloriented continual learning framework to address this challenge. Inspired by the human brain’s ability to separate
the mechanisms responsible for stability and plasticity, our
framework consists of a two-level architecture where an inference network effectively acquires new knowledge and a
generative network recalls past knowledge when necessary. In
particular, to maximize the stability of past knowledge, we investigate the complexity of knowledge depending on different
representations, and thereby introducing generative adversarial meta-model (GAMM) that incrementally learns taskspecific parameters instead of input data samples of the task.
Through our experiments, we show that our framework not
only effectively learns new knowledge without any disruption
but also achieves high stability of previous knowledge in both
task-aware and task-agnostic learning scenarios. Our code is
available at: https://github.com/bigdata-inha/recall-orientedcl-framework.

Figure 1: Trade-off between stability and plasticity in various CL baseline approaches on Split CIFAR-100.

In contrast, the human brain gracefully resolves the
dilemma by separating yet complementing the parts responsible for stability and plasticity. More specifically, working
memory (a.k.a. short-term memory) focuses on processing
new information, whereas long-term memory is responsible for retaining and consolidating the information that is
not currently used but may be needed in the future (McClelland, McNaughton, and O’Reilly 1995; O’Reilly et al.
2014). More interestingly, when we recall past knowledge,
it is known that our brain creates something new in a generative manner from long-term memory, rather than simply retrieving something that explicitly exists in the brain (Schacter and Addis 2007).
Existing brain-inspired CL methods also consider a certain level of separation of new knowledge from previous
knowledge, but mostly focus on the rehearsal process of human memory. This has led to the development of techniques
like memory replay (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato 2017; Rebuffi
et al. 2017) and generative replay (Kemker and Kanan 2018;
Shin et al. 2017). Memory replay stores representative old
samples in an extra buffer, while generative replay trains a
generative model that can generate pseudo-samples of previous tasks. Then, in both techniques, previous samples or
pseudo-samples are jointly trained with new data in a single neural network. However, due to limited memory and
the complexity of underlying data distribution, neither approach can fully capture the entire knowledge of previous
tasks, which results in less satisfactory performance.
In this paper, we propose the recall-oriented CL frame-

Introduction
The ability to continuously acquire new knowledge without
forgetting previously learned information is a major challenge in continual learning (CL) over deep neural networks.
This challenge, often referred to as the stability-plasticity
dilemma (Parisi et al. 2019), requires balancing two opposing objectives: preserving past knowledge (stability) while
adapting to new tasks (plasticity). On the one hand, if we focus on stability by preventing the model’s state from undergoing significant changes, the model’s plasticity to acquire
new information is impaired. On the other hand, making the
model highly adaptable to incoming tasks leads to stability
degradation on previous tasks, known as catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen 1989). Despite considerable
progress of recent studies in CL, the trade-off between learning new tasks and maintaining old knowledge remains somewhat inevitable. As shown in Figure 1, methods with high
plasticity experience significant forgetting, while those with
less forgetting lack the ability to adapt to new tasks.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13040

