The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Geometry-Guided Domain Generalization for Monocular 3D Object Detection
Fan Yang1,2,3 , Hui Chen1,2 * , Yuwei He1,2 , Sicheng Zhao1,2 ,
Chenghao Zhang1,2 , Kai Ni4 , Guiguang Ding1,2 *
1

Tsinghua University
2
BNRist
3
Hangzhou Zhuoxi Institute of Brain and Intelligence
4
HoloMatic Technology
yfthu@outlook.com, {jichenhui2012, heyuwei403, schzhao}@gmail.com, ch-zhang20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
nikai97@gmail.com, dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

2019; Recht et al. 2019). To cope with this challenge, recent studies have started exploring cross-domain techniques
for M3OD. STMono3D (Li et al. 2022b) proposes the domain adaptation in M3OD. DGMono3D (Li et al. 2022a) investigates domain generalization (DG). Despite remarkable
progress, existing methods still suffer from some limitations.
In this context, we aim to highlight two vital issues in domain generalization for M3OD.

Monocular 3D object detection (M3OD) is important for
autonomous driving. However, existing deep learning-based
methods easily suffer from performance degradation in realworld scenarios due to the substantial domain gap between
training and testing. M3OD’s domain gaps are complex, including camera intrinsic parameters, extrinsic parameters,
image appearance, etc. Existing works primarily focus on
the domain gaps of camera intrinsic parameters, ignoring
other key factors. Moreover, at the feature level, conventional domain invariant learning methods generally cause
the negative transfer issue, due to the ignorance of dependency between geometry tasks and domains. To tackle these
issues, in this paper, we propose MonoGDG, a geometryguided domain generalization framework for M3OD, which
effectively addresses the domain gap at both camera and
feature levels. Specifically, MonoGDG consists of two major components. One is geometry-based image reprojection,
which mitigates the impact of camera discrepancy by unifying intrinsic parameters, randomizing camera orientations,
and unifying the field of view range. The other is geometrydependent feature disentanglement, which overcomes the
negative transfer problems by incorporating domain-shared
and domain-specific features. Additionally, we leverage a
depth-disentangled domain discriminator and a domainaware geometry regression attention mechanism to account
for the geometry-domain dependency. Extensive experiments
on multiple autonomous driving benchmarks demonstrate
that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in domain generalization for M3OD.

First, the domain gap in M3OD can be attributed to complex factors. We systematically analyze three crucial domain
gaps in M3OD. (1) The intrinsic parameter gap, including
focal length and field of view (FOV), influences the predicted depth by the detector (Fig. 1(a)). (2) Extrinsic parameter gap: (Fig. 1(b)) demonstrates that the camera’s orientation can impact the M3OD results. (3) Image appearance
gap: the variations in image style and environmental conditions, such as weather and lighting (Fig. 1(c)), can considerably affect the features extracted by the model. Existing
approaches primarily focus on the first gap, i.e., camera intrinsic parameters, neglecting other domain gaps and thus
lacking robustness in real-world scenarios.
Secondly, at the feature level, commonly used domain invariant learning methods often lead to the negative transfer
issue in M3OD. Li et al. point out that DG aims to learn
domain-invariant representations for varying domains (Li
et al. 2018a). However, popular feature invariant learning
techniques, such as domain adversarial training (Ganin et al.
2016; Chen et al. 2019) and statistical matching (Sun and
Saenko 2016; Long et al. 2015), often result in a severe
negative transfer problem, leading to a significant performance decay for M3OD (Fig. 2(a)). In light of this, we argue
that the fundamental assumption of feature invariant learning, which assumes independence between domains and labels (Ghifary et al. 2017; Xie et al. 2017), does not hold
true in M3OD. Specifically, M3OD exhibits a significant
geometry-domain dependency, with substantial differences
in geometry depth, dimensions, and object rotation across
domains (Fig. 2). Through an entropy perspective analysis, we demonstrate that in M3OD, eliminating domainspecific features can disrupt geometry features, and using
only domain-shared features is insufficient for geometry prediction. Moreover, depth prediction, widely recognized as

Introduction
Monocular 3D object detection (M3OD) enables inferring
3D bounding boxes from a single image, considerably reducing the perception cost for autonomous driving (Mousavian et al. 2017). Many research works have focused on deep
learning-based methods for M3OD, but they often suffer
from performance degradation in real-world scenarios due
to the presence of domain gap (Hendrycks and Dietterich
* Corresponding Authors.
https://MonoGDG.github.io/
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6467

