The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Early Detection of Extreme Storm Tide Events
Using Multimodal Data Processing
Marcel Barros1 , Andressa Pinto1 , Andres Monroy2 , Felipe Moreno1 ,
Jefferson Coelho1 , Aldomar Pietro Silva1 , Caio Fabricio Deberaldini Netto1 ,
José Roberto Leite1 , Marlon Mathias1 , Eduardo Tannuri1 , Artur Jordão1 ,
Edson Gomi1 , Fábio Cozman1 , Marcelo Dottori1 , Anna Helena Reali Costa1
2

1
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
marcel.barros@usp.br

Abstract

the cumulative damage to the Santos coastal area between
2010 and 2100 could reach 242 million USD (Marengo et al.
2019).
Researchers successfully implemented physical models
for predicting extreme events in Santos (Costa et al. 2020).
These models, considered state-of-the-art for the oceanography community, serve as baselines for forecasting. Given
that we have access to those models’ predictions and data
from sensors and satellites, we exploit these modalities in a
lightweight manner. Such a model aims to match the performance of physical models, while integrating observed and
simulated time series with satellite imagery. Our novel approach ensures lower computational costs than numerical
models and addresses real-world challenges, such as noise
and missing data. Designed for multimodal data and with
low complexity, it enables a significant societal and environmental impact, adaptable to regions with similar characteristics. Importantly, our objective is not to benchmark this task;
instead, we emphasize the practical application and potential
for widespread implementation of our model in problems
with highly irregular multimodal time series.
Therefore, we propose a modularized model for multimodal data, including observational sensory data, numerical models, and satellite images. The model is divided
into three modules: (1) a timestamp encoding for capturing temporal information of periodic signals, with the ability to smoothly handle missing data; (2) a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)-based temporal encoding for time-series
signals, providing flexibility to the model for differences
in signals’ sampling and missingness rates; (3) a signal
information-sharing module using Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) (Scarselli et al. 2009) so as to extract connections
among variables and use those connections profitably.
We state our main contributions as:

Sea-level rise is a well-known consequence of climate
change. Several studies have estimated the social and economic impact of the increase in extreme flooding. An efficient way to mitigate its consequences is the development of a flood alert and prediction system, based on highresolution numerical models and robust sensing networks.
However, current models use various simplifying assumptions that compromise accuracy to ensure solvability within
a reasonable timeframe, hindering more regular and costeffective forecasts for various locations along the shoreline.
To address these issues, this work proposes a hybrid model
for multimodal data processing that combines physics-based
numerical simulations, data obtained from a network of sensors, and satellite images to provide refined wave and seasurface height forecasts, with real results obtained in a critical location within the Port of Santos (the largest port in
Latin America). Our approach exhibits faster convergence
than data-driven models while achieving more accurate predictions. Moreover, the model handles irregularly sampled
time series and missing data without the need for complex
preprocessing mechanisms or data imputation while keeping
low computational costs through a combination of time encoding, recurrent and graph neural networks. Enabling raw
sensor data to be easily combined with existing physics-based
models opens up new possibilities for accurate extreme storm
tide events forecast systems that enhance community safety
and aid policymakers in their decision-making processes.

Introduction
Sea-level rise is a well-known and documented trend directly associated with climate change. There is also mounting evidence in favor of related phenomena such as changes
in the intensity and frequency of extreme meteorological
events. Storm tides are key phenomena that refer to the composition of high astronomical and meteorological tides that
can cause severe flooding in coastal areas.
This work focuses on improving early alerts for extreme
storm tide events in the city of Santos, Brazil. The city is
home to the largest port in Latin America and also hosts
rich ecosystems like the Atlantic Rainforest and a vast mangrove system. Under an optimistic sea-level rise scenario,

• Defining an architecture that can learn from multimodal
data sources to generate accurate early detection of extreme storm tide events;
• Providing evidence that recurrent and graph neural networks (RNN+GNN) mixtures can be applied to reduce
the complexity of handling irregular data sources;
• Providing evidence that time encoding can increase a
model robustness to missing data and provide flexibility

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21923

