The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Imitate the Good and Avoid the Bad: An Incremental Approach to Safe
Reinforcement Learning
Huy Hoang, Tien Mai, Pradeep Varakantham
School of Computing and Information Systems
Singapore Management Univerisity, Singapore
{mhhoang, atmai, pradeepv}@smu.edu.sg

Abstract

Constrained RL: To address these challenges, Constrained
Markov Decision Processes (CMDPs) have been developed
as an extension of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) (Altman 1999). CMDPs have emerged as a valuable framework
for decision-making in various domains, as they allow for
the optimization of objectives while ensuring the fulfillment of trajectory-based constraints over expected cost and
other measures (e.g., CVaR). In order to tackle the challenges posed by these constraints, several Constrained RL
algorithms have been proposed (Yang et al. 2022; Zhang,
Vuong, and Ross 2020). State-of-the-art constrained RL approaches (Satija, Amortila, and Pineau 2020; Chow et al.
2019; Achiam et al. 2017) convert trajectory-based cost constraints into local cost constraints that can be solved easily
while guaranteeing the enforcement of trajectory-based constraints. One potential issue with such local cost constraints
in challenging constrained RL problems is the estimation of
cost value functions. Due to the difficulty involved in estimating the costs of partial (or full) trajectories, output policies can either be conservative or aggressive with regard to
costs.
In this work, we develop a novel principled framework
that avoids the use of local cost constraints and, instead,
focuses on directly solving the original constrained MDP
problem, thereby avoiding cost estimation. Our innovation is
rooted in the observation that, within the context of CMDP,
from a given set of trajectories, it is easy to identify “good”
trajectories that are feasible with respect to the cost constraints and offer high rewards. In contrast, “bad” trajectories would be identified as infeasible with respect to the cost
constraints and/or yield low rewards. Subsequently, a policy
that assigns high probabilities to good trajectories becomes a
strong candidate for effectively addressing the CMDP problem. Hence, our approach to address CMDP involves learning a policy that replicates the actions of the good trajectories while steering clear of the bad ones. We do this by employing imitation learning, a framework designed to imitate
an expert’s policy based on their demonstrations.
Imitation Learning: Imitation learning (IL) has been recognized as a compelling approach for making sequential
decisions (Ng, Russell et al. 2000; Abbeel and Ng 2004).
In IL, a set of expert trajectories is provided, and the aim
is to train a policy that replicates the behavior of the expert’s policy. One of the simplest IL methods is Behavioral

A popular framework for enforcing safe actions in Reinforcement Learning (RL) is Constrained RL, where trajectory
based constraints on expected cost (or other cost measures)
are employed to enforce safety and more importantly these
constraints are enforced while maximizing expected reward.
Most recent approaches for solving Constrained RL convert
the trajectory based cost constraint into a surrogate problem
that can be solved using minor modifications to RL methods.
A key drawback with such approaches is an over or underestimation of the cost constraint at each state. Therefore, we
provide an approach that does not modify the trajectory based
cost constraint and instead imitates “good” trajectories and
avoids “bad” trajectories generated from incrementally improving policies. We employ an oracle that utilizes a reward
threshold (which is varied with learning) and the overall cost
constraint to label trajectories as “good” or “bad”. A key advantage of our approach is that we are able to work from any
starting policy or set of trajectories and improve on it. In an
exhaustive set of experiments, we demonstrate that our approach is able to outperform top benchmark approaches for
solving Constrained RL problems, with respect to expected
cost, CVaR cost, or even unknown cost constraints.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is widely acknowledged as a
powerful paradigm, thanks to its exceptional ability to learn
and adapt by interacting with the environment. This adaptability has been demonstrated through numerous studies that
highlight its practical applications across diverse domains.
For example, reinforcement learning has been successfully
employed in video games to achieve groundbreaking results (Mnih et al. 2016; Firoiu, Whitney, and Tenenbaum
2017), robot manipulation tasks have been enhanced using
this approach (Hoang, Dinh, and Nguyen 2023; Kilinc and
Montana 2022), and even the field of healthcare has benefited from its potential (Weng et al. 2017; Raghu et al. 2017).
In light of the notable achievements of reinforcement learning, it is crucial to acknowledge the practical limitations that
come with this approach when applied to real-world situations. The constraints of limited resources, budgetary restrictions, and safety concerns pose significant challenges in
implementing reinforcement learning effectively.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12439

