The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Omnipotent Distillation with LLMs for Weakly-Supervised Natural Language
Video Localization: When Divergence Meets Consistency
Peijun Bao* 1 , Zihao Shao2 , Wenhan Yang3 , Boon Poh Ng1 , Meng Hwa Er1 , Alex C. Kot1
1

Nanyang Technological University
2
Peking University
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
peijun001@e.ntu.edu.sg, zh.s@pku.edu.cn, yangwh@pcl.ac.cn, {ebpng, emher, eackot}@ntu.edu.sg
Query

Abstract

A person picks up his
phone and talks on it.

Natural language video localization plays a pivotal role in
video understanding, and leveraging weakly-labeled data is
considered a promising approach to circumvent the laborintensive process of manual annotations. However, this approach encounters two significant challenges: 1) limited input distribution, namely that the limited writing styles of the
language query, annotated by human annotators, hinder the
model’s generalization to real-world scenarios with diverse vocabularies and sentence structures; 2) the incomplete ground
truth, whose supervision guidance is insufficient. To overcome these challenges, we propose an omnipotent distillation
algorithm with large language models (LLM). The distribution
of the input sample is enriched to obtain diverse multi-view
versions while a consistency then comes to regularize the consistency of their results for distillation. Specifically, we first
train our teacher model with the proposed intra-model agreement, where multiple sub-models are supervised by each other.
Then, we leverage the LLM to paraphrase the language query
and distill the teacher model to a lightweight student model by
enforcing the consistency between the localization results of
the paraphrased sentence and the original one. In addition, to
assess the generalization of the model across different dimensions of language variation, we create extensive datasets by
building upon existing datasets. Our experiments demonstrate
substantial performance improvements adaptively to diverse
kinds of language queries.

LLM

Paraphrasing

LLM

Teacher’s prediction

Paraphrasing

Paraphrased Query

Paraphrased Query

The phone is picked up by a
person and he is talking on it.

An individual takes hold of his
mobile phone and engages in a chat.

Temporal Boundary
Consistency

Student’s prediction

Student’s prediction

Figure 1: Existing datasets suffer from limited sentence structures and vocabulary of natural language queries e.g., on
the Charades-STA dataset often with the structure of “sub +
pred + obj”. By exploiting temporal boundary consistency,
we propose a manual annotation-free omnipotent distillation
algorithm with LLM, adapting the localization ability from
a teacher model focusing on the vanilla language style to a
student model whose input sentence queries are with rich
language variations.

Due to this, the weakly-supervised setting has attracted
increasing attention in recent years (Gao et al. 2019; Mithun,
Paul, and Roy-Chowdhury 2019; Lin et al. 2020; Chen et al.
2020; Tan et al. 2021; Zheng et al. 2022a,b), where only
video-level descriptions are available during training. However, the performance of the existing weakly-supervised methods is still unsatisfactory and lags behind the fully-supervised
methods because the incomprehensive annotations do not
provide sufficient supervisory signals for training. Moreover,
the language queries provided by the human annotator often
suffer from limitations in writing styles, such as restricted
vocabulary and sentence structures. As a result, this hinders
the model’s capability to generalize to real-world applications, whose language queries showcase notable variations in
writing styles as well as cultural nuances.
To address these issues, we propose an Omnipotent Distillation algorithm (OmniD) with the Large Language Model
(LLM) as shown in Fig 1. Specifically, we first devise a
bootstrapping learning framework to train a sophisticated

Introduction
Natural language video localization (Gao et al. 2017) is an
important yet challenging task with a wide spectrum of applications in video understanding and analysis (Sreenu and
Durai 2019; Qi et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2021; Bao et al. 2023).
The goal of this task is to temporally localize a video segment
(i.e., start and end time) that best corresponds to a query sentence from untrimmed videos. Despite achieving impressive
results, the fully-supervised natural language video localization (Liu et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019a,b, 2020a; Wang,
Ma, and Jiang 2020; Bao and Mu 2022) requires laborious
manual annotations of temporal moment boundaries, which
are unscalable to the real-world setting.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

747

