The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Adv-Diffusion: Imperceptible Adversarial Face Identity Attack via Latent
Diffusion Model
Decheng Liu1,2∗ , Xijun Wang3∗ , Chunlei Peng1,2† , Nannan Wang4 , Ruimin Hu5 , Xinbo Gao6
1

School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, China
3
School of Artifical Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
4
School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
5
Hangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
6
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Image Cognition, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
dchliu@xidian.edu.cn, xdu.xjwang@gmail.com, clpeng@xidian.edu.cn, nnwang@xidian.edu.cn,
hrm1964@163.com, gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Komkov and Petiushko 2021). Thus, exploring craft adversarial examples in face recognition is vital and significant in
the field of biometrics and economic security.

Adversarial attacks involve adding perturbations to the source
image to cause misclassification by the target model, which
demonstrates the potential of attacking face recognition models. Existing adversarial face image generation methods still
can’t achieve satisfactory performance because of low transferability and high detectability. In this paper, we propose
a unified framework Adv-Diffusion that can generate imperceptible adversarial identity perturbations in the latent space but not the raw pixel space, which utilizes strong inpainting capabilities of the latent diffusion model to generate realistic adversarial images. Specifically, we propose
the identity-sensitive conditioned diffusion generative model to generate semantic perturbations in the surroundings.
The designed adaptive strength-based adversarial perturbation algorithm can ensure both attack transferability and
stealthiness. Extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments on the public FFHQ and CelebA-HQ datasets prove the
proposed method achieves superior performance compared
with the state-of-the-art methods without an extra generative model training process. The source code is available at
https://github.com/kopper-xdu/Adv-Diffusion.

Existing adversarial attacks on face recognition methods are roughly grouped into three categories: gradient-based
methods, patch-based methods and stealthy-based methods. The goal of adversarial face examples is to successfully attack target models with strong transferability, and generate high-quality adversarial images with inconspicuous
perturbations. Gradient-based adversarial examples methods are early explorations to add Lp bounded perturbations directly to source images, which could bring in arbitrary
predictions when testing (Madry et al. 2018; Dong et al.
2018). By controlling the perturbation boundary, pixel-level
attacking clues seem imperceptible and make it more feasible to invade deployed face recognition systems. However, some related studies have found that gradient-based
methods are vulnerable to variant lighting conditions (Xiao et al. 2018) and perform poorly in black-box attacking
evaluations (Xiao et al. 2021). Patch-based methods (Sharif
et al. 2016; Komkov and Petiushko 2021) aim to generate
adversarial local face patches to protect identity information in physical-world scenarios. These existing synthesized
craft adversarial patches usually have specific color and texture patterns, which are more easily distinguished and fail
to be stealthy. Formerly mentioned kinds of adversarial face
examples methods are generating suitable perturbations in
raw pixel space, ignoring the specific properties of face images inherently. (Qiu et al. 2020) first explored learning adversarial face examples with semantic appearance, which
could help to make these images visually imperceptible. (Hu
et al. 2022) leveraged the makeup transfer generative network to generate better visual-quality adversarial faces. Recently, (Jia et al. 2022) has focused on synthesizing adversarial faces with edited attributes from reference faces to
improve the stealthiness of attacking information. However, noting that not any reference face images would provide
suitable and precise semantic information (e.g. attribute text
(Qiu et al. 2020), semantic clues (Jia et al. 2022)) as guidance, and it is essential to learn adversarial semantic ap-

Introduction
With the development of deep learning technology, face
recognition systems have been applied in more and more
real-world scenarios, which also brings increasing security
risks of biometrics in the meantime. Recent works find that
these deep neural network-based models are vulnerable to
adversarial perturbations added in the original clean images
(Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Madry et al. 2018).
These well-designed perturbations added images, also called
adversarial examples, demonstrate the strong potential of
attacking against existing state-of-the-art face recognition
models (Deb, Zhang, and Jain 2020; Sharif et al. 2016), even
evaluating black-box attacking scenarios (Jia et al. 2022;
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3585

