The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Confucius: Iterative Tool Learning from Introspection Feedback
by Easy-to-Difficult Curriculum
Shen Gao1 * , Zhengliang Shi1 * , Minghang Zhu1 , Bowen Fang1 ,
Xin Xin1 , Pengjie Ren1 , Zhumin Chen1 , Jun Ma1 , Zhaochun Ren2†
1

Shandong University, Qingdao, China
Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands
{shengao, xinxin, renpengjie, chenzhumin, majun}@sdu.edu.cn
{shizhl, mhzhu}@mail.sdu.edu.cn, bwn.fang@gmail.com, z.ren@liacs.leidenuniv.nl
2

Previous Work

Abstract
Augmenting large language models (LLMs) with external
tools has emerged as a promising approach to extending the
capability of LLMs. Although some works employ opensource LLMs for the tool learning task, most of them
are trained in a controlled environment in which LLMs
only learn to execute the human-provided tools. However,
selecting proper tools from the large toolset is also a crucial
ability for the tool learning model to be applied in realworld applications. Existing methods usually directly employ
self-instruction methods to train the model, which ignores
differences in tool complexity. In this paper, we propose
the Confucius, a novel tool learning framework to train
LLM to use complicated tools in real-world scenarios, which
contains two main phases: (1) We first propose a multistage learning method to teach the LLM to use various
tools from an easy-to-difficult curriculum; (2) thenceforth,
we propose the Iterative Self-instruct from Introspective
Feedback (ISIF) to dynamically construct the dataset to
improve the ability to use the complicated tool. Extensive
experiments conducted on both controlled and real-world
settings demonstrate the superiority of our tool learning
framework in real-world application scenarios compared to
both tuning-free (e.g., ChatGPT, Claude) and tuning-based
baselines (e.g., GPT4Tools).

Self-Instruct

Dataset
…
Fine-tuning × 𝑵

Our Method

𝑫𝒂𝒕𝒂𝒔𝒆𝒕
Self-Instruct
Introspection

𝑫𝒊

Stage-1
Stage-2
Stage-3
Multi-stage Training × 𝑵

Figure 1: Comparison between the existing tuning-based
tool learning methods and our proposed Confucius. Instead
of using a pre-constructed dataset, we propose an iterative
data construction framework with multi-stage learning to
train the tool-use model effectively.

tools is the prompt (Li et al. 2023). Thus, the limited
context length of LLMs restricts the application of massive
tools. In contrast, the tuning-based methods fine-tune opensource LLMs to memorize and understand external tools
by explicitly training on elaborate datasets (Li et al. 2023;
Schick et al. 2023). The majority of these methods (Qin
et al. 2023b) first use Self-Instruct technique to collect tooluse data from proprietary LLMs and then fine-tune an opensource model. Since the training data only contains a limited
range of tools, most turn-based methods lack the capability
to generalize to unseen tools (tools outside the training data).
In Table 1, we list several cutting-edge tool-use LLMs.
As shown in Figure 1, most existing methods directly
provide a minimal essential toolset to LLMs without
redundant tools. However, when adapting to real-world
applications, LLMs typically face a large toolset that
contains various tools across different tasks. Thus, how to
teach LLMs to select an appropriate tool from the candidates
becomes the first challenge.
Intuitively, the difficulty of using different tools is
not the same. Some tools are used in different ways in

Introduction
The task of tool learning aims to unleash the power of
large language models (LLMs) to effectively interact with
various tools to accomplish complex tasks (Qin et al.
2023b). By integrating LLM with APIs, we can greatly
expand their utility and empower LLM to serve as an
efficient intermediary between users and the vast ecosystem
of applications (Qin et al. 2023a; Jin et al. 2023; Park
et al. 2023). Existing tool learning approaches can be
divided into two categories: tuning-free and tuning-based
methods. The former ones leverage the proprietary LLMs,
such as ChatGPT or GPT-4, to interact with various tools to
solve complex tasks. These methods prompt the proprietary
LLMs with demonstrations of tool usage. However, the only
way for the proprietary LLMs to access the user-defined
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18030

