The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Attribute-Missing Graph Clustering Network
Wenxuan Tu1 , Renxiang Guan1 , Sihang Zhou2 , Chuan Ma3 , Xin Peng1 ,
Zhiping Cai1 , Zhe Liu3 , Jieren Cheng4,5 , Xinwang Liu1
2

1
School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
3
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Hainan University, Haikou, China
5
Hainan Blockchain Technology Engineering Research Center, Haikou, China
wenxuantu@163.com, sihangjoe@gmail.com, xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract

2021; Gong et al. 2022a,b; Liu et al. 2023; Hu et al. 2023;
Yang et al. 2022, 2023) lies in the assumption that all samples within a graph are trustworthy and complete. However,
such an assumption may not always hold in practical scenarios since it is hard to collect all information from graph
data. The reasons behind this include but are not limited to
the privacy-protecting policy, the copyright restriction, and
the failures in data acquisition equipment. All these uncontrollable factors could easily trigger data-sparse and dataabsent issues that adversely affect clustering performance.
Based on the absence of node attributes, the graphs with
absent attributes can be broadly classified into two categories: 1) attribute-incomplete graphs, where only a subset
of attributes for all nodes is absent; and 2) attribute-missing
graphs, where all attributes for specific nodes are absent. In
this study, we focus specifically on the second category as it
is more challenging and holds relevance to numerous realworld applications. For example, in a citation graph, some
papers are entirely not accessible due to copyright protection. Moreover, within the co-purchase graph, consumers
tend to abstain entirely from offering feedback for certain
items, primarily driven by privacy concerns. However, most
existing DGC methods lack a dedicated feature completion
mechanism to handle attribute-missing samples. This poses
a significant challenge in learning effective graph embedding for accurate clustering on attribute-missing graphs.
To learn strong graph neural networks (GNNs) capable of
handling attribute-missing data for clustering, recent studies
propose two types of graph learning methods. The first category is termed embedding alignment-based methods, which
firstly conduct the structure-attribute embedding distribution
matching to reconstruct latent features of attribute-missing
samples (Chen et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022b) and then utilize the decoded information for clustering. The second category, termed data imputation-based methods, addresses this
issue by completing missing attributes using data imputation
techniques (Yoo et al. 2022; Tu et al. 2022; Jin et al. 2023)
and subsequently performing clustering in the latent space.
Though demonstrating impressive clustering performance,
the above “two-stage” methods share the following limitations: 1) isolate the clustering and imputation processes, preventing two steps from negotiating with each other to learn
clustering-friendly graph embedding; and 2) not tailored for
clustering tasks. Most of them complete missing attributes

Deep clustering with attribute-missing graphs, where only
a subset of nodes possesses complete attributes while those
of others are missing, is an important yet challenging topic
in various practical applications. It has become a prevalent
learning paradigm in existing studies to perform data imputation first and subsequently conduct clustering using the imputed information. However, these “two-stage” methods disconnect the clustering and imputation processes, preventing
the model from effectively learning clustering-friendly graph
embedding. Furthermore, they are not tailored for clustering
tasks, leading to inferior clustering results. To solve these issues, we propose a novel Attribute-Missing Graph Clustering
(AMGC) method to alternately promote clustering and imputation in a unified framework, where we iteratively produce the clustering-enhanced nearest neighbor information to
boost the quality of data imputation and utilize the imputed
information to implicitly refine the clustering distribution
through model optimization. Specifically, in the imputation
step, we take the learned clustering information as imputation
prompts to help each attribute-missing sample gather highly
correlated features within its clusters for data completion,
such that the intra-class compactness can be improved. Moreover, to support reliable clustering, we maximize inter-class
separability by conducting cost-efficient dual non-contrastive
learning over the imputed latent features, which in turn promotes greater graph encoding capability for clustering subnetwork. Extensive experiments on five datasets have verified
the superiority of AMGC against competitors.

Introduction
Deep graph clustering (DGC), as a fundamental task in unlabelled data analysis, aims to identify groups of nodes with
similar properties or behaviors within a given graph. With
the powerful representation learning capability of graph neural networks (Kipf and Welling 2017; Velickovic et al. 2018;
Xu et al. 2019), DGC has been intensively researched and
demonstrated encouraging performance across a wide range
of practical applications, such as community detection (Park
et al. 2022), face recognition (Wang et al. 2022b), and
metagenomic binning (Xue et al. 2022).
The key prerequisite for the success of current DGC methods (Bo et al. 2020; Cui et al. 2020; Tu et al. 2021; Peng et al.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15392

