The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Deep Quantum Error Correction
Yoni Choukroun, Lior Wolf
The Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
choukroun.yoni@gmail.com, wolf@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract

function to collapse and erase the encoded quantum information (Neumann, Wigner, and Hofstadter 1955).
Shor (Shor 1995) proposed the first quantum error correction scheme, demonstrating that these challenges can be
overcome. Subsequently, threshold 1 theorems have shown
that increasing the distance of a code will result in a corresponding reduction in the logical error rate, signifying
that quantum error correction codes can arbitrarily suppress
the logical error rate (Aharonov and Ben-Or 1997; Kitaev
1997a; Preskill 1998). This distance increase is obtained by
developing encoding schemes that reliably store and process
information in a logical set of qubits, by encoding it redundantly on top of a larger set of less reliable physical qubits
(Nielsen and Chuang 2002).
Most current QECC methods fall in the category of stabilizer codes, which can be seen as a generalization of the classical linear codes (Gottesman 1997). Similarly to the classical parity check constraints, a group of stabilizer operators
can provide a syndrome, while preserving the logical quantum states and enabling error detection.
Optimal decoding is defined by the unfeasible NP-hard
maximum likelihood rule (Dennis et al. 2002; Kuo and Lu
2020). Considerable research dedicated to the design of
codes with some additional algebraic structure have been
done in order to support efficient decoding (Calderbank and
Shor 1996; Schindler et al. 2011). One of the most promising categories of codes are topological codes, particularly
surface codes, which originated from Toric codes (Bravyi
and Kitaev 1998; Kitaev 1997a,b; Dennis et al. 2002; Kitaev
2003). Given boundary conditions, the idea is to encode every logical qubit in a 2D lattice of physical qubits. This local design of the code via nearest-neighbors coupled qubits
allows the correction of a wide range of errors,and, under
certain assumptions, surface codes provide an exponential
reduction in the error rate (Kitaev 1997a,c).
In this work, we present a novel end-to-end neural quantum decoding algorithm that can be applied to any stabilizer
code. We first predict an approximation of the system noise,
turning the quantum syndrome decoding task into a form
that is compliant with the classical ECC Transformer decoder (Choukroun and Wolf 2022), which is based on the

Quantum error correction codes (QECC) are a key component
for realizing the potential of quantum computing. QECC, as
its classical counterpart (ECC), enables the reduction of error rates, by distributing quantum logical information across
redundant physical qubits, such that errors can be detected
and corrected. In this work, we efficiently train novel end-toend deep quantum error decoders. We resolve the quantum
measurement collapse by augmenting syndrome decoding to
predict an initial estimate of the system noise, which is then
refined iteratively through a deep neural network. The logical
error rates calculated over finite fields are directly optimized
via a differentiable objective, enabling efficient decoding under the constraints imposed by the code. Finally, our architecture is extended to support faulty syndrome measurement, by
efficient decoding of repeated syndrome sampling. The proposed method demonstrates the power of neural decoders for
QECC by achieving state-of-the-art accuracy, outperforming
for small distance topological codes, the existing end-to-end
neural and classical decoders, which are often computationally prohibitive.

Introduction
Error Correcting Codes (ECC) are required in order to overcome computation and transmission corruption in almost
every computation device (Shannon 1948; MacKay 2003).
Quantum systems are known for being extremely noisy,
thereby requiring the use of error correction (Lidar and Brun
2013; Ballance et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2019; Foxen et al.
2020). However, adapting existing classical ECC methods
to the quantum domain (QECC) is not straightforward (Raimond and Haroche 1996).
The first difficulty in applying ECC-based knowledge
to QECC arises from the no-cloning theorem for quantum
states (Wootters and Zurek 1982), which asserts that it is
impossible to clone a quantum state and thus add arbitrarily
redundant parity information, as done in classical ECC. The
second challenge is the need to detect and correct quantum
continuous bit-flips, as well as phase-flips (Cory et al. 1998;
Schindler et al. 2011), while classical ECC addresses only
bit-flip errors. A third major challenge is the wave function
collapse phenomenon: any direct measurements (while being standard in ECC) of the qubits would cause the wave

1
A threshold is the minimal error rate such that adding more
physical qubits results in fewer logical errors.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

64

