The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Instance-Aware Multi-Camera 3D Object Detection with Structural Priors
Mining and Self-Boosting Learning
Yang Jiao1,2 , Zequn Jie3 , Shaoxiang Chen3 , Lechao Cheng4 , Jingjing Chen1,2† ,
Lin Ma3† , Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center on Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Meituan
4
Zhejiang Lab
Abstract

…

Camera-based bird-eye-view (BEV) perception paradigm has
made significant progress in the autonomous driving field.
Under such a paradigm, accurate BEV representation construction relies on reliable depth estimation for multi-camera
images. However, existing approaches exhaustively predict
depths for every pixel without prioritizing objects, which are
precisely the entities requiring detection in the 3D space. To
this end, we propose IA-BEV, which integrates image-plane
instance awareness into the depth estimation process within a
BEV-based detector. First, a category-specific structural priors mining approach is proposed for enhancing the efficacy of
monocular depth generation. Besides, a self-boosting learning strategy is further proposed to encourage the model to
place more emphasis on challenging objects in computationexpensive temporal stereo matching. Together they provide
Conquer
advanced depth estimation results for high-quality
BEV features construction, benefiting the ultimate 3D detection. The
proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performances on
the challenging nuScenes benchmark, and extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our designs.

(a) Camera images
category-centric perspective

(b) Relative depth maps

Introduction

Foreground Parsing
Instance-centric perspective

(c) Visual appearances

Parallel Processing

Iterative Processing

SPM

SBL

(d) Our SPM and SBL for accurate BEV features construction

In recent years, there has been a surge of research interest
in multi-camera 3D object detection within the autonomous
driving field (Huang et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022c, 2023a; Feng
et al. 2023). Compared with LiDAR, the camera excels at
capturing object semantics and enjoys the advantage of a
lower deployment cost. The recent trend in this field is to
transform the multi-view image features to a unified Bird’sEye-View (BEV) space for the subsequent perception. This
paradigm facilitates aligning signals from multiple sensors
and timestamps in the BEV space, serving as a generic representation for downstream tasks such as detection (Jiao et al.
2023; Li et al. 2023b), map segmentation (Xie et al. 2022)
and question answering (Qian et al. 2023).
Within the BEV-based perception pipeline, depth estimation plays a pivotal role in the perspective projection from
the image view to BEV. Pioneering methods estimate depth
from monocular images either implicitly (Li et al. 2022c)
or explicitly (Li et al. 2023a). Motivated by the success

Figure 1: The overall workflow of the proposed IA-BEV. In
(b), we first use gaussian kernel to densely fill depth values
for each pixel, then calculate relative depths by dividing the
maximum depth of the corresponding objects. All objects
illustrated in (b) and (c) are extracted from nuScenes images
and resized to the same scale for clarity.

of the multi-view stereo technique (Yao et al. 2018; Wei
et al. 2021), follow-up approaches (Li et al. 2022a; Park
et al. 2022) leverage consecutive camera frames to construct cost volume for stereo matching. Benefiting from enhanced depth estimation, these methods enjoy high-quality
BEV features and thus achieve remarkable detection performances.
Despite significant advancements, existing methods (Li
et al. 2023a, 2022a) treat every pixel equally, neglecting
the inherent properties encapsulated in foreground objects.
In fact, foreground objects can exhibit consistency within
a category and heterogeneity among instances, which we

†Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2598

