The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Hybrid Global-Local Perception Network for Lane Detection
Qing Chang, Yifei Tong *
School of Mechanical Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
qingchang@njust.edu.cn, tyf51129@aliyun.com

Abstract
Lane detection is a critical task in autonomous driving, which
requires accurately predicting the complex topology of lanes
in various scenarios. While previous methods of lane detection have shown success, challenges still exist, especially in
scenarios where lane markings are absent. In this paper, we
analyze the role of global and local features in accurately detecting lanes and propose a Hybrid Global-Local Perception
Network (HGLNet) to leverage them. Global and local features play distinct roles in lane detection by respectively aiding in the detection of lane instances and the localization of
corresponding lanes. HGLNet extracts global semantic context by utilizing a global extraction head that aggregates information about adaptive sampling points around lanes, achieving an optimal trade-off between performance and efficiency.
Moreover, we introduce a Multi-hierarchy feature aggregator (MFA) to capture feature hierarchies in both regional and
local ranges, elevating the representation of local features.
The proposed Hybrid architecture can simultaneously focus
on global and local features at different depth levels and efficiently integrate them to sense the global presence of lanes
and accurately regress their locations. Experimental results
demonstrate that our proposed method improves detection accuracy in various challenging scenarios, outperforming the
state-of-the-art lane detection methods.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Illustrations of hard cases for lane detection. (a)
The case that lane is almost occupied by the cars. The global
features (the cyan rectangles) assist in determining the presence of lane lines at occluded areas. (b) Roads without lane
marking. (c) The lane line is blurred under night conditions,
subsequently requiring various hierarchical features, e.g.,
the local features (edges, colors), and an extended range of
region features (the orange squares), to precisely locate the
lane line. (d) The case that the extreme lighting blurs lane.

Introduction
Lane detection is a fundamental component of autonomous
driving systems. It requires the detector to accurately determine the shape of each lane line from a front-view image
obtained by a vehicle camera. The detection of lanes assists
the vehicle in accurately determining its present location and
the subsequent decision-making process.
Recently, deep-learning-based methods for lane detection
have shown promising results (Pan et al. 2018; Zheng et al.
2021, 2022). However, there are still some challenges in detecting accurate lanes, such as faded lane lines, adverse illumination or weather situations, occlusion of lane markings
by other objects like cars, or the absence of lane markings.
To address these challenges, we perform an extensive
analysis of contemporary approaches to lane detection and

observe three significant characteristics of lane representation: globality, locality, and consistency. When the majority
of the lanes are invisible, utilizing the globality of lane
representation (cyan rectangles in Fig. 1) becomes necessary for predicting the existence of the lanes by using all
available visible portions. The locality refers to the inherent
various features hierarchies of lanes, e.g., the straight edges
of lane markings, the same color, and regular shapes within
regions(orange squares in Fig. 1). It contributes to correcting
the position of lanes by enhancing and associating different
hierarchies of features. The consistency means that many
types of lanes are a smooth thin line, which is an a priori
shape that is crucial for lane prediction.
Fig. 1(a) illustrates that the majority of lane instances are
obscured by vehicles, but some are still discernible, thereby
necessitating the detector to incorporate global context to

* Yifei Tong is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

981

