The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FedLPS: Heterogeneous Federated Learning for Multiple Tasks
with Local Parameter Sharing
Yongzhe Jia1 , Xuyun Zhang2,* , Amin Beheshti2 , Wanchun Dou1, *
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Computing, Macquarie University, Australia
jiayz@smail.nju.edu.cn, {xuyun.zhang, amin.beheshti}@mq.edu.au, douwc@nju.edu.cn
Abstract

entails clients (i.e., edge devices) updating the ML model using their private local data, while the central server is responsible for aggregating these updated local models. In contrast
to traditional centralized ML, FL facilitates data processing on distributed edge devices where the data is generated.
In addition, the distributed learning nature of FL eliminates
the need for transmitting raw data to the central server, thus
avoiding unnecessary communication costs and enhancing
user privacy (McMahan et al. 2017; Ezzeldin et al. 2023).
Despite the successful practical applications in FL, it
still faces the following critical challenges: a) Limited resource budgets of edge devices. Popular Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) commonly possess larger than hundreds of
megabytes of parameters that need to be trained (He et al.
2016), whereas the computational resources of edge devices
are limited in EC environments (Kairouz et al. 2021). Training these unleashing DNN models on edge devices heavily hampered the learning efficiency of FL. b) Multitasking
on a single device. Ideally, each edge device maintains a
task-specific DNN model for each task, resulting in linear
growth of training costs on edge devices. Therefore, directly
deploying multiple unleashing DNN models for each specific task on edge devices is impractical (Fu et al. 2021; Ma
et al. 2019; Wallingford et al. 2022). c) Data heterogeneity and system heterogeneity. On one hand, the numbers
of data samples and the data distributions of edge devices
are typically various (i.e., non-identically distributed data,
non-IID data), resulting in the accuracy degradation of the
global model (Gao, Yao, and Yang 2022; Luo et al. 2021).
On the other hand, the system capabilities of edge devices,
such as CPU, GPU, memory, battery power, etc., also can be
various. The devices with weaker system capabilities (i.e.,
“stragglers”) will fail to finish local training, therefore hampering the learning process of FL (Gao, Yao, and Yang 2022;
Jiang et al. 2022).
Several pioneering work have made efforts to mitigate
these challenges through various solutions (Caldas et al.
2018; Li et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020b; Jiang et al. 2022;
Li et al. 2021). Li et al. (Li et al. 2020) propose FedProx
to address the data heterogeneity problem by incentivizing
participants to preserve similarity with the global model,
while addressing the system heterogeneity problem by accommodating low-end devices (i.e., devices with fewer system capabilities) to carry out a reduced number of local up-

Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a promising solution
in Edge Computing (EC) environments to process the proliferation of data generated by edge devices. By collaboratively
optimizing the global machine learning models on distributed
edge devices, FL circumvents the need for transmitting raw
data and enhances user privacy. Despite practical successes,
FL still confronts significant challenges including constrained
edge device resources, multiple tasks deployment, and data
heterogeneity. However, existing studies focus on mitigating the FL training costs of each single task whereas neglecting the resource consumption across multiple tasks in
heterogeneous FL scenarios. In this paper, we propose heterogeneous FEDerated learning with Local Parameter Sharing (FedLPS) to fill this gap. FedLPS leverages principles
from transfer learning to facilitate the deployment of multiple tasks on a single device by dividing the local model into
a shareable encoder and task-specific predictors. To further
reduce resource consumption, a channel-wise model pruning
algorithm that shrinks the footprint of local models while accounting for both data and system heterogeneity is employed
in FedLPS. Additionally, a novel heterogeneous model aggregation algorithm is proposed to aggregate the heterogeneous predictors in FedLPS. We implemented the proposed
FedLPS on a real FL platform and compared it with stateof-the-art (SOTA) FL frameworks. The experimental results
on five popular datasets and two modern DNN models illustrate that the proposed FedLPS significantly outperforms the
SOTA FL frameworks by up to 4.88% and reduces the computational resource consumption by 21.3%. Our code is available at: https://github.com/jyzgh/FedLPS.

Introduction
Over the past decade, there has been a remarkable surge in
the generation of massive amounts of data from billions of
Internet of Things (IoT) devices (Khan et al. 2021). In the
context of Edge Computing (EC) environments, Federated
Learning (FL) has emerged as a promising solution for processing such extensive data at the edge (McMahan et al.
2017; Khan et al. 2020). FL enables various edge devices
to collaboratively optimize a global Machine Learning (ML)
model with the assistance of an edge server. This approach
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12848

