The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

H-ensemble: An Information Theoretic Approach to Reliable Few-Shot
Multi-Source-Free Transfer
Yanru Wu1 , Jianning Wang2 , Weida Wang1 , Yang Li1 *
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduation School, Tsinghua University†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
{wu-yr21, wangwd19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wangjianning@stu.hit.edu.cn, yangli@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

growing privacy concerns have impeded access to source
data, particularly when compared to the models they’ve nurtured (Feng et al. 2021). This evolving landscape underscores the need for the novel paradigm of multi-source-free
(MSF) transfer learning (Fang et al. 2022).
MSF transfer learning, sometimes referred to as MSF
domain adaptation (Han et al. 2023), entails transferring
knowledge from multiple sources to a target task without
accessing source data, as depicted in Fig. 1. Despite not being clearly defined in most previous papers and still largely
underexplored, MSF transfer has been explored by several
works these years. Preliminary efforts centered around simple strategies like averaging source models or reducing the
problem to single source-free transfers, by source selection
using empirical validations or transferability metrics (e.g.
Yang et al. 2023). Contemporary research has pivoted towards sophisticated model ensembles, assigning weights to
sources based on perceived importance. For instance, approaches range from correlating source relevance to the target (Lee, Sattigeri, and Wornell 2019), to conditional entropy minimization (Ahmed et al. 2021), and even leveraging source-similarity and class-relationship perception modules for weight determination (Dong et al. 2021; Han et al.
2023). Beyond these linear ensemble techniques, some researchers also introduced auxiliary models to endow crossdomain capabilities (Li et al. 2022).

Multi-source transfer learning is an effective solution to data
scarcity by utilizing multiple source tasks for the learning of
the target task. However, access to source data and model details is limited in the era of commercial models, giving rise to
the setting of multi-source-free (MSF) transfer learning that
aims to leverage source domain knowledge without such access. As a newly defined problem paradigm, MSF transfer
learning remains largely underexplored and not clearly formulated. In this work, we adopt an information theoretic perspective on it and propose a framework named H-ensemble,
which dynamically learns the optimal linear combination, or
ensemble, of source models for the target task, using a generalization of maximal correlation regression. The ensemble
weights are optimized by maximizing an information theoretic metric for transferability. Compared to previous works,
H-ensemble is characterized by: 1) its adaptability to a novel
and realistic MSF setting for few-shot target tasks, 2) theoretical reliability, 3) a lightweight structure easy to interpret and
adapt. Our method is empirically validated by ablation studies, along with extensive comparative analysis with other task
ensemble and transfer learning methods. We show that the Hensemble can successfully learn the optimal task ensemble,
as well as outperform prior arts.

Introduction
The scarcity of annotated data is a principal challenge to
machine learning algorithms in a variety of real-world scenarios, where transfer learning has emerged as an effective remedy, harnessing information and insights from wellestablished source tasks to augment data-deficient domains
(see Perkins, Salomon et al. 1992; Weiss, Khoshgoftaar, and
Wang 2016; Zhuang et al. 2020). Historically, transfer learning has centered on a singular source-task and target-task
relationship. However, the spotlight is gradually shifting towards multi-source transfer learning, capitalizing on multiple source tasks to facilitate the training of the target task
(see Sun, Shi, and Wu 2015). A variety of works have contributed to both the theoretical foundation and practical algorithms on this topic. Yet, the trend of decentralization and

Source Data

D3

θ1

θ2

θ3

Source Model

DM

.
.
.

D2

.
.
.

D1

θM

Transfer
Target Task

Figure 1: Problem Setting of Multi-Source-Free Transfer
Learning. The transfer to the target task is based on the
source models (whose access in our redefined MSF setting
is also restricted) trained on the inaccessible source data.

* Corresponding author.
†
Yanru Wu, Weida Wang and Yang Li are from the Shenzhen
Key Laboratory of Ubiquitous Data Enabling, SIGS, Tsinghua.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15970

