The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Descanning: From Scanned to the Original Images with
a Color Correction Diffusion Model
Junghun Cha1* , Ali Haider1* , Seoyun Yang1 , Hoeyeong Jin1 , Subin Yang1 ,
A. F. M. Shahab Uddin2 , Jaehyoung Kim1 , Soo Ye Kim3 , Sung-Ho Bae1
1
Kyung Hee University
Jashore University of Science and Technology
3
Adobe Research
{jhcha08, alihaider, 2019101234, wlsghldud, ysb8049, crux153, shbae}@khu.ac.kr, s.uddin@just.edu.bd, sooyek@adobe.com
2

Abstract

each scanned image has been obtained after printing and
scanning an original digital copy, there exists a ground truth
digital copy for each scanned version.
In this paper, we define a new inverse problem called Descanning, i.e., image restoration from a scanned copy to its
original digital one. Specifically, this refers to the restoration
of information physically printed on papers that have been
corrupted in the process of scanning or during preservation.
We broadly categorize degradation resulting from such processes into two types: color-related degradation (CD) and
non-color-related degradation (NCD). CD contains color
transition while NCD consists of external noise, internal
noise, halftone pattern, texture distortion, and bleed-through
effect, each of which will be explained in detail.
Although many real-world image restoration methods and
datasets have been proposed, only a few have focused on
various degradation mixtures that can exist in real-world
scanned images due to the lack of scanned image datasets.
Therefore, it is crucial to acquire many real scanned images
and examine their degradation characteristics systematically
to train a learning-based descanning model. In this study,
we build a novel dataset for descanning, namely DESCAN18K. This is composed of 18,360 pairs of 1024 × 1024 resolution RGB TIFF original images and scanned versions
of them from various scanners. DESCAN-18K provides
rich information about the aforementioned six representative complex degradations in typical scanned images. It also
contains various natural scenes and texts, making the descanning task difficult yet practical. These characteristics of
our dataset differ from existing restoration datasets that usually have a single (or few) degradation type and contain either texts or pictures. We conduct a statistical analysis on
DESCAN-18K as well as systematize the degradations existing within. Based on this analysis, we also synthesize additional training data pairs to contain similar degradations as
in the original DESCAN-18K.
Meanwhile, diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015)
have recently garnered attention as a highly effective generative method capable of performing low-level vision tasks
(Kawar et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022c). However, they
are yet to be explored for restoring images with multiple
degradations such as for our descanning problem. To address

A significant volume of analog information, i.e., documents
and images, have been digitized in the form of scanned copies
for storing, sharing, and/or analyzing in the digital world.
However, the quality of such contents is severely degraded by
various distortions caused by printing, storing, and scanning
processes in the physical world. Although restoring highquality content from scanned copies has become an indispensable task for many products, it has not been systematically explored, and to the best of our knowledge, no public
datasets are available. In this paper, we define this problem
as Descanning and introduce a new high-quality and largescale dataset named DESCAN-18K. It contains 18K pairs
of original and scanned images collected in the wild containing multiple complex degradations. In order to eliminate
such complex degradations, we propose a new image restoration model called DescanDiffusion consisting of a color encoder that corrects the global color degradation and a conditional denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) that
removes local degradations. To further improve the generalization ability of DescanDiffusion, we also design a synthetic
data generation scheme by reproducing prominent degradations in scanned images. We demonstrate that our DescanDiffusion outperforms other baselines including commercial
restoration products, objectively and subjectively, via comprehensive experiments and analyses.

Introduction
In the last several decades, information in the form of general paper-type materials (e.g., magazines, books, or photos) has been actively digitized via scanning processes, to
store, share and analyze such information in digital form.
For instance, Google has scanned and digitized more than
25 million books under the codename Project Ocean (Love
2017) since 2002. However, the quality of scanned images
is often degraded due to the printing, storing, and scanning
processes. Thus, to preserve the original information accurately, degradations caused by such processes should be removed from the digitized (scanned) copies. Technically, as
* These authors contributed equally.
Sung-Ho Bae and Soo Ye Kim are co-corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

954

