The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Neural Physical Simulation with Multi-Resolution Hash Grid Encoding
Haoxiang Wang1 , Tao Yu1† ,Tianwei Yang1 , Hui Qiao1, 2† ,Qionghai Dai1
1

Department of Automation & BNRist, Tsinghua University
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

Abstract

velopment of implicit representation has opened up many
possibilities for mesh-free simulations, with various implicit
representations (Park et al. 2019; Mildenhall et al. 2021;
Mescheder et al. 2019; Chen and Zhang 2019; Sitzmann
et al. 2020) proposed for efficient encoding and consideration of spatiotemporal characteristics. However, leveraging
current implicit representations for continuous simulation
remains challenging because:

We explore the generalization of the implicit representation in
the physical simulation task. Traditional time-dependent partial differential equations (PDEs) solvers for physical simulation often adopt the grid or mesh for spatial discretization,
which is memory-consuming for high resolution and lack of
adaptivity. Many implicit representations like local extreme
machine or Siren are proposed but they are still too compact
to suffer from limited accuracy in handling local details and a
long time of convergence. We contribute a neural simulation
framework based on multi-resolution hash grid representation
to introduce hierarchical consideration of global and local
information, simultaneously. Furthermore, we propose two
key strategies: 1) a numerical gradient method for computing
high-order derivatives with boundary conditions; 2) a range
analysis sample method for fast neural geometry boundary
sampling with dynamic topologies. Our method shows higher
accuracy and strong flexibility for various simulation problems: e.g., large elastic deformations, complex fluid dynamics, and multi-scale phenomena which remain challenging for
existing neural physical solvers.

1. the existing implicit representations based on neural network are too compact, characterized by high correlations
of values corresponding to neighboring sample points,
leading to low representation efficiency and slow convergence during training;
2. the other representations based on kernel functions suffer
from high computational cost and heavy memory storage
burden;
3. most of the representations are struggling to handle dynamic geometries effectively due to inefficient sampling.
To tackle these challenges, we propose a general and efficient physics simulation method based on the implicit neural representation. This method enhances the performance
and accuracy of simulations, while also demonstrating the
potential to overcome simulation challenges under dynamic
geometry changes, which is the case that traditional methods
struggle with. Specifically, to address the compactness issue
in the existing approaches, we adopt the multi-resolution
hash grid as a positional input encoder to facilitate representation from large to extremely small levels with limited
memory and automatically focus on the relevant details. The
utilization of the hash grid for simulation, however, poses
various challenges, such as the locality issue when calculating analytical gradient w.r.t position. Therefore, we propose a finite-difference-based numerical gradient computation method to enhance the joint optimization of multiple
hash entries. Moreover, to resolve the issue of topological variation under dynamic geometry changes, we propose
a range-analysis-based fast adaptive object boundary sampling method to improve the sampling efficiency. In summary, we make the following contributions:

Introduction
Physics simulations involve continuous spatiotemporal systems governed by partial differential equations. In traditional
simulations, time and space need to be discretized due to the
lack of an effective continuous representation. Mesh/grid is
often a common topic in classical simulation. However, several issues arise for these mesh-based approaches: first of
all, they cannot simulate in a continuous spatiotemporal domain owing to the limited resolution of discretization. Moreover, the introduction of mesh or grid through spatial discretization also hinders the adaptability to dynamic geometries. Methods like re-meshing or adaptive grids to handle
dynamic geometries are difficult to implement and require
a large memory usage. Some current advanced data-driven
simulation methods (Morimoto et al. 2021; Pfaff et al. 2020)
try to fill these gaps with features on the discretized structures, but they are often not easy to generalize and do not
ensure the physical equations.
As a promising alternative, mesh-free simulations are favored over mesh-based methods. In recent years, the de-

• A novel mesh-free neural simulation framework based on
multi-resolution hash grid encoding, with strong flexibility to support different physical simulation tasks.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†: corresponding author

5410

