The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Disentangled Diffusion-Based 3D Human Pose Estimation with
Hierarchical Spatial and Temporal Denoiser
Qingyuan Cai1 * , Xuecai Hu1 * , Saihui Hou1,2† , Li Yao1 , Yongzhen Huang1,2†
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University
2
WATRIX.AI
caiqingyuan@mail.bnu.edu.cn, {huxc1208, housaihui, yaoli, huangyongzhen}@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, diffusion-based methods for monocular 3D human pose estimation have achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance by directly regressing the 3D joint coordinates
from the 2D pose sequence. Although some methods decompose the task into bone length and bone direction prediction based on the human anatomical skeleton to explicitly
incorporate more human body prior constraints, the performance of these methods is significantly lower than that of
the SOTA diffusion-based methods. This can be attributed
to the tree structure of the human skeleton. Direct application of the disentangled method could amplify the accumulation of hierarchical errors, propagating through each hierarchy. Meanwhile, the hierarchical information has not been
fully explored by the previous methods. To address these
problems, a Disentangled Diffusion-based 3D human Pose
Estimation method with Hierarchical Spatial and Temporal
Denoiser is proposed, termed DDHPose. In our approach:
(1) We disentangle the 3D pose and diffuse the bone length
and bone direction during the forward process of the diffusion model to effectively model the human pose prior. A disentanglement loss is proposed to supervise diffusion model
learning. (2) For the reverse process, we propose Hierarchical
Spatial and Temporal Denoiser (HSTDenoiser) to improve
the hierarchical modeling of each joint. Our HSTDenoiser
comprises two components: the Hierarchical-Related Spatial
Transformer (HRST) and the Hierarchical-Related Temporal
Transformer (HRTT). HRST exploits joint spatial information and the influence of the parent joint on each joint for
spatial modeling, while HRTT utilizes information from both
the joint and its hierarchical adjacent joints to explore the hierarchical temporal correlations among joints. Extensive experiments on the Human3.6M and MPI-INF-3DHP datasets
show that our method outperforms the SOTA disentangledbased, non-disentangled based, and probabilistic approaches
by 10.0%, 2.0%, and 1.3%, respectively.

Figure 1: Left: The hierarchy defined in our method and
the forward kinematic structure (drawn with brown dashed
lines) based on the Human3.6M dataset. Right: The MPJPE
of the hierarchy 1-5 joints comparison among Anatomy3D
(Chen et al. 2021), MixSTE (Zhang et al. 2022a), D3DP
(Shan et al. 2023) and our method.

regress the 3D joints locations of a human in the 3D space
using the input of 2D pose sequence. Most of the methods
first derive predictions of 2D joints using estimators such as
HRNet (Wang et al. 2020), CPN (Chen et al. 2018), OpenPose (Cao et al. 2017) and AlphaPose (Fang et al. 2017), and
then perform 2D-to-3D lifting to obtain the final estimation
results.
Recently, monocular 3D human pose estimation has experienced significant advancements. Many methods have been
proposed to alleviate the depth ambiguity. (Pavllo et al.
2019) considers this issue by exploring temporal information with the convolutional network while the transformerbased methods (Zheng et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022a) make
use of spatial-temporal information to compensate for the information loss in the 2D to 3D mapping process. Learning or
introducing human pose prior is another method to mitigate
the depth ambiguity. (Shan et al. 2023; Ci et al. 2023; Gong
et al. 2023) introduce the original pose distribution prior in
the training phase, and model 2D-to-3D lifting as a process
to denoise from the pose distribution with uncertain noise.
Moreover, some disentangle-based methods like (Xu et al.
2020; Chen et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022) explicitly predict
the bone length and bone direction, subsequently composing
3D joints locations based on the forward kinematics of the
human skeleton. Such methods employ explicit pose constraints, integrating symmetry loss, joint angle limits (Xu
et al. 2020), and the consistent bone length in the videos

Introduction
3D Human Pose Estimation (HPE) has crucial applications
in virtual reality (Hagbi et al. 2010), human motion recognition (Zhang et al. 2022b), and human-computer interaction (Kisacanin, Pavlovic, and Huang 2005). The goal is to
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

882

