The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On the Concept Trustworthiness in Concept Bottleneck Models
Qihan Huang1 , Jie Song1 * , Jingwen Hu1 , Haofei Zhang1 , Yong Wang2 , Mingli Song1
1

Zhejiang University
State Grid Shandong Electric Power Company
{qh.huang, sjie, jw hu, haofeizhang, brooksong}@zju.edu.cn, wangyong@sd.sgcc.com.cn
2

forehead::gray (concept)

Abstract

Probability: 86.4%
(Before Removing)

Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs), which break down the
reasoning process into the input-to-concept mapping and
the concept-to-label prediction, have garnered significant attention due to their remarkable interpretability achieved by
the interpretable concept bottleneck. However, despite the
transparency of the concept-to-label prediction, the mapping
from the input to the intermediate concept remains a black
box, giving rise to concerns about the trustworthiness of the
learned concepts (i.e., these concepts may be predicted based
on spurious cues). The issue of concept untrustworthiness
greatly hampers the interpretability of CBMs, thereby hindering their further advancement. To conduct a comprehensive
analysis on this issue, in this study we establish a benchmark
to assess the trustworthiness of concepts in CBMs. A pioneering metric, referred to as concept trustworthiness score,
is proposed to gauge whether the concepts are derived from
relevant regions. Additionally, an enhanced CBM is introduced, enabling concept predictions to be made specifically
from distinct parts of the feature map, thereby facilitating
the exploration of their related regions. Besides, we introduce three modules, namely the cross-layer alignment (CLA)
module, the cross-image alignment (CIA) module, and the
prediction alignment (PA) module, to further enhance the
concept trustworthiness within the elaborated CBM. The experiments on five datasets across ten architectures demonstrate that without using any concept localization annotations during training, our model improves the concept trustworthiness by a large margin, meanwhile achieving superior accuracy to the state-of-the-arts. Our code is available
at https://github.com/hqhQAQ/ProtoCBM.

(a) Input Image (b) Grad-CAM

Probability: 82.7%
(After Removing)
(c) Remove Head

Figure 1: Untrustworthiness of a concept named “forehead::gray” in the vanilla CBM. (a) The input image. (b) The
localization map of this concept (generated by Grad-CAM)
concentrates on the underpart of the bird. (c) After removing
the head part in the image, the prediction probability for this
concept changes very slightly.

et al. 2020), a plethora of CBM variants have emerged in the
research landscape. These variants include, but are not limited to, PCBM (Yüksekgönül, Wang, and Zou 2023), Labelfree CBM (Oikarinen et al. 2023), Hard CBM (Havasi, Parbhoo, and Doshi-Velez 2022), and Interactive CBM (Chauhan
et al. 2023).
Despite the remarkable strides made in the field, the interpretability of existing CBMs primarily stems from the transparency of the concept-to-label prediction. The input-toconcept mapping, in contrast, is still a black box and thus remains elusive, which significantly undermines the trustworthiness of the subsequent concept-to-label prediction. Figure 1 illustrates an example highlighting this issue. Specifically, Figure 1 (b) demonstrates the attribution map of a head
concept prediction using Grad-CAM (Selvaraju et al. 2017),
indicating that the prediction of this head concept is based on
the underpart rather than the head part. Besides, Figure 1 (c)
further presents that after removing the head part in the input image, the classification probability of this head concept
only changes slightly. While some recent studies have shed
light on the concept untrustworthiness in CBMs (Margeloiu
et al. 2021; Heidemann, Monnet, and Roscher 2023; Furby
et al. 2023), these works have been limited to either visualization examples or a simple metric applied to a specific
CBM on a single backbone. A more comprehensive investigation into concept trustworthiness is urgently needed to
drive the progress of CBMs.
In this work, we establish a systematic benchmark on

Introduction
Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) have recently emerged
as self-explanatory models that begin by predicting the highlevel concepts present in the input data (input-to-concept
mapping), and subsequently make class label predictions
based on these inferred concepts (concept-to-label prediction). CBMs have garnered substantial attention from researchers due to their inherent interpretability and comparable performance when compared to non-interpretable models. Following the pioneering work of the first CBM (Koh
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21161

