The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SHoP: A Deep Learning Framework for Solving
High-Order Partial Differential Equations
Tingxiong Xiao1 , Runzhao Yang1 , Yuxiao Cheng1 , Jinli Suo1,2
1

2

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Institute for Brain and Cognitive Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
jlsuo@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

based on deep neural networks are gaining momentum recently. PDE-FIND(Rudy et al. 2017) proposes a sparse regression method capable of discovering the governing partial differential equation(s) of a given system by measured
time series in the spatial domain, and demonstrates its computation efficiency, robustness, and applicability on a variety of canonical problems spanning a number of scientific
domains. Later, Deep Ritz Method(Yu et al. 2018) is designed to solve PDEs via approximating its analytical solution using a deep neural network, using the estimators in
Ritz method to train the network and obtain the approximate solution. To solve high-dimensional PDEs, Sirignano
et al. draw inspirations from Galerkin methods and proposed
Deep Galerkin Method (DGM)(Sirignano and Spiliopoulos
2018), with the solution approximated by a neural network
instead of a linear combination of basis functions. In 2019,
Raissi et al. attempt to incorporate the principled physical constraints into learning of the deep neural networks,
named Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs)(Raissi,
Perdikaris, and Karniadakis 2019), targeting for reducing
demanding training data, raising robustness and accelerate convergence. This approach can both search for datadriven solution and conduct data-driven discovery of partial differential equations, and fire up a series of working
for further improvement. For example, DeepXDE (Lu et al.
2021b) improves its training efficiency using a new residualbased adaptive refinement (RAR) method and provides a
Python library for PINNs as an educational and research
tool; there are also some work(Wang, Teng, and Perdikaris
2021; Liu and Wang 2021; Xiang et al. 2021) studying the
composite loss functions in the training process to accelerate the convergence or improve the final accuracy. Some
other researchers (Meng et al. 2020; Moseley, Markham, and
Nissen-Meyer 2021; Lyu et al. 2022) adapt the domain decomposition technology in traditional PDEs methods to realize parallel operations in time and space, or decomposes
the order of derivatives to reduce the complexity and difficulty of single network learning. In the most recent years,
Lu et al. design DeepONet(Lu et al. 2021a), a new network
structure consisting of a branch net and a trunk net to encode
the discrete input function space and output functions. Under
this new architecture, one can learn various explicit operators, such as integrals and fractional Laplacians, as well as
implicit operators that represent deterministic and stochastic

Solving partial differential equations (PDEs) has been a fundamental problem in computational science and of wide applications for both scientific and engineering research. Due
to its universal approximation property, neural network is
widely used to approximate the solutions of PDEs. However,
existing works are incapable of solving high-order PDEs due
to insufficient calculation accuracy of higher-order derivatives, and the final network is a black box without explicit explanation. To address these issues, we propose a deep learning
framework to solve high-order PDEs, named SHoP. Specifically, we derive the high-order derivative rule for neural network, to get the derivatives quickly and accurately; moreover, we expand the network into a Taylor series, providing an explicit solution for the PDEs. We conduct experimental validations four high-order PDEs with different dimensions, showing that we can solve high-order PDEs efficiently and accurately. The source code can be found at
https://github.com/HarryPotterXTX/SHoP.git.

Introduction
Partial differential equations (PDEs) are used to describe
the basic rules underlying complex processes in both scientific and engineering fields, and researchers have devoted
lots of efforts to developing algorithms searching for their
numerical solutions. Conventional finite difference methods
become infeasible for high scale PDEs due to the difficulty
in constructing mesh. With the rapid development of deep
neural networks, ones began to utilize its universal approximating capability (Cybenko 1989; Hornik, Stinchcombe,
and White 1989; Chen and Chen 1995; Leshno et al. 1993)
to fit the solutions of PDEs, including its differential operator and constraints (the initial condition and boundary conditions), if any. Being a mesh-free approach, deep learning
based solvers can circumvent the grand challenges in terms
of memory and time when tackling high scale PDE.
The pioneering work utilizing neural networks to solve
PDEs can date back to 1990s, when Dissanayake et al.
proposed to use an MLP to find PDE’s numerical solution
(Dissanayake and Phan-Thien 1994) with easy implementation and high running efficiency, but with low proximity.
With the rapid development in deep learning, PDE solvers
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16032

