The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Integrated Decision Gradients: Compute Your Attributions Where the Model
Makes Its Decision
Chase Walker1 , Sumit Jha2 , Kenny Chen3 , Rickard Ewetz1
1

2

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA
Knights Foundation School of Computing and Information Sciences, Florida International University, Miami, FL, USA
3
Lockheed Martin, Orlando, FL, USA
chase.walker@ucf.edu, jha@cs.fiu.edu, kenny.chen@lmco.com, rickard.ewetz@ucf.edu
Abstract

2016), backpropagation based (Springenberg et al. 2015;
Selvaraju et al. 2017), and gradient based methods (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014; Sundararajan, Taly,
and Yan 2017). Gradient based methods are promising due
to their strong axiomatic foundation, and model-agnostic
implementation (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017).
Gradient based methods compute attribution maps by capturing the gradients at the model inputs with respect to the
model outputs (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014).
However, gradients computed with respect to important input pixels may be zero due to the non-linear activation functions. Integrated Gradients (IG) solved this problem by integrating the gradients along a path from a baseline reference image to the input image (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan
2017). Unfortunately, it can be observed that gradients from
regions of the path where the output logit changes minimally
(e.g. is saturated) provide poor explanations for the model
decision (Miglani et al. 2020a). This phenomena is called
the saturation effect problem. Solution templates to solve
the saturation problem include: selecting non-straight-line
paths (Kapishnikov et al. 2021b; Pan, Li, and Zhu 2021b),
path truncation (Miglani et al. 2020a), post processing methods that use thresholding (Kapishnikov et al. 2019a), averaging across blurred inputs (Smilkov et al. 2017), and redefining the model (Jha et al. 2021, 2022). While these methods
improve attribution quality, they do not provide a principled
solution to the saturation problem.
In this paper, we propose a new path integral attribution
method called Integrated Decision Gradients (IDG). We call
the portion of the path where the output logit rapidly transitions from zero to its final value the decision region. IDG
focuses on integrating gradients from the decision region of
the path integral. This is realized by scaling each gradient by
the derivative of the output logit with respect to the path. The
scaling factor rewards gradients in the decision region and
penalizes gradients from outside the decision region. The
main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We propose IDG, a new attribution method that provides
a principled solution to saturation by satisfying the IG
axioms and a new path integral sensitivity axiom.
• We present an adaptive sampling technique to select nonuniform subdivisions for the Riemann approximation of
the path integral. This reduces computational errors (and
runtime overheads) compared to uniform subdivisions.

Attribution algorithms are frequently employed to explain
the decisions of neural network models. Integrated Gradients
(IG) is an influential attribution method due to its strong axiomatic foundation. The algorithm is based on integrating the
gradients along a path from a reference image to the input
image. Unfortunately, it can be observed that gradients computed from regions where the output logit changes minimally
along the path provide poor explanations for the model decision, which is called the saturation effect problem. In this paper, we propose an attribution algorithm called integrated decision gradients (IDG). The algorithm focuses on integrating
gradients from the region of the path where the model makes
its decision, i.e., the portion of the path where the output logit
rapidly transitions from zero to its final value. This is practically realized by scaling each gradient by the derivative of the
output logit with respect to the path. The algorithm thereby
provides a principled solution to the saturation problem. Additionally, we minimize the errors within the Riemann sum
approximation of the path integral by utilizing non-uniform
subdivisions determined by adaptive sampling. In the evaluation on ImageNet, it is demonstrated that IDG outperforms
IG, Left-IG, Guided IG, and adversarial gradient integration
both qualitatively and quantitatively using standard insertion
and deletion metrics across three common models.

Introduction
The access to internet-scale data and compute power has
fueled the success of black box neural network models for
applications such as disease detection (Fatima, Pasha et al.
2017), image synthesis (Rombach et al. 2022), and protein
folding (Mirdita et al. 2022). The phenomenal performance
of these networks comes from the large number of parameters and non-linear interactions among them. The complex
and high dimensional dynamics makes it difficult to understand and visualize why a neural network makes a particular decision. To establish trustworthiness in neural network
models, noteworthy research efforts have been devoted to
interpretability and explainability (Das and Rad 2020). Attribution methods provide model explanation by computing the contribution of each input feature to a model decision. Attribution methods broadly fall into perturbation
based (Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5289

