The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Decoupling Representation and Knowledge for Few-Shot Intent Classification and
Slot Filling
Jie Han1 , Yixiong Zou1 * , Haozhao Wang1 , Jun Wang2 , Wei Liu1 , Yao Wu3 , Tao Zhang3 , Ruixuan
Li1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
iWudao Tech, 3 Banma Network Technology
{jiehan,yixiongz,hz wang,idc lw,rxli}@hust.edu.cn, jwang@iwudao.tech, {qifang.wy,billow.zhangt}@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

Target

Source

Few-shot intent classification and slot filling are important
but challenging tasks due to the scarcity of finely labeled
data. Therefore, current works first train a model on source
domains with sufficiently labeled data, and then transfer the
model to target domains where only rarely labeled data is
available. However, experience transferring as a whole usually suffers from gaps that exist among source domains and
target domains. For instance, transferring domain-specificknowledge-related experience is difficult. To tackle this problem, we propose a new method that explicitly decouples the
transferring of general-semantic-representation-related experience and the domain-specific-knowledge-related experience. Specifically, for domain-specific-knowledge-related experience, we design two modules to capture intent-slot relation and slot-slot relation respectively. Extensive experiments on Snips and FewJoint datasets show that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance. The method improves
the joint accuracy metric from 27.72% to 42.20% in the 1shot setting, and from 46.54% to 60.79% in the 5-shot setting.

Evaluation

Experience
(a) Previous methods
Source

Target

Evaluation

Experience
I2S+MSD

transfer
decouple

I2S+MSD

general semantic representation
domain-specific knowledge
(b) Our method

Figure 1: Framework of Joint Modeling with Relationship
Masking (JMRM). Firstly, we explicitly decouple the general semantic representation and the domain-specific knowledge of source domains. Secondly, we only transfer the general semantic representation to target domains. Thirdly, we
apply the knowledge specific to target domains to the transferred representations.

Introduction
Natural language understanding (NLU) is a critical component of conversational dialogue systems, such as Siri, Alexa,
and Google Assistant. Specifically, NLU includes two subtasks: (1) intent classification, which classifies an utterance
into an intent label, and (2) slot filling, which classifies each
word in the utterance into a slot label. Both sub-tasks rely
on large amounts of finely labeled data, which is difficult to
obtain. Therefore, some work proposed to study NLU in the
setting of few-shot, where only a few labeled data are available (Krone, Zhang, and Diab 2020; Gangadharaiah and
Narayanaswamy 2022). Recently, to boost NLU learning in
the few-shot setting, some methods tried to utilize labeled
data from other sufficiently labeled source domains to help
NLU learning (in the rarely labeled target domains) (Rongali
et al. 2023; Kwon et al. 2023). However, due to gaps that
exist among different domains, it is hard to directly transfer
prior experience from source domains to target domains.
In this paper, we hold that the prior experience in source
domains consists of two parts: the general semantic representation that refers to utterance semantics, and the

domain-specific knowledge that refers to the intent-slot relation and slot-slot relation. Intuitively, general semantics
are shared across domains while the domain-specific intents/slots are not. Therefore, it is reasonable to transfer
the general semantic representation from source domains to
target domains, while it is difficult to transfer the domainspecific knowledge. Despite a few work has noticed the differences between the two parts, they still tried to conduct the
transferring as a whole (Hou et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021),
which may be inefficient.
To this end, we propose Joint Modeling with Relationship Masking (JMRM), which explicitly decouples
the transferring of the general semantic representation and
the domain-specific knowledge. Specifically, to achieve decoupling, we design two modules, I2S-Mask (I2S) and
Masked Slot Decoding (MSD), to capture the domainspecific knowledge (intent-slot relation and slot-slot relation). In the I2S module, we introduce an intent-slot correla-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18171

