The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Spear and Shield: Adversarial Attacks and Defense Methods for Model-Based
Link Prediction on Continuous-Time Dynamic Graphs
Dongjin Lee1 , Juho Lee2 , Kijung Shin1,2
1

2

School of Electrical Engineering, Daejeon, South Korea
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Seoul, South Korea
{dongjin.lee, juholee, kijungs}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

In the real world, graphs are dynamic, constantly changing over time. For example, in financial networks, transactions between accounts occur continuously over time, leading to ever-changing graphs. Dynamic graphs fall into two
types: Discrete-Time Dynamic Graphs (DTDGs), denoted as
a sequence of static graph snapshots, and Continuous-Time
Dynamic Graphs (CTDGs), represented as a sequence of interactions over continuous time. Due to the capability of CTDGs to capture more intricate and fine-grained temporal patterns in dynamic graphs, CTDGs have recently garnered increasing attention, resulting in the development of numerous
machine learning models on CTDGs for time-critical applications (Kazemi et al. 2020; Thomas et al. 2022).
To effectively capture the evolving patterns in CTDGs,
Temporal Graph Neural Networks (TGNNs) (Rossi et al.
2020; Kumar, Zhang, and Leskovec 2019; Xu et al. 2020;
Wang et al. 2021a; Zhou et al. 2022) have been developed.
TGNNs jointly learn the temporal, structural, and contextual
relationships present in CTDGs by encoding graph information into time-aware node embeddings. By incorporating
temporal information, TGNNs have demonstrated superior
performance over static GNNs in various tasks like link prediction (Cong et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2021b) and dynamic
node classification (Rossi et al. 2020).
Nonetheless, in contrast to the actively researched adversarial attacks on static GNNs, the vulnerabilities of TGNNs
to adversarial attacks remain underexplored, yet the significance of conducting such research is undeniable. For instance, in a financial attack (Fursov et al. 2021; Zeager et al.
2017) scenario, an adversary may inject adversarial transactions into the transaction graph, perturbing the timing and
content of transactions to mislead the model running on the
graph. This manipulation could lead to the model falsely
predicting fraudulent transactions as legitimate, resulting in
inaccurate risk predictions and potential financial losses.
In this context, we explore the weakness of TGNNs by
introducing T-S PEAR, a simple and effective adversarial attack method for link prediction on CTDGs. From an adversarial perspective, designing effective attacks on CTDGs poses unique challenges compared to attacks on static
graphs. First, in addition to the perturbation injected into
graphs, attacks should carefully be timed. Second, attacks
should stay stealthy and not deviate significantly from the
usual evolving patterns of interactions in the original graph.

Real-world graphs are dynamic, constantly evolving with
new interactions, such as financial transactions in financial
networks. Temporal Graph Neural Networks (TGNNs) have
been developed to effectively capture the evolving patterns
in dynamic graphs. While these models have demonstrated
their superiority, being widely adopted in various important
fields, their vulnerabilities against adversarial attacks remain
largely unexplored. In this paper, we propose T-S PEAR, a
simple and effective adversarial attack method for link prediction on continuous-time dynamic graphs, focusing on investigating the vulnerabilities of TGNNs. Specifically, before the training procedure of a victim model, which is a
TGNN for link prediction, we inject edge perturbations to
the data that are unnoticeable in terms of the four constraints
we propose, and yet effective enough to cause malfunction
of the victim model. Moreover, we propose a robust training approach T-S HIELD to mitigate the impact of adversarial attacks. By using edge filtering and enforcing temporal smoothness to node embeddings, we enhance the robustness of the victim model. Our experimental study shows that
T-S PEAR significantly degrades the victim model’s performance on link prediction tasks, and even more, our attacks
are transferable to other TGNNs, which differ from the victim model assumed by the attacker. Moreover, we demonstrate that T-S HIELD effectively filters out adversarial edges
and exhibits robustness against adversarial attacks, surpassing the link prediction performance of the naı̈ve TGNN by up
to 11.2% under T-S PEAR. The code and datasets are available
at https://github.com/wooner49/T-spear-shield.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown impressive capabilities across various tasks (Sun et al. 2022; Jin et al.
2021). However, their susceptibility to adversarial perturbations (Bojchevski and Günnemann 2019; Dai et al. 2018;
Zügner, Akbarnejad, and Günnemann 2018; Xu et al. 2019)
has raised concerns about their safe use in critical applications, including fraud detection (Hooi et al. 2016; Zeager
et al. 2017) and malware detection (Hou et al. 2019). Despite
substantial progress made in developing attack and defense
techniques (Sun et al. 2022; Jin et al. 2021), the focus has
primarily been on GNNs designed for static graphs.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13374

