The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SNN-PDE: Learning Dynamic PDEs from Data with Simplicial Neural Networks
Jae Choi,1 Yuzhou Chen,2 Hugo K. Lee,3 Hyun Kim,4 Yulia R. Gel5,6
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Dallas
Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple University
3
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology
4
Air Resources Laboratory, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
5
Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas
6
National Science Foundation
jaewon.choi@utdallas.edu, yuzhou.chen@temple.edu, huikyo.lee@jpl.nasa.gov, hyun.kim@noaa.gov, ygl@utdallas.edu
2

Abstract

terms, the idea of PIML is to complement physical laws
and the more traditional mathematical methods that describe
them, with the ML tools such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and graph neural networks (GNNs). One
of the primary advantages of such fusion of methods is
that PIML allows for modeling various dynamic phenomena using unstructured data at arbitrary space-time locations,
with applications ranging from oceanography to biomedical
imaging and biosurveillance.
Indeed, the traditional numerical methods to solve partial
differential equations (PDEs) assume that the data input arrives on a regular grid. However, in many real-world studies such as air pollution monitoring and infectious disease
tracking, the data records are intrinsically irregularly spaced
both in space and time. Furthermore, conventional PDE solutions are often limited to course-grained representations
due to computational costs. This in turn restricts applicability of such solutions to studies requiring finer-resolution
grids such as the ones related to the impact of smoke plumes
and wildfires on health outcomes.
The emerging PIML approach to tackle this problem
is to employ DL tools such as CNNs and GNNs to approximate differential operators (Iakovlev, Heinonen, and
Lähdesmäki 2020; Brandstetter, Worrall, and Welling 2022;
Moshe Eliasof and Treister 2021; Brandstetter, Welling, and
Worrall 2022; Horie and Mitsume 2022; Rakhoon Hwang
and Hwang 2022). However, such techniques are largely
based on the conventional convolution operation, focusing
only on the pairwise interactions among the system entities,
and as a result they tend to overlook the important information delivered by higher-order geometric structures exhibited by real world phenomena, especially, ones that live on
manifolds.
We propose to address this fundamental gap, by introducing the elements of the Hodge theory and, in particular,
simplicial convolution defined on the Hodge-Laplacian to
DL-assisted solutions of PDEs. While the Hodge theory has
been used in scientific ML before, for example, for regularization of GNNs (Seo and Liu 2019), it has never been
used in conjunction with ML-enabled PDE solvers. Contrary to the conventional convolution based on the Laplacian
operator, the simplicial convolution induced by the HodgeLaplacian enables for systematic and rigorous characterization of diffusion across higher-order structures described via

Dynamics of many complex systems, from weather and climate to spread of infectious diseases, can be described by
partial differential equations (PDEs). Such PDEs involve unknown function(s), partial derivatives, and typically multiple
independent variables. The traditional numerical methods for
solving PDEs assume that the data are observed on a regular grid. However, in many applications data records are irregularly spaced. Furthermore, in problems involving prediction analytics such as forecasting wildfire smoke plumes, the
primary focus may be on a set of irregular locations associated with urban development. In recent years, deep learning (DL) methods and, in particular, graph neural networks
(GNNs) have emerged as a new promising tool that can complement traditional PDE solvers in scenarios of the irregular spaced data, contributing to the newest research trend of
physics informed machine learning (PIML). However, most
existing PIML methods tend to be limited in their ability to
describe higher dimensional structural properties exhibited
by real world phenomena, especially, ones that live on manifolds. To address this fundamental challenge, we bring the
elements of the Hodge theory and, in particular, simplicial
convolution defined on the Hodge Laplacian to the emerging nexus of DL and PDEs. Contrary to conventional Laplacian and the associated convolution operation, the simplicial
convolution allows us to rigorously describe diffusion across
higher order structures and to better approximate the complex underlying topology and geometry of the data. The new
approach, Simplicial Neural Networks for Partial Differential Equations (SNN PDE) offers a computationally efficient
yet effective solution for time dependent PDEs. Our studies
of synthetic data and wildfire processes show that SNN PDE
improves upon state of the art baselines in handling unstructured grids and irregular time intervals of complex physical
systems and offers competitive forecasting capabilities for
weather and air quality forecasting.

Introduction
Physics-informed machine learning (PIML) is the recently
emerged research trend and (arguably) one of the most actively developing research directions in scientific machine
learning. PIML allows to describe various complex phenomena in physical and biological systems, governed by multiscale dynamic processes (Shukla et al. 2022). In broader
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11561

