The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fine-Grained Knowledge Selection and Restoration
for Non-exemplar Class Incremental Learning
Jiang-Tian Zhai 1 , Xialei Liu 1, * , Lu Yu 2 , Ming-Ming Cheng 1
1

2

VCIP, CS, Nankai University
Tianjin University of Technology

Stability

Abstract
Non-exemplar class incremental learning aims to learn both
the new and old tasks without accessing any training data
from the past. This strict restriction enlarges the difficulty
of alleviating catastrophic forgetting since all techniques can
only be applied to current task data. Considering this challenge, we propose a novel framework of fine-grained knowledge selection and restoration. The conventional knowledge
distillation-based methods place too strict constraints on the
network parameters and features to prevent forgetting, which
limits the training of new tasks. To loose this constraint, we
proposed a novel fine-grained selective patch-level distillation to adaptively balance plasticity and stability. Some taskagnostic patches can be used to preserve the decision boundary of the old task. While some patches containing the important foreground are favorable for learning the new task.
Moreover, we employ a task-agnostic mechanism to generate more realistic prototypes of old tasks with the current task
sample for reducing classifier bias for fine-grained knowledge
restoration. Extensive experiments on CIFAR100, TinyImageNet and ImageNet-Subset demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method. Code is available at https://github.com/scok30/
vit-cil.

Knowledge
distillation

CNN
Feature map

Stability

Ours

Vision
Transformer

Plasticity

…
Patch embedding
Background
patches

Foreground
patches

Figure 1: Comparison between conventional knowledge distillation (KD) and our patch-level fine-grained knowledge
selection method based on vision Transformer architecture.
Conventional KD treats the image as a whole, while patch
embeddings enable us to strike a better trade-off between
stability and plasticity for different local regions. Moreover,
a task-agnostic fine-grained prototype restoration is proposed to better replay the old knowledge.

Introduction

and Sun 2021; Rebuffi et al. 2017; Yan, Xie, and He 2021)
are proposed to alleviate the catastrophic forgetting problem.
In this paper, we consider a challenging task setting of
class incremental learning termed non-exemplar class incremental learning (NECIL)(Gao et al. 2022; Zhu et al. 2021a,
2022), that forbids the model to preserve any old task sample while learning sequential tasks with samples from disjoint classes. Compared with normal settings, non-exemplar
class incremental learning considers the data privacy issue
and storage burden. To address the issue of catastrophic forgetting in this task, researchers have introduced various approaches aimed at preserving acquired knowledge without
the need of past data.
Early work like LwF (Li and Hoiem 2017) introduces
vanilla knowledge distillation between the old and current
model and does not perform well under this challenging setting. Some replay-based methods usually narrow the gap by
generating synthetic images. While the effectiveness of incremental learning can be influenced by the quality of the
generated images. Recently, DeepInversion (Yin et al. 2020)

Deep neural networks have achieved superior performance
in many computer vision tasks. Since the real world is open
and dynamic, it is important to be capable of learning new
knowledge during the application of these networks. Incremental learning aims at learning new tasks without forgetting previous ones, and it is also a crucial characteristic of
deep neural networks applied to real-world scenarios. For
example, the system of face recognition may meet some
faces with masks in recent years, and it is essential to adapt
to these new circumstances as well. However, simply finetuning deep neural networks on the new task will cause
severe catastrophic forgetting (Robins 1995) since the network almost completely adjusts its parameters to the new
task (Goodfellow et al. 2013; McCloskey and Cohen 1989).
To address this problem, many recent works (Castro et al.
2018; Douillard et al. 2020; Hou et al. 2019; Liu, Schiele,
* Corresponding author (xialei@nankai.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6971

