The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Journey to the Center of the Knowledge Neurons: Discoveries of
Language-Independent Knowledge Neurons and Degenerate Knowledge Neurons
†

Yuheng Chen1,2 * , Pengfei Cao1,2 * , Yubo Chen1,2 , Kang Liu1,2 , Jun Zhao1,2
1

The Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
chenyuheng22@ia.ac.cn, {pengfei.cao, yubo.chen, kliu, jzhao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

English KN

The capital of
Tanzania is ___

Pre-trained language models (PLMs) contain vast amounts of
factual knowledge, but how the knowledge is stored in the parameters remains unclear. This paper delves into the complex
task of understanding how factual knowledge is stored in multilingual PLMs, and introduces the Architecture-adapted Multilingual Integrated Gradients method, which successfully localizes knowledge neurons more precisely compared to current
methods, and is more universal across various architectures
and languages. Moreover, we conduct an in-depth exploration
of knowledge neurons, leading to the following two important discoveries: (1) The discovery of Language-Independent
Knowledge Neurons, which store factual knowledge in a form
that transcends language. We design cross-lingual knowledge
editing experiments, demonstrating that the PLMs can accomplish this task based on language-independent neurons; (2)
The discovery of Degenerate Knowledge Neurons, a novel
type of neuron showing that different knowledge neurons can
store the same fact. Its property of functional overlap endows
the PLMs with a robust mastery of factual knowledge. We
design fact-checking experiments, proving that the degenerate knowledge neurons can help the PLMs to detect wrong
facts. Experiments corroborate these findings, shedding light
on the mechanisms of factual knowledge storage in multilingual PLMs, and contribute valuable insights to the field. The
code is available at https://github.com/heng840/AMIG.

Dodoma

PLMs

Locate
KN

English query

坦桑尼亚的
首都是 ___

Intersection

多多马

Chinese KN

Chinese query

LIKN

(a) Language-Independent Knowledge Neurons: Acquisition process and functionality.

PLMs
The capital of
Tanzania is ___

Locate
KN

KN

DKN
Filter
Dodoma

(b) Degenerate Knowledge Neurons: Acquisition process and
functionality. “ON” indicates the PLMs must activate at least one
corresponding degenerate knowledge neuron.

Figure 1: Explanation of Language-Independent Knowledge Neurons (LIKN) and Degenerate Knowledge Neurons
(DKN). KN denotes knowledge neurons.

Introduction
Pre-trained language models (PLMs) (Devlin et al. 2018;
Radford et al. 2019; Shliazhko et al. 2022; OpenAI 2023;
Touvron et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023) have revolutionized
the field of natural language processing, due to their exceptional performance across a broad spectrum of tasks. These
models, trained on extensive corpora such as Wikipedia, are
widely believed to encapsulate vast amounts of factual knowledge (Petroni et al. 2019b; Jiang et al. 2020), but how the
knowledge is stored in the parameters remains unclear (Kandpal et al. 2023). Investigating knowledge storage mechanisms
will facilitate deeper comprehension and mastery of knowledge in PLMs (Zhen et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2023). In this
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17817

paper, we conduct an in-depth study on the Knowledge Localization task (Hase et al. 2023; Andreas 2022), which seeks to
determine the storage location of specific factual knowledge
in the model parameters, where such parameters are named
Knowledge Neurons (Dai et al. 2022).
Recently, several established approaches strive to elucidate
the knowledge storage mechanism in PLMs. One strategy
is the gradient-based method (Ancona et al. 2019), which
assesses the contribution of each neuron by calculating its
attribution score using integrated gradients. Another is the
causal-inspired method (Cao et al. 2023), which employs a
tracing algorithm to follow causal influences across model
layers. Despite successful efforts in the knowledge localization task, these methods still face two major challenges:
(1) Lack of Universal Method for Different PLM Architectures: Factual knowledge is observed to emerge in all kinds
of PLM architectures, including auto-encoding models (e.g.,
BERT) (Devlin et al. 2018) and auto-regressive models (e.g.,
GPT) (Shliazhko et al. 2022). However, while some methods are suited for auto-encoding models and perform poorly

