The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dependency Structure-Enhanced Graph Attention Networks for Event Detection
Qizhi Wan1,2 , Changxuan Wan1,2 * , Keli Xiao3∗ , Kun Lu4 , Chenliang Li5 , Xiping Liu1,2 , Dexi Liu1,2
1

School of Information Management, Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics
2
Jiangxi Key Lab of Data and Knowledge Engineering
3
College of Business, Stony Brook University
4
School of Library and Information Studies, The University of Oklahoma
5
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University
{wanqizhi1006@163.com, wanchangxuan@263.net, keli.xiao@stonybrook.edu}
Abstract

Existing models on event detection share three-fold limitations, including (1) insufficient consideration of the structures
between dependency relations, (2) limited exploration of the
directed-edge semantics, and (3) issues in strengthening the
event core arguments. To tackle these problems, we propose
a dependency structure-enhanced event detection framework.
In addition to the traditional token dependency parsing tree,
denoted as TDG, our model considers the dependency edges
in it as new nodes and constructs a dependency relation graph
(DRG). DRG allows the embedding representations of dependency relations to be updated as nodes rather than edges in a
graph neural network. Moreover, the levels of core argument
nodes in the two graphs are adjusted by dependency relation
types in TDG to enhance their status. Subsequently, the two
graphs are further encoded and jointly trained in graph attention networks (GAT). Importantly, we design an interaction
strategy of node embedding for the two graphs and refine the
attention coefficient computational method to encode the semantic meaning of directed edges. Extensive experiments are
conducted to validate the effectiveness of our method, and the
results confirm its superiority over the state-of-the-art baselines. Our model outperforms the best benchmark with the F1
score increased by 3.5 and 3.4 percentage points on ACE2005
English and Chinese corpus.

nsubj
bomb
det

go

compound:prt

aux
will

off

a

Lev2

Lev3

(a) TDG

root

Lev1
nsubj

aux

compound:prt

det

(b) DRG

Figure 1: Illustration of the Attack event type from ACE2005
(sentence example: “A bomb will go off”). (a) displays the
token dependency tree (TDG), where triggers annotated in
the corpus are highlighted in red, and the core arguments, as
per our definition, are in blue. The dependency relation types
shown include det, nsubj, aux, and compound:prt. The root
type is the dependency relation of “go” and its parent ROOT
node (a virtual node). (b) presents the corresponding dependency relation graph (DRG) constructed in this paper. Here,
a node, termed a “dependency relation node,” corresponds
to a dependency edge in the TDG. If two TDG dependency
edges share a token node, an edge is established between the
dependency relation nodes in the DRG. LevX indicates the
X level in the graph structures.

et al. (2023a) used static dependency relation representations to compute edge attentions. Liu, Xu, and Liu (2021)
devised a self-attention graph residual convolution network
to mine node-to-node latent dependency relations. Mi, Hu,
and Li (2022) performed event detection with dual relational
graph attention networks based on two graphs constructed
by dependency parsing and semantic role labeling. Despite
TDG being widely studied, the dependency information can
be further exploited for better implementations, which we
summarize into the following three aspects.
First, the structures between dependency relations
have not been sufficiently explored. Merely using the dependency relations based on TDG (Cui et al. 2020; Wan et al.
2023a), some important information regarding associations
between different dependency relations may be ignored. The
TDG merely describes the dependency relations between tokens, but not the structures between dependency relations.
For example, Figure 1(a) demonstrates a token dependency
tree. Existing work only considers the token dependency in-

Introduction
Event detection is an essential and challenging task of information extraction. Its target is to identify the events and
their types in texts, and a common implementation is to detect whether each token in the sentence triggers a specific
event type.
Token dependency information, mainly including the token syntactic dependency structure and dependency relations (i.e., relation types), is usually demonstrated in the
form of a token dependency tree/graph (TDG) by the dependency parsing tool. Most recent studies on event detection utilized graph neural networks for encoding token dependency information, showing the effectiveness of TDG.
Based on TDG, Cui et al. (2020) updated edge representations to obtain dependency relation information, and Wan
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19098

