The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis with Explicit Sentiment Augmentations
Jihong Ouyang1,2 * , Zhiyao Yang1,2 * , Silong Liang1,2 , Bing Wang1,2 , Yimeng Wang1 , Ximing Li1,2†
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of MOE, Jilin University, China
{ouyj@, zhiyaoy20@mails., liangsl23@mails.}jlu.edu.cn, {wangbing1416, wangyimeng116, liximing86}@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA), a fine-grained
sentiment classification task, has received much attention
recently. Many works investigate sentiment information
through opinion words, such as “good” and “bad”. However, implicit sentiment data widely exists in the ABSA
dataset, whose sentiment polarity is hard to determine due
to the lack of distinct opinion words. To deal with implicit
sentiment, this paper proposes an ABSA method that integrates explicit sentiment augmentations (ABSA-ESA) to add
more sentiment clues. We propose an ABSA-specific explicit
sentiment generation method to create such augmentations.
Specifically, we post-train T5 by rule-based data and employ
three strategies to constrain the sentiment polarity and aspect term of the generated augmentations. We employ Syntax Distance Weighting and Unlikelihood Contrastive Regularization in the training procedure to guide the model to
generate the explicit opinion words with the same polarity
as the input sentence. Meanwhile, we utilize the Constrained
Beam Search to ensure the augmentations are aspect-related.
We test ABSA-ESA on two ABSA benchmarks. The results
show that ABSA-ESA outperforms the SOTA baselines on
implicit and explicit sentiment accuracy.

(a)

1. The fried rice (Positive) is amazing here .
2. It is crushed at outside (Negative), but the minute you walk
inside, it has a nice atmosphere (Positive).

(b)

1. Our server checked on us maybe twice during the entire
meal (Negative).
2. All the money went into the interior decoration (Positive),
none of it went to the chefs (Negative).

Figure 1: Examples of the explicit sentiment sentences (a)
vs. implicit sentiment sentences (b) from Rest.14 dataset.
The words with are the opinion words.

representations for aspect terms to enhance the identification performance of sentiment polarity. Some early studies
generate strong aspect term representations by directly employing deep neural encoders, such as LSTM (Tang et al.
2016; Wang et al. 2016; Cheng et al. 2017) and pre-trained
language models (Xu et al. 2020; Dai et al. 2021). Beyond
them, to further link the aspect terms and opinion words,
some studies build dependency trees of sentences and then
generate aspect term representations by employing graph
convolution networks (GCN) (Sun et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2020; Chen, Teng, and Zhang 2020; Li et al. 2021a).
The success of the GCN-based approach underscores the
pivotal role that opinion words play in the realm of ABSA.
However, recent research has highlighted a complex scenario characterized by a lack of distinct opinion words,
termed “implicit sentiment” (Li et al. 2021b; Wang et al.
2022b). To delve into this phenomenon, we select four examples from the Rest.14 to compare the implicit and explicit
sentiment sentences. In the context of Fig.1(a), the sentiment is discernible due to distinct opinion words. In contrast, as shown in Fig.1(b), unraveling the sentiment associated with aspect terms such as “meal,” “interior decoration,”
and “chefs” is challenging. Implicit sentiment is a prevalent
occurrence within ABSA datasets and it is hard to deal with
(Li et al. 2021b).
To tackle the challenge mentioned above, in the paper,
we design a novel ABSA method by integrating Explicit
Sentiment Augmentations (ABSA-ESA). Such augmentations provide more sentiment clues for predicting sentiment
polarity. We add them after the corresponding input sen-

Introduction
Aspect-based Sentiment Analysis (ABSA) aims to induce
predictive models over manually annotated sentences to
identify the sentiment polarity towards each specific aspect
term (Wang et al. 2022a; Li et al. 2022). Taking the second
sentence in Fig. 1 (a) as an example, the task aims to automatically identify the sentiment polarities of its aspect terms
“outside” (Negative) and “atmosphere” (Positive)
potentially with the corresponding opinion words “crushed”
and “nice”. Due to its popularity, ABSA has been widely
applied in many real-world scenarios, and accordingly, it is
one of the most significant tasks in the natural language processing community (Yang et al. 2023; Ouyang et al. 2023).
To handle the task of ABSA, many studies have been investigated during the past decade. Broadly speaking, the focus of recent work is on how to generate more discriminative
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18842

