The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Backward Responsibility in Transition Systems Using General Power Indices
Christel Baier1,2 , Roxane van den Bossche3 , Sascha Klüppelholz1 ,
Johannes Lehmann1,2 , Jakob Piribauer1 *
1

TU Dresden, Germany
Centre for Tactile Internet with Human-in-the-Loop (CeTI)
3
Université Paris-Saclay, ENS Paris-Saclay, France
{christel.baier, sascha.klueppelholz, johannes alexander.lehmann, jakob.piribauer}@tu-dresden.de,
roxane.van den bossche@ens-paris-saclay.fr
2

Abstract

violates the property (see Baier and Katoen (2008) for more
details). While this demonstrates that an error exists, it is not
obvious which part of the model is responsible for the error.
Some states in the counterexample may be unable to change
the outcome, whereas others can ensure that the safety property is satisfied.
We distinguish between forward and backward responsibility (Van de Poel 2011). In the forward case, responsibility depends only on the model, whereas in the backward
case, it also takes a specific counterexample into account.
Existing causality-based approaches to backward responsibility include the use of distance metrics (Groce et al. 2006),
mutation-based techniques (Beer et al. 2012), event-order
logic (Leitner-Fischer and Leue 2013) and hyperproperties
(Coenen et al. 2022).
In this paper, we introduce an intuitive, game-based approach to compute backward responsibility. Our approach
is inspired by Mascle et al. (2021) where the Shapley value
(Shapley et al. 1953) is used to determine a numeric value
of forward responsibility. For a more recent discussion of
the Shapley value, we refer the reader to Laruelle and Valenciano (2001). The Shapley value is also used for responsibility attribution by Baier, Funke, and Majumdar (2021),
who present a technique that operates on game trees.
Incorporating a counterexample allows us to analyse a
specific fault in the system. Moreover, we extend our definitions to general power indices, also known as semivalues
(Dubey, Neyman, and Weber 1981), of which the Shapley
value is an instance.
To illustrate our scenario, consider the railway network
depicted in Figure 1 with three switches s1 , s2 and s3 . The
goal is to route the train to the destination ✓. However, it
can also be routed to the unfinished line ✗, which causes an
accident. We investigate how the switches share the responsibility for the outcome.

To improve reliability and the understanding of AI systems,
there is increasing interest in the use of formal methods, e.g.
model checking. Model checking tools produce a counterexample when a model does not satisfy a property. Understanding these counterexamples is critical for efficient debugging,
as it allows the developer to focus on the parts of the program
that caused the issue.
To this end, we present a new technique that ascribes a responsibility value to each state in a transition system that
does not satisfy a given safety property. The value is higher
if the non-deterministic choices in a state have more power
to change the outcome, given the behaviour observed in the
counterexample. For this, we employ a concept from cooperative game theory – namely general power indices, such as the
Shapley value – to compute the responsibility of the states.
We present an optimistic and pessimistic version of responsibility that differ in how they treat the states that do not lie on
the counterexample. We give a characterisation of optimistic
responsibility that leads to an efficient algorithm for it and
show computational hardness of the pessimistic version. We
also present a tool to compute responsibility and show how a
stochastic algorithm can be used to approximate responsibility in larger models. These methods can be deployed in the
design phase, at runtime and at inspection time to gain insights on causal relations within the behavior of AI systems.

1

Introduction

Due to the ever-growing demand for reliable, trustworthy AI
systems, research on ways to incorporate formal methods
for the verification of such systems is becoming more and
more important (see e.g. Seshia, Sadigh, and Sastry (2022)).
AI systems are in general instances of parallel systems that
operate in complex environments. As such, techniques such
as model checking are suitable for this setting. The aim of
model checking is to analyse a given system to prove automatically that this system satisfies some property. For example, we might require certain states to never be reached, because they correspond to an undesired event. When a model
does not satisfy a safety property, the model checker returns
a counterexample, which is an execution of the model that

s2

✓

s3

✗

s1

* Authors are listed in alphabetical order
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Figure 1: Railway network with three switches s1 , s2 and s3 .
If a train is routed to ✗, an accident occurs.

20320

