The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PM-INR: Prior-Rich Multi-Modal Implicit Large-Scale Scene Neural
Representation
Yiying Yang1 , Fukun Yin2 , Wen Liu3 ,
Jiayuan Fan1 * , Xin Chen3 , Gang Yu3 , Tao Chen2
1
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University
School of Information Science and Technology, Fudan University
3
Tencent PCG
{yiyingyang23, fkyin21}@m.fudan.edu.cn, liuwen@shanghaitech.edu.cn,
jyfan@fudan.edu.cn, chenxin2@shanghaitech.edu.cn, iskicy@gmail.com, eetchen@fudan.edu.cn
2

Abstract

PSNR: 26.61

Recent advancements in implicit neural representations have
contributed to high-fidelity surface reconstruction and photorealistic novel view synthesis. However, with the expansion
of the scene scale, such as block or city level, existing methods will encounter challenges because traditional sampling
cannot cope with the cubically growing sampling space. To
alleviate the dependence on filling the sampling space, we
explore using multi-modal priors to assist individual points to
obtain more global semantic information and propose a priorrich multi-modal implicit neural representation network, PMINR, for the outdoor unbounded large-scale scene. The core
of our method is multi-modal prior extraction and crossmodal prior fusion modules. The former encodes codebooks
from different modality inputs and extracts valuable priors,
while the latter fuses priors to maintain view consistency and
preserve unique features among multi-modal priors. Finally,
feature-rich cross-modal priors are injected into the sampling regions to allow each region to perceive global information without filling the sampling space. Extensive experiments have demonstrated the effectiveness and robustness of
our method for outdoor unbounded large-scale scene novel
view synthesis, which outperforms state-of-the-art methods
in terms of PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS.

1

PSNR: 27.69

PSNR: 26.76

Stone hill

Building

PSNR: 28.48

Natural scene

PSNR: 25.57

Skyscraper

PSNR: 29.12

Memorial Hall

PSNR: 28.22

Island

Stone

Figure 1: PM-INR is capable of handling outdoor unbounded large-scale scenes, and we have demonstrated
this capability through experiments with scenes from the
OMMO dataset (Lu et al. 2023). Impressively, PM-INR
shows superior performance in various large scenes such as
stone hills, memorials, buildings, etc.

Introduction

Implicit neural representations have shown promising performance in surface reconstruction and novel view synthesis
for single objects or object-centric small-scale scenes under
sparse or limited posed camera images (Barron et al. 2021;
Martin-Brualla et al. 2021; Park et al. 2021) and have been
widely applied in the field of virtual reality and augmented
reality. However, the difficulty exacerbates at the cubic level
when the sampling space increases from a small-scale scenario or object to an outdoor unbounded large-scale scene.
The core of the problem is that the existing implicit neural
representation networks only model the scene by sampling
points according to the ray direction from the entire scene
space. Hence, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) methods designed for small-scale scenes (Mildenhall et al. 2021; Verbin
et al. 2022) are challenging to fill the sampling space for

large-scale scenes and will synthesize rough geometry and
blurry images.
Fortunately, Some methods have also noticed this problem and sample small regions rather than individual sample
points to alleviate exploding sampling spaces to some extent (Barron et al. 2021, 2022; Ding et al. 2023). Moreover,
compared to sampling individual points, sampling a small
region allows a region of space to be compactly featured,
which can help improve NeRF’s (Mildenhall et al. 2021)
ability to represent fine details. While for the block or citylevel scenes, view synthesis quality degrades as the camera
is moved far from the center of the scene. Meanwhile, inspired by codebook-assisted vision tasks, which learn a representative codebook to denote valuable prototypes and have
been applied to image segmentation (You et al. 2022; Rahebi 2022; Zhou et al. 2022; Yin and Zhou 2020; Ye et al.
2022a; Yin et al. 2023b; Wu et al. 2023), image synthesis (Esser, Rombach, and Ommer 2021; Zhang et al. 2021;

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6594

