The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On the Affinity, Rationality, and Diversity of Hierarchical Topic Modeling
Xiaobao Wu1 , Fengjun Pan1 , Thong Nguyen2 ,
Yichao Feng1 , Chaoqun Liu1, 3 , Cong-Duy Nguyen1 , Anh Tuan Luu1
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Singapore
{xiaobao002,panf0004,yichao002,chaoqun001,nguyentr003,anhtuan.luu}@ntu.edu.sg, e0998147@u.nus.edu
2

image
images
training
object
segmentation

war
army
battle
french
british

Abstract
Hierarchical topic modeling aims to discover latent topics
from a corpus and organize them into a hierarchy to understand documents with desirable semantic granularity. However, existing work struggles with producing topic hierarchies
of low affinity, rationality, and diversity, which hampers document understanding. To overcome these challenges, we in
this paper propose Transport Plan and Context-aware Hierarchical Topic Model (TraCo). Instead of early simple topic dependencies, we propose a transport plan dependency method.
It constrains dependencies to ensure their sparsity and balance, and also regularizes topic hierarchy building with them.
This improves affinity and diversity of hierarchies. We further
propose a context-aware disentangled decoder. Rather than
previously entangled decoding, it distributes different semantic granularity to topics at different levels by disentangled decoding. This facilitates the rationality of hierarchies. Experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate that our method
surpasses state-of-the-art baselines, effectively improving the
affinity, rationality, and diversity of hierarchical topic modeling with better performance on downstream tasks.

final
fantasy
game
music
soundtrack

city
town
school
area
population

image
images
object
segmentation
visual

image
images
object
segmentation
scene

Figure 1: Illustration of low affinity (left), and low rationality
and diversity issues (right). Each rectangle is the top related
words of a topic from HyperMiner (Xu et al. 2022). Repetitive words are underlined.

et al. 2021b, 2023). The second category is neural models
including HNTM (Chen et al. 2021a), HyperMiner (Xu et al.
2022), and others (Isonuma et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021b,
2023; Duan et al. 2021). They generally follow VAE frameworks and enjoy back-propagation for faster parameter inferences (Wu, Nguyen, and Luu 2023).
However, these work struggles with producing lowquality topic hierarchies due to three issues: (i) Low Affinity: child topics are not affinitive to their parents (Kim et al.
2012). As exemplified in the left of Figure 1, the parent topic
relates to “army”, whereas its child topics contain irrelevant
words “game music” and “school”. Such low-affinity hierarchies capture inaccurate relationships among topics. (ii) Low
Rationality: child topics are excessively similar to their parent topics instead of being specific to them as expected (Viegas et al. 2020). The right part of Figure 1 shows the parent
and its child topics all focus on “image segmentation” with
the same granularity. So low-rationality hierarchies provide
topics with less comprehensive granularity. (iii) Low Diversity: sibling topics are repetitive instead of being diverse as
expected (Zhang, Zhang, and Rao 2022). In the right part
of Figure 1, the two sibling topics repeat each other and
become redundant, implying other undisclosed latent topics. Thus low-diversity hierarchies produce less informative
and incomplete topics. Due to these issues, existing hierarchical topic models generate low-quality hierarchies, which
impedes document understanding and thus damages their interpretability and performance on downstream applications.
To address these challenges, we in this paper propose

Introduction
Instead of traditional flat topic models, hierarchical topic
models strive to discover a topic hierarchy from documents
(Griffiths et al. 2003; Teh et al. 2004). Each topic is interpreted as relevant words to represent a semantic concept.
The hierarchy captures the relationships among topics and
organizes them by semantic granularity: child topics at lower
levels are relatively specific to parent topics at higher levels. Therefore hierarchical topic models can provide a more
comprehensive understanding of complex documents with
desirable granularity. Due to this advantage, they have been
applied in various downstream applications like document
retrieval (Weninger, Bisk, and Han 2012), sentiment analysis (Kim et al. 2013), and text summarization (Celikyilmaz
and Hakkani-Tur 2010) or generation (Guo et al. 2020).
Existing hierarchical topic models have two categories.
The first category is conventional models like hLDA (Griffiths et al. 2003) and its variants (Kim et al. 2012; Paisley
et al. 2013). They infer parameters through Gibbs sampling
or Variational Inference. But they cannot well handle largescale datasets due to their high computational cost (Chen
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19261

