The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PreRoutGNN for Timing Prediction with Order Preserving Partition: Global
Circuit Pre-training, Local Delay Learning and Attentional Cell Modeling
Ruizhe Zhong1 , Junjie Ye2 , Zhentao Tang2 , Shixiong Kai2 ,
Mingxuan Yuan2 , Jianye Hao2, 3 , Junchi Yan1 *
1

Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering & MoE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
zerzerzerz271828@sjtu.edu.cn, kourenmu@163.com, tangzhentao1@huawei.com, kaishixiong@huawei.com,
Yuan.Mingxuan@huawei.com, haojianye@huawei.com, yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

cell placement stage is unacceptable, many analytical placers (Lu et al. 2015; Lin et al. 2019) use half-perimeter wirelength as a surrogate of design timing quality.
Machine learning has been widely applied in EDA design flow, such as logic synthesis (Yuan et al. 2023), placement (Mirhoseini et al. 2021; Cheng and Yan 2021; Cheng
et al. 2022) and routing (Du et al. 2023). However, accurate
timing information can be accessed only after routing stage,
which is time-consuming. To estimate pre-routing timing
metrics, machine learning has been introduced for timing
prediction, such as delay (Barboza et al. 2019; Yang, He, and
Cao 2022), wirelength (Xie et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2022), to
guide timing-driven cell placement.
Among various timing metrics, slack (Hu, Sinha, and
Keller 2014) is one of the most important yet challenging
metric for prediction. Slack is the difference between Required signal Arrival Time (RAT) and actual Arrival Time
(AT), and it is calculated on each pin. Accurate slack prediction can be accessed only after routing stage, which is a
time consuming process. To avoid the time consuming routing stage, directly estimating timing information is attractive, which can be defined formally as follows: given the
intermediate results after standard cell placement stage and
before routing stage, we want to predict slack for all pins after routing stage. Usually, RAT is provided in external files,
so we mainly focus on the prediction of AT. However, in
large designs, the timing path can be long with hundreds
of circuit elements, where signal decay and error accumulation problems exist, making slack prediction challenging.
Besides, directly applying deep learning into large circuits
are always faced with high peak GPU memory cost problem, making training process hard or even intractable.
Typical GNNs (Graph Neural Networks) such as
GCN (Kipf and Welling 2017) and GAT (Veličković et al.
2018) are designed to process graphs where local information is already sufficient. However, in circuits graphs, signals travel from primary inputs to timing endpoints, forming
long timing paths (Hu, Sinha, and Keller 2014), where long
range dependencies and global view play a critical role but
they are hard for typical GNN to handle. Previous methods
for other timing metric (delay, wirelength) prediction (Xie
et al. 2018; Barboza et al. 2019; Ghose et al. 2021; Xie
et al. 2021; Yang, He, and Cao 2022; Yang et al. 2022)

Pre-routing timing prediction has been recently studied for
evaluating the quality of a candidate cell placement in chip
design. It involves directly estimating the timing metrics for
both pin-level (slack, slew) and edge-level (net delay, cell
delay), without time-consuming routing. However, it often
suffers from signal decay and error accumulation due to the
long timing paths in large-scale industrial circuits. To address
these challenges, we propose a two-stage approach. First,
we propose global circuit training to pre-train a graph autoencoder that learns the global graph embedding from circuit
netlist. Second, we use a novel node updating scheme for
message passing on GCN, following the topological sorting
sequence of the learned graph embedding and circuit graph.
This scheme residually models the local time delay between
two adjacent pins in the updating sequence, and extracts the
lookup table information inside each cell via a new attention mechanism. To handle large-scale circuits efficiently, we
introduce an order preserving partition scheme that reduces
memory consumption while maintaining the topological dependencies. Experiments on 21 real world circuits achieve a
new SOTA R2 of 0.93 for slack prediction, which is significantly surpasses 0.59 by previous SOTA method. Code will
be available at: https://github.com/Thinklab-SJTU/EDA-AI.

Introduction
The process of integrated circuit (IC) design can be thought
of as a series of hierarchical decomposition steps, typically
consisting of architectural design, logic synthesis, physical
design (macro & cell placement, routing) and verification.
As IC becomes more and more complex, timing constraints,
such as delay and slack, are becoming more difficult to satisfy during the physical design stage. ‘Shift-left’ (Zhou et al.
2022) suggests circuit constraints and performance should
be considered in earlier stages of design flow, for instance,
taking timing into consideration during standard cell placement stage (Liao et al. 2022). Timing metrics are critical
to judge the performance of a design, but accurate timing
information is only available after routing, which is one of
the most time-consuming steps. Since repetitive routing in
* Correspondence author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17087

