The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AUC Optimization from Multiple Unlabeled Datasets
Zheng Xie* 1 , Yu Liu* 12 , Ming Li†12
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{xiez, liuy, lim}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

classifier-consistent approach for learning from m unlabeled
sets (m > 2) that optimizes a classification loss.
In this paper, we further consider the problem of learning
an AUC (area under ROC curve) optimization model from
the Um data, which maximizes the pairwise ranking ability
of the classifier (Hanley and McNeil 1982). The importance
of this problem lie in two folds: First, we note that for certain scenarios, the ranking performance of the model is more
important. E.g., ranking items with coarse-grind rank labels.
Second, given multiple U sets with different class priors, the
imbalance issue is very likely to affect the learning process.
Thus, taking an imbalance-aware performance measure, i.e.,
AUC, is naturally appropriate for the problem.
To achieve this goal, we introduce Um -AUC, a novel AUC
optimization approach from Um data. Um -AUC solves the
problem as a multi-label AUC optimization problem, as each
label of the multi-label learning problem corresponds to a
pseudo binary AUC optimization sub-problem. To overcome
the quadratic time complexity of the pairwise loss computation, we convert the problem and solve it through a pointwise AUC optimization algorithm. Our theoretical analysis
shows that Um -AUC is consistent with the optimal AUC
optimization model, and provides the generalization bound.
Experiments show that our approach outperforms the stateof-the-art methods and has superior robustness.
Our main contributions are highlighted as follows:

Abstract
Weakly supervised learning aims to make machine learning
more powerful when the perfect supervision is unavailable,
and has attracted much attention from researchers. Among
the various scenarios of weak supervision, one of the most
challenging cases is learning from multiple unlabeled (U)
datasets with only a little knowledge of the class priors, or
Um learning for short. In this paper, we study the problem
of building an AUC (area under ROC curve) optimal model
from multiple unlabeled datasets, which maximizes the pairwise ranking ability of the classifier. We propose Um -AUC,
an AUC optimization approach that converts the Um data into
a multi-label AUC optimization problem, and can be trained
efficiently. We show that the proposed Um -AUC is effective
theoretically and empirically.

1

Introduction

Since obtaining perfect supervision is usually challenging in
real-world machine learning problems, the machine learning
approaches often have to deal with inaccurate, incomplete,
or inexact supervisions, collectively referred to as weak supervision (Zhou 2017). To achieve this, many researchers
have devoted into the area of weakly supervised learning,
such as semi-supervised learning (Zhu et al. 2009), positiveunlabeled learning (Bekker and Davis 2020), noisy label
learning (Han et al. 2021), etc.
Among multiple scenarios of weakly supervised learning,
one of the most challenging scenarios is to learn classifiers
from m unlabeled (U) datasets with different class priors,
i.e., the proportions of positive instances in the sets. Such a
learning task is usually referred to as Um learning. This scenario usually occur when the instances can be categorized
into different groups, and the probability of an instance to
be positive varies across the groups, e.g., for predicting voting rates or morbidity rates. Prior studies include Scott and
Zhang (2020), which ensembles the classifiers trained on
all pairs of the unlabeled sets; Tsai and Lin (2020), which
introduces consistency regularization for the problem. Recently, Lu et al. (2021) proposed a consistent approach for
classification from multiple unlabeled sets, which is the first

• To the best of our knowledge, we present the first algorithm for optimizing AUC in Um scenarios. It is also the
first one to address the Um problem without relying on
exact class priors. Importantly, our algorithm is simple
yet efficient.
• Furthermore, we conduct a comprehensive theoretical
analysis of the proposed methodology, demonstrating its
validity and assessing its excess risk.
• We perform experiments on various settings using multiple benchmark datasets, and the results demonstrate that
our proposed method consistently outperforms the stateof-the-art methods and performs robustly under different
imbalance settings.
The reminder of our paper is organized as follows. We
first introduce preliminary in section 2. Then, we introduce
the Um -AUC approach and conducts the theoretical analysis
in section 3, while section 4 shows the experimental results.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Ming Li is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16058

