The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Continuous Treatment Effect Estimation
Using Gradient Interpolation and Kernel Smoothing
Lokesh Nagalapatti, Akshay Iyer, Abir De, Sunita Sarawagi
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
nlokesh@cse.iitb.ac.in, akshaygiyer@gmail.com, abir@cse.iitb.ac.in, sunita@iitb.ac.in

Abstract

outcomes on all treatment doses, thereby making dose independent of the individual in the test data distribution.
Several prior work have proposed to correct the above
mismatch but most of these have focused on binary treatments. Broadly, most methods rely on a combination of
these three strategies: (1) Learn shared representation of the
feature with treatment specific outcome prediction (Shalit,
Johansson, and Sontag 2017), (2) Impose regularizers to
make feature representations distributionally independent
of the treatment (Shalit, Johansson, and Sontag 2017), (3)
Exploit the overlap assumption to impose instance-specific
counterfactual losses in the learned feature space (Alaa and
Van Der Schaar 2017; Zhang, Bellot, and Schaar 2020). Recently, a subset of these strategies have been extended to the
case of continuous treatments where some have focused on
extending the neural architecture to handle continuous treatments (Schwab et al. 2020; Nie et al. 2021; Zhang et al.
2022), and others extend the distributional regularizers (Nie
et al. 2021; Bellot, Dhir, and Prando 2022). However, as we
show in our experiment evaluation, such regularizers are not
too effective in reducing individual continuous treatment effect estimation errors.
In this paper, we propose to directly minimize counterfactual loss for each individual by inferring outcomes at independently sampled new treatments. We infer outcomes using two types of smoothing strategies. First, by exploiting
the differentiability of the response function to treatment,
we infer the counterfactual response by gradient interpolation (Nasery et al. 2021). Second, by exploiting the property
of overlap required for the identifiability of ICTE from observational data, we infer a counterfactual response by using a Gaussian process over feature kernels. We handle the
potential unreliability of the inferred outcomes by downweighing examples based on the variance of the GP estimate. We show that individual-level counterfactual losses
are significantly more effective in learning ICTE compared
to distributional regularizers, particularly in a mini-batch
setting. We attribute the reasons for the observed gains of our
method to two factors: (1) the inferred outcomes from the
data are more accurate than a baseline that is just trained on
an observational dataset, and (2) the augmented data makes
the training distribution closer to the test distribution.
We make the following contributions in this paper:

We address the Individualized continuous treatment effect
(ICTE) estimation problem where we predict the effect of
any continuous-valued treatment on an individual using observational data. The main challenge in this estimation task
is the potential confounding of treatment assignment with an
individual’s covariates in the training data, whereas during inference ICTE requires prediction on independently sampled
treatments. In contrast to prior work that relied on regularizers
or unstable GAN training, we advocate the direct approach
of augmenting training individuals with independently sampled treatments and inferred counterfactual outcomes. We infer counterfactual outcomes using a two-pronged strategy: a
Gradient Interpolation for close-to-observed treatments, and
a Gaussian Process based Kernel Smoothing which allows
us to downweigh high variance inferences. We evaluate our
method on five benchmarks and show that our method outperforms six state-of-the-art methods on the counterfactual
estimation error. We analyze the superior performance of
our method by showing that (1) our inferred counterfactual
responses are more accurate, and (2) adding them to the
training data reduces the distributional distance between the
confounded training distribution and test distribution where
treatment is independent of covariates. Our proposed method
is model-agnostic and we show that it improves ICTE accuracy of several existing models. We release the code at:
https://github.com/nlokeshiisc/GIKS release.

1

Introduction

Many applications require the estimation of the effect of a
continuous treatment variable on an individual’s response.
For example, in healthcare we need to estimate the effect of
the dose of a drug on the recovery of a patient, in economics,
we need to estimate the effect of a discount on the sales of a
product, and in public policy, we need to estimate the effect
of income on a person’s longevity. In all these cases, observational data is available in abundance but controlled experiments to estimate these effects exactly either raise ethical issues or incur hidden costs. The main challenge in estimating
treatment effects from observational data is that in the observed data each individual is associated with one treatment
dose which may be correlated with observed covariates of
the individual, but during deployment, we need to estimate
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We address the ICTE problem by directly minimizing loss

14397

