The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Gradient-Guided Modality Decoupling for Missing-Modality Robustness
Hao Wang1 , Shengda Luo1 , Guosheng Hu2 , Jianguo Zhang1,3 *
1

Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous Systems and Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern
University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
2
Oosto, BT1 2BE, Belfast, U.K.
3
Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen, China
12232399@mail.sustech.edu.cn, shengdaluo1991@gmail.com,
huguosheng100@gmail.com, zhangjg@sustech.edu.cn
Abstract

Unimodal
(missing 3)

Multimodal learning with incomplete input data (missing
modality) is practical and challenging. In this work, we
conduct an in-depth analysis of this challenge and find
that modality dominance has a significant negative impact on the model training, greatly degrading the missing
modality performance. Motivated by Grad-CAM, we introduce a novel indicator, gradients, to monitor and reduce
modality dominance which widely exists in the missingmodality scenario. In aid of this indicator, we present a novel
Gradient-guided Modality Decoupling (GMD) method to decouple the dependency on dominating modalities. Specifically, GMD removes the conflicted gradient components
from different modalities to achieve this decoupling, significantly improving the performance. In addition, to flexibly handle modal-incomplete data, we design a parameterefficient Dynamic Sharing (DS) framework which can adaptively switch on/off the network parameters based on whether
one modality is available. We conduct extensive experiments
on three popular multimodal benchmarks, including BraTS
2018 for medical segmentation, CMU-MOSI, and CMUMOSEI for sentiment analysis. The results show that our
method can significantly outperform the competitors, showing the effectiveness of the proposed solutions. Our code
is released here: https://github.com/HaoWang420/Gradientguided-Modality-Decoupling.

Multimodal
(missing 1)

Method

Flair

T2

T1

Flair,T2,T1

∆ (M.-U.)

U. base.
ACN
SMU-N.
RFNet
Ours

58.3
67.7
71.8
69.2
74.1

56.3
67.9
67.2
71.0
75.4

71.0
71.2
69.5
66.0
73.2

67.9
67.9
75.2
79.0

-3.3
-3.9
+4.1
+4.6

Table 1: Two scenarios, unimodal (missing 3 modalities) and
multimodal (misssing 1 modality) evaluated on BraTS 2018
TC task with DSC (↑) score. Existing methods either exhibit lower multimodal than unimodal performance (ACN,
SMU-Net) or have worse unimodal performance than baseline (T1 of RFNet), indicating unresolved modality dominance. In contrast, our method addresses this problem and
achieves the best performance.

ing the robustness of multimodal algorithms against modalincomplete data is crucial for applying deep learning in various multimodal tasks. Additionally, humans, unlike multimodal systems, possess a remarkable capability of recognizing concepts, objects, and sentiments even when presented
with only partial modalities or missing senses. For example,
a person can still effectively understand the emotional state
of another by listening to their tone of voice, even without visual access to their facial expressions. This inherent
robustness against missing modalities in human perception
serves as part of the motivation for us to improve the robustness of multimodal models.
Existing methods for handling missing-modality problems can be roughly classified into three categories: (1)
distillation and co-training between multiple networks;
(2) reconstruction-based modal-completion; (3) missingmodality robust architecture. For distillation or co-training
approaches (Xing et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2021; Poklukar
et al. 2022), Although they marginally improve the missingmodality robustness, their methods are highly dependent on
the choice of similarity measurements and require modalincomplete input to be filled with masking values (Wang
et al. 2021; Tsai et al. 2019a), which may cause unexpected
behavior in the models, leading to degraded performance
(Shen and Gao 2019). Reconstruction-based methods (Khat-

Introduction
Multimodal learning (Ma et al. 2022; Tsai et al. 2019a), in
contrary to traditional tasks performed on a single modality, aims to utilize multiple sources of information from distinct modalities. Various multimodal frameworks have been
proposed to fully exploit complementary information across
multiple modalities. In the real world, it is not always easy
or feasible to obtain the data of all the modalities, leading
to practical research to address this missing-modality problem. In particular, in the medical domain, missing modality
is a vital problem. As a matter of routine, healthcare clinics
and facilities may lack the necessary infrastructure to obtain valuable data of all the modalities, leading to a shortage of critical diagnostic information. Therefore, improv* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15483

