The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dealing with Numeric and Metric Time Constraints in PDDL3 via Compilation to
Numeric Planning
Luigi Bonassi, Alfonso Emilio Gerevini, Enrico Scala
Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione, Università degli Studi di Brescia, Italy
{luigi.bonassi, alfonso.gerevini, enrico.scala}@unibs.it

Abstract

and intermediate locations to explore (Kiam et al. 2020).
The problem of planning with trajectory constraints
has been addressed from different perspectives. For the
class of PDDL3 constraints, MIPS-XXL (Edelkamp 2006;
Edelkamp, Jabbar, and Nazih 2006) exploits automata transformation to encode the trajectory constraints into the planning problem, and then invokes a custom version of MetricFF (Hoffmann 2003) to solve the resulting problem. Optic (Benton, Coles, and Coles 2012) exploits a similar automaton representation directly in the search engine and in
the relaxed planning graph heuristic of the planner. Lastly,
SGPlan (Hsu et al. 2007) is based on a decompositionbased approach and handles trajectory constraints using the
Metric-FF planning system as a sub-solver. In the context
of PDDL3, other researchers have instead focused on soft
trajectory constraints (Baier, Bacchus, and McIlraith 2009;
Coles and Coles 2011; Wright, Mattmüller, and Nebel 2018;
Percassi and Gerevini 2019) or on trajectory constraints
over actions (Bonassi, Gerevini, and Scala 2022). Other approaches deal with the more general class of trajectory constraints represented as LTL propositional constraints over
finite traces, and do so either through compilation (Baier
and McIlraith 2006a,b; Torres and Baier 2015; Bonassi et al.
2023a,b) or techniques exploiting the trajectory constraints
to control the search during planning (Bacchus and Kabanza 1998). However, overall, little attention has been devoted to planning problems involving numeric state variables and trajectory constraints. To fill this gap, this paper
proposes a novel encoding to translate a numeric problem
with PDDL3 constraints into an equivalent numeric problem without them. Our compilation takes inspiration from
TCORE (Bonassi et al. 2021), which however only focuses
on propositional trajectory constraints, and substantially extends it with PDDL3 constraints involving numeric conditions and metric time trajectory constraints.
The contributions of this paper are as follows. We propose a compilation schema that handles mixed propositional
and numeric formulas in the trajectory constraints. We do so
by providing a regression mechanism that reasons over both
Boolean and numeric state variables (Rintanen 2008; Scala
et al. 2020a; Bonassi et al. 2021). The regression we propose works with trajectory constraints over arbitrary propositional formulas and general arithmetic expressions (e.g.,
linear and non-linear expressions are supported), that can be

This paper studies an approach to planning with PDDL3
constraints involving mixed propositional and numeric conditions, as well as metric time constraints. We show how the
whole PDDL3 with instantaneous actions can be compiled
away into a numeric planning problem without PDDL3 constraints, enabling the use of any state-of-the-art numeric planner that is agnostic to the existence of PDDL3. Our solution exploits the concept of regression. In addition to a basic
compilation, we present an optimized variant based on the
observation that it is possible to make the compilation sensitive to the structure of the problem to solve; this can be
done by reasoning on the interactions between the problem
actions and the constraints. The resulting optimization substantially reduces the size of the planning task. We experimentally observe that our approach significantly outperforms
existing state-of-the-art planners supporting the same class of
constraints over known benchmark domains, settling a new
state-of-the-art planning system for PDDL3.

Introduction
PDDL3 (Gerevini et al. 2009) is a standard and popular
planning formalism for expressing planning problems with
trajectory constraints, temporal properties that every valid
plan must satisfy. As other languages to express trajectory
constraints (e.g., LTL by Pnueli (1977)), it has been proven
to be useful for controlling the structure of the desired solution plans (Bacchus and Kabanza 1998; Baier and McIlraith 2006a,b; Gerevini et al. 2009; De Giacomo, Masellis,
and Montali 2014). In this paper, we study planning problems extended with PDDL3 trajectory constraints involving mixed propositional and numeric conditions (PDDL3
constraints, for short), as well as time metric constraints.
These temporal specifications are useful for modeling desirable and relevant properties that are not easily captured using Boolean state variables only (Felli, Montali, and Winkler
2022; Geatti, Gianola, and Gigante 2022). For instance, in a
logistic domain, we could enforce an airplane to always preserve a certain amount of fuel, or impose that it should carry
a specific number of passengers. We can also use trajectory
constraints to control the movement of agents in spatial domains, using numeric coordinates to define prohibited areas
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20036

