The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ND-MRM: Neuronal Diversity Inspired Multisensory Recognition Model
Qixin Wang, Chaoqiong Fan, Tianyuan Jia, Yuyang Han, Xia Wu*
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China
{qxwang, fcq, tianyj, yuyang han}@mail.bnu.edu.cn, wuxia@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract

coders (VAEs) (Lee and Pavlovic 2021; Wang et al. 2022),
generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Zhang et al. 2017a;
Kosaraju et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2023), and so on, also show
their excellent performance because of their superiority in
feature representation (Suzuki and Matsuo 2022). However,
many of these models do not consider the interaction between different senses, a crucial aspect for effective multisensory recognition (Mansouri-Benssassi and Ye 2020).
In contrast, transformer-based cross-modal models, such as
MulT (Bhattacharjee et al. 2022), achieve the interaction
between different senses based on diverse attention mechanisms. Nevertheless, some concerns regarding their reliance
on a large amount of computation and large datasets remain,
leading to low computational efficiency and high training
costs (Shin, Ishii, and Narihira 2022). With the limitations of
the previous research, there is an urgency for a multisensory
recognition model that can facilitate intricate cross-sensory
interaction without excessive computation and data requirements, enabling more efficient recognition of multisensory
information.
The human brain possesses an inherently remarkable
ability to effectively perceive and recognize the external
environment by fully utilizing multisensory information,
such as vision and hearing(McDonald, Teder-Salejarvi, and
Ward 2001; Ohshiro, Angelaki, and DeAngelis 2011; Stein,
Stanford, and Rowland 2014). Neuroscience research has
demonstrated that this ability of the brain stems from diverse
neurons, including unisensory neurons for each sense and
multisensory neurons (Alvarado et al. 2007). These neurons
exhibit distinct responses to sensory inputs, where unisensory neurons respond only to single sensory information,
while multisensory neurons respond to multisensory information (Stein and Stanford 2008; Stevenson et al. 2014).
This diversity in neuronal response characteristics enables
the human brain to effectively capture cross-sensory interaction, leading to superior abilities in multisensory recognition
(Laurienti et al. 2005; Holmes 2007).
Therefore, based on the facilitation of diverse neurons
including unisensory neurons and multisensory neurons to
multisensory integration, we propose a Neuronal Diversity inspired Multisensory Recognition Model (ND-MRM)
through spiking neural networks (SNN). This model is more
biologically plausible, incorporating the novel concept of
neuronal diversity, thus enabling more effective recognition

Cross-sensory interaction is a key aspect of multisensory
recognition. Without cross-sensory interaction, artificial neural networks show inferior performance in multisensory
recognition. On the contrary, the human brain has an inherently remarkable ability in multisensory recognition, which
stems from the diverse neurons that exhibit distinct responses
to sensory inputs, especially the multisensory neurons with
multisensory responses hence enabling cross-sensory interaction. Based on this neuronal diversity, we propose a Neuronal
Diversity inspired Multisensory Recognition Model (NDMRM), which, similar to the brain, comprises unisensory
neurons and multisensory neurons. To reflect the different response characteristics of diverse neurons in the brain, special connection constraints are innovatively designed to regulate the feature transmission in the ND-MRM. Leveraging
this novel concept of neuronal diversity, our model is biologically plausible, enabling more effective recognition of multisensory information. To validate the performance of the proposed ND-MRM, we employ a multisensory emotion recognition task as a case study. The results demonstrate that our
model surpasses state-of-the-art brain-inspired baselines on
two datasets, proving the potential of brain-inspired methods
for advancing multisensory interaction and recognition.

Introduction
Compared to unisensory recognition, multisensory recognition, which considers information from various senses,
demonstrates superior performance. This superiority has led
to extensive research in multisensory recognition tasks, resulting in significant progress in areas such as emotion
recognition (Ju et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2022), medical diagnosis (Boehm et al. 2022a,b), and intelligent robotics (Papanastasiou et al. 2019; Heredia et al. 2022).
Research in multisensory recognition mainly focuses on
the fusion of features from multiple senses. Various approaches, such as CNN-based, RNN-based, and their hybrid with other algorithms, have been utilized to realize
the integration, demonstrating promising results in multisensory recognition tasks (Zhang et al. 2017b; Gong et al.
2021; Zhang et al. 2021; Gültekin et al. 2022). Additionally, deep generative models, including variational autoen* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15589

