The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MorphVAE: Advancing Morphological Design of Voxel-Based Soft Robots with
Variational Autoencoders
Junru Song1 * , Yang Yang2, 3 * , Wei Peng2, 3 , Weien Zhou2, 3 , Feifei Wang4, 5 † , Wen Yao 2, 3 †
1

2

Institute of Statistics and Big Data, Renmin University of China,
National Innovation Institute of Defense Technology, Chinese Academy of Military Science,
3
Intelligent Game and Decision Laboratory, Chinese Academy of Military Science,
4
Center for Applied Statistics, Renmin University of China,
5
School of Statistics, Renmin University of China
{songjunru, feifei.wang}@ruc.edu.cn, bigyangy@gmail.com,
{weipeng0098, wendy0782}@126.com, weienzhou@outlook.com
Abstract

ometries (Gómez-Bombarelli et al. 2018; Joy et al. 2020;
Xu et al. 2023), remains largely untapped in the realm of
soft robot design. Probabilistic generative models, albeit requiring additional computational expense for training, hold
particular appeal to robot design automation, including their
inherent multimodality, rapid execution speed and the capability to statistically deduce patterns from diverse samples,
which we deem well worth further leveraging.
In this paper, we capitalize on the remarkable potential
of generative models to unlock shared insights from diverse
multimodal resources. Our investigation into the distribution
of robot designs across seemingly disparate tasks reveals a
remarkable pattern: many designs cluster closely, hinting at
shared sub-structures that traverse task boundaries. Driven
by this revelation, we propose MorphVAE, which, to the
best of our knowledge, stands as the pioneering method for
task-specific and free-form soft robot design. Unlike existing approaches, MorphVAE makes full use of probabilistic
generative models to deduce favorable morphological structures from evaluated robot designs across different tasks and
the evolutionary timeline. Its training adopts a bootstrapping
manner, eliminating reliance on conventional EAs.
To be more specific, our methodology employs the Variational Autoencoder (VAE; Kingma and Welling (2013)),
a prominent probabilistic generative model, to establish a
mapping from tasks to their distributions of high-performing
robot designs. We introduce a novel sampling technique
named continuous natural selection, gradually pushing the
generator towards higher-performing designs, and apply
a temperature parameter to flexibly control the strength
of selection pressure. Additionally, we propose a technique named exploration-exploitation rebalancing to promote broader search ranges and diverse robot designs. In
summary, our work makes the following contributions:

Soft robot design is an intricate field with unique challenges
due to its complex and vast search space. In the past literature,
evolutionary computation algorithms, including novel probabilistic generative models (PGMs), have shown potential in
this realm. However, these methods are sample inefficient
and predominantly focus on rigid robots in locomotion tasks,
which limit their performance and application in robot design
automation. In this work, we propose MorphVAE, an innovative PGM that incorporates a multi-task training scheme and a
meticulously crafted sampling technique termed “continuous
natural selection”, aimed at bolstering sample efficiency. This
method empowers us to gain insights from assessed samples
across diverse tasks and temporal evolutionary stages, while
simultaneously maintaining a delicate balance between optimization efficiency and biodiversity. Through extensive experiments in various locomotion and manipulation tasks, we
substantiate the efficiency of MorphVAE in generating highperforming and diverse designs, surpassing the performance
of competitive baselines.

1

Introduction

Voxel-Based Soft Robots (VSRs), which are made up of
elastic blocks that expand or contract with many degrees of
freedom, were first introduced in Hiller and Lipson (2011)
and attracted the attention from both the academia and the
industry due to their great flexibility and resemblance to
natural organisms. A considerable number of works have
studied the design automation of VSRs, mostly with traditional Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) that feature biologically inspired meta-heuristics (Cheney, Bongard, and Lipson 2015; Bhatia et al. 2021; Medvet et al. 2021). However,
the substantial combinatorial search space of VSRs poses a
big challenge to EAs and limits their performance; Generative encoding, on the other hand, has demonstrated promise
as a solution (Cheney et al. 2014; Corucci et al. 2018; Hu
et al. 2022). Nonetheless, the potential of probabilistic generative models, extensively applied in modeling complex ge-

1. We observe, through pilot experiments, that highperforming robot designs overlap across different tasks,
and adopt a multi-task training approach so that knowledge could be shared across task boundaries.
2. We propose MorphVAE, featuring a novel sampling technique termed continuous natural selection, which unprecedentedly tackles free-form robot design automation

* Equal contributions.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10368

