The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Text Image Inpainting via Global Structure-Guided Diffusion Models
Shipeng Zhu1,2 , Pengfei Fang1,2 , Chenjie Zhu1,2 , Zuoyan Zhao1,2 , Qiang Xu1,2 , Hui Xue1,2 *
2

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
{shipengzhu, fangpengfei, chenjiezhu, zuoyanzhao, 220232307, hxue}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Real-world text can be damaged by corrosion issues caused
by environmental or human factors, which hinder the preservation of the complete styles of texts, e.g., texture and structure. These corrosion issues, such as graffiti signs and incomplete signatures, bring difficulties in understanding the texts,
thereby posing significant challenges to downstream applications, e.g., scene text recognition and signature identification. Notably, current inpainting techniques often fail to adequately address this problem and have difficulties restoring
accurate text images along with reasonable and consistent
styles. Formulating this as an open problem of text image inpainting, this paper aims to build a benchmark to facilitate
its study. In doing so, we establish two specific text inpainting datasets which contain scene text images and handwritten
text images, respectively. Each of them includes images revamped by real-life and synthetic datasets, featuring pairs of
original images, corrupted images, and other assistant information. On top of the datasets, we further develop a novel
neural framework, Global Structure-guided Diffusion Model
(GSDM), as a potential solution. Leveraging the global structure of the text as a prior, the proposed GSDM develops
an efficient diffusion model to recover clean texts. The efficacy of our approach is demonstrated by thorough empirical study, including a substantial boost in both recognition
accuracy and image quality. These findings not only highlight the effectiveness of our method but also underscore its
potential to enhance the broader field of text image understanding and processing. Code and datasets are available at:
https://github.com/blackprotoss/GSDM.

Irregular Region
Convex Hull
Quick Draw
(a) Corrosion in real-life scenarios
rabbit

“property”
“propepty”
(b) Ambiguity in corrupted images

“also”
“alse”

(c) Massive styles of text images

Figure 1: The illustration of corrosion forms in real-life scenarios and the challenges of text image inpainting.

systems. In other words, tasks such as scene text editing (Qu
et al. 2023) and signature verification (Lai et al. 2021) are
inevitably affected by the integrity of text images.
Aiming to provide visually plausible restoration for missing regions in corrupted images (Bertalmio et al. 2003; Xiang et al. 2023), image inpainting technologies have made
considerable progress (Zhao et al. 2022; Lugmayr et al.
2022; Ji et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2023) in recent years. However, some inherent challenges restrict these general image inpainting methods from restoring corrupted text images. Firstly, the corrupted regions of text images are unknown. That is, the corrosive factors, rooted in real-life scenarios, mean the location mask cannot be provided. Consequently, prevailing non-blind inpainting methods cannot
handle this entire image reconstruction task. Secondly, the
corrupted regions induce content ambiguity in the text
image. It is known that natural objects can be recognized
based on their iconic local features. For example, a rabbit
can be easily recognized by its long ears, despite corrosion over most of the body parts (Shown in Figure 1(b)).
However, the corrosion disrupts the integrity of the global
structure in the text image, including its shape and profile, making it challenging to reconstruct the correct characters/words from the remaining strokes. Lastly, text images
contain massive style variations. The text images exhibit
high inter- and intra-class variability in style (Krishnan et al.

Introduction
Text in the real world serves as a visual embodiment of human language (Long, He, and Yao 2021). It plays a vital
role in conveying vast linguistic information and facilitating
communication and collaboration in daily life. However, the
integrity of text with specific styles, e.g., structure, texture,
and background clutter, can be compromised by factors such
as environmental corrosion and human interference (Krishnan et al. 2023). As a consequence, these resultant images,
as shown in Figure 1(a), are inherently degraded, leading to
a performance drop in the text reading and understanding
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7775

