The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fusion-Vital: Video-RF Fusion Transformer for
Advanced Remote Physiological Measurement
Jae-Ho Choi1 , Ki-Bong Kang2 , Kyung-Tae Kim3
1

Stanford University, CA, USA
Samsung Electronics, South Korea
3
Pohang University of Science and Technology, South Korea
jhochoi@stanford.edu, kb131.kang@samsung.com, kkt@postech.ac.kr
2

Abstract

human vital signs (Wang, Kao, and Hsu 2019; Lu, Han, and
Zhou 2021). Despite its potentiality for capturing vital motion, the fundamental weaknesses of RGB-reflected physiology, such as the great variability in surrounding illumination and vulnerability to dark settings, remain open challenges. Moreover, the algorithmic necessity for consistent
face tracking (Estepp, Blackford, and Meier 2014; Bobbia
et al. 2019; Revanur et al. 2021; Choi, Kang, and Kim 2022)
incurs degradation in global motion settings.
An effective solution involves the utilization of alternative sensory systems that maintain functional robustness to
the aforementioned issues. A representative alternative is a
radio frequency (RF) sensor that measures the radial depth
near the chest vibrating in response to the vital cycle of the
individual. Unlike video-based physiology, which relies on
the RGB pixel intensity as a core information source (Zheng
et al. 2020; Park et al. 2019), RF sensors infer radial depth
information through periodic transmission and reception of
electromagnetic signals, inherently mitigating the influence
of surrounding illumination. Nevertheless, RF sensors also
suffer from their own disadvantages, such as poor angular
resolution that makes them susceptible to lateral motions,
or the greater difficulty they pose for data acquisition compared to cameras (Boyer 2011; Choi et al. 2020; Choi, Kim,
and Kim 2022). Consequently, most previous RF physiological approaches have depended upon learning-free methods
and have been limited to controlled setups (Li and Lin 2018;
Mercuri et al. 2018, 2019; Obadi et al. 2022).
In this study, we aim to explore the potential for enhancing cardiopulmonary measurements through the multimodal
fusion of video and RF reflections. Our fundamental premise
is that the RGB and radio data can serve as complementary
information, particularly in terms of physiological monitoring. Video and RF sensors capture human vital signs based
on disparate physical signatures (RGB intensity and radial
distance) that emanate from different body regions (facial
skin and upper front of the body), respectively. More importantly, while cameras can maintain high resolution in
the lateral direction but lack depth information (Long et al.
2021b), RF sensors have a fine depth resolution but suffer
from poor lateral resolution (Fogle and Rigling 2012; Choi,
Kim, and Kim 2021), meaning that the strengths of each
sensor can compensate for the weaknesses of the other. To
fully exploit such complementarity between RGB and RF

Remote physiology, which involves monitoring vital signs
without the need for physical contact, has great potential for
various applications. Current remote physiology methods rely
only on a single camera or radio frequency (RF) sensor to
capture the microscopic signatures from vital movements.
However, our study shows that fusing deep RGB and RF
features from both sensor streams can further improve performance. Because these multimodal features are defined in
distinct dimensions and have varying contextual importance,
the main challenge in the fusion process lies in the effective
alignment of them and adaptive integration of features under
dynamic scenarios. To address this challenge, we propose a
novel vital sensing model, named Fusion-Vital, that combines
the RGB and RF modalities through the new introduction of
pairwise input formats and transformer-based fusion strategies. We also perform comprehensive experiments based on a
newly collected and released remote vital dataset comprising
synchronized video-RF sensors, showing the superiority of
the fusion approach over the previous single-sensor baselines
in various aspects.

Introduction
Human physiological signs, such as respiration and cardiograms, are representative indicators that can directly reflect
one’s physical and mental conditions. For example, continuous monitoring of human physiology enables an overall diagnosis of general health (Revanur et al. 2021) as well as
mental fatigue (e.g., sleep status (Zhao et al. 2017) or stress
level (Zhang et al. 2012; McDuff et al. 2016)). Traditionally,
cardiopulmonary measurements have relied on information
from contact sensors; however, their constraints for direct
interaction with the skin precipitate great inconvenience to
users, disturbing continuous monitoring in everyday life. To
alleviate this discomfort and achieve ubiquitous sensing, recent approaches have focused on remote solutions that can
extract human vital signs without the need for physical contact.
General non-contact physiology systems typically exploit
the remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) characteristics of
a camera: the RGB spectrum of the skin vibrates along with
the blood volume pulse (BVP), which directly involves the
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1344

