The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Score-Based Deterministic Diffusion Algorithm with
Smooth Scores for General Distributions
Karthik Elamvazhuthi1 * , Xuechen Zhang1 * , Matthew Jacobs2 , Samet Oymak3 , Fabio Pasqualetti1
1

University of California, Riverside
University of California, Santa Barbara
3
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
karthike@ucr.edu, xzhan394@ucr.edu, majaco@ucsb.edu,oymak@umich.edu,fabiopas@engr.ucr.edu
2

Abstract

techniques (De Bortoli 2022; Chen et al. 2022; Chen, Lee,
and Lu 2023; Lee, Lu, and Tan 2022; Benton, Deligiannidis, and Doucet 2023) study the rate of convergence of solutions of the discrete implementations of the continuous forward and reverse process to the data distribution. A common thread in these works is that if the data distribution has
bounded logarithmic gradient, then the distributions can be
sampled with error that depends polynomial on some algorithm parameters. To sample from distributions that have a
bounded logarithmic gradient implies that the data distribution is positive everywhere on the sample space. For example, if one wants to sample from the set of cats, there is still a
small probability that one will sample from the set of chairs.
To address this issue, (De Bortoli 2022) study the rate of
convergence when the data distribution satisfies the manifold hypothesis that data is concentrated on a lower dimensional manifold. They derived error estimates that scale exponentially with the algorithm parameters using the fact that
one can approximate the measure value distribution using a
distribution of full support using the regularizing properties
of the Fokker Planck equation. Similar ideas have been used
to derive early stopping criteria to sample from data distributions that are not fully supported on the sample space (Chen,
Lee, and Lu 2023). However, the actual distributions that the
approaches sample are still positive everywhere and the exploding score issue cannot be avoided.
Another drawback of stochastic forward processes is that
the particle trajectories are not differentiable and the approximation procedure for the reverse phase does not achieve the
best error estimates. One way to address this issue is to ensure that the forward phase trajectories are obtained from a
deterministic process. For this reason, probabilistic ordinary
differential equation (ODE) flows have been analyzed in literature to derive better error estimates (Chen et al. 2023).
However, the implementation of the forward algorithm in
(Chen et al. 2023) is not strictly deterministic. Similarly,
(Liu, Gong, and Liu 2022) constructs deterministic vector
fields that transport one measure to another. However, the
vector fields can be highly irregular for distributions that are
not positive everywhere.
To sample from data general distributions we introduce an
alternative deterministic forward process to the probabilistic ODE model. Similar to the probabilistic flow ODE, the
vector-field is a function of the particle distribution. How-

Score matching based diffusion has shown to achieve the state
of art results in generation modeling. In the original score
matching based diffusion algorithm, the forward equation is
a differential equation for which the probability density equation evolves according to a linear partial differential equation,
the Fokker-Planck equation. A drawback of this approach is
that one needs the data distribution to have a Lipschitz logarithmic gradient. This excludes a large class of data distributions that have compact support. We present a deterministic
diffusion process for which the vector fields are always Lipschitz, and hence the score does not explode for probability
measures with compact support. This deterministic diffusion
process can be seen as a regularization of the porous media
equation, which enables one to guarantee long-term convergence of the forward process to the noise distribution. Though
the porous media equation is itself not always guaranteed to
have a Lipschitz vector field, it can be used to understand
the closeness of the output of the algorithm to the data distribution as a function of the time horizon and score matching error. This analysis enables us to show that the algorithm
has better dependence on the score matching error than approaches based on stochastic diffusions. Using numerical experiments we verify our theoretical results on example one
and two dimensional data distributions which are compactly
supported. Additionally, we validate the approach on modified versions of the MNIST and CIFAR-10 data sets for which
the distribution is concentrated on a compact set. In each of
the experiments, the approach using deterministic diffusion
performs better that the diffusion algorithm with a stochastic forward process, when considering the FID scores of the
generated samples.

1

Introduction

In recent years, score matching based diffusion models have
become the state of art in generative modeling (Ho, Jain, and
Abbeel 2020; Song et al. 2020; Dhariwal and Nichol 2021).
They have found several applications such as image synthesis (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021), protein modeling (Anand
and Achim 2022) and inpainting (Lugmayr et al. 2022).
Due to their success, a number of works have focused on
the theoretical understanding of the class of data distributions that can be sampled from using score matching based
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11866

