The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Model-Driven Deep Neural Network for Enhanced AoA Estimation Using 5G gNB
Shengheng Liu1, 2 * , Xingkang Li1 , Zihuan Mao1, 2 , Peng Liu2 , and Yongming Huang1, 2 *
1

National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing, China
{s.liu; huangym}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

of-arrival (UL-TDoA), downlink-angle-of-departure (DLAoD), uplink-angle-of-arrival (UL-AoA), and multi-round
trip time (Multi-RTT) positioning. Among these schemes,
UL-AoA has been identified as more feasible for mitigating the multipath effect of the receive signal and enhancing the positioning performance, as it aligns with the
trend towards increasing array size and bandwidth. However, purely model-driven AoA estimation algorithms usually suffer from hardware impairments that can affect the array response used in the estimation process (Pan et al. 2022).
By leveraging artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms, such
as machine learning and deep neural networks (DNN), wireless networks can now dynamically learn and adapt to realworld conditions, compensating for hardware impairments
and environmental variations (Dai et al. 2022; Lee et al.
2023). To address this issue, data-driven methods, such as
DNN-based direction finding techniques, have surged exponential popularity (Ghourchian, Allegue-Martinez, and Precup 2017; Mo and Morgado 2023). Nonetheless, the accuracy of such methods is heavily reliant on the availability of
massive data sets, which hinders their translation to practical
uses. The integration of neural network (NN) and modeldriven methods (Zhu et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2023) provides inspiration for developing a model-driven deep learning method to mitigate the impact of hardware impairments
and improve the AoA estimation performance.
Building on these recent advancements, this paper
presents an innovative model-driven deep neural network
(MoD-DNN) framework, featuring spectrum calibration capabilities to enhance AoA estimation. Simulation and experimental results demonstrate that the proposed framework yields superior AoA estimation performance compared to both purely model-driven and data-driven methods.
To the best of our knowledge, this study marks the first AIempowered positioning endeavor utilizing commodity 5G
NR gNB. The key contributions of this paper include: (1)
The problem formulation of an inverse problem from the
coarray spatial spectrum (CSS) to a sparse solution of the
over-completed AoA set; (2) Employing a one-dimensional
convolutional neural network (1D-CNN) for CSS calibration, followed by a sparse conjugate gradient (SCG) algorithm for sparse AoA spectrum recovery; and (3) Proposing
an iterative optimization strategy utilizing shared CNN coefficients between the CNN and SCG modules to establish

High-accuracy positioning has become a fundamental enabler
for intelligent connected devices. Nevertheless, the present
wireless networks still rely on model-driven approaches to
achieve positioning functionality, which are susceptible to
performance degradation in practical scenarios, primarily due
to hardware impairments. Integrating artificial intelligence
into the positioning framework presents a promising solution to revolutionize the accuracy and robustness of locationbased services. In this study, we address this challenge by
reformulating the problem of angle-of-arrival (AoA) estimation into image reconstruction of spatial spectrum. To
this end, we design a model-driven deep neural network
(MoD-DNN), which can automatically calibrate the angulardependent phase error. The proposed MoD-DNN approach
employs an iterative optimization scheme between a convolutional neural network and a sparse conjugate gradient algorithm. Simulation and experimental results are presented to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method in enhancing spectrum calibration and AoA estimation.

Introduction
Development of the forthcoming wireless communications
entails the exploration and integration of cutting-edge technologies and paradigms for diverse and emerging applications (You et al. 2023). Among the essential components,
high-accuracy positioning functionality assumes a critical
role in guaranteeing a seamless user experience and accommodating various use cases such as emergency response,
asset tracking, and location-based services (Sun, Melamed,
and Kitani 2021). Despite being in its nascent stages, an escalating number of 5G mobile base stations (a.k.a. gNBs)
have been deployed on a massive scale in both indoor and
outdoor areas, offering an extraordinary platform for supporting positioning services (Pai and Kumar 2019). As a result, there is a renewed drive for the perception of the surrounding environment and the provision of location-aware
services from the physical layer to the application layer.
In Release 16 of the 3GPP, which was finalized in
2021, several positioning schemes for 5G new radio
(NR) have been introduced. These include Downlink-timedifference-of-arrival (DL-TDoA), uplink-time-differenceCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

214

