The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DRF: Improving Certified Robustness via Distributional Robustness Framework
Zekai Wang, Zhengyu Zhou, Weiwei Liu*
School of Computer Science,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
Wuhan University, China
{wzekai99, zzysince1999, liuweiwei863}@gmail.com
Abstract

attack algorithms (Carlini and Wagner 2017; Uesato et al.
2018; Tramèr et al. 2020). Even if the model is made robust
to the attack algorithm used for evaluation, there is no guarantee that it will remain robust to other unseen attacks. This
has encouraged researchers to develop certified robustness
(Katz et al. 2017; Wong et al. 2018; Wang and Liu 2022,
2023): i.e., regardless of what attack algorithm is applied,
classifiers whose prediction at point x is certified to be constant within a neighborhood of x.
Randomized smoothing (RS) (Lécuyer et al. 2019; Cohen,
Rosenfeld, and Kolter 2019) is a promising method that can
provide certified robustness for large NNs. Cohen, Rosenfeld, and Kolter (2019) show that any classifier can be transformed into a certified robust classifier by averaging its predictions over Gaussian noise, with the certified robustness
depending on how well the classifier performs when faced
with the noise. At present, RS is considered the SOTA approach to offering a provable guarantee of robustness against
L2 -perturbations (Li et al. 2020). In light of this, many existing works focus on improving the robustness guarantee
given by RS, such as by using different smoothing measures
(Lee et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2020), different divergences
(Dvijotham et al. 2020), etc.
One important direction in this line of research is that
of investigating which training of the base classifier can
maximize the certified robustness after smoothing. Empirically, RS methods employing adversarial training can outperform Gaussian-based RS and significantly improve the
certified robustness. Adversarial training (AT) (Madry et al.
2018; Zhang et al. 2019; Ma, Wang, and Liu 2022; Li and
Liu 2023; Wang et al. 2023), one of the most effective and
widely-used approaches among adversarial defenses, improves the robustness of NN by augmenting the training set
with adversarial examples (Figure 1a). AT-based RS can be
viewed as a robust optimization process that involves seeking a pointwise adversary of the smoothed classifier, which
generates the worst-case adversarial example by independently perturbing each benign image.
Note that previous works of AT-based RS focus on pointwise certification, i.e., trying to provide a provable guarantee
for the worst-case adversarial example around the given input, as shown in Figure 1b. However, these works ignore
the performance of the smoothed classifier on the input data
population, which is an important indicator, since it relates

Randomized smoothing (RS) has provided state-of-the-art
(SOTA) certified robustness against adversarial perturbations
for large neural networks. Among studies in this field, methods based on adversarial training (AT) achieve remarkably
robust performance by applying adversarial examples to construct the smoothed classifier. These AT-based RS methods
typically seek a pointwise adversary that generates the worstcase adversarial examples by perturbing each input independently. However, there are unexplored benefits to considering such adversarial robustness across the entire data distribution. To this end, we provide a novel framework called
DRF, which connects AT-based RS methods with distributional robustness (DR), and show that these methods are special cases of their counterparts in our framework. Due to the
advantages conferred by DR, our framework can control the
trade-off between the clean accuracy and certified robustness
of smoothed classifiers to a significant extent. Our experiments demonstrate that DRF can substantially improve the
certified robustness of AT-based RS.

1

Introduction

While neural networks (NNs) have achieved remarkable performance in various applications (He et al. 2016; Devlin
et al. 2019; Silver et al. 2017; Mao et al. 2021, 2022, 2023),
many empirical and theoretical studies (Xu and Liu 2022,
2023; Chen and Liu 2023) have demonstrated that NNs are
vulnerable when dealing with imperceptibly perturbed images, referred to as adversarial examples. Adversarial attacks (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Madry et al.
2018; Carlini and Wagner 2017) are usually generated by
adding small perturbations to benign images; notably, these
minor perturbations can drastically change the predictions
of an NN-based classifier, even when the perturbation has
no effect whatsoever on the semantic information perceived
by humans.
This intriguing weakness of NN has motivated a rapidly
growing body of work focused on obtaining a robust NN
model (Li, Zou, and Liu 2022; Zou and Liu 2023a,b; Shi
and Liu 2023). Unfortunately, most defense heuristics have
subsequently been shown to fail against suitably powerful
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15752

