The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

When to Show a Suggestion? Integrating Human Feedback
in AI-Assisted Programming
Hussein Mozannar1 , Gagan Bansal2 , Adam Fourney2 , Eric Horvitz2
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
Microsoft Research
mozannar@mit.edu

Abstract

programmer

AI powered code-recommendation systems, such as Copilot and CodeWhisperer, provide code suggestions inside a
programmer’s environment (e.g., an IDE) with the aim of
improving productivity. We pursue mechanisms for leveraging signals about programmers’ acceptance and rejection of
code suggestions to guide recommendations. We harness data
drawn from interactions with GitHub Copilot, a system used
by millions of programmers, to develop interventions that can
save time for programmers. We introduce a utility-theoretic
framework to drive decisions about suggestions to display
versus withhold. The approach, conditional suggestion display from human feedback (CDHF), relies on a cascade of
models that provide the likelihood that recommended code
will be accepted. These likelihoods are used to selectively
hide suggestions, reducing both latency and programmer verification time. Using data from 535 programmers, we perform a retrospective evaluation of CDHF and show that we
can avoid displaying a significant fraction of suggestions that
would have been rejected. We further demonstrate the importance of incorporating the programmer’s latent unobserved
state in decisions about when to display suggestions through
an ablation study. Finally, we showcase how using suggestion
acceptance as a reward signal for guiding the display of suggestions can lead to suggestions of reduced quality, indicating
an unexpected pitfall.

CDHF

Hide Suggestion

import numpy as np
class LogisticRegression:
def __init(self):
self.w = None
self.b = None

Pr(accept|P,S) = 0.1
Stage 2 Acceptance Model

| # implement the predict
method

prompt

suggestion

Copilot
shown
A1
(S1,P1)

Pr(accept|P) = 0.5
Stage 1 Acceptance Model

t1

accepted
A2
…
t2

Telemetry Data of
Suggestions and
Actions

Train models using
Telemetry Feedback

Figure 1: Operating mode of Copilot inside Visual Studio
Code showing how CDHF influences the interaction by selectively hiding certain suggestions. Data collected by the
interaction is stored in telemetry and used to train CDHF to
create a feedback loop.

Introduction

a factor of two (Kalliamvakou 2022). These and other reports that the code-recommendation systems can improve
programmer productivity motivate our research to pursue
improvements to these systems.
Code-recommendation systems are powered by large language models (LLMs) such as GPT that are trained on
standard language modeling objectives using the Common
Crawl data (Radford et al. 2019), and then fine-tuned on public code repositories (Chen et al. 2021). The public roll-out
of the code recommendation models has attracted millions
of programmers, enabling a unique opportunity to leverage
the data of programmers interacting with the models. In this
work, we study GitHub’s Copilot which is used by millions
of programmers (Github 2022). For a set of programmers
within our organization who consented to have their usage
data collected, we collected telemetry data of Copilot suggestions, along with their associated prompts and the pro-

Code recommendation systems powered by large-scale neural language models, such as Github Copilot (Github 2022)
and Amazon CodeWhisperer (Amazon 2022), are aimed at
providing programmers with code suggestions to help improve their productivity. These systems usually operate by
displaying the suggestion as ghost text—a grayed-out code
suggestion inline inside the IDE. Programmers can accept
the suggestion, browse through different suggestions, or reject the suggestion (see Figure 1). The code suggestions
appear either at the explicit invocation of the programmer
or when the programmer pauses their cursor when writing
code. GitHub reported a recent randomized study with 95
participants who wrote a web server, where they found that
Copilot could potentially reduce task completion time by
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10137

