The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

WeakPCSOD: Overcoming the Bias of Box Annotations for Weakly Supervised
Point Cloud Salient Object Detection
Jun Wei1,2 , S. Kevin Zhou3,4 , Shuguang Cui2,1 , Zhen Li2,1 *
1

FNii, CUHK-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
SSE, CUHK-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Biomedical Engineering & Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, University of Science and Technology of
China, Suzhou, China
4
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
junwei@link.cuhk.edu.cn, lizhen@cuhk.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Point cloud salient object detection (PCSOD) is a newly proposed task in 3D dense segmentation. However, the acquisition of accurate 3D dense annotations comes at a high cost,
severely limiting the progress of PCSOD. To address this issue, we propose the first weakly supervised PCSOD (named
WeakPCSOD) model, which relies solely on cheap 3D
bounding box annotations. In WeakPCSOD, we extract noisefree supervision from coarse 3D bounding boxes while mitigating shape biases inherent in box annotations. To achieve
this, we introduce a novel mask-to-box (M2B) transformation
and a color consistency (CC) loss. The M2B transformation,
from a shape perspective, disentangles predictions from labels, enabling the extraction of noiseless supervision from labels while preserving object shapes independently of the box
bias. From an appearance perspective, we further introduce
the CC loss to provide dense supervision, which mitigates the
non-unique predictions stemming from weak supervision and
substantially reduces prediction variability. Furthermore, we
employ a self-training (ST) strategy to enhance performance
by utilizing high-confidence pseudo labels. Notably, the M2B
transformation, CC loss, and ST strategy are seamlessly integrated into any model and incur no computational costs for
inference. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our WeakPCSOD model, even comparable to fully
supervised models utilizing dense annotations.

Figure 1: (a) shows the naive direct supervision with 3D
bounding box annotations for point cloud salient object detection (PCSOD). (b) is our proposed WeakPCSOD model,
which conducts indirect supervision to overcome the box annotation bias through a mask-to-box (M2B) transformation.

of any given view in a 3D scene. Specifically, given a large
3D scene and an observer, salient objects are not constant
but change with the position and perspective of the observer.
Therefore, PCSOD deals with the subspace of a scene noticed by the observer, rather than the entire scene. It stimulates the attention mechanism of human eyes and avoids the
saliency ambiguity of large cluttered scenes, which has great
potential in VR/AR scenarios. For PCSOD data annotation,
it is necessary to involve multiple professional annotators to
jointly determine the salient object. An object is regarded
as a positive label only if more than 80% annotators verify
it. Otherwise, this sample will be ignored to avoid saliency
conflict. For more comparison between PCSOD and 3DSS,
and data annotation details, please refer to (Fan, Gao, and Li
2022). Due to the class-agnostic feature, PCSOD can provide the pre-processing results for many downstream tasks,
such as 3D shape classification, compression, and quality assessment. Specifically, with the popularity of mobile phones
and virtual reality devices, PCSOD can capture what the user
watches at any time, and can also be exploited to build a 3D
avatar for live stream or display. Therefore, PCSOD has a
wide range of application prospects.

Introduction
Point Cloud Salient Object Detection (PCSOD) is a 3D segmentation task newly proposed by Fan et al. (Fan, Gao, and
Li 2022), which aims to segment the most attractive objects
in point cloud scenarios. Compared with 2D salient object
detection (Wei, Wang, and Huang 2020; Wei et al. 2020b),
PCSOD can make full use of depth information, thus reducing the prediction ambiguity. Although formally similar to
3D semantic segmentation (3DSS), PCSOD has its own
unique characteristics. First, PCSOD is a class-agnostic
segmentation task and thus can be applied to a wide range
of scenarios without being limited to the semantic classes
of training data. Second, salient objects in point clouds depend on views, and PCSOD is to segment the salient objects
* Corresponding author: Zhen Li
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5894

