The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

VITA: ‘Carefully Chosen and Weighted Less’ Is Better
in Medication Recommendation
Taeri Kim1 * , Jiho Heo1 * , Hongil Kim2 * , Kijung Shin3† , Sang-Wook Kim1†
1

Department of Computer Science, Hanyang University, South Korea
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Hanyang University, South Korea
3
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI & School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea
{taerik, linda0123, hong0814, wook}@hanyang.ac.kr, kijungs@kaist.ac.kr
2

Abstract

given with the same diagnoses at the current visit, the cause
of the given diagnoses may be different for each patient, so
the medications for them could also be different (Shang et al.
2019b; Yang et al. 2021b); this is because they do not utilize
the patients’ past health records (Wu et al. 2022b).
To alleviate this limitation, longitudinal-based medication
recommender systems have emerged, which utilize not only
a patient’s current visit information but also her past health
records (Shang et al. 2019a,b; Bhoi et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2021a,b; Yang et al. 2021b; Wu et al. 2022a,b). These methods usually consist of an encoder and a predictor. For their
encoders, most of them (Shang et al. 2019b; Bhoi et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2021a,b; Yang et al. 2021b; Wu et al.
2022a) learn a patient representation indicative of her current health status by aggregating her current visit information and the diagnoses and procedures given at her past visits
(i.e., past visit information) in consideration of the visit order via a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)-based model.
Then, for their predictors, they recommend medications to
her by utilizing other past health records (e.g., medications
prescribed at her past visits) based on their relevance with
her patient representation via various deep-learning models (e.g., an attention network (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio
2015)). On the other hand, COGNet (Wu et al. 2022b), another longitudinal-based method recently proposed, encodes
only a patient’s current visit information, unlike the above
methods, to obtain her current health status in the encoder by
capturing the relation between diagnoses (resp. procedures)
at her current visit via a transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017)based model. Then, in the predictor, COGNet additionally
takes into account the similarity between (a) medications
that should be prescribed at her current visit by considering
only her current visit information and (b) those prescribed at
her past visits, to improve upon the predictor of the aforementioned methods. Please refer to the Appendix1 for more
detailed information on these (i.e., related studies).
Although longitudinal-based methods achieve higher accuracy than instance-based methods by utilizing a patient’s
past health records, we point out a key limitation of them:
when obtaining the patient’s current health status (i.e., in

We address the medication recommendation problem, which
aims to recommend effective medications for a patient’s current visit by utilizing information (e.g., diagnoses and procedures) given at the patient’s current and past visits. While
there exist a number of recommender systems designed for
this problem, we point out that they are challenged in accurately capturing the relation (spec., the degree of relevance)
between the current and each of the past visits for the patient
when obtaining her current health status, which is the basis for recommending medications. To address this limitation,
we propose a novel medication recommendation framework,
named VITA, based on the following two novel ideas: (1)
relevant-Visit selectIon; (2) Target-aware Attention. Through
extensive experiments using real-world datasets, we demonstrate the superiority of VITA (spec., up to 5.67% higher accuracy, in terms of Jaccard, than the best competitor) and the
effectiveness of its two core ideas. The code is available at
https://github.com/jhheo0123/VITA.

1

Introduction

Medication recommendation aims to help doctors in
prescribing effective medications for a patient’s current
visit (Zhang et al. 2017; Shang et al. 2019b). When prescribing medications to a patient, doctors should consider the
following factors: (1) the diagnoses and procedures given
to her at the current visit; (2) her past health records; (3)
the relations between medications to be prescribed (e.g., the
possibility of adverse effects when taken together). This is
a time-consuming and challenging process even for experienced doctors (Wu et al. 2022b). Therefore, the medication
recommendation that can alleviate these difficulties of doctors has been an important research area in medical tasks.
Early medication recommender systems recommend
medications to a patient by considering only the diagnoses
and procedures given to her at the current visit (i.e., current
visit information), which are called instance-based methods (Zhang et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018; Gong et al. 2021).
However, they overlooked the fact that, although patients are
* These authors contributed equally as co-first authors.
†

Co-corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The Appendix for VITA can be found at https://github.com/
jhheo0123/VITA.

8600

