The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

VadCLIP: Adapting Vision-Language Models for Weakly Supervised
Video Anomaly Detection
Peng Wu1 , Xuerong Zhou1 , Guansong Pang2 * , Lingru Zhou1 , Qingsen Yan1 ,
Peng Wang1∗ , Yanning Zhang1
1

ASGO, School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
{xdwupeng, zxr2333}@gmail.com, gspang@smu.edu.sg, {lingruzhou, yqs}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn,
{peng.wang, ynzhang}@nwpu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

visual
encoder

The recent contrastive language-image pre-training (CLIP)
model has shown great success in a wide range of image-level
tasks, revealing remarkable ability for learning powerful visual representations with rich semantics. An open and worthwhile problem is efficiently adapting such a strong model to
the video domain and designing a robust video anomaly detector. In this work, we propose VadCLIP, a new paradigm
for weakly supervised video anomaly detection (WSVAD)
by leveraging the frozen CLIP model directly without any
pre-training and fine-tuning process. Unlike current works
that directly feed extracted features into the weakly supervised classifier for frame-level binary classification, VadCLIP
makes full use of fine-grained associations between vision
and language on the strength of CLIP and involves dual
branch. One branch simply utilizes visual features for coarsegrained binary classification, while the other fully leverages
the fine-grained language-image alignment. With the benefit of dual branch, VadCLIP achieves both coarse-grained
and fine-grained video anomaly detection by transferring pretrained knowledge from CLIP to WSVAD task. We conduct
extensive experiments on two commonly-used benchmarks,
demonstrating that VadCLIP achieves the best performance
on both coarse-grained and fine-grained WSVAD, surpassing
the state-of-the-art methods by a large margin. Specifically,
VadCLIP achieves 84.51% AP and 88.02% AUC on XDViolence and UCF-Crime, respectively. Code and features are
released at https://github.com/nwpu-zxr/VadCLIP.

... ...

Binary
Classifier
anomaly or not

Classification-based Paradigm
visual
encoder

M

[abuse]
textual
[arrest] encoder
[assault]
......
Our Proposed Paradigm

... ...

... ...

Binary
Classifier
D

anomaly or not
dual branch

product
M

anomaly category

Figure 1: Comparisons of different paradigms for WSVAD.
et al. 2020), and ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Li, Liu, and
Jiao 2022), followed by feeding these features into multiple instance learning (MIL) based binary classifiers for the
purpose of model training, and the final step is to detect
abnormal events based on predicted anomaly confidences.
Despite their simple schemes and promising results, such a
classification-based paradigm fails to take full advantage of
cross-modal relationships, e.g, vision-language associations.
During the past two years, we have witnessed great
progress in the development of vision-language pre-training
(VLP) models (Kim, Son, and Kim 2021; Jia et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2023a), e.g., CLIP (Radford
et al. 2021), for learning more generalized visual representations with semantic concepts. The main idea of CLIP
is to align images and texts by contrastive learning, that
is, pull together images and matched textual descriptions
while pushing away unmatched pairs in the joint embedding
space. Thanks to hundreds of million noisy image-text pairs
crawled from the web, such models pre-trained at a large
scale really demonstrate their strong representation learning
as well as associations between vision and language. In view
of the breakthrough performance of CLIP, recently, building
task-specific models on top of CLIP is becoming emerging
research topics and applied to a broad range of vision tasks,
and these models achieve unprecedented performance.
Although CLIP and its affiliated models demonstrate the
great potential on various vision tasks, these methods mainly
focus on the image domain. Therefore, how to efficiently
adapt such a model learned from image-text pairs to more

Introduction
In recent years, weakly supervised video anomaly detection
(WSVAD, VAD) has received growing concerns due to its
broad application prospects. For instance, with the aid of
WSVAD, it is convenient to develop more powerful intelligent video surveillance systems and video content review
systems. In WSVAD, the anomaly detector is expected to
generate frame-level anomaly confidences with only videolevel annotations provided. The majority of current research
in this field follows a systematic process, wherein the initial step is to extract frame-level features using pre-trained
visual models, e.g., C3D (Tran et al. 2015; Sultani, Chen,
and Shah 2018), I3D (Carreira and Zisserman 2017; Wu
* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6074

