The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Approximating the Shapley Value without Marginal Contributions
Patrick Kolpaczki1 , Viktor Bengs2,3 , Maximilian Muschalik2,3 , Eyke Hüllermeier2,3
1
Paderborn University
Institute of Informatics, University of Munich (LMU)
3
Munich Center for Machine Learning
patrick.kolpaczki@upb.de, viktor.bengs@lmu.de, maximilian.muschalik@lmu.de, eyke@lmu.de
2

Abstract

evaluating the importance of parameters in a machine learning model, e.g. single neurons in a deep neural network
(Ghorbani and Zou 2020) or base learners in an ensemble (Rozemberczki and Sarkar 2021), or assigning relevance
scores to datapoints in a given dataset (Ghorbani and Zou
2019). See Rozemberczki et al. (2022) for a wider overview
of its usage in the field of explainable artificial intelligence.
Outside the realm of machine learning cooperative games
also found applications in operations research (Luo, Zhou,
and Lev 2022), for finding fair compensation mechanisms
in electricity grids (O’Brien, Gamal, and Rajagopal 2015),
or even for the purpose of identifying the most influential
individuals in terrorist networks (van Campen et al. 2018).
In all of these applications, the question naturally arises
of how to appropriately determine the contribution of a single player (feature, parameter, etc.) with respect to the grand
collective benefit. In other words, how to allocate the worth
ν(N ) of the full player set N among the players in a fair
manner. The indisputably most popular solution to this problem is the Shapley value (Shapley 1953), which can be intuitively expressed by marginal contributions. We call the increase in worth that comes with the inclusion of player i to
a coalition S, i.e., the difference ν(S ∪ {i}) − ν(S), player
i’s marginal contribution to S. The Shapley value of i is a
weighted average of all its marginal contributions to coalitions that do not include i. Its popularity stems from the fact
that it is the only solution to satisfy axiomatic properties that
arguably capture fairness (Shapley 1953).
Despite the appealing theoretical properties of the Shapley value, there is one major drawback with respect to its
practical application, as its computational complexity increases exponentially with the number of players n. As a
consequence, the exact computation of the Shapley value
becomes practically infeasible even for a moderate number
of players. This is especially the case where accesses to ν
are costly, e.g., re-evaluating a (complex) machine learning
model for a specific feature subset, or manipulating training data each time ν is accessed. Recently, several approximation methods have been proposed in search of a remedy, enabling the utilization of the Shapley value in explainable AI (and beyond). However, most works are stiffened
towards the notion of marginal contribution, and, consequently, judge algorithms by their achieved approximation
accuracy depending on the number of evaluated marginal

The Shapley value, which is arguably the most popular approach for assigning a meaningful contribution value to players in a cooperative game, has recently been used intensively
in explainable artificial intelligence. Its meaningfulness is due
to axiomatic properties that only the Shapley value satisfies, which, however, comes at the expense of an exact computation growing exponentially with the number of agents.
Accordingly, a number of works are devoted to the efficient
approximation of the Shapley value, most of them revolve
around the notion of an agent’s marginal contribution. In this
paper, we propose with SVARM and Stratified SVARM two
parameter-free and domain-independent approximation algorithms based on a representation of the Shapley value detached from the notion of marginal contribution. We prove
unmatched theoretical guarantees regarding their approximation quality and provide empirical results including synthetic
games as well as common explainability use cases comparing
ourselves with state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Whenever agents can federalize in groups (form coalitions)
to accomplish a task and get rewarded with a collective benefit that is to be shared among the group members, the notion of cooperative game stemming from game theory is arguably the most favorable concept to model such situations.
This is due to its simplicity, which nevertheless allows for
covering a whole range of practical applications. The agents
are called players and are contained in a player set N . Each
possible subset of players S ⊆ N is understood as a coalition and the coalition N containing all players is called the
grand coalition. The collective benefit ν(S) that a coalition
S receives upon formation is given by a value function ν
assigning each coalition a real-valued worth.
The connection of cooperative games to (supervised) machine learning is already well-established. The most prominent example is feature importance scores, both local and
global, for a machine learning model: features of a dataset
can be seen as players, allowing one to interpret a feature
subset as a coalition, while the model’s generalization performance using exactly that feature subset is its worth (Cohen, Dror, and Ruppin 2007). Other applications include
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13246

