The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

STAIR: Spatial-Temporal Reasoning with Auditable Intermediate Results for
Video Question Answering
Yueqian Wang1 , Yuxuan Wang2,3 , Kai Chen4 , Dongyan Zhao1,3 *
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence
3
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence
4
School of Economics, Peking University
wangyueqian@pku.edu.cn, wangyuxuan1@bigai.ai, chen.kai@pku.edu.cn, zhaodongyan@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

drop when understanding long and informative videos and
answering complicated temporal-reasoning questions, such
as determining the order of two events, or identifying events
in a given time period of the video, where small differences
in temporal expressions can lead to different results.
In comparison, in image question answering, many
neural-symbolic methods have been proposed to tackle with
complicated spatial-reasoning problems. Neural Symbolic
VQA (Yi et al. 2018) aims to parse a symbolic scene representation out of an image, and converts the question to a
program that executes on the symbolic scene representation.
Neural Symbolic Concept Learners (Mao et al. 2019) also
convert images to symbolic representations, but by learning vector representations for every visual concept. However, though these neural symbolic methods can achieve
very good results on synthetic images like CLEVR (Johnson et al. 2016) and Minecraft (Wu, Tenenbaum, and Kohli
2017; Yi et al. 2018), they can not perform well on realworld images. One promising neural-symbolic approach is
Neural Module Networks (NMNs) (Andreas et al. 2015). It
first converts the question to a program composed of several functions using a program generator, and then executes
the program by implementing each function with a neural
network, which is also known as a “module”. With the introduction of neural networks at execution, it works better
on real-word image question answering like VQA (Agrawal
et al. 2015), and can also provide clues about its reasoning
process by checking the program and inspecting the output
of its modules.
In this paper we apply the idea of NMN to video question
answering and propose STAIR, a Spatial-Temporal Reasoning model with Auditable Intermediate Results.
We define a set of basic video-text sub-tasks for video
QA, such as localizing the time span of actions in the video,
recognizing objects in a video clip, etc. We use a sequenceto-sequence program generator to decompose a question
into its reasoning process, which is a hierarchical combination of several sub-tasks, and formalize this reasoning
process into a formal-language program. Note that though
the program generator requires question-program pairs to
train, in practice we found that the program generator trained
on AGQA2 (Grunde-McLaughlin, Krishna, and Agrawala
2022) question-program pairs (which is publicly available)
can generate plausible programs for questions from other

Recently we have witnessed the rapid development of video
question answering models. However, most models can only
handle simple videos in terms of temporal reasoning, and
their performance tends to drop when answering temporalreasoning questions on long and informative videos. To tackle
this problem we propose STAIR, a Spatial-Temporal Reasoning model with Auditable Intermediate Results for video
question answering. STAIR is a neural module network,
which contains a program generator to decompose a given
question into a hierarchical combination of several sub-tasks,
and a set of lightweight neural modules to complete each
of these sub-tasks. Though neural module networks are already widely studied on image-text tasks, applying them to
videos is a non-trivial task, as reasoning on videos requires
different abilities. In this paper, we define a set of basic
video-text sub-tasks for video question answering and design a set of lightweight modules to complete them. Different from most prior works, modules of STAIR return intermediate outputs specific to their intentions instead of always
returning attention maps, which makes it easier to interpret
and collaborate with pre-trained models. We also introduce
intermediate supervision to make these intermediate outputs
more accurate. We conduct extensive experiments on several video question answering datasets under various settings
to show STAIR’s performance, explainability, compatibility
with pre-trained models, and applicability when program annotations are not available. Code: https://github.com/yellowbinary-tree/STAIR

Introduction
Video question answering (video QA) is a challenging task
that lies between the field of Natural Language Processing
and Computer Vision, which requires a joint understanding of text and video to give correct answers. However,
most approaches, including some recently proposed videotext large pre-trained models, only treat videos as animated
images. They use black-box deep neural networks to learn
mappings directly from inputs to outputs on factual questions like “Who is driving a car?”, ignoring the biggest difference between videos and images: the existence of temporal information. As a result, their performance tends to
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19215

