The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hierarchical Topology Isomorphism Expertise Embedded
Graph Contrastive Learning
Jiangmeng Li 1 2 * , Yifan Jin1 3 * , Hang Gao1 , Wenwen Qiang1† , Changwen Zheng1 3† , Fuchun Sun1 4
1

Science & Technology on Integrated Information System Laboratory, Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Game
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Tsinghua University
{jiangmeng2019,yifan2020,gaohang,qiangwenwen,changwen}@iscas.ac.cn, fcsun@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

pervised manner on the target unlabeled dataset. In view of
that, the contrastive learning paradigm has achieved impressive successes in a spectrum of practical fields, such as computer vision (Wu et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2020; Qiang et al.
2022), natural language processing (Gao, Yao, and Chen
2021; Qu et al. 2021), signal processing (Yao et al. 2022;
Tang et al. 2022), etc. As tractable surrogates, the contrastive
approaches further establish promising capacity in the field
of unsupervised graph learning, namely GCL methods (You
et al. 2020). The primary principle of GCL is jointly differentiating features of heterogeneous samples while gathering
features of homogeneous samples.

Graph contrastive learning (GCL) aims to align the positive
features while differentiating the negative features in the latent space by minimizing a pair-wise contrastive loss. As the
embodiment of an outstanding discriminative unsupervised
graph representation learning approach, GCL achieves impressive successes in various graph benchmarks. However,
such an approach falls short of recognizing the topology
isomorphism of graphs, resulting in that graphs with relatively homogeneous node features cannot be sufficiently discriminated. By revisiting classic graph topology recognition
works, we disclose that the corresponding expertise intuitively complements GCL methods. To this end, we propose
a novel hierarchical topology isomorphism expertise embedded graph contrastive learning, which introduces knowledge
distillations to empower GCL models to learn the hierarchical topology isomorphism expertise, including the graph-tier
and subgraph-tier. On top of this, the proposed method holds
the feature of plug-and-play, and we empirically demonstrate that the proposed method is universal to multiple stateof-the-art GCL models. The solid theoretical analyses are
further provided to prove that compared with conventional
GCL methods, our method acquires the tighter upper bound
of Bayes classification error. We conduct extensive experiments on real-world benchmarks to exhibit the performance
superiority of our method over candidate GCL methods,
e.g., for the real-world graph representation learning experiments, the proposed method beats the state-of-the-art method
by 0.23% on unsupervised representation learning setting,
0.43% on transfer learning setting. Our code is available at
https://github.com/jyf123/HTML.

1

A major challenge for state-of-the-art (SOTA) GCL methods is sufficiently exploring heterogeneous discriminative
information. Orthogonal to the natural data structures, e.g.,
images and videos, as the artificially derived discrete data
structure, graphs contain two critical ingredients of potential discriminative information: feature-level information
and topology-level information. Benefiting from the powerful non-linear mapping capability of graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2016; Velickovic et al.
2017; Gao et al. 2023), GCL methods can practically explore feature-level discriminative information. However, recent works (Xu et al. 2018; Wijesinghe and Wang 2022)
demonstrate that compared with topology-expertise-based
approaches, GNN-based GCL methods can only model relatively limited topology-level discriminative information,
e.g., (Xu et al. 2018) empirically substantiate that specific
GNN-based methods (Kipf and Welling 2016; Hamilton,
Ying, and Leskovec 2017) fall short of discriminating the
topology structures of graphs that the Weisfeiler-Lehmanbased approach can explicitly discriminate. To this end, we
are primarily dedicated to exploring the difference in knowledge between the topology-expertise-based approaches and
GNN-based GCL methods with respect to capturing the discriminative information. As demonstrated in Figure 1, the
experimental exploration attests that canonical GNN-based
GCL methods cannot effectively learn the topology expertise, and accordingly, introducing such graph expertise into
the GNN-based GCL method incurs a precipitous rise in the
discriminative performance. Concretely, we empirically derive a conclusion: the topology expertise is complementary
to GNN-based GCL methods, and prudently aggregating the

Introduction

Unsupervised graph representation learning aims to capture
the discriminative information from graphs without manual annotations. The intuition behind such a learning approach is that the covariate shift problem (Heckman 1979;
Shimodaira 2000) occurs when the data distributions in the
source labeled and target unlabeled domains are different.
Thus, the identically distributed assumption is violated, halting the forthright application of the model trained in the su* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13518

