The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Federated Causality Learning with Explainable Adaptive Optimization
Dezhi Yang1, 2 , Xintong He3 , Jun Wang2 * , Guoxian Yu1, 2 , Carlotta Domeniconi4 , Jinglin Zhang5
1

School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
SDU-NTU Joint Centre for AI Research, Shandong University, Jinan, China
3
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, Singapore
4
Departiment of Computer Science, George Mason University, VA, USA
5
School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan, China
dzyang@mail.sdu.edu.cn, E0966399@u.nus.edu.sg, {kingjun, gxyu,jinglin.zhang}@sdu.edu.cn, carlotta@cs.gmu.edu
2

Abstract

such as image classification and recommendation systems
(Chai et al. 2020). However, recent FL algorithms are based
on continuous optimization and cannot be directly applied to
causal discovery algorithms with a combinatorial optimization property. For example, constraint-based algorithms PC
(Spirtes et al. 2000) and FCI (Spirtes, Meek, and Richardson 2013) use conditional independence between variables
to judge whether there is a causal structure, while scorebased algorithms GES (Chickering 2002) and the max-min
hill-climbing algorithm (Tsamardinos, Brown, and Aliferis
2006) use score functions and heuristic search strategies to
find causal graphs with the best scores.
Recent gradient-based causal discovery algorithms,
Zheng et al. (2018) and Yu et al. (2019) make use of smooth
equality constraints instead of discrete acyclic constraints to
discover causal structures through continuous optimization
(i.e., Augmented Lagrange method (Nemirovsky 1999)),
and they provide the opportunity of learning causal graphs
in a continuous manner within a federated framework. Subsequently, Lachapelle et al. (2019) and Zheng et al. (2020)
introduced deep neural networks to deal with more complex
causal models. However, these gradient-based algorithms
need to center data, which is not feasible due to privacy
protection. For dispersed data, several distributed causal discovery methods have been proposed. Some of them need to
make assumptions about parameters but lack generalization
(Shimizu 2012; Xiong et al. 2021), and others need to share
additional learning parameters but cause privacy leakage
(Na and Yang 2010; Ye, Amini, and Zhou 2022). More importantly, they are often unable to deal with non-independent
identical distributed (non-IID) data among clients.
In this paper, we develop a general federated DAG learning strategy (FedCausal) to seek the global causal graph
from horizontally partitioned data with different distributions. This strategy designs a global optimization process instead of traditional weighted average in the server to aggregate local causal graphs, which naturally ensures the sparsity and acyclicity of the global causal graph. The local
and global optimization processes form a whole as an explainable adaptive optimization objective, which is consistent with the centralized optimization objective under statistical homogeneity. In addition, this explainable objective
allows clients to flexibly learn local data distributions with
statistical heterogeneity and seek a uniform global graph on

Discovering the causality from observational data is a crucial task in various scientific domains. With increasing awareness of privacy, data are not allowed to be exposed, and it is
very hard to learn causal graphs from dispersed data, since
these data may have different distributions. In this paper, we
propose a federated causal discovery strategy (FedCausal) to
learn the unified global causal graph from decentralized heterogeneous data. We design a global optimization formula
to naturally aggregate the causal graphs from client data and
constrain the acyclicity of the global graph without exposing
local data. Unlike other federated causal learning algorithms,
FedCausal unifies the local and global optimizations into a
complete directed acyclic graph (DAG) learning process with
a flexible optimization objective. We prove that this optimization objective has a high interpretability and can adaptively
handle homogeneous and heterogeneous data. Experimental
results on synthetic and real datasets show that FedCausal
can effectively deal with non-independently and identically
distributed (non-IID) data and has a superior performance.

Introduction
Causal structure discovery is a fundamental and critical
problem in many fields, such as economics (Koller and
Friedman 2009) and biology (Sachs et al. 2005). Randomized controlled experiments are the golden standard for discovering causal structure, but they are often limited by cost
and may even be prohibited by ethics. Causal discovery typically infers a directed acyclic graph (DAG) from observational data at a central site (Pearl 2009; Peters, Janzing,
and Schölkopf 2017); this DAG encodes causal relationships
between variables. However, with the increasing awareness
of privacy and security, data are scattered among different
clients and cannot be shared, which makes it difficult for
canonical causal discovery algorithms to find reliable causal
structure from limited client data.
Federated learning (FL), as a secure framework for cooperative training with multiple clients, learns a unified model
from scattered data by exchanging model parameters or gradients among clients, without exposing local clients’ data
(McMahan et al. 2017). FL has made good progress in areas
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16308

