The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

QI-IRA: Quantum-Inspired Interactive Ranking Aggregation for
Person Re-identification
Chunyu Hu1 * , Hong Zhang2,3 * , Chao Liang1,2,3,4† , Hao Huang1
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, China
3
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Wuhan University, China
4
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, China
{2019300003061, 2018302180055, cliang, haohuang}@whu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Ranking aggregation (RA), the process of aggregating multiple rankings derived from multiple search strategies, has been
proved effective in person re-identification (re-ID) because of
a single re-ID method can not always achieve consistent superiority for different scenarios. Existing RA research mainly
focus on unsupervised and fully-supervised methods. The
former lack external supervision to optimize performance,
while the latter are costly because of expensive labeling effort required for training. To address the above challenges,
this paper proposes a quantum-inspired interactive ranking
aggregation (QI-IRA) method, which (1) utilizes quantum
theory to interpret and model the generation and aggregation
of multiple basic rankings, (2) approximates or even exceeds
the performance of fully-supervised RA methods with much
less labeling cost, even as low as only two feedbacks per
query on Market1501, MARS and DukeMTMC-VideoReID
datasets. Comparative experiments conducted on six public re-ID datasets validate the superiority of the proposed
QI-IRA method over existing unsupervised, interactive, and
fully-supervised RA approaches.

Figure 1: Rank position changes of mAP performance
of six representative re-ID methods, including BoT (Luo
et al. 2019), Top-DB-Net+RK (Quispe and Pedrini 2021),
LightMBN (Herzog et al. 2021), FPB (Zhang et al. 2021),
LUPerson (Fu et al. 2021), and BDB (Dai et al. 2019), and
their aggregated ranking (by our proposed QI-IRA method)
on four public image re-ID datasets.
Ranking aggregation (RA) is a technique for obtaining
a better aggregated ranking from multiple basic rankings
(Deng et al. 2014), which has been widely applied in social choice (Borda 1781), biometric recognition (Wang et al.
2022), recommendation systems (Bałchanowski and Boryczka 2022) and information retrieval (Wu et al. 2019).
The mainstream RA research can be generally classified as
unsupervised and fully-supervised methods (Oliveira et al.
2020). Unsupervised methods (Xiao et al. 2021) lack external supervision to directly optimize ranking aggregation
performance. Fully-supervised methods (Yu et al. 2020), in
contrast, require massive supervisory information which is
costly or even unavailable in the practical scenario. Recently,
an interactive RA method (IRA) (Huang et al. 2022) has
been heuristically proposed to fuse basic rankings with linear weighting guided by relevance feedback. Although IRA
improves ranking performance, it doesn’t provide the theoretical analysis and explanation of the rationality. And its
strategy of updating fusion weights relies on empirically set
model parameters, which limits the performance on different
datasets (Table 2).
In this paper, we propose a quantum-inspired interactive
ranking aggregation method (QI-IRA). The core idea is using quantum theory to model the generation and aggregation

Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) aims to retrieve the same
person across a group of networking cameras, which has
been widely applied in video surveillance and criminal investigation (Wang et al. 2020; Luo et al. 2021; Zahra et al.
2023). The existing re-ID research mainly focuses on designing a single algorithm by improving the feature extraction (Ge et al. 2020; Cho et al. 2022), or metric learning
(Yuan et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022) or re-ranking (Mansouri, Ammar, and Kessentini 2021; Zhang et al. 2022).
However, due to the environment complexity, a single reID method can not always achieve consistent superiority for
different scenarios, which means that it performs better on
some datasets and worse on others (as shown in Figure 1). In
this case, effectively aggregating the advantages of multiple
methods is essential to improve the robustness and generalization of the re-ID methods (Ye et al. 2016).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Chao Liang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2202

