The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Topic-VQ-VAE: Leveraging Latent Codebooks for
Flexible Topic-Guided Document Generation
YoungJoon Yoo1 , Jongwon Choi2
1

2

ImageVision, NAVER Cloud.
Department of Advanced Imaging (GSAIM) and Graduate School of AI, Chung-Ang University.
youngjoon.yoo@navercorp.com, choijw@cau.ac.kr

Abstract

2022; Grootendorst 2022) directions. Moreover, with the advancements in generation methods, such as autoregressive
and diffusion-based generation, there is a growing need for
the topic-based generation to evolve beyond the traditional
BoW form and become more flexible.
To address the issue, we propose a novel topic-driven
generative model using Vector-Quantized (VQ) embeddings
from (Van Den Oord, Vinyals et al. 2017), an essential building block for the recent vision-text generative model such
as (Ramesh et al. 2021). In contrast to previous approaches
in topic modeling (Gupta and Zhang 2021, 2023) that treat
VQ embeddings as topics, in our method, each VQ embedding represents the embeddings of conceptually defined
words. Through the distinct perspective, we achieve the enhanced flexibility that a corresponding codebook serves as
its BoW representation. We further demonstrate that the
codebook consisting of VQ embedding itself is an implicit
topic learner and can be tuned to achieve exact topic context,
with a supporting flexible format of sample generation.
Based on the interpretation, we present a novel generative topic model, Topic-VQ Variational Autoencoder (TVQVAE), which applies a VQ-VAE framework (Van Den Oord,
Vinyals et al. 2017) incorporating topic extraction to the
BoW representation of the VQ-embedding. The TVQ-VAE
facilitates the generation of the BoW-style documents and
also enables document generation in a general configuration,
simultaneously. We demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed methodology in two distinct domains: (1) document
clustering coupled with set-of-words style topic extraction,
which poses a fundamental and well-established challenge
in the field of topic modeling. For the pre-trained information, we utilize codebooks derived from inputs embedded
with a Pre-trained Language Model (PLM) (Reimers and
Gurevych 2019). Additionally, (2) we delve into the autoregressive image generation, leveraging the VQ-VAE framework with latent codebook sequence generation as delineated in (Van Den Oord, Kalchbrenner, and Kavukcuoglu
2016; Esser, Rombach, and Ommer 2021).
The contributions of the paper are summarized as follows:

This paper introduces a novel approach for topic modeling utilizing latent codebooks from Vector-Quantized Variational Auto-Encoder (VQ-VAE), discretely encapsulating the
rich information of the pre-trained embeddings such as the
pre-trained language model. From the novel interpretation
of the latent codebooks and embeddings as conceptual bagof-words, we propose a new generative topic model called
Topic-VQ-VAE (TVQ-VAE) which inversely generates the
original documents related to the respective latent codebook.
The TVQ-VAE can visualize the topics with various generative distributions including the traditional BoW distribution
and the autoregressive image generation. Our experimental
results on document analysis and image generation demonstrate that TVQ-VAE effectively captures the topic context
which reveals the underlying structures of the dataset and
supports flexible forms of document generation. Official implementation of the proposed TVQ-VAE is available at https:
//github.com/clovaai/TVQ-VAE.

Introduction
Topic modeling, the process of extracting thematic structures, called topic, represented by coherent word sets and
subsequently clustering and generating documents based on
these topics, constitutes a foundational challenge in the manipulation of natural language data The initiative Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003) and
subsequent studies (Teh et al. 2004; Paisley et al. 2014)
configure the inference process as a Bayesian framework
by defining the probabilistic generation of the word, interpreted as bag-of-words (BoW), by the input word and document distributions. The Bayesian frameworks utilize the cooccurrence of the words in each document and have become
a standard for topic models.
Despite the success, topic modeling has also faced demands for the evolution to reflect advances of recent deep
generative studies. One main issue is utilizing information
from large-scale datasets encapsulated in pre-trained embeddings (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014; Devlin
et al. 2018; Radford et al. 2021). Many follow-up studies
have approached the problem in generative (Dieng, Ruiz,
and Blei 2020) or non-generative (Duan et al. 2021; Xu et al.

• We propose a new generative topic modeling framework
called TVQ-VAE utilizing codebooks of VQ embeddings and providing a flexible form of sampling. Our proposed model interprets the codebooks as a conceptual
word and extracts the topic information from them.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19422

