The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ASWT-SGNN: Adaptive Spectral Wavelet Transform-Based
Self-Supervised Graph Neural Network
Ruyue Liu1,2 , Rong Yin1,2 * , Yong Liu3 , Weiping Wang1
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Renmin University of China
{liuruyue, yinrong, wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn, liuyonggsai@ruc.edu.cn
Abstract

ities of GNN and comparative learning techniques, making it a promising paradigm in the field of graph analysis
(He et al. 2020). Typically, GCL methods generate multiple
views by randomly augmenting input data and optimize the
GNN encoder by learning consistency across views. GCL
reduces the dependence of graph representation learning
on human annotations and achieves state-of-the-art performance in tasks such as node classification.
Most GCL methods utilize graph convolutional neural
networks (GCNs) as encoders (Xie et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2022b). Similar to convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in
computer vision, spectral GCNs use Fourier bases in the design of graph-based operators (Bruna et al. 2013). However,
these operators are localized in the frequency rather than
the spatial domain. Additionally, they require costly multiplications between eigen-decomposition and dense matrices,
leading to high computational expenses. In order to address
this issue and achieve spatial localization, methods such as
ChebyNet (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016)
and GCN (Kipf and Welling 2016) employ polynomial approximation. While GCN is widely adopted for graph problems due to its impressive performance and computational
efficiency (Shi et al. 2020), it encounters limitations and
challenges when applied to large graphs, especially in minibatch settings (Zeng et al. 2019b). To overcome the scaling
challenges of GCN on large graphs, researchers have proposed layer sampling methods (Ying et al. 2018; Kaler et al.
2022) and subgraph sampling methods (Zeng et al. 2019b,a).
However, the filter size is determined by the size of the entire graph or the sampled subgraph, which restricts flexibility
for inputs of different sizes. Although some flexible spatial
methods have been proposed, their aggregators lack learnability and convolutional properties. Consequently, the problem of designing a flexible filter that combines the learnability of spatial methods and the convolutional properties of
spectral methods still needs to be solved.
To address the issues of inflexible and unlearnable filters,
as well as the limited applicability caused by high computational complexity in existing methods, this paper proposes
a novel graph comparative learning paradigm based on the
adaptive spectral wavelet transform. More specifically, a fast
spectral adaptive approximation method is utilized to estimate the wavelet filter, and contrast loss is employed to
optimize the wavelet scale directly. Additionally, the intro-

Graph Comparative Learning (GCL) is a self-supervised
method that combines the advantages of Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) and comparative learning, making it promising for learning node representations. However, the GCN encoders used in these methods rely on
the Fourier transform to learn fixed graph representations,
which is inherently limited by the uncertainty principle involving spatial and spectral localization trade-offs. To overcome the inflexibility of existing methods and the computationally expensive eigen-decomposition and dense matrix multiplication, this paper proposes an Adaptive Spectral
Wavelet Transform-based Self-Supervised Graph Neural Network (ASWT-SGNN). The proposed method employs spectral adaptive polynomials to approximate the filter function
and optimize the wavelet using contrast loss. This design enables the creation of local filters in both spectral and spatial
domains, allowing flexible aggregation of neighborhood information at various scales and facilitating controlled transformation between local and global information. Compared
to existing methods, the proposed approach reduces computational complexity and addresses the limitation of graph convolutional neural networks, which are constrained by graph
size and lack flexible control over the neighborhood aspect.
Extensive experiments on eight benchmark datasets demonstrate that ASWT-SGNN accurately approximates the filter function in high-density spectral regions, avoiding costly
eigen-decomposition. Furthermore, ASWT-SGNN achieves
comparable performance to state-of-the-art models in node
classification tasks.

Introduction
Graphs are essential in various real-world domains such as
social networks, brain networks, transportation networks,
and citation networks (Wang et al. 2016; Yu, Lee, and
Sohn 2020). Recently, the emergence of graph neural networks (GNNs) (He et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022b) has attracted much attention due to their success in applications
involving graph-structured data such as node classification
(Kipf and Welling 2016) and edge prediction (Hasanzadeh
et al. 2019). Graph Comparative Learning (GCL) (Velickovic et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2019) combines the capabil* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13990

