The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PaintHuman: Towards High-Fidelity Text-to-3D Human Texturing
via Denoised Score Distillation
Jianhui Yu1 , Hao Zhu2 , Liming Jiang3 , Chen Change Loy3 , Weidong Cai1 , Wayne Wu2
1
University of Sydney
Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
jianhui.yu@sydney.edu.au, haozhu96@gmail.com, liming002@ntu.edu.sg,
ccloy@ntu.edu.sg, tom.cai@sydney.edu.au, wuwenyan0503@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Recent advances in zero-shot text-to-3D human generation,
which employ the human model prior (e.g., SMPL) or Score
Distillation Sampling (SDS) with pre-trained text-to-image
diffusion models, have been groundbreaking. However, SDS
may provide inaccurate gradient directions under the weak
diffusion guidance, as it tends to produce over-smoothed results and generate body textures that are inconsistent with
the detailed mesh geometry. Therefore, directly leveraging
existing strategies for high-fidelity text-to-3D human texturing is challenging. In this work, we propose a model called
PaintHuman to addresses the challenges from two perspectives. We first propose a novel score function, Denoised Score
Distillation (DSD), which directly modifies the SDS by introducing negative gradient components to iteratively correct
the gradient direction and generate high-quality textures. In
addition, we use the depth map as a geometric guide to ensure that the texture is semantically aligned to human mesh
surfaces. To guarantee the quality of rendered results, we
employ geometry-aware networks to predict surface materials and render realistic human textures. Extensive experiments, benchmarked against state-of-the-art (SoTA) methods, validate the efficacy of our approach. Project page:
https://painthuman.github.io/
A man in a
Introduction
Text
hoodie

A kid wearing
long sleeves

Significant progress has been made in text-to-3D content
generation. Some methods are proposed for general objects (Poole et al. 2023; Lin et al. 2023), and some are specifically for 3D human avatars (Cao et al. 2023; Hong et al.
2022; Jiang et al. 2023). 3D human avatars are increasingly
important in various applications, including games, films,
and metaverse. In this work, we focus on texturing a predefined human mesh with text prompts.
The success of recent methods rely on CLIP model (Hong
et al. 2022) or text-to-image generation, which leverages
the diffusion model (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Rombach
et al. 2022), and Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) (Poole
et al. 2023) combined with differentiable 3D representations (Mildenhall et al. 2020; Barron et al. 2021). However, directly leveraging existing strategies for detailed human avatar texturing in a zero-shot manner is challenging

TextText

A man in a
suit with a
Text
tie and belt

A man
A in
manain a
hoodie
hoodie

AAwoman
woman
wearing
T-shirt
wearing
a Tshirt

A kid
wearing
man
in a
suit
A kid
wearing A A
man
in a
A woman
longlong
sleeves
a tie
anda belt wearing T-shirt
sleeves withsuit
with
tie and belt

AA young
young girl
girl
wearing
wearingboots
boots

An old
old man
man in
in a
An
polo shirt
shirt
a polo

Figure 1: Generated results of PaintHuman. Given textureless human meshes and textual descriptions as input, our
model can generate high-quality and detailed textures that
aligned to input geometry and texts.

for two reasons. First, we find that SDS is a general-purpose
optimization, which guides the loss gradient in a direction
due to its weak supervision and unable to well handle unclear signal from the diffusion model. This issue results in
generated human textures of low quality, including oversmoothed body parts and blurry garment details. Second,
textures guided by text-to-image models are usually not semantically unaligned to either input texts or human mesh
surfaces, resulting in missing textures or unaligned texture
mapping for the geometry.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6800

