The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Turning Dust into Gold: Distilling Complex Reasoning Capabilities from LLMs by
Leveraging Negative Data
Yiwei Li1 * , Peiwen Yuan1∗ , Shaoxiong Feng2 , Boyuan Pan2 , Bin Sun1 , Xinglin Wang1 , Heda
Wang2 , Kan Li1†
1

School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
Xiaohongshu Inc
{liyiwei,peiwenyuan,binsun,wangxinglin,likan}@bit.edu.cn
{shaoxiongfeng2023,whd.thu}@gmail.com {panby}@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

MATH Dataset

Intersection

Pos

Neg

IoU

Large Language Models (LLMs) have performed well on various reasoning tasks, but their inaccessibility and numerous
parameters hinder wide application in practice. One promising way is distilling the reasoning ability from LLMs to small
models by the generated chain-of-thought reasoning paths. In
some cases, however, LLMs may produce incorrect reasoning
chains, especially when facing complex mathematical problems. Previous studies only transfer knowledge from positive
samples and drop the synthesized data with wrong answers.
In this work, we illustrate the merit of negative data and propose a model specialization framework to distill LLMs with
negative samples besides positive ones. The framework consists of three progressive steps, covering from training to inference stages, to absorb knowledge from negative data. We
conduct extensive experiments across arithmetic reasoning
tasks to demonstrate the role of negative data in distillation
from LLM.

InterAlgebra
Prealgebra
Geometry
NumberTheory
Precalculus
Probability
Algebra
Overall

4
9
1
1
2
4
8
29

35
72
21
29
25
19
52
253

21
43
10
17
16
16
43
166

0.077
0.085
0.033
0.022
0.051
0.129
0.062
0.074

Table 1: The distribution of correct answers in MATH test
set. Pos and Neg refer to models trained on positive and negative samples respectively. Intersection over Union (IoU) exhibits a remarkably low value across all subsets, which confirms the value of negative samples.

paths (rationales) of math problems, which are more beneficial for small models to acquire complex reasoning ability
than reference reasoning paths. Table 1 shows an intriguing
phenomenon: models trained on positive and negative data
separately have an extremely small overlap (intersection) in
their correct answers on the MATH test set. Although the
negative model has a lower accuracy, it can address some
questions that the positive model is unable to provide correct answers, which confirms the valuable knowledge contained in negative data. Additionally, the undesirable behaviors within negative data are also useful when preventing the
model from committing similar issues. Another reason that
we should exploit negative data is the token-based pricing
strategy of OpenAI. Even for GPT-4, the accuracy on MATH
dataset is less than 50% (Bubeck et al. 2023b), meaning that
all tokens of negative data are charged for nothing. Therefore, instead of discarding negative samples, we extract and
utilize valuable knowledge from negative samples to boost
the model specialization.
The conventional process of model specialization can be
summarized as three steps (Zhu et al. 2023): The first step is
chain-of-thought distillation, training small models with reasoning chains generated from LLMs. The second step can be
regarded as self-enhancement, conducting self-distillation
(Mobahi, Farajtabar, and Bartlett 2020) or self-augmentation
to further optimize the models. Besides, self-consistency
(Wang et al. 2023) is widely used as an effective decoding

Introduction
Nowadays, owing to chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting
(Wei et al. 2022b), large language models (LLMs) exhibit strong reasoning capabilities (Bubeck et al. 2023a),
especially when it comes to complex mathematical problems (Hendrycks et al. 2021). Unfortunately, CoT has been
demonstrated to be an emergent property of models with
more than 100B parameters, but not of smaller models (Wei
et al. 2022a). The burdensome computational requirements
and high inference costs of these models hinder their development in real-world scenarios with limited resources (Ho,
Schmid, and Yun 2023). Thus, the goal of our research is
to enable complex arithmetic reasoning in small models for
deploying at scale.
Knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015)
offers a promising way to transfer specific capabilities from
LLMs into smaller models. This process is also referred to
as model specialization enforcing compact models to focus
on certain skills. Prior works (Magister et al. 2023; Fu et al.
2023; Hsieh et al. 2023) employed LLMs with in-context
learning (ICL) (Brown et al. 2020) to generate reasoning
* Equal contributions.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18591

