The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Roll with the Punches: Expansion and Shrinkage of
Soft Label Selection for Semi-supervised Fine-Grained Learning
Yue Duan1,2 , Zhen Zhao3 , Lei Qi4 , Luping Zhou3 , Lei Wang5 , Yinghuan Shi1,2, *
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
National Institute of Healthcare Data Science, Nanjing University, China
3
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The University of Sydney, Sydney
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
5
School of Computing and Information Technology, University of Wollongong, Australia
yueduan@smail.nju.edu.cn, {zhen.zhao, luping.zhou}@sydney.edu.au, qilei@seu.edu.cn, leiw@uow.edu.au, syh@nju.edu.cn
Abstract
While semi-supervised learning (SSL) has yielded promising results, the more realistic SSL scenario remains to be explored, in which the unlabeled data exhibits extremely high
recognition difficulty, e.g., fine-grained visual classification
in the context of SSL (SS-FGVC). The increased recognition difficulty on fine-grained unlabeled data spells disaster for pseudo-labeling accuracy, resulting in poor performance of the SSL model. To tackle this challenge, we propose Soft Label Selection with Confidence-Aware Clustering
based on Class Transition Tracking (SoC) by reconstructing
the pseudo-label selection process by jointly optimizing Expansion Objective and Shrinkage Objective, which is based
on a soft label manner. Respectively, the former objective
encourages soft labels to absorb more candidate classes to
ensure the attendance of ground-truth class, while the latter
encourages soft labels to reject more noisy classes, which is
theoretically proved to be equivalent to entropy minimization. In comparisons with various state-of-the-art methods,
our approach demonstrates its superior performance in SSFGVC. Checkpoints and source code are available at https:
//github.com/NJUyued/SoC4SS-FGVC.

1

(a) Semi-Aves

(b) Semi-Fungi

Figure 1: Experimental results on Semi-Aves and SemiFungi (see Sec. 4.1 for details of the dataset). Our SoC (soft
label) consistently outperforms FixMatch (hard label) even
when using pseudo-labels with lower accuracy.

SS-FGVC scenario poses a more problematic problem for
pseudo-labeling-based SSL approaches. In general, pseudolabeling (Lee et al. 2013; Iscen et al. 2019; Arazo et al.
2020) based methods assign pseudo-labels to the unlabeled
data online for self-training loops, where these methods rely
heavily on the accuracy of pseudo-labels (Xie et al. 2020;
Sohn et al. 2020; Li, Xiong, and Hoi 2021; Zhang et al.
2021; Zhao et al. 2022). Unfortunately, fine-grained data
may severely affect the quality of pseudo-labels and consequently pull down the model performance. As an example, FixMatch (Sohn et al. 2020), currently the most popular SSL method, selects high-confidence pseudo-labels by a
threshold, which are more likely correct in intuition. Then
the selected pseudo-labels are converted into one-hot labels
for training. If applying to SS-FGVC, the low accuracy of
pseudo-labels caused by fine-grained data will pose a great
risk to the model training, resulting in further error accumulation in subsequent iterations. Therefore, considering the
difficulty of accurately predicting the pseudo-labels in the
SS-FGVC scenario, why not step back on a relaxed manner to generate pseudo-labels? A natural idea is to use the
soft label. Our motivation is that training with proper soft
labels is more robust to noisy pseudo-labels compared to
hard labels in SS-FGVC. As shown in Fig. 1, the proposed
SoC (as described below) unexpectedly maintains a perfor-

Introduction

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) aims to leverage a pool of
unlabeled data to alleviate the dependence of deep models
on labeled data (Zhu and Goldberg 2009). However, current SSL approaches achieve promising performance with
clean and ordinary data, but become unstuck against the indiscernible unlabeled data. A typical and worth discussing
example is the semi-supervised fine-grained visual classification (SS-FGVC) (Su, Cheng, and Maji 2021), where the
unlabeled data faced by the SSL model is no longer like
the “house” and “bird” that are easy to distinguish, but like
the dizzying “Streptopelia chinensi” and “Streptopelia orientalis”, which are difficult to distinguish accurately even
for ornithologists. The mentioned scenario also hints at the
practicality of SS-FGVC, i.e., it is resource-consuming to
label the fine-grained data for supervised learning.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11829

