The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

UniAP: Towards Universal Animal Perception in Vision via Few-Shot Learning
Meiqi Sun1 * , Zhonghan Zhao2 * , Wenhao Chai3 * , Hanjun Luo1 , Shidong Cao1 , Yanting Zhang4 ,
†
Jenq-Neng Hwang3 , Gaoang Wang1,2,5
1

Zhejiang University-University of Illinois Urbana Champaign Institute, Zhejiang University
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
3
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Washington
4
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Donghua University
5
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
gaoangwang@intl.zju.edu.cn
Query Image

Abstract

Output

Support Label

Classification

Mask

Segmentation

Keypoint

Pose Estimation

Support Image

UniAP

llama

✔

Yes / No
0.82

Similarity

Animal visual perception is an important technique for automatically monitoring animal health, understanding animal
behaviors, and assisting animal-related research. However,
it is challenging to design a deep learning-based perception
model that can freely adapt to different animals across various perception tasks, due to the varying poses of a large diversity of animals, lacking data on rare species, and the semantic inconsistency of different tasks. We introduce UniAP, a
novel Universal Animal Perception model that leverages fewshot learning to enable cross-species perception among various visual tasks. Our proposed model takes support images
and labels as prompt guidance for a query image. Images and
labels are processed through a Transformer-based encoder
and a lightweight label encoder, respectively. Then a matching module is designed for aggregating information between
prompt guidance and the query image, followed by a multihead label decoder to generate outputs for various tasks. By
capitalizing on the shared visual characteristics among different animals and tasks, UniAP enables the transfer of knowledge from well-studied species to those with limited labeled
data or even unseen species. We demonstrate the effectiveness of UniAP through comprehensive experiments in pose
estimation, segmentation, and classification tasks on diverse
animal species, showcasing its ability to generalize and adapt
to new classes with minimal labeled examples.

Figure 1: UniAP unifies animal pose estimation (top), segmentation (middle), and classification (bottom) tasks under
a single model via few-shot learning. We use different support images of alpaca in Animal Kingdom dataset (Ng et al.
2022) as examples for different tasks.

a universal animal perception model for diverse species and
poses on various tasks.
Due to various animal species with different poses and semantic inconsistency of various visual tasks, it is challenging to build a universal animal perception model. Firstly, the
variety of animal species requires the perception model to
have a high generalization capability. The mainstream approaches for animal perception rely on large-scale, manually
labeled data for supervised training, which is inefficient and
suffers from annotation quality issues. Adapting the model
to rare animals with only a few data examples or unseen
species is difficult. Secondly, due to the semantic inconsistency of various tasks, it remains difficult to integrate information across different animal-related tasks and species to
create a comprehensive representation of animal perception.
This lack of unified cross-task models in multi-modal animal
perception presents a significant challenge.
We claim that a universal few-shot model of animal perception tasks requires meeting certain criteria. Firstly, the
model should have a unified architecture that can handle
multiple tasks and share parameters across tasks to acquire
generalizable knowledge. Secondly, the model ought to have
the ability to work effectively with various animal species,

Introduction
Animal perception plays an essential role in learning and
understanding animal behaviors (Ashwood, Jha, and Pillow
2022; Anderson and Donath 1990; Butail et al. 2015). Animal perception techniques have been employed in many visual tasks, such as pose estimation (Li and Lee 2023; Graving et al. 2019), pose tracking (Pereira et al. 2022; Lauer
et al. 2022), face recognition (Shi et al. 2020), and semantic segmentation (Li et al. 2021). Existing animal perception models usually focus on specific animal species on specific tasks. To facilitate analyzing animal behaviors and assist animal-related research, it is highly demanded to design
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5008

