The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Sequential Fusion Based Multi-Granularity Consistency
for Space-Time Transformer Tracking
Kun Hu1 * , Wenjing Yang1 * , Wanrong Huang1 , Xianchen Zhou2 , Mingyu Cao1 ,
Jing Ren1 , Huibin Tan1†
1

Department of Intelligent Data Science, College of Computer Science and Technology,
National University of Defense Technology.
2
College of Sciences, National University of Defense Technology.
hu kun @outlook.com, {wenjing.yang, huangwanrong12, zhouxianchen13, caomy720, renjing, tanhb }@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract

and Keyvanrad 2022). Notwithstanding the booming of diverse tracking algorithms (Danelljan et al. 2018; Voigtlaender et al. 2019; Yan et al. 2021) in recent years, many challenges like appearance variation and occlusion still hinder us
from accurate real-time tracking in complex real-world scenarios. Recapping current prevailing trackers, most of them
cast this task as template-matching frame by frame. Specifically, it takes a target image as a template, and then compares
it with other frames to find the location and the size of the
target. The popular Siamese family (Bertinetto et al. 2016;
Chen et al. 2020) is a typical representative of them. And
the recently emerging Transformer-based trackers (Lin et al.
2022; Cui et al. 2022) realize template matching through full
interaction between templates and search features.
Under the influence of this paradigm, a significant advancement in learning spatial representations has been
made. But few have considered temporal information. Some
handle this problem by adding an online updating mechanism into the inference stage (Zhang and Peng 2020; Yan
et al. 2021), but this is trapped by template selection and
update settings. Those who add complicated updating network (Bhat et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019) or memory network (Fu et al. 2021; Yang and Chan 2018) are plagued by
massive computational complexity and bring in extra hyperparameters to tune. Besides, the common template fusion
or similar operations also ignore the order of frames, which
carries rich temporal contexts.
To alleviate these problems, we propose a Space-Time
Consistent Transformer Tracker (STCFormer) to glean
temporal information which is commonly overlooked by existing works. Specifically, we model the space-time relationship with multi-granularity cycle consistency constraints
embedded in a sequential fusion framework, i.e. Label Consistency Loss (LCL), Attention Consistency Loss (ACL),
and Semantic Consistency Loss (SCL). During training, we
use a sequential fusion framework to construct a cycle that
includes a template image and several chronological search
images. We continuously update the template image based
on previous prediction results during chronological frame
tracking and use the final template for backward tracking
with the first search frame again, forming a closed loop. To
increase the robustness of our framework, we incorporate
three consistency constraints to avoid over-dependence on

Regarded as a template-matching task for a long time, visual
object tracking has witnessed significant progress in spacewise exploration. However, since tracking is performed on
videos with substantial time-wise information, it is important to simultaneously mine the temporal contexts which have
not yet been deeply explored. Previous supervised works
mostly consider template reform as the breakthrough point,
but they are often limited by additional computational burdens or the quality of chosen templates. To address this issue,
we propose a Space-Time Consistent Transformer Tracker
(STCFormer), which uses a sequential fusion framework with
multi-granularity consistency constraints to learn spatiotemporal context information. We design a sequential fusion
framework that recombines template and search images based
on tracking results from chronological frames, fusing updated
tracking states in training. To further overcome the overreliance on the fixed template without increasing computational complexity, we design three space-time consistent constraints: Label Consistency Loss (LCL) for label-level consistency, Attention Consistency Loss (ACL) for patch-level
ROI consistency, and Semantic Consistency Loss (SCL) for
feature-level semantic consistency. Specifically, in ACL and
SCL, the label information is used to constrain the attention and feature consistency of the target and the background,
respectively, to avoid mutual interference. Extensive experiments have shown that our STCFormer outperforms many of
the best-performing trackers on several popular benchmarks.

Introduction
Visual Object Tracking (VOT) has attracted increasing interest due to its broad applications in various fields, such as
medical science (Bouget et al. 2017), unmanned aerial vehicle (Hao et al. 2018), and self-driving cars (Gao et al. 2020)
which is a hot topic nowadays. One popular category of VOT
is Single Object Tracking (SOT) and its goal can be described as follows: Given a target specified in the first frame,
we need to estimate the states (including the location and the
scale) of this target in subsequent frames (Soleimanitaleb
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12519

