The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enhancing Zero-Shot Multi-Speaker TTS with Negated Speaker Representations
Yejin Jeon1 , Yunsu Kim2 , Gary Geunbae Lee1,3
1

Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH, Republic of Korea
2
aiXplain Inc. Los Gatos, CA, USA
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Republic of Korea
{jeonyj0612, gblee}@postech.ac.kr, yunsu.kim@aixplain.com

Abstract

speakers with minimal audio data samples, or even from just
one audio input, has gained paramount significance.
One avenue of investigation involves fine-tuning a pretrained model initially trained on an extensive multi-speaker
dataset, with a limited set of speech samples of the desired
target speaker (Chen et al. 2019, 2021). While this few-shot
approach has demonstrated good speaker adaptability, it is
not impervious to inherent limitations. In particular, it necessitates additional training tailored to each target speaker
to ensure accurate synthesis of speech in their specific voice.
Moreover, when confronted with a scarcity of audio samples
for fine-tuning, the resulting voice quality exhibits a noticeable degradation in speaker similarity.
In response to the challenges observed in few-shot synthesis, another branch of research have focused on extracting target speaker embeddings from a single reference audio sample in a zero-shot manner. Some investigations utilize x-vectors that are generated from pretrained speaker
verification models, which in turn are trained with large
voice datasets (Jia et al. 2018). However, not only does
this method entail substantial data requisites, but also experiences limited speaker fidelity for out-of-domain speakers. Consequently, other endeavors have gravitated towards
strategies of reduced data expenditure while conceptualizing speaker attributes as latent characteristics. Specifically,
target speaker attributes are learned through unsupervised
methods like Global Style Tokens (GST) (Choi et al. 2022)
or variational autoencoders (VAE) (Zhao et al. 2022). While
a certain degree of speaker adaptation is achievable through
the aforementioned methods, speaker-dependent factors are
not sufficiently disentangled from other components such as
the uttered linguistic content. Thus, models learn to extract
speaker embeddings that include undesired content information. Not only does this lead to discrepancies in speaker timbre, but also towards unstable synthesis since the TTS model
learns to rely on the contextual cues from the intended target
input text, as well as those provided via the reference audio.
Towards accurate and robust multi-speaker TTS, we propose a novel zero-shot and end-to-end model that incorporates the following fundamental aspects. (1) We introduce for the first time, a negated feature learning strategy
that effectively generates speaker representations by computing it as the differentials between the full representation of the reference audio and its linguistic contents. Not

Zero-shot multi-speaker TTS aims to synthesize speech with
the voice of a chosen target speaker without any fine-tuning.
Prevailing methods, however, encounter limitations at adapting to new speakers of out-of-domain settings, primarily due
to inadequate speaker disentanglement and content leakage.
To overcome these constraints, we propose an innovative
negation feature learning paradigm that models decoupled
speaker attributes as deviations from the complete audio representation by utilizing the subtraction operation. By eliminating superfluous content information from the speaker representation, our negation scheme not only mitigates content
leakage, thereby enhancing synthesis robustness, but also improves speaker fidelity. In addition, to facilitate the learning of diverse speaker attributes, we leverage multi-stream
Transformers, which retain multiple hypotheses and instigate
a training paradigm akin to ensemble learning. To unify these
hypotheses and realize the final speaker representation, we
employ attention pooling. Finally, in light of the imperative to
generate target text utterances in the desired voice, we adopt
adaptive layer normalizations to effectively fuse the previously generated speaker representation with the target text
representations, as opposed to mere concatenation of the text
and audio modalities. Extensive experiments and validations
substantiate the efficacy of our proposed approach in preserving and harnessing speaker-specific attributes vis-à-vis alternative baseline models.

Introduction
Recent neural network-based models have revolutionized
the field of text-to-speech (TTS), generating natural speech
that closely resembles human-like qualities (Shen et al.
2018; Ren et al. 2021). This has fueled a demand for personalized TTS capabilities, particularly voice imitation using multi-speaker TTS. Yet, the effective implementation
of such a task presents formidable challenges. First, multispeaker TTS models must be able to adapt to diverse speakers, including those unseen in the data, while maintaining fidelity across all text inputs. Second, there exist practical limitations in gathering sufficient speech data for each speaker
for accurate imitation by TTS models. Thus, the ability
to accurately replicate the voices of both seen and unseen
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18336

