The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AI-Based Energy Transportation Safety:
Pipeline Radial Threat Estimation Using Intelligent Sensing System
Chengyuan Zhu1 , Yiyuan Yang2 * , Kaixiang Yang3† , Haifeng Zhang4 ,
Qinmin Yang1† , C. L. Philip Chen3
1
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
University of Oxford, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom
3
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
4
Research Institute of Tsinghua University, Pearl River Delta, Guangzhou, China
zhuchengyuan517@zju.edu.cn, yiyuan.yang@cs.ox.ac.uk, yangkaixiang@zju.edu.cn,
zhanghf@tsinghua-gd.org, qmyang@zju.edu.cn, philipchen@scut.edu.cn
2

Abstract

portant part of energy safety. Pipelines undertake the majority of energy transportation capacity, including oil, natural
gas, hydrogen, etc (Xiang et al. 2022). Especially in the oil
and gas field, according to statistics, 70% of crude oil in the
United States is transported through pipelines, and the total length of global energy pipelines has exceeded 4 million
kilometers. However, long-distance energy pipelines are in
open natural areas and pose great safety risks. Pipeline leakage and breakage accidents may threaten human life, property and health, and have a negative and nonnegligible social impact. In 2022, the Nord Stream natural gas pipeline
suffered external damage and leaked, resulting in multiple
explosions1 . In the same year, more than 14,000 barrels of
crude oil leaked from the pipeline of Kansas, USA, causing
significant economic loss and environmental pollution2 .
To ensure pipeline safety, a large amount of manpower
and resources have been invested in pipeline inspection recently. The development of intelligent sensing, data-driven,
and advanced artificial intelligence (AI) technology has empowered the pipeline safety field (Zhang, Liu, and He 2019;
Yang et al. 2022a; Bao and Yang 2021). Therefore, industry experts and researchers have begun to combine sensing measurement technology with AI algorithms to achieve
pipeline safety early warning (PSEW) (Zhu et al. 2023a,b;
Yang, Zhang, and Li 2021). Among them, distributed optical fiber sensing (DOFS) technology plays a crucial role
and has been widely recognized by the industry. On the one
hand, it has the advantages of high sensitivity, long-distance
continuous monitoring, low cost, anti-electromagnetic interference, etc. On the other hand, the device is easy to deploy
in stations along the pipeline. The storage and invocation of
data, as well as the training and updating of algorithms, have
become convenient (Zhu et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2022b).
However, the current development of this technology still
faces many important challenges. (1) There are complex
background noise and interference signals in the external en-

The application of artificial intelligence technology has
greatly enhanced and fortified the safety of energy pipelines,
particularly in safeguarding against external threats. The predominant methods involve the integration of intelligent sensors to detect external vibration, enabling the identification of
event types and locations, thereby replacing manual detection
methods. However, practical implementation has exposed a
limitation in current methods - their constrained ability to accurately discern the spatial dimensions of external signals,
which complicates the authentication of threat events. Our
research endeavors to overcome the above issues by harnessing deep learning techniques to achieve a more fine-grained
recognition and localization process. This refinement is crucial in effectively identifying genuine threats to pipelines,
thus enhancing the safety of energy transportation. This paper proposes a radial threat estimation method for energy
pipelines based on distributed optical fiber sensing technology. Specifically, we introduce a continuous multi-view and
multi-domain feature fusion methodology to extract comprehensive signal features and construct a threat estimation and
recognition network. The utilization of collected acoustic signal data is optimized, and the underlying principle is elucidated. Moreover, we incorporate the concept of transfer learning through a pre-trained model, enhancing both recognition
accuracy and training efficiency. Empirical evidence gathered from real-world scenarios underscores the efficacy of our
method, notably in its substantial reduction of false alarms
and remarkable gains in recognition accuracy. More generally, our method exhibits versatility and can be extrapolated
to a broader spectrum of recognition tasks and scenarios.

Introduction
Energy safety has a significant impact on natural safety and
social stability. Among them, energy transportation is an im* Work done as a student in Tsinghua University. He is now with
the Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, OX1
3SA, Oxford, UK.
†
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2022 Nord Stream pipeline sab
otage
2
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2022 Keystone Pipeline oil spill

22556

