The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improving Panoptic Narrative Grounding by Harnessing Semantic Relationships
and Visual Confirmation
Tianyu Guo* , Haowei Wang* , Yiwei Ma, Jiayi Ji† , Xiaoshuai Sun
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China,
Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China
{guotianyu, wanghaowei, yiweima}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, jjyxmu@gmail.com, xssun@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

Text
Encoder

Recent advancements in single-stage Panoptic Narrative
Grounding (PNG) have demonstrated significant potential.
These methods predict pixel-level masks by directly matching pixels and phrases. However, they often neglect the modeling of semantic and visual relationships between phraselevel instances, limiting their ability for complex multi-modal
reasoning in PNG. To tackle this issue, we propose XPNG, a
“differentiation-refinement-localization” reasoning paradigm
for accurately locating instances or regions. In XPNG, we introduce a Semantic Context Convolution (SCC) module to
leverage semantic priors for generating distinctive features.
This well-crafted module employs a combination of dynamic
channel-wise convolution and pixel-wise convolution to embed semantic information and establish inter-object relationships guided by semantics. Subsequently, we propose a Visual Context Verification (VCV) module to provide visual
cues, eliminating potential space biases introduced by semantics and further refining the visual features generated by the
previous module. Extensive experiments on PNG benchmark
datasets reveal that our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance, significantly outperforming existing methods by a
considerable margin and yielding a 3.9-point improvement
in overall metrics. Our codes and results are available at our
project webpage: https://github.com/TianyuGoGO/XPNG.

1

Phrase
Kernel

Pixel-Phrase
Matching
Image
Encoder
Visual Feature
(a) Previous one-stage method
Phrase
Kernel

Text
Encoder
Text Context Visual Relation
Modeling
Modeling

Pixel-Phrase
Matching
Image
Encoder
Visual Feature
(b) Our proposed XPNG

Figure 1: A comparison between the previously mentioned
one-stage method, PPMN (Ding et al. 2022), and our proposed XPNG framework. PPMN overlooks modeling relationship, resulting in an inability to distinguish between two
“giraffes”. In contrast, our proposed XPNG achieves accurate segmentation. Notably, it has only a slightly higher parameter count compared to PPMN, as shown in Tab. 1.

Introduction

Recently, the growing interest in multimodal research (Fei
2022; Li et al. 2022a; Chen et al. 2022; Jing et al. 2020;
Ma et al. 2022, 2023; Ji et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2023;
Zhao et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023) at the intersection of
computer vision and natural language processing has driven
the development of systems that can understand and describe the world as humans do. Panoptic Narrative Grounding (PNG) (González et al. 2021) is an emerging visuallygrounded language understanding task that aims to locate
and segment all instances of objects and regions in an image,
corresponding to a given text description using binary pixel
masks. This task goes beyond conventional grounding tasks,
such as Referring Expression Segmentation (RES) (Cheng

et al. 2021; Li, Bu, and Cai 2021; Liao et al. 2022; Liu et al.
2021; Luo et al. 2020a), by involving the joint understanding of multi-modal information and necessitating many-tomany language-vision alignment, which adds complexity to
the task.
Previous PNG research primarily involves a two-stage
paradigm. These models first use pre-trained panoptic segmentation models (Kirillov et al. 2019) to generate a set of
candidate masks for a given image and then transform these
candidates into features, which are ranked via cross-modal
matching with language features. However, two-stage models (González et al. 2021) have limitations: they are less efficient due to the separated segmentation and matching processes, and they interact with language in a matching way,

* These authors contributed equally.
†

The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1985

