The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Adversarial Socialbots Modeling Based on Structural Information Principles
Xianghua Zeng1 , Hao Peng1 , Angsheng Li1,2
1

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
{zengxianghua, penghao, angsheng}@buaa.edu.cn, liangsheng@gmail.zgclab.edu.cn

Abstract

including forming appropriate followers and engaging in interactions (Cresci 2020; Arin and Kutlu 2023).
Various methods have been proposed to detect socialbots and prevent their negative impact, including supervised
and unsupervised machine learning approaches (Chavoshi,
Hamooni, and Mueen 2016; Varol et al. 2017; Yang et al.
2023a). Researchers have developed a framework that relies on minimal account metadata to improve scalability and
generalization for adequate detection (Yang et al. 2020).
Nevertheless, these methods are passive as they wait for
socialbot evasion before developing appropriate detection
measures (Cresci et al. 2021). Instead of relying on these
reactive approaches, researchers explore proactive detection methods using the multi-agent hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) mechanism (Le, Tran-Thanh, and Lee
2022), which simulates and understands the adversarial behaviors of socialbots. Within this HRL mechanism, two adversarial objectives of socialbots are formulated: to survive
under robust detectors by determining activity types and to
maximize network influence by selecting good followers.
However, implementing the HRL mechanism poses practical challenges. On the one hand, it is insufficient for the
upper-level agent to dynamically determine activity types
solely by learning from scratch without considering the entire social network structure. On the other hand, the lowerlevel agent maintains the local features of all users to select
followers, which leads to computational inefficiency.
In this paper, we propose a novel mathematical Structural
Information principles-based Adversarial Socialbots
Modeling framework, namely SIASM, to address the
challenges above and further develop proactive detection.
Firstly, we transform the diverse user nodes and their multirelational interconnections in the original social network
into a unified structure, specifically, a heterogeneous graph.
We calculate the structural entropy of this graph to quantify its dynamic uncertainty. Secondly, we minimize the
high-dimensional structural entropy to generate an optimal
encoding tree representing a hierarchical community structure of social users. Each node in this tree corresponds to a
user community, where users of the same community engage in frequent interactions. To enhance the computational
efficiency of SIASM, thirdly, we present a new method
for quantifying the network influence of each community.
This method utilizes the assigned structural entropy of the

The importance of effective detection is underscored by the
fact that socialbots imitate human behavior to propagate misinformation, leading to an ongoing competition between socialbots and detectors. Despite the rapid advancement of reactive detectors, the exploration of adversarial socialbot modeling remains incomplete, significantly hindering the development of proactive detectors. To address this issue, we
propose a mathematical Structural Information principlesbased Adversarial Socialbots Modeling framework, namely
SIASM, to enable more accurate and effective modeling of
adversarial behaviors. First, a heterogeneous graph is presented to integrate various users and rich activities in the
original social network and measure its dynamic uncertainty
as structural entropy. By minimizing the high-dimensional
structural entropy, a hierarchical community structure of the
social network is generated and referred to as the optimal encoding tree. Secondly, a novel method is designed to quantify
influence by utilizing the assigned structural entropy, which
helps reduce the computational cost of SIASM by filtering
out uninfluential users. Besides, a new conditional structural
entropy is defined between the socialbot and other users to
guide the follower selection for network influence maximization. Extensive and comparative experiments on both homogeneous and heterogeneous social networks demonstrate
that, compared with state-of-the-art baselines, the proposed
SIASM framework yields substantial performance improvements in terms of network influence (up to 16.32%) and sustainable stealthiness (up to 16.29%) when evaluated against
a robust detector with 90% accuracy.

Introduction
Socialbots, automated user accounts partly controlled by
software, have become indispensable in manipulating public
opinion on social media (Ferrara et al. 2016; Subrahmanian
et al. 2016). However, socialbots often receive criticism for
disseminating false or unreliable information, causing confusion among online communities regarding crucial issues
(Das, Lavoie, and Magdon-Ismail 2016; Deb et al. 2019;
Aral and Eckles 2019). Differentiating socialbots from regular user accounts is challenging due to their diverse and
dynamic behaviors that resemble real-life users’ behaviors,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

392

