The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Backdoor Adjustment via Group Adaptation
for Debiased Coupon Recommendations
Junpeng Fang, Gongduo Zhang, Qing Cui, Caizhi Tang,
Lihong Gu, Longfei Li, Jinjie Gu, Jun Zhou *
Ant Group, Hangzhou, China,
{junpeng.fjp,gongduo.zgd,cuiqing.cq,caizhi.tcz,lihong.glh,longyao.llf,jinjie.gujj}@antgroup.com; jun.zhoujun@antfin.com

Abstract
Accurate prediction of coupon usage is crucial for promoting user consumption through targeted coupon recommendations. However, in real-world coupon recommendations, the
coupon allocation process is not solely determined by the
model trained with the history interaction data but is also interfered with by marketing tactics desired to fulfill specific
commercial goals. This interference creates an imbalance in
the interactions, which causes the data to deviate from the
user’s natural preferences. We refer to this deviation as the
matching bias. Such biased interaction data affects the efficacy of the model, and thus it is necessary to employ debiasing techniques to prevent any negative impact. We investigate
the mitigation of matching bias in coupon recommendations
from a causal-effect perspective. By treating the attributes of
users and coupons associated with marketing tactics as confounders, we find the confounders open the backdoor path
between user-coupon matching and the conversion, which introduces spurious correlation. To remove the bad effect, we
propose a novel training paradigm named Backdoor Adjustment via Group Adaptation (BAGA) for debiased coupon recommendations, which performs intervened training and inference, i.e., separately modeling each user-coupon group pair.
However, modeling all possible group pairs greatly increases
the computational complexity and cost. To address the efficiency challenge, we further present a simple but effective dual-tower multi-task framework and leverage the Customized Gate Control (CGC) model architecture, which separately models each user and coupon group with a separate
expert module. We instantiate BAGA on five representative
models: F M, D NN, N CF, M ASKNET, and D EEP F M, and conduct comprehensive offline and online experiments to demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed paradigm.

0.6

Public transport coupons

item representation

interaction
model

Degree of demand:
Predicted conversion prob.:

middel-age
no private var
walk to work
eat take-out
user representation

0.4

Take-out coupons

interaction
model

item representation

Public transport coupons < Take-out coupons
0.6 > 0.4

Figure 1: Empirical evidence of how imbalanced historical
interaction data leads to imprecise estimations.

is to estimate the conversion probability, which refers to
the likelihood of a user using a coupon. As with other recommendation scenarios, researchers typically employ UserItem Click-Through-Rate (CTR) models (Sim and Lee 2014;
Mutanen, Nousiainen, and Liang 2010; Huan et al. 2022;
Huangfu et al. 2022) to handle this problem.
To achieve specific commercial objectives, such as maximizing daily active users (DAUs) or increasing the exposure of a particular coupon, the organizers may employ specific tactics to interfere with the coupon allocation process.
These tactics can be manifested as limiting the likelihood
of certain types of users receiving specific coupons or limiting the likelihood of certain types of coupons being exposed
to particular users. By leveraging these tactics, organizers
can effectively drive user behavior and achieve their desired
goals. However, this interference can create an imbalance in
user-coupon interaction data distribution, i.e., result in certain user-coupon pairs dominating the majority of historical
interaction data, which causes the data to deviate from the
user’s natural preferences. This deviation is referred to as the
matching bias (Fang et al. 2023). Models trained with such
data tend to further exacerbate the imbalance by overemphasizing majority user-coupon pairs and distorting the estimation of conversion probability. Ultimately, this bias decreases the efficiency of the recommendation model.
Fig.1 shows the empirical evidence of the affection of
matching bias in the marketing coupon recommendation
scenario of a payment platform studied in this paper. Assuming there are two tactics employed 1 : public transport

Introduction
With the development of e-commerce and m-payment, recommendation technology has been increasingly used in online marketing campaigns. For instance, a payment platform
periodically organizes marketing campaigns designed to allocate online coupons to incentivize consumption and bolster customer retention (Li et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2023; Fang
et al. 2023). The key objective of modeling these campaigns
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Here, the tactics work by multiplying the predicted model
scoring of coupons by a specific weighted score, and the resulting

11944

