The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Diagnosing and Rectifying Fake OOD Invariance: A Restructured
Causal Approach
Ziliang Chen1,2 , Yongsen Zheng3 , Zhao-Rong Lai1 , Quanlong Guan1 * , Liang Lin3
1

Jinan University
2
Pazhou Lab
3
Sun Yat-sen University
c.ziliang@yahoo.com, z.yongsensmile@gmail.com, {laizhr,Gql}@jnu.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org
Abstract

become the promising trend known as invariant representation learning (IRL) for out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization (Shen et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022a).
The emergence of IRL dates back to approaches for domain adaptation (Ganin et al. 2016; Zhao et al. 2019) where
data drawn from a test domain (so-called target domain) can
be accessed to quantify the distributional shift, thus, invariant representation is spontaneously obtained while minimizing the domain shift. In the OOD generalization setup, only a
few number of domains are available whereas the goal turns
to learning the invariant representation to unseen domains.
It becomes more challenging since minimizing the observed
domain gaps does not imply the model generalization to unseen domains. The recent development of causal inference
(Peters, Bühlmann, and Meinshausen 2016; Mahajan, Tople,
and Sharma 2021) provided a set of innovative principles,
i.e., Invariant Causal Prediction (ICP), of connecting the IRL
and OOD generalization. Most IRL frameworks henceforth
consider data as an endogenous vairable generated through
a Structural Causal Model (SCM) (Pearl 2010), which could
be partitioned into different environment factors where each
one corresponds to a specific intervention action taken in
the SCM. In such regards, IRL aims for the recovery of invariant features via the arbitrary environment interventions
for diminishing spurious correlation with the label. Of particular prominent methods are Invariant Risk Minimization
(IRM) (Arjovsky et al. 2019), Invariant Rationalization (InvRat) (Chang et al. 2020; Li et al. 2022), REx (Krueger et al.
2021) and some other approaches in the similar spirit (Zhou
et al. 2022; Ahuja et al. 2020; Li et al. 2022). Their objectives are optimized to prevent the classifier from overfitting
to environment-specific properties.

Invariant representation learning (IRL) encourages the prediction from invariant causal features to labels deconfounded
from the environments, advancing the technical roadmap of
out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization. Despite spotlights
around, recent theoretical result verified that some causal features recovered by IRLs merely pretend domain-invariantly
in the training environments but fail in unseen domains. The
fake invariance severely endangers OOD generalization since
the trustful objective can not be diagnosed and existing causal
remedies are invalid to rectify. In this paper, we review a IRL
family (InvRat) under the Partially and Fully Informative Invariant Feature Structural Causal Models (PIIF SCM /FIIF
SCM) respectively, to certify their weaknesses in representing fake invariant features, then, unify their causal diagrams
to propose ReStructured SCM (RS-SCM). RS-SCM can ideally rebuild the spurious and the fake invariant features simultaneously. Given this, we further develop an approach based
on conditional mutual information with respect to RS-SCM,
then rigorously rectify the spurious and fake invariant effects.
It can be easily implemented by a small feature selection subnet introduced in the IRL family, which is alternatively optimized to achieve our goal. Experiments verified the superiority of our approach to fight against the fake invariant issue
across a variety of OOD generalization benchmarks.

Introduction
A fundamental pressumption of machine learning widely believes that models are trained and tested with samples identically and independently (i.i.d.) drawn from a distribution.
Whereas in practice, the models are inevitably trained and
deployed in ubiquitous scenarios so that they poorly perform
than what was expected, due to the violation of the i.i.d. condition inducing distributional shift across various scenarios.
The failure could be understood from the view of representation learning, where the i.i.d. condition typically achieves
the feature generalizing in a distribution, but unfortunately,
at the sacrifice of generalization beyond this observed distribution. It is obviously impossible to obtain the domain universe by collecting data from all scenarios, so how to learn
reprsentation with limited observed domains for chasing the
invariant performance to unseen domains, have gradually

Fake OOD Invariant Effect
Despite the potential and popularity of IRL, plentiful followup studies unveiled IRLs’ unreliability to learn invariant representation (Kamath et al. 2021; Nagarajan, Andreassen, and
Neyshabur 2020; Rosenfeld, Ravikumar, and Risteski 2020),
in which the most notorious problem is probably the fake invariant effect . Particularly, given each environment factor to
identify a specific spurious feature in a SCM, if the number
of latent environment factors less than the capacity of spurious features, latent spurious correlation would pretend as
an invarant part of the algorithm-recovered features recov-

* indicate corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11471

