The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Open-Set Graph Domain Adaptation via Separate Domain Alignment
Yu Wang1 * , Ronghang Zhu2∗ , Pengsheng Ji3 , Sheng Li4
1
LinkedIn Corporation
School of Computing, University of Georgia
3
Department of Statistics, University of Georgia
4
School of Data Science, University of Virginia
ywang11@linkedin.com, ronghangzhu@uga.edu, psji@uga.edu, shengli@virginia.edu
2

Abstract
Domain adaptation has become an attractive learning
paradigm, as it can leverage source domains with rich labels
to deal with classification tasks in an unlabeled target domain.
A few recent studies develop domain adaptation approaches
for graph-structured data. In the case of node classification
task, current domain adaptation methods only focus on the
closed-set setting, where source and target domains share the
same label space. A more practical assumption is that the target domain may contain new classes that are not included
in the source domain. Therefore, in this paper, we introduce
a novel and challenging problem for graphs, i.e., open-set
domain adaptive node classification, and propose a new approach to solve it. Specifically, we develop an algorithm for
efficient knowledge transfer from a labeled source graph to
an unlabeled target graph under a separate domain alignment
(SDA) strategy, in order to learn discriminative feature representations for the target graph. Our goal is to not only correctly classify target nodes into the known classes, but also
classify unseen types of nodes into an unknown class. Experimental results on real-world datasets show that our method
outperforms existing methods on graph domain adaptation.

Figure 1: Problem setting difference between closed-set and
open-set graph domain adaptation. Different colors denote
different categories.

vision (Zhu and Li 2022; Zhu et al. 2021b), natural language
processing (Jiang and Zhai 2007; Rezayi et al. 2023), and facial expression recognition (Zhu, Sang, and Zhao 2016; Zhu
et al. 2015).
Graph data, which efficiently represents the relationships
(edges) between objects (nodes), is ubiquitous and has various applications in the real world. One of the most important
learning tasks on graph data is node classification, where
the algorithms learn to predict the category of each node.
Examples of this task are found in diverse areas, including social networks1 (Bhagat, Cormode, and Muthukrishnan
2011), citation networks (Ji and Jin 2016), protein–protein
association networks (Szklarczyk et al. 2018), and product co-purchasing networks (Bhatia et al. 2016). Although
many algorithms have been developed for supervised and
semi-supervised graph learning, the topic of cross-network
(or cross-graph) domain adaptation has been largely underexplored. In recent years, a few graph domain adaptation
methods are brought up (Shen et al. 2021; Dai et al. 2022;
Wu et al. 2020). They focus on the closed-set cross-network
node classification problem, holding the assumption that the
target graph contains nodes of categories only in the source
graph, however, which is unrealistic. In many real-world applications, the target graph always contains novel nodes that

Introduction
Many top-performing machine learning models are trained
on large-scale labeled data. However, in practice, labels can
be hard to obtain due to the huge cost and/or considerable
difficulty of labeling. To handle these challenges, domain
adaptation (DA) (Zhu et al. 2023) is proposed to transfer
knowledge from a labeled dataset, namely source domain,
to an unlabeled dataset, namely target domain, while domain
divergence always exists among source and target domains.
DA has drawn much attention in recent years for several reasons. First, traditional machine learning methods require a
large amount of labeled data for model training, but unlabeled data from new domains constantly emerge. Second,
compared to labeling the data from every new domain, it is
more efficient to transfer knowledge from a similar domain
that already has sufficient labels. Third, studies have shown
promising performance on knowledge transfer using domain
adaptation techniques in multiple fields, such as computer
* These authors contributed equally to this research.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
In this paper, we use the two terms, graph and network, interchangeably to refer to graph-structured data.

9142

