The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Visual Abstract Reasoning through Dual-Stream Networks
Kai Zhao1 , Chang Xu1 , Bailu Si1, 2 *
1

School of Systems Science, Beijing Normal University
2
Chinese Institute for Brain Research, Beijing
zhaokai id@foxmail.com, changxu@mail.bnu.edu.cn, bailusi@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual abstract reasoning tasks present challenges for deep
neural networks, exposing limitations in their capabilities.
In this work, we present a neural network model that addresses the challenges posed by Raven’s Progressive Matrices
(RPM). Inspired by the two-stream hypothesis of visual processing, we introduce the Dual-stream Reasoning Network
(DRNet), which utilizes two parallel branches to capture image features. On top of the two streams, a reasoning module first learns to merge the high-level features of the same
image. Then, it employs a rule extractor to handle combinations involving the eight context images and each candidate image, extracting discrete abstract rules and utilizing an
multilayer perceptron (MLP) to make predictions. Empirical
results demonstrate that the proposed DRNet achieves stateof-the-art average performance across multiple RPM benchmarks. Furthermore, DRNet demonstrates robust generalization capabilities, even extending to various out-of-distribution
scenarios. The dual streams within DRNet serve distinct functions by addressing local or spatial information. They are
then integrated into the reasoning module, leveraging abstract rules to facilitate the execution of visual reasoning
tasks. These findings indicate that the dual-stream architecture could play a crucial role in visual abstract reasoning.

Figure 1: Examples from RAVEN and Procedurally Generated Matrices (PGM) are shown in (a) and (b) respectively.
Both types of problems involve presenting participants with
eight context images. They are required to select the correct
answer (highlighted in red) from the candidate set of eight
images to fill in the blank (denoted by ?), in order to satisfy
specific rules in the row or column direction of the 3×3 matrix.

Introduction
As a significant assessment tool in the realm of analogy reasoning, the RAVEN test boasts an 80-year history
(Court 1982; Prabhakaran et al. 1997; Perfetti et al. 2009).
Researchers from various disciplines, including psychology,
cognitive science, and artificial intelligence, have extensively explored this area. In recent years, preceding works
(Zhang et al. 2019a; Hu et al. 2021; Benny, Pekar, and Wolf
2021) have generated program-controlled RPM datasets, as
depicted in Figure 1. These efforts have greatly facilitated
deep learning research in this domain and have assessed
the analogy reasoning capability of deep learning systems
(Małkiński and Mańdziuk 2022a). Serving as a widely accepted benchmark for intelligence evaluation, RPM problem
requires participants to identify one or more rules within a
3×3 matrix, and then make a correct choice. This process of
abstract reasoning mirrors the attributes of advanced human
intelligence (Snow and Lohman 1984; Snow et al. 1984;
Jaeggi et al. 2008).
Inspired by the two-stream hypothesis (Goodale and Mil-

One goal of artificial intelligence (AI) is to equip machines
with universal reasoning capabilities. Presently, deep learning has emerged as the dominant paradigm in AI, enabling
the modeling of data to execute intricate tasks such as image
classification (He et al. 2016; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021), object recognition (Girshick et al. 2015; Ronneberger, Fischer,
and Brox 2015), and natural language processing (Vaswani
et al. 2017). In the field of cognitive science, analogical reasoning has consistently been regarded as the foundation of
general intelligence that sets humans apart from animals and
is considered the essence of cognition. It is often shaped by
the interplay between higher cognitive abilities and the quality of incoming representations (Norman, 1975). However,
current deep learning systems still struggle to excel in tasks
that demand analogical and relational reasoning.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16979

