The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hypercorrelation Evolution for Video Class-Incremental Learning
Sen Liang1 , Kai Zhu1 * , Wei Zhai1 * , Zhiheng Liu1 , Yang Cao1,2
1

University of Science and Technology of China
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{liangsen@mail., zkzy@mail., wzhai056@, lzh990528@mail., forrest@}ustc.edu.cn
2

Abstract

2023) methods have almost achieved the upper limit of performance in image classification tasks by distilling extracted
features and expanding network structures to retain the representation ability on old classes while greatly enhancing the
discriminability of new ones.
Recently, some studies (Park, Kang, and Han 2021; Pei
et al. 2022; Villa et al. 2022; Douillard et al. 2020) focus on
video class-incremental learning problem (VCIL) and find
that directly introducing classical image class-incremental
methods to action recognition is suboptimal in terms of
maintaining performance on old classes due to the complexity of the multi-frame information of videos compared to
images. Our further analysis shows that this is mainly attributed to multi-level feature confusion during the incremental process. As shown in Figure 1, video actions are
often composed of multiple sub-actions involving different
semantic levels, aligning them directly on the final layer feature will result in uncontrollable knowledge conflicts in the
middle levels. In contrast, explicitly aggregating different
levels of matching information can adaptively promote the
alignment or discrimination of action-specific features. So
the key question is how to ensure that feature combinations
from different levels are reasonably involved in the distillation process, which is conducive to maintaining complex
feature relationships.
Besides, the redundancy fluctuation among different
video segments introduces interference in evaluating the
learning imbalance between old and new class data. Many
works (Douillard et al. 2020; Liu, Schiele, and Sun 2021a,b;
Yan, Xie, and He 2021) in image class-incremental learning show that compensating for the optimization bias by the
number ratio of old and new samples can effectively alleviate the learning imbalance caused by exemplars, especially
in cases where storage space is limited. However, when applying the same strategy to VCIL, we found that it had little
effect, indicating that the redundancy in video frames makes
it difficult to measure the exact bias level with a simple number ratio among classes during the incremental process.
Motivated by the above analysis, we aim to improve
VCIL performance by increasing the combination flexibility of the aligned features and adaptively adjusting the imbalance degree between old and new classes. Our proposed
HyperCorrelation Evolution (HCE) scheme is mainly manifested in two aspects. First, we present the Hierarchical

Video class-incremental learning aims to recognize new actions while restricting the catastrophic forgetting of old ones,
whose representative samples can only be saved in limited memory. Semantically variable subactions are susceptible to class confusion due to data imbalance. While existing methods address the problem by estimating and distilling the spatio-temporal knowledge, we further explores
that the refinement of hierarchical correlations is crucial for
the alignment of spatio-temporal features. To enhance the
adaptability on evolved actions, we proposes a hierarchical
aggregation strategy, in which hierarchical matching matrices are combined and jointly optimized to selectively store
and retrieve relevant features from previous tasks. Meanwhile, a correlation refinement mechanism is presented to reinforce the bias on informative exemplars according to online
hypercorrelation distribution. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method on three
standard video class-incremental learning benchmarks, outperforming state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at:
https://github.com/Lsen991031/HCE

Introduction
With the rapid advancement of deep learning research, models trained on batch data can achieve good recognition performance in known distributions. However, in real-world applications, there exists a more complex and variable semantic shift. This poses new requirements for the continuous
updates of the representation and discrimination capabilities in existing recognition networks, which is called classincremental learning (CIL).
When encountering new tasks, it is often impossible to
save a large amount of old class data due to equipment limitations or privacy and security concerns. In such cases, directly fine-tuning a well-trained model representation can
also lead to representation and classifier biases towards the
new classes due to the imbalance of new and old data, which
is known as catastrophic forgetting (Dhar et al. 2019; Douillard et al. 2020). Existing class-incremental (Dhar et al.
2019; Douillard et al. 2020; Hou et al. 2019; Li and Hoiem
2017; Rebuffi et al. 2017; Yan, Xie, and He 2021; Zhai et al.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3315

