The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Decoupled Contrastive Learning for Long-Tailed Recognition
Shiyu Xuan, Shiliang Zhang
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing
School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
shiyu xuan@stu.pku.edu.cn, slzhang.jdl@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
SCL

Supervised Contrastive Loss (SCL) is popular in visual representation learning. Given an anchor image, SCL pulls two
types of positive samples, i.e., its augmentation and other
images from the same class together, while pushes negative
images apart to optimize the learned embedding. In the scenario of long-tailed recognition, where the number of samples
in each class is imbalanced, treating two types of positive samples equally leads to the biased optimization for intra-category
distance. In addition, similarity relationship among negative
samples, that are ignored by SCL, also presents meaningful
semantic cues. To improve the performance on long-tailed
recognition, this paper addresses those two issues of SCL by
decoupling the training objective. Specifically, it decouples
two types of positives in SCL and optimizes their relations
toward different objectives to alleviate the influence of the
imbalanced dataset. We further propose a patch-based self
distillation to transfer knowledge from head to tail classes to
relieve the under-representation of tail classes. It uses patchbased features to mine shared visual patterns among different instances and leverages a self distillation procedure to
transfer such knowledge. Experiments on different long-tailed
classification benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our
method. For instance, it achieves the 57.7% top-1 accuracy on
the ImageNet-LT dataset. Combined with the ensemble-based
method, the performance can be further boosted to 59.7%,
which substantially outperforms many recent works. Our code
will be released.

SCL
(a) Head Classes
SCL

Our

SCL

Our
(b) Tail Classes
True Positive

False Positive

Figure 1: Examples of retrieval results using features learned
by SCL on head classes in (a) and tail classes in (b). In (b),
features learned by SCL are biased to low-level appearance
cues, while features learned by our method are more discriminative to semantic cues.

Introduction
Thanks to the powerful deep learning methods, the performance of various vision tasks (Russakovsky et al. 2015; Long,
Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015) on manually balanced dataset
has been significantly boosted. In real-world applications,
training samples commonly exhibit a long-tailed distribution,
where a few head classes contribute most of the observations, while lots of tail classes are associated with only a
few samples (Van Horn et al. 2018). Long-tailed distribution
leads to two challenges for visual recognition: (a) the loss
function designed for the balanced dataset can be easily biased toward the head classes. (b) each of tail classes contains
too few samples to represent visual variances, leading to the
under-representation of the tail classes.

By optimizing the intra-inter category distance, Supervised
Contrastive Loss (SCL) (Khosla et al. 2020) has achieved impressive performance on balanced datasets. Given an anchor
image, SCL pulls two kinds of positive samples together, i.e.,
(a) different views of the anchor image generated by the data
augmentation, and (b) other images from the same classes.
Those two types of positives supervise the model to learn
different representations, i.e., images from the same categories enforce the learning of semantic cues, while samples
augmented by appearance variances mostly lead to the learning of low-level appearance cues. Fig. 1 (a) shows that, SCL
effective learns semantic features for head classes, e.g.,the
learned semantic “bee” is robust to cluttered backgrounds.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6396

