The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

HORIZON: High-Resolution Semantically Controlled Panorama Synthesis
Kun Yan1 , Lei Ji2 , Chenfei Wu2 , Jian Liang3 , Ming Zhou4 , Nan Duan2 , Shuai Ma1
SKLSDE Lab, Beihang University,
2
Microsoft Reseach Asia,
3
Peking University,
4
Langboat Technology
{kunyan,mashuai}@buaa.edu.cn, {leiji,chewu,nanduan}@microsoft.com, j.liang@stu.pku.edu.cn, zhouming@langboat.com
1

Abstract
Task 1: Panorama Generation

Panorama synthesis endeavors to craft captivating 360-degree
visual landscapes, immersing users in the heart of virtual worlds. Nevertheless, contemporary panoramic synthesis
techniques grapple with the challenge of semantically guiding the content generation process. Although recent breakthroughs in visual synthesis have unlocked the potential for
semantic control in 2D flat images, a direct application of
these methods to panorama synthesis yields distorted content.
In this study, we unveil an innovative framework for generating high-resolution panoramas, adeptly addressing the issues
of spherical distortion and edge discontinuity through sophisticated spherical modeling. Our pioneering approach empowers users with semantic control, harnessing both image and
text inputs, while concurrently streamlining the generation of
high-resolution panoramas using parallel decoding. We rigorously evaluate our methodology on a diverse array of indoor
and outdoor datasets, establishing its superiority over recent
related work, in terms of both quantitative and qualitative performance metrics. Our research elevates the controllability,
efficiency, and fidelity of panorama synthesis to new levels.

Model

Task 2: View Extrapolation
The sky is blue with
cloud and there is water,
and house around.

Task 3: Guided
Generation

Figure 1: HORIZON supports multitype panorama synthesis

Panoramic images possess two unique characteristics:
spherical distortion in distinct spatial locations and continuity between the left and right boundaries as compared
to planar images. Current research on panoramic image
synthesis primarily focuses on generating a spherical image with a large FOV from a single or a sequence of
FOV images.(Sumantri and Park 2020) introduced the use
of equirectangular projection for the generation of realistic spherical images from multiple images, addressing distorted projection issues commonly encountered when working with flat images. (Hara, Mukuta, and Harada 2021) proposed a method for generating spherical images without discontinuity. However, these methods lack the ability for user
control, which is crucial in the synthesis of virtual worlds.
In particular, the ability to control generated content with
style or semantic guidance is crucial for achieving desired
images. As designers often invest a significant amount of
time into creating and editing images with similar backgrounds but different semantics or styles. Research has been
conducted in order to mimic human’s capability to easily imagine 360-degree panoramic sceneries. This includes
methods for image guidance for view extrapolation based
on similar scene categories (Zhang et al. 2013), scene label
guidance for controlling style using a co-modulated GAN
(Karimi Dastjerdi et al. 2022), and text guidance for image
synthesis (Chen, Wang, and Liu 2022). Both view extrapolation and panoramic image synthesis tasks can benefit from
a variety of inputs to guide the generation process and make
this technique more flexible and useful in real-world applications. As shown in Figure 1, the inputs can be text descrip-

Introduction
Panoramic images and videos are becoming increasingly
popular, due to the ability to provide an unlimited field
of view (FOV) compared with traditional, planar images.
With panoramic images, viewers can navigate 360° views
and shift the viewing perspective in all directions, capturing a wealth of environmental detail. Additionally, these
images provide an immersive experience that opens up a
range of possibilities for interactive applications in a variety
of domains, such as advertising, entertainment, and the design industry. However, the process of panorama acquisition
typically requires significant human efforts or specialized
panoramic equipment. Thus, the development of automated
panoramic synthesis techniques is becoming increasingly
important as virtual and augmented reality technology and
devices, such as head-mounted displays and glasses, continue to evolve. This technique not only helps designers save
time and effort when creating and editing blueprints, but it
also reduces the cost associated with specialized panoramic
equipment.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6431

