The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Colored Noise in PPO: Improved Exploration and Performance through Correlated
Action Sampling
Jakob Hollenstein1 , Georg Martius3,4 , Justus Piater1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Innsbruck, Austria
2
Digital Science Center, University of Innsbruck, Austria
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Tübingen, Germany
{jakob.hollenstein,justus.piater}@uibk.ac.at
georg.martius@uni-tuebingen.de
similar approach by sampling variations from a Gaussian
distribution.
While previous research (Hollenstein et al. 2022; Eberhard
et al. 2023; Raffin, Kober, and Stulp 2021) has emphasized
the importance of temporal correlation in action noise for exploration in off-policy algorithms, on-policy algorithms such
as PPO do not incorporate correlated action noise and instead
sample uncorrelated variations from a Gaussian distributed
policy.
PPO, as an on-policy deep reinforcement learning algorithm, offers several advantages over off-policy algorithms:
by not relying on replay buffers, on-policy algorithms exhibit fewer instabilities due to distributional shift between
the distribution of previously collected data and the current
policy-induced distribution. Moreover, on-policy algorithms
mitigate Q-function divergence issues since the policy evaluation can leverage data collected under the current policy.
These benefits make on-policy methods particularly advantageous when environment samples are inexpensive to obtain.
However, exploration in on-policy methods needs to be induced by changes to the environment (exploration reward)
or by changes to the policy itself, as, by definition, on-policy
methods learn from data induced by the current policy. Consequently, altering the exploration technique without changing
the environment implies a change in the policy distribution.

Abstract
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO), a popular on-policy deep
reinforcement learning method, employs a stochastic policy
for exploration. In this paper, we propose a colored noisebased stochastic policy variant of PPO. Previous research highlighted the importance of temporal correlation in action noise
for effective exploration in off-policy reinforcement learning.
Building on this, we investigate whether correlated noise can
also enhance exploration in on-policy methods like PPO. We
discovered that correlated noise for action selection improves
learning performance and outperforms the currently popular
uncorrelated white noise approach in on-policy methods. Unlike off-policy learning, where pink noise was found to be
highly effective, we found that a colored noise, intermediate
between white and pink, performed best for on-policy learning in PPO. We examined the impact of varying the amount
of data collected for each update by modifying the number
of parallel simulation environments for data collection and
observed that with a larger number of parallel environments,
more strongly correlated noise is beneficial. Due to the significant impact and ease of implementation, we recommend
switching to correlated noise as the default noise source in
PPO.

1

Introduction

Exploration plays a crucial role in deep reinforcement learning, particularly in continuous action space applications like
robotics, where the number of states and actions is infinite. In
the continuous action space setting, exploration is typically
achieved by introducing variability around the mean action
proposed by the policy. For instance, deterministic off-policy
algorithms such as TD3 (Fujimoto, van Hoof, and Meger
2018) and DDPG (Lillicrap et al. 2016) use additive action
noise, while stochastic off-policy algorithms such as SAC
(Haarnoja et al. 2019) and MPO (Abdolmaleki et al. 2018)
employ a Gaussian distributed policy to sample actions and
induce variation. On-policy algorithms such as TRPO (Schulman et al. 2015) and PPO (Schulman et al. 2017) follow a
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Supplementary Appendix: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.11091
Code: https://github.com/jkbjh/cn-ppo-paper-code

12466

Contributions In this paper, we extend previous work on
correlated action-noise in off-policy RL to on-policy RL
methods: we introduce and empirically evaluate a modification to PPO incorporating temporally correlated colored
noise into the stochastic policy’s distribution. Utilizing the
re-parameterization trick, we maintain a Gaussian distributed
behavior while injecting correlated noise instead of uncorrelated noise. This introduces a new hyperparameter, the noise
color β parameterizing the correlated noise.
Our experiments demonstrate that adopting colored noise
enhances performance in the majority of tested environments.
In the off-policy setting Eberhard et al. (2023) found a common noise color, pink noise, to significantly outperform the
previous default of uncorrelated white noise. Surprisingly we
found the optimal common colored noise for improved performance — for the on-policy method PPO — to lie between
white and pink noise (β = 0.5, see Sec. 2). Furthermore, we
investigated the effect of update dataset size on the efficacy

