The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Video Event Extraction with Multi-View Interaction Knowledge Distillation
Kaiwen Wei1 , Runyan Du2 * , Li Jin2† , Jian Liu3 , Jianhua Yin4 , Linhao Zhang2 ,
Jintao Liu2 , Nayu Liu5 , Jingyuan Zhang6 , Zhi Guo2
1

College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao, China
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tiangong University, Tianjin, China
6
Kuaishou Technology Inc., Beijing, China
{weikaiwen1997, durunyan08, jinlimails}@gmail.com
Abstract
Video event extraction (VEE) aims to extract key events and
generate the event arguments for their semantic roles from
the video. Despite promising results have been achieved by
existing methods, they still lack an elaborate learning strategy to adequately consider: (1) inter-object interaction, which
reflects the relation between objects; (2) inter-modality interaction, which aligns the features from text and video modality. In this paper, we propose a Multi-view Interaction with
knowledge Distillation (MID) framework to solve the above
problems with the Knowledge Distillation (KD) mechanism.
Specifically, we propose the self-Relational KD (self-RKD)
to enhance the inter-object interaction, where the relation between objects is measured by distance metric, and the highlevel relational knowledge from the deeper layer is taken as
the guidance for boosting the shallow layer in the video encoder. Meanwhile, to improve the inter-modality interaction,
the Layer-to-layer KD (LKD) is proposed, which integrates
additional cross-modal supervisions (i.e., the results of crossattention) with the textual supervising signal for training each
transformer decoder layer. Extensive experiments show that
without any additional parameters, MID achieves the stateof-the-art performance compared to other strong methods in
VEE.

Figure 1: An example of showing the importance of interobject interaction in VEE. The relative position between
“man” and “horse” is similar in the above two scenes, but
the two videos show very different events.

have been proposed for the VEE task. For instance, Sadhu
et al. (2021) utilized the strong SlowFast model (Feichtenhofer et al. 2019) as the backbone for video feature extraction. Yang et al. (2022) explicitly model the states of objects/entities and their relations in the video. Despite their
promising results, existing methods still have shortcomings
in considering the interactions from the following views:
(1) Inter-object interaction: It reflects the relationship
between objects, which is critical to predict verbs and arguments. As shown in Fig. 1, although “horse” and “man”
objects exist in both videos, the final event type is totally different because of the way they interact with each other. The
existing method (Yang et al. 2022) only models the interobject interaction with a union calculation following a simple pooling method, which drops most information.
(2) Inter-modality interaction: It exists in the the transformer decoder during the decoding process for generating
the event arguments, where the output from each transformer
layer reflect the interaction between text and video modalities.
Existing methods (Sadhu et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2022)
only take the desired output text as the ground truth label
for training, and implicitly optimize the cross-modal align-

Introduction
Video event extraction (VEE) is a challenging multi-modal
task in video understanding, which aims to identify the
events and generate their arguments in a video. For example,
as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a), a VEE system should classify the
drag event and generate <Arg0, the horse>, <Arg1, the man
wearing the healmet> as its event arguments. VEE could
drive many downstream applications, such as video description (Krishna et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2019),
visual content retrieval (Miech et al. 2019), and knowledge
graphs (Mahon et al. 2020).
Recently, many methods (Feichtenhofer et al. 2019; Xiao,
Tighe, and Modolo 2022; Yang et al. 2022; Xiao et al. 2022)
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19224

