The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Motif-Aware Riemannian Graph Neural Network with
Generative-Contrastive Learning
Li Sun1 , Zhenhao Huang1 , Zixi Wang1 , Feiyang Wang2 , Hao Peng3∗ , Philip Yu4
1
North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China
3
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, IL 60607, USA
ccesunli@ncepu.edu.cn; penghao@buaa.edu.cn; psyu@uic.edu
2

Abstract
Graphs are typical non-Euclidean data of complex structures.
In recent years, Riemannian graph representation learning has
emerged as an exciting alternative to Euclidean ones. However, Riemannian methods are still in an early stage: most of
them present a single curvature (radius) regardless of structural complexity, suffer from numerical instability due to the
exponential/logarithmic map, and lack the ability to capture
motif regularity. In light of the issues above, we propose
the problem of Motif-aware Riemannian Graph Representation Learning, seeking a numerically stable encoder to capture motif regularity in a diverse-curvature manifold without labels. To this end, we present a novel Motif-aware Riemannian model with Generative-Contrastive learning (MotifRGC), which conducts a minmax game in Riemannian
manifold in a self-supervised manner. First, we propose a new
type of Riemannian GCN (D-GCN), in which we construct
a diverse-curvature manifold by a product layer with the diversified factor, and replace the exponential/logarithmic map
by a stable kernel layer. Second, we introduce a motif-aware
Riemannian generative-contrastive learning to capture motif
regularity in the constructed manifold and learn motif-aware
node representation without external labels. Empirical results
show the superiority of MofitRGC.

HGCN (NIPS19)
κ-GCN (ICML20)
LGCN (WWW21)
H-to-H (CVPR21)
SelfMG (AAAI22)
fullyH (ACL22)
Q-GCN (NIPS22)
Ours

Curvature
Diversity
one κ < 0
one κ ∈ R
one κ < 0
one κ < 0
one κ ∈ R
one κ < 0
1
one radius |κ|
diverse

Motif
Regularity

Numerical
Stability

X
X
X

X

Table 1: Comparison of proposed MotifRGC and previous
Riemannian methods. (κ denotes the curvature.)

The first issue is on the curvature diversity. Most of prior
Riemannian methods (Zhang et al. 2021; Dai et al. 2021;
Liu, Nickel, and Kiela 2019) study graphs in the manifold of
a single curvature (radius), which is only suitable for a special type of graphs. For example, a negative curvature manifold (hyperbolic space) is well aligned with hierarchical and
tree-like graphs (Nickel and Kiela 2017; Chen et al. 2022).
A positive curvature manifold (hyperspherical space) is suitable for cyclical graphs (Bachmann, Bécigneul, and Ganea
2020). Note that, the product of single-curvature manifolds
(Gu et al. 2019) still presents a single curvature as a whole.
The recent quotient manifold (Xiong et al. 2022b) also relies on a single curvature radius. There is a lack of curvature
diversity to model the complex structures of real graphs.
The second issue is on the numerical stability. Riemannian methods (Chami et al. 2019; Liu, Nickel, and Kiela
2019; Xiong et al. 2022b) typically model graphs with the
couple of exponential and logarithmic maps. Unfortunately,
exponential/logarithmic map is not strictly numerical-stable,
and the issue of “Not a Number” (NaN) may occur in practice without numerical processing or careful hyperparameter tuning (Chen et al. 2022; Yu and Sa 2023). Recently,
Dai et al. (2021) introduce the Lorentz-type operators to replace exponential/logarithmic map, but pose difficulty in optimization as side effect. Thus, the issue of numerical stability largely remains open.
The third issue is on the motif regularity. The motifs
(small substructures such as triangles and cliques) are the
fundamental building blocks of a graph, and they play an
essential role in modeling and understanding social or bio-

Introduction
Graphs are the natural descriptions of real systems, ranging from social networks and recommender systems to
chemistry and bioinformatics. Graph representation learning shows fundamental importance in a variety of learning
tasks, such as node classification and link prediction (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Velickovic et al. 2018). Euclidean space has been the workhorse of graph representation learning for decades (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena
2014; Kipf and Welling 2017). It is not until recently that
Riemannian spaces have emerged as an exciting alternative
(Shimizu, Mukuta, and Harada 2021; Li et al. 2022a; Topping et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2023b), since they generally
better match the geometry of the graph than the Euclidean
counterpart (Petersen 2016; Krioukov et al. 2010). While
achieving encouraging performance, Riemannian graph representation learning is still in its early stages. There are several important issues largely remaining open.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9044

