The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

RLfOLD: Reinforcement Learning from Online Demonstrations
in Urban Autonomous Driving
Daniel Coelho 1, 2 , Miguel Oliveira 1, 2 , Vı́tor Santos 1, 2
1

2

Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal
Intelligent System Associate Laboratory (LASI), Institute of Electronics and Informatics Engineering of Aveiro (IEETA),
University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal
{danielsilveiracoelho, mriem, vitor}@ua.pt
Abstract

and acquiring safe and efficient behaviors (Liu et al. 2022).
However, agents trained with IL may face challenges in generalizing to unseen scenarios, as they tend to be biased towards the demonstrated behavior (Chekroun et al. 2021). On
the other hand, RL involves learning through trial and error,
where an agent explores the environment, receives feedback
in the form of rewards, and gradually improves its policy.
A key advantage of RL is its ability to handle unknown situations. However, RL often requires extensive exploration
and can be sample-inefficient, requiring significant time and
resources for learning (Van Hasselt, Guez, and Silver 2016).
Reinforcement Learning from Demonstrations (RLfD)
seeks to harness the benefits of both IL and RL by integrating expert demonstrations into the RL training. Thus offering a significant boost in sample efficiency compared to
standalone RL (Liu et al. 2022). This enhancement stems
from the ability of expert demonstrations to minimize the
required interactions with the environment for learning the
desired behavior. Moreover, the expert demonstrations provide valuable insights that enable the agent to explore the
state-action space more effectively (Goecks et al. 2019).
Despite the recent advancements of RLfD (Nair et al.
2018; Hansen et al. 2022), the conventional approach of
collecting a demonstration dataset has inherent limitations.
One major drawback is the requirement of pre-collecting a
dataset, which can be a laborious and time-consuming process. In complex domains, like urban AD, it can be particularly arduous to ensure the dataset’s diversity and coverage of various scenarios and edge cases. Moreover, the reliance on an offline dataset introduces a potential distribution
gap between the demonstrations and the training environment, hindering the agent’s ability to generalize effectively
(Chekroun et al. 2021). One known strategy to mitigate
the distribution mismatch between offline datasets and the
training environment is the DAGGER algorithm (Ross, Gordon, and Bagnell 2011), which iteratively refines policies
by aggregating training data across a mixture of expert and
learner-induced distributions. However, while DAGGER reduces the distribution gap, it does not inherently account for
the uncertainty in decision-making, which can be critical in
dynamic and unpredictable urban driving scenarios.
To tackle the limitations of traditional RLfD, we introduce
RLfOLD. RLfOLD utilizes online demonstrations, collected
using privileged information from the simulator, which cir-

Reinforcement Learning from Demonstrations (RLfD) has
emerged as an effective method by fusing expert demonstrations into Reinforcement Learning (RL) training, harnessing the strengths of both Imitation Learning (IL) and RL.
However, existing algorithms rely on offline demonstrations,
which can introduce a distribution gap between the demonstrations and the actual training environment, limiting their
performance. In this paper, we propose a novel approach,
Reinforcement Learning from Online Demonstrations (RLfOLD), that leverages online demonstrations to address this
limitation, ensuring the agent learns from relevant and up-todate scenarios, thus effectively bridging the distribution gap.
Unlike conventional policy networks used in typical actorcritic algorithms, RLfOLD introduces a policy network that
outputs two standard deviations: one for exploration and the
other for IL training. This novel design allows the agent to
adapt to varying levels of uncertainty inherent in both RL and
IL. Furthermore, we introduce an exploration process guided
by an online expert, incorporating an uncertainty-based technique. Our experiments on the CARLA NoCrash benchmark
demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of RLfOLD. Notably, even with a significantly smaller encoder and a singlecamera setup, RLfOLD surpasses state-of-the-art methods
in this evaluation. These results, achieved with limited resources, highlight RLfOLD as a highly promising solution
for real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Urban Autonomous Driving (AD) is considered a challenging and critical task. In order to navigate effectively, agents
must analyze a highly intricate environment and continuously make real-time decisions to adhere to driving regulations, while also interacting with other dynamic agents like
drivers and pedestrians (Coelho and Oliveira 2022). Consequently, researchers have been redirecting their efforts from
rule-based methods to end-to-end learning approaches.
End-to-end learning methods can be divided into two categories: Imitation Learning (IL) and Reinforcement Learning (RL). In IL, an agent learns a task by imitating an expert’s behavior, leveraging expert demonstrations as ground
truth. The main advantage of IL is the ability to rapidly learn
from expert knowledge, accelerating the learning process
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11660

