The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Mitigating Label Noise through Data Ambiguation
Julian Lienen1 , Eyke Hüllermeier2,3
Department of Computer Science, Paderborn University
2
Institute of Informatics, LMU Munich
3
Munich Center for Machine Learning
julian.lienen@upb.de, eyke@lmu.de

0.8

1.0

Fraction of Examples

Abstract

0.8

0.6

Label noise poses an important challenge in machine learning, especially in deep learning, in which large models with
high expressive power dominate the field. Models of that kind
are prone to memorizing incorrect labels, thereby harming
generalization performance. Many methods have been proposed to address this problem, including robust loss functions and more complex label correction approaches. Robust
loss functions are appealing due to their simplicity, but typically lack flexibility, while label correction usually adds substantial complexity to the training setup. In this paper, we
suggest to address the shortcomings of both methodologies
by “ambiguating” the target information, adding additional,
complementary candidate labels in case the learner is not
sufficiently convinced of the observed training label. More
precisely, we leverage the framework of so-called superset
learning to construct set-valued targets based on a confidence
threshold, which deliver imprecise yet more reliable beliefs
about the ground-truth, effectively helping the learner to suppress the memorization effect. In an extensive empirical evaluation, our method demonstrates favorable learning behavior
on synthetic and real-world noise, confirming the effectiveness in detecting and correcting erroneous training labels.

Correct
Memorized
Incorrect (others)

0.4
0.2
0.0

Avg. Probability Magnitude

1

0.6
Training Label (clean)
Training Label (noisy)
True Label (noisy)
Other Label (noisy)

0.4
0.2

0

50
Epoch

100

0.0

0

50
Epoch

100

Figure 1: For ResNet34 models trained with cross-entropy
on CIFAR-10 with 25 % of corrupted instances (averaged
over five seeds), the left plot shows the fractions of examples
that are correctly classified, whose corrupted training label
are memorized, or incorrectly classified with a label other
than the ground-truth or training label, confirming the result
in (Liu et al. 2020). The right plot illustrates the predicted
probability magnitudes for clean or noisy labels.

of noise by remodeling the labels. However, this comes at
the cost of an increased model complexity, typically reducing the efficiency of the training (Liu et al. 2020).
The training dynamics of models have been thoroughly
studied in the aforementioned regime (Chang, LearnedMiller, and McCallum 2017; Arazo et al. 2019; Liu et al.
2020), and two learning phases have been identified: Initially, as shown in the left plot of Fig. 1, the model shows reasonable learning behavior by establishing correct relations
between features and targets, classifying even mislabeled instances mostly correctly. In this phase, the loss minimization
is dominated by the clean fraction, such that the mislabeling does not affect the learning too much. However, after
the clean labels are fit sufficiently well, the learner starts to
concentrate predominantly on the mislabeled part, thereby
overfitting incorrect labels and harming generalization.
A closer look at the probabilistic predictions in the first
learning phase reveals that erroneous training labels can be
distinguished from the underlying ground-truth classes by
the learner’s confidence. The right plot in Fig. 1 illustrates
that models are typically not incentivized to optimize for
predicting the corrupted training labels in the first epochs,
but infer relatively high probability scores for the (unknown)
ground-truth class, at least on average. Evidently, the model

Introduction
Label noise refers to the presence of incorrect or unreliable
annotations in the training data, which can negatively impact
the generalization performance of learning methods. Dealing with label noise constitutes a major challenge for the
application of machine learning methods to real-world applications, which often exhibit noisy annotations in the form
of erroneous labels or distorted sensor values. This is no less
a concern for large models in the regime of deep learning,
which have become increasingly popular due to their high
expressive power, and which are not immune to the harming nature of label noise either. Existing methods addressing
this issue include off-the-shelf robust loss functions, e.g., as
proposed by Wang et al. (2019), and label correction, for example by means of replacing labels assumed to be corrupted
(Wu et al. 2021). While the former appeals with its effortless
integration into classical supervised learning setups, methods of the latter kind allow for a more effective suppression
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13799

