The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DiG-In-GNN: Discriminative Feature Guided GNN-Based Fraud Detector against
Inconsistencies in Multi-Relation Fraud Graph
Jinghui Zhang, Zhengjia Xu* , Dingyang Lv* , Zhan Shi, Dian Shen, Jiahui Jin, Fang Dong
Southeast University
{jhzhang, xzhengjia, dylv, shizhan, dshen, jjin, fdong}@seu.edu.cn

Rating Star to
Products
within a week

Abstract
Fraud detection on multi-relation graphs aims to identify
fraudsters in graphs. Graph Neural Network (GNN) models
leverage graph structures to pass messages from neighbors
to the target nodes, thereby enriching the representations of
those target nodes. However, feature and structural inconsistency in the graph, owing to fraudsters’ camouflage behaviors, diminish the suspiciousness of fraud nodes which hinders the effectiveness of GNN-based models. In this work,
we propose DiG-In-GNN, Discriminative Feature Guided
GNN against Inconsistency, to dig into graphs for fraudsters. Specifically, we use multi-scale contrastive learning
from the perspective of the neighborhood subgraph where
the target node is located to generate guidance nodes to cope
with the feature inconsistency. Then, guided by the guidance
nodes, we conduct fine-grained neighbor selection through
reinforcement learning for each neighbor node to precisely
filter nodes that can enhance the message passing and therefore alleviate structural inconsistency. Finally, the two modules are integrated together to obtain discriminable representations of the nodes. Experiments on three fraud detection
datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method
DiG-In-GNN, which obtains up to 20.73% improvement over
previous state-of-the-art methods. Our code can be found at
https://github.com/GraphBerry/DiG-In-GNN.

User 1

Linguistically
similar users

Products

User 2
User 3
User 4
(Fraudster)

Linguistically
similar users

(a) a scenario of e-commerce

U-P-U
U-S-U
U-V-U
(b) a multi-relation graph

Figure 1: (a) Users rate and review products, it can be
modeled by a multi-relation graph. (b) In the multi-relation
graph, there are three edge types: U-P-U connects users reviewing at least one product; U-S-U connects users having
at least one identical star rating within a week; U-V-U connects linguistically similar users.

sistencies in the graph, limiting the effectiveness of fraud
detectors (Dou et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021). In Figure 1, a
multi-relation graph depicts a realistic e-commerce scenario
where users give rating stars and reviews on e-commerce
websites. In this scenario, fraudsters typically use two sophisticated camouflage strategies to avoid detection. Feature
camouflage is the first, where fraudsters adopt the linguistic
style of benign reviews, and may even leverage deep language generation models to make their fraudulent reviews
appear more authentic. This leads to a mismatch between
node feature patterns and their labels, termed feature inconsistency. The second strategy, relation camouflage, involves
fraudsters employing various identities to post reviews on
various items. They cleverly connect themselves within the
graph to benign users, creating various camouflage connections. In this way, fraudsters hide among benign nodes, resulting in structural inconsistency.
To identify suspicious entities in such multi-relation
graphs, graph-based algorithms are typically used. In recent
years, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have garnered significant attention as an effective approach to perform deep
learning on graph data, and have become the de facto solution for graph-based fraud detection (Ma et al. 2021). GNNs
employ a message passing mechanism to recursively aggregate neighbor information into each node’s representation.

Introduction
The proliferation of the Internet has led to an increase in
fraudulent activities in various real-world scenarios (Jiang,
Cui, and Faloutsos 2016), such as review fraud, fake accounts, and malicious websites. In recent years, graph-based
fraud detection techniques have garnered considerable research interest. By modeling real-world entities as nodes and
their interactions as edges, fraudulent entities can be identified through abundant graph information. For instance, the
classification of fraud comments in a Review-User-Review
graph (Dou et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2023), the detection of
fake accounts in an Account graph (Yuan et al. 2019; Liu
et al. 2018), filtering out malicious websites with a URL
graph (Zhang et al. 2019; Tan et al. 2020).
However, fraudsters often resort to various techniques to
camouflage and alleviate suspicion, causing various incon* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9323

