The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Computation-Aware Shape Loss Function for Point Cloud Completion
Shunran Zhang1, 2 * , Xiubo Zhang1 * , Tsz Nam Chan3 , Shenghui Zhang1 , Leong Hou U1†
1
University of Macau
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Shenzhen University
{yc27968, mc25209}@um.edu.mo, edisonchan@szu.edu.cn, {yc07428, ryanlhu}@um.edu.mo
2

Abstract

for many state-of-the-art algorithms and systems in modern
sensing and navigation applications.
However, one challenge of using LiDAR-generated spatial point clouds is that they may fail to fully depict the surface of the observed object due to occlusions or the inability to arrange sensors at sufficient angles. As a result, the
captured point cloud data may only provide a partial representation of the object. This limitation can have a significant
impact on subsequent point cloud processing tasks, such as
point cloud registration, object detection, and classification.

Learning-based point cloud completion tasks have shown
potential in various critical tasks, such as object detection,
classification, and registration. However, accurately and efficiently quantifying the shape error between the predicted
point clouds generated by networks and the ground truth remains challenging. While EMD-based loss functions excel in
shape detail and perceived density distribution, their approach
can only yield results with significant discrepancies from the
actual EMD within a tolerable training time. To address these
challenges, we first propose an initial price based on an auction algorithm, reducing the number of iterations required for
the algorithm while ensuring the correctness of the assignment results. We then introduce a method to compute the initial price through a successive shortest path and the Euclidean
information between its nodes. Finally, we adopt a series of
optimization strategies to speed up the algorithm and offer an
EMD approximation scheme for point cloud problems that
balances time loss and computational accuracy based on point
cloud data characteristics. Our experimental results confirm
that our algorithm achieves the smallest gap with the real
EMD within an acceptable time range and yields the best results in end-to-end training.

Input Point
S'

Encoder

Decoder

Learning-based Model
s1

s2

s3

s4

s5

…

sn

t1

t2

t3

t4

t5

…

tn

T

Ground Truth

Distance for Unordered Points
Shape Error

S

Predicted
Point Cloud

Figure 1: The illustration of point cloud completion task.

Introduction
Numerous studies (Achlioptas et al. 2018; Yuan et al.
2018; Sarmad, Lee, and Kim 2019) have successfully showcased the efficacy of employing learning-based techniques
for 3D shape completion, offering significant advantages for
subsequent processing tasks. As depicted in Figure 1, dealing with irregular and unordered point clouds introduces
substantial challenges in this context. Accurately quantifying the distance between point cloud pairs, accounting for
shape discrepancies in the output loss of a deep learning
model concerning the ground truth, and facilitating the update of the model parameters pose significant hurdles due to
the inherent complexities of point cloud data.
Fan et al. (Fan, Su, and Guibas 2017) introduced two
permutation invariant functions, namely Chamfer Distance
(CD) and Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD). While CD is efficient, it does not penalize uneven distributions, leading to
shape detail fluctuations (Achlioptas et al. 2018). EMD is
more sensitive to shape detail and density distribution differences (Liu et al. 2020), which can achieve more accurate comparison between a pair of point clouds. However,

Understanding the environment is a fundamental necessity
across various domains, ranging from autonomous driving
and intelligent transportation systems to robotics and mixed
reality applications. The success of these cutting-edge technologies heavily depends on the capacity of a system to
interact with and accurately perceive its surroundings. In
this regard, point clouds have emerged as a pivotal element
in environmental sensing, and their generation can be facilitated by diverse technologies like LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) (Reutebuch, Andersen, and McGaughey
2005). Point clouds provide a rich representation of the environment and can capture detailed geometrical and spatial
information, making them invaluable in various tasks related
to perception, localization, mapping, and object recognition.
As a result, point cloud data has become a fundamental input
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7287

