The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Adversarial Attacks on Federated-Learned Adaptive Bitrate Algorithms
Rui-Xiao Zhang* †1 , Tianchi Huang* ‡2
1

The University of Hong Kong 2 Sony Group Corporation
zrxhku@hku.hk, tianchi.huang@sony.com

Abstract

through mobile edge computing (MEC) offers a promising
solution (Nishio and Yonetani 2019). FL protects privacy
by collaboratively generating a global model without sharing training data, while MEC devices support training and
adapting DRL models to network conditions. Recent studies
have confirmed FL’s superior performance in ABR-related
tasks(Zhang et al. 2020a).
However, FL, despite its advantages, is still vulnerable to
adversarial attacks due to its distributed nature. Malicious
participants have an easier time launching attacks since the
training process occurs on local devices – they can directly
influence model parameters. Additionally, FL attacks are
more challenging to counter when secure aggregation is
used (Bonawitz et al. 2017), which prevents the server from
inspecting each client’s update.
In this paper, we take advantage of the limited visibility of
the model updating process and investigate the possibility of
attacking the ABR model via the FL-based training framework. Our objective is to cause the collaboratively trained
ABR model to perform poorly on a “target client” while preserving good overall performance on other benign clients
(referred to as a ”targeted attack” (Chen et al. 2017; Gu,
Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2017)). It’s quite challenging since
i) the objective function is “compelling” with contradictory
components, which requires the attacker to “automatically”
distinguish when to perform well or launch an attack; ii) the
inaccessibility of environmental data from all clients makes
it difficult to ensure model performance on benign clients;
iii) our approach differs from existing work that only focuses on supervised learning (Sun et al. 2019; Bagdasaryan
et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020), as we consider adversarial attacks for DRL, which introduces the unique challenge of dynamic state distribution. Precisely attacking the target client
becomes even more challenging when its environment dynamics overlap with the benign clients.
We propose MAFL (Malicious ABR model based on
Federated Learning), a novel approach for attacking the
DRL-based ABR algorithm through FL framework. MAFL
solves the problem in a two-stage manner, i.e., model generation stage and model replacement stage. In the first stage,
MAFL builds up the single malicious model which achieves
the attack objective (i.e., degrade the performance of the target client and works well in benign clients); while in the
second stage, MAFL backdoors the global model through

Learning-based adaptive bitrate (ABR) algorithms have revolutionized video streaming solutions. With the growing demand for data privacy and the rapid development of mobile
devices, federated learning (FL) has emerged as a popular
training method for neural ABR algorithms in both academia
and industry. However, we have discovered that FL-based
ABR models are vulnerable to model-poisoning attacks as
local updates remain unseen during global aggregation. In response, we propose MAFL (Malicious ABR model based on
Federated Learning) to prove that backdooring the learningbased ABR model via FL is practical. Instead of attacking
the global policy, MAFL only targets a single “target client”.
Moreover, the unique challenges brought by deep reinforcement learning (DRL) make the attack even more challenging.
To address these challenges, MAFL is designed with a twostage attacking mechanism. Using two representative attack
cases with real-world traces, we show that MAFL significantly degrades the model performance on the target client
(i.e., increasing rebuffering penalty by 2× and 5×) with a
minimal negative impact on benign clients.

Introduction
Video streaming plays a dominant part in the networking field. As reported in SANDVINE (Sandvine 2022),
videos have taken over 65.93% traffic in the first half of
2022. Providing better Quality of Experience (QoE) has received significant attention in both academia and industry,
and there have been extensive work focusing on scheduling (Zhang et al. 2022), modeling (Huang et al. 2023; Zhang
et al. 2020b), and transmission (Wang et al. 2023). Among
them, adaptive video streaming, along with adaptive bitrate
(ABR) has become the basic solution. Existing ABR algorithms use deep reinforcement learning (DRL) with network
traces from viewers, but face challenges with privacy leakage and outdated models. Additionally, transferring massive raw data to a centralized server leads to high costs and
delays. To address these concerns, federated learning (FL)
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
This work was conducted independently before joining Sony
Group Corporation.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

419

