The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Visual Redundancy Removal for Composite Images: A Benchmark Dataset and a
Multi-Visual-Effects Driven Incremental Method
Miaohui Wang* , Rong Zhang, Lirong Huang, Yanshan Li
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060
wang.miaohui@gmail.com, zhangrong2208@gmail.com, hlr.rongger@gmail.com, lys@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Composite images (CIs) typically combine various elements
from different scenes, views, and styles, which are a very important information carrier in the era of mixed media such
as virtual reality, mixed reality, metaverse, etc. However, the
complexity of CI content presents a significant challenge for
subsequent visual perception modeling and compression. In
addition, the lack of benchmark CI databases also hinders the
use of recent advanced data-driven methods. To address these
challenges, we first establish one of the earliest visual redundancy prediction (VRP) databases for CIs. Moreover, we propose a multi-visual effect (MVE)-driven incremental learning
method that combines the strengths of hand-crafted and datadriven approaches to achieve more accurate VRP modeling.
Specifically, we design special incremental rules to learn the
visual knowledge flow of MVE. To effectively capture the associated features of MVE, we further develop a three-stage
incremental learning approach for VRP based on an encoderdecoder network. Extensive experimental results validate the
superiority of the proposed method in terms of subjective, objective, and compression experiments.

Figure 1: Applications of composite images (CIs) and illustration of the multi-visual effect (MVE)-driven visual redundancy prediction (mveVRP). A three-stage manner incremental learning approach is designed to model visual redundancy, which can be applied to perceptual compression, watermarking enhancement, and quality assessment.

Consequently, the transmission of large CIs has placed a
heavy burden on communication and storage systems. Visual redundancy prediction (VRP) is an effective approach
to improve the compression efficiency without compromising the quality of experience (QoE) (Qin et al. 2023; Yin
et al. 2022). As depicted in Figure 1, by eliminating visual
redundancy, compression efficiency can be greatly improved
(Bai et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022), thereby ensuring QoE
and low latency for multimedia applications.
Existing VRP methods (Jiang et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2021) generally rely on the visual effects of the human visual system (HVS) to simulate the perception process. These
methods are based on either hand-crafted or deep-learned
paradigms, and they predict visual redundancy through linear and nonlinear superposition or deep feature fusion (Shen
et al. 2021). However, there are several challenges in accurately modeling the complex HVS perception process in
VRP. These challenges include representing various visual
effects, understanding their correlation, and determining fusion mechanisms. Both knowledge-driven and data-driven
methods have their limitations in VRP: 1) Knowledgedriven. This type of method is able to consider multiple
visual effects related to perceptual redundancy simultaneously. However, the simple superposition and fusion of dif-

Introduction
Nowadays, multimedia applications such as live streaming,
video conferencing, virtual reality, and AI generation (Kang
et al. 2023) have greatly prompted an explosive growth in
the creation of composite images (CIs) (Xie et al. 2023b).
A typical CI is composed of various elements from different scenes, views, and styles, resulting in complex content
structures. In addition, multimedia visual services are expected to provide high-quality visual experiences while minimizing data transmission delays (Huang et al. 2023), which
presents a more challenging task for compressing CI data.
* This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 61701310, 62372306 and
62076165, in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province under Grants 2022A1515011245, 2020KCXTD004
and 2022GXJK367, and in part by the Natural Science Foundation
of Shenzhen City under Grant JCYJ20220809160139001. (Corresponding author: Miaohui Wang)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10189

