The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CMDA: Cross-Modal and Domain Adversarial Adaptation
for LiDAR-Based 3D Object Detection
Gyusam Chang1 * , Wonseok Roh1 * , Sujin Jang2 , Dongwook Lee2 , Daehyun Ji2 ,
Gyeongrok Oh1 , Jinsun Park3 , Jinkyu Kim4 † , Sangpil Kim1†
1

Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Republic of Korea
2
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), Republic of Korea
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Pusan National University, Republic of Korea
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University, Republic of Korea
{gsjang95, paulroh, dhrudfhr98, jinkyukim, spk7}@korea.ac.kr,
{s.steve.jang, dw12.lee, derek.ji}@samsung.com, jspark@pusan.ac.kr
Abstract

due to inevitable domain shift issues (e.g., variations in point
density, weather conditions, and geographic locations).
To address these challenges, recent approaches in LiDARbased Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) primarily
focus on effectively leveraging precise geometric information from point clouds (Wang et al. 2021) or self-training
strategies with pseudo-labels (Yang et al. 2021). However,
these methods face challenges in learning domain-agnostic
contextual information (e.g., colors, textures, and object appearances) relying solely on geometric LiDAR features.
To supplement the absence of semantic information, we
introduce Cross-Modality Knowledge Interaction (CMKI),
leveraging the contextual details presented in RGB images
to guide the learning of rich semantic cues in LiDARbased geometric features. Recent studies on multi-modal
fusion (Zhang, Chen, and Huang 2022; Bai et al. 2022;
Liu et al. 2023) demonstrate that properly complementing
3D point clouds and 2D images with each other enhances
overall detection accuracy. Due to the individualized multimodality sensor configuration for each dataset, these methods are still limited in the UDA task. To tackle these issues, we advocate for leveraging optimal joint representation, Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV), facilitating the transfer of
deep semantic clues from 2D image-based features to 3D
LiDAR-based features. Here, the context details of each image pixel can serve as discriminative semantic priors for improved 3DOD performance. Finally, CMKI enables producing highly informative features by softly associating multimodal cues. We empirically found that our image-assisted
approach effectively overcomes domain shift. To the best of
our knowledge, we are the first to adopt the usefulness of
multi-modality for UDA on 3DOD.
In addition to utilizing the fine detail of 2D images,
we focus on smartly extending the standard self-training
approach (Yang et al. 2021) to adapt to the previously
unseen target data distributions. We propose self-trainingbased learning strategy with Cross-Domain Adversarial Network (CDAN) to relieve the distinct representational gap
between source and target data. To ensure an explicit connection across domains, we first introduce the point cloud
mix-up technique, which swaps points sector with random

Recent LiDAR-based 3D Object Detection (3DOD) methods show promising results, but they often do not generalize well to target domains outside the source (or training) data distribution. To reduce such domain gaps and thus
to make 3DOD models more generalizable, we introduce a
novel unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) method, called
CMDA, which (i) leverages visual semantic cues from an
image modality (i.e., camera images) as an effective semantic bridge to close the domain gap in the cross-modal Bird’s
Eye View (BEV) representations. Further, (ii) we also introduce a self-training-based learning strategy, wherein a model
is adversarially trained to generate domain-invariant features,
which disrupt the discrimination of whether a feature instance
comes from a source or an unseen target domain. Overall,
our CMDA framework guides the 3DOD model to generate
highly informative and domain-adaptive features for novel
data distributions. In our extensive experiments with largescale benchmarks, such as nuScenes, Waymo, and KITTI,
those mentioned above provide significant performance gains
for UDA tasks, achieving state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
3D Object Detection (3DOD) is one of the fundamental computer vision problems and plays a crucial role in
real-world applications such as autonomous driving and
robotics (Qian, Lai, and Li 2022; Zhu et al. 2014). Recent studies (Shi, Wang, and Li 2019; Wang et al. 2022;
Roh et al. 2022) have achieved significant advancements in
3DOD with large-scale benchmarks and precise 3D vision
sensors. Especially, LiDAR-based approaches (Liang et al.
2022; Liu et al. 2023; Yin, Zhou, and Krahenbuhl 2021)
have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance by leveraging precise 3D geometric information (i.e., object location
and size) from point clouds. However, despite these breakthroughs, most 3DOD works face significant performance
drops when tested on previously unseen data distributions
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

972

