The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Complementary Knowledge Distillation for Robust and Privacy-Preserving
Model Serving in Vertical Federated Learning
Dashan Gao1,2 , Sheng Wan1,2 , Lixin Fan3 , Xin Yao1 , Qiang Yang2
1

Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China
3
Webank AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
dgaoaa@cse.ust.hk, swanae@cse.ust.hk, lixinfan@webank.com, xiny@sustech.edu.cn, qyang@cse.ust.hk
2

Abstract

Prediction

Vertical Federated Learning (VFL) enables an active party
with labeled data to enhance model performance (utility) by
collaborating with multiple passive parties that possess auxiliary features corresponding to the same sample identifiers
(IDs). Model serving in VFL is vital for real-world, delaysensitive applications, and it faces two major challenges:
1) robustness against arbitrarily-aligned data and stragglers;
and 2) privacy protection, ensuring minimal label leakage to
passive parties. Existing methods fail to transfer knowledge
among parties to improve robustness in a privacy-preserving
way. In this paper, we introduce a privacy-preserving knowledge transfer framework, Complementary Knowledge Distillation (CKD), designed to enhance the robustness and privacy of multi-party VFL systems. Specifically, we formulate
a Complementary Label Coding (CLC) objective to encode
only complementary label information of the active party’s
local model for passive parties to learn. Then, CKD selectively transfers the CLC-encoded complementary knowledge
1) from the passive parties to the active party, and 2) among
the passive parties themselves. Experimental results on four
real-world datasets demonstrate that CKD outperforms existing approaches in terms of robustness against arbitrarilyaligned data, while also minimizing label privacy leakage.

Challgenges
Robustness: 1. unaligned data. 2. straggler
Privacy:
3. label privacy leakage
2 >100ms
3

Embedding

Null

1

No

...

Yes

Sample ID
Active party

Passive party

Passive party

Figure 1: Illustration of model serving in VFL system and
the two major challenges: 1) robustness against unaligned
data and stragglers, and 2) label privacy protection.

crux lies in ensuring that passive parties cannot infer labels
from their own bottom model outputs (Fu et al. 2022).
The robustness and privacy of VFL model serving have
recently emerged as a critical focal point of research.
Robustness: In two-party VFL, knowledge distillation
(KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) has been employed
to enhance robustness against unaligned data (Li et al. 2023;
Ren, Yang, and Chen 2022), as shown in Figure 2(a). Based
on alignment results, samples are routed to appropriate models (local or VFL model) for inference. However, such
”alignment → routing → inference” paradigm lacks scalability in multi-party settings, given the exponential complexity of candidate models. Meanwhile, the recent partywise dropout technique (Sun et al. 2023) does not effectively
transfer knowledge, leading to inferior utility on unaligned
data. Privacy: Existing KD-based methods expose redundant label information to passive parties to transfer knowledge, compromising label privacy. While cryptographic protections (Ren, Yang, and Chen 2022) have been proposed,
they introduce significant overheads and often fail to meet
stringent efficiency requirements. Recent inference-phase
protection techniques (Sun et al. 2023; Zou, Liu, and Zhang
2023) tend to reduce the label knowledge learned by passive parties, neglecting to preserve active party’s unlearned
information for passive parties to learn and transfer. In sum-

Introduction
Vertical Federated Learning (VFL) (Yang et al. 2019)
enables global model building among organizations with
datasets sharing overlapping samples but differing in features. In VFL, an active party with labeled data aligns samples with passive parties holding auxiliary features. Model
serving (Wang et al. 2023), the process of inferring a trained
machine learning model in a production environment to receive input data and respond with predictions in real time, is
particularly challenging in the context of VFL.
Figure 1 illustrates the concept of model serving in a
VFL system, highlighting two major challenges: robustness
against arbitrarily-aligned data, and label privacy protection.
Robustness primarily involves: 1) maintaining high utility
amidst arbitrary feature alignments across multiple parties;
and 2) ensuring timely, accurate predictions even with delays from straggling passive parties. For label privacy, the
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19832

