The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Rethinking Robustness of Model Attributions
Sandesh Kamath1 , Sankalp Mittal1 , Amit Deshpande2 , Vineeth N Balasubramanian1
1

Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad
2
Microsoft Research, Bengaluru
sandesh.kamath@gmail.com

Abstract

detailed surveys on these methods. Recently, the growing
numbers of attribution methods has led to a concerted focus on studying the robustness of attributions to input perturbations to handle potential security hazards (Chen et al.
2019; Sarkar, Sarkar, and Balasubramanian 2021; Wang and
Kong 2022; Agarwal et al. 2022). One could view these efforts as akin to adversarial robustness that focuses on defending against attacks on model predictions, whereas attributional robustness focuses on defending against attacks on
model explanations. For example, an explanation for a predicted credit card failure cannot change significantly for a
small human-imperceptible change in input features, or the
saliency maps explaining the COVID risk prediction from
a chest X-ray should not change significantly with a minor
human-imperceptible change in the image.
DNN-based models are known to have a vulnerability
to imperceptible adversarial perturbations (Biggio et al.
2013; Szegedy et al. 2014; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2015), which make them misclassify input images. Adversarial training (Madry et al. 2018) is widely understood to
provide a reasonable degree of robustness to such perturbation attacks. While adversarial robustness has received significant attention over the last few years (Ozdag 2018; Silva
and Najafirad 2020), the need for stable and robust attributions, corresponding explanation methods and their awareness are still in their early stages at this time (Ghorbani,
Abid, and Zou 2019; Chen et al. 2019; Slack et al. 2020;
Sarkar, Sarkar, and Balasubramanian 2021; Lakkaraju, Arsov, and Bastani 2020; Slack et al. 2021a,b). In an early
effort, (Ghorbani, Abid, and Zou 2019) provided a method
to construct a small imperceptible perturbation which when
added to an input x results in a change in attribution map
of the original map to that of the perturbed image. This is
measured through top-k intersection, Spearman’s rank-order
correlation or Kendall’s rank-order correlation between the
two attribution maps (of original and perturbed images). See
Figure 1 for an example. Defenses proposed against such attributional attacks (Chen et al. 2019; Singh et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2020; Sarkar, Sarkar, and Balasubramanian 2021) also
leverage the same metrics to evaluate the robustness of attribution methods.
While these efforts have showcased the need and importance of studying the robustness of attribution methods, we
note in this work that the metrics used, and hence the meth-

For machine learning models to be reliable and trustworthy,
their decisions must be interpretable. As these models find increasing use in safety-critical applications, it is important that
not just the model predictions but also their explanations (as
feature attributions) be robust to small human-imperceptible
input perturbations. Recent works have shown that many attribution methods are fragile and have proposed improvements in either these methods or the model training. We observe two main causes for fragile attributions: first, the existing metrics of robustness (e.g., top-k intersection) overpenalize even reasonable local shifts in attribution, thereby making
random perturbations to appear as a strong attack, and second, the attribution can be concentrated in a small region even
when there are multiple important parts in an image. To rectify this, we propose simple ways to strengthen existing metrics and attribution methods that incorporate locality of pixels
in robustness metrics and diversity of pixel locations in attributions. Towards the role of model training in attributional
robustness, we empirically observe that adversarially trained
models have more robust attributions on smaller datasets,
however, this advantage disappears in larger datasets. Code
is made available at https://github.com/ksandeshk/LENS.

1

Introduction

The explosive increase in the use of deep neural network
(DNN)-based models for applications across domains has
resulted in a very strong need to find ways to interpret the decisions made by these models (Gade et al. 2020; Tang et al.
2021; Yap et al. 2021; Oviedo et al. 2022; Oh and Jeong
2020). Interpretability is an important aspect of responsible and trustworthy AI, and model explanation methods
(also known as attribution methods) are an important aspect
of the community’s efforts towards explaining and debugging real-world AI/ML systems. Attribution methods (Zeiler
et al. 2010; Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014; Bach
et al. 2015; Selvaraju et al. 2017; Chattopadhyay et al. 2018;
Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017; Shrikumar et al. 2016;
Smilkov et al. 2017; Lundberg and Lee 2017) attempt to
explain the decisions made by DNN models through inputoutput attributions or saliency maps. (Lipton 2018; Samek
et al. 2019; Fan et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2020) present
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2688

