The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Evidential and Class Separable Open Set Object Detection
Ruofan Wang1 , Rui-Wei Zhao2 , Xiaobo Zhang3 * , Rui Feng1,2,3,4 *
1

School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University, Shanghai
2
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai
3
Children’s Hospital of Fudan University, National Children’s Medical Center, Shanghai, China
4
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
21212010034@m.fudan.edu.cn, rwzhao@fudan.edu.cn, zhangxiaobo0307@163.com, fengrui@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract
Detecting in open-world scenarios poses a formidable challenge for models intended for real-world deployment. The
advanced closed set object detectors achieve impressive performance under the closed set setting, but often produce overconfident misprediction on unknown objects due to the lack
of supervision. In this paper, we propose a novel Evidential Object Detector (EOD) to formulate the Open Set Object
Detection (OSOD) problem from the perspective of Evidential Deep Learning (EDL) theory, which quantifies classification uncertainty by placing the Dirichlet Prior over the categorical distribution parameters. The task-specific customized
evidential framework, equipped with meticulously designed
model architecture and loss function, effectively bridges the
gap between EDL theory and detection tasks. Moreover, we
utilize contrastive learning as an implicit means of evidential regularization and to encourage the class separation in
the latent space. Alongside, we innovatively model the background uncertainty to further improve the unknown discovery
ability. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate the outperformance of the proposed method over existing ones.

(a) Faster R-CNN

(b) EOD (Ours)

(c) Faster R-CNN

(d) EOD (Ours)

Figure 1: Compared to Faster R-CNN, which may misclassify unknown as incorrect known (a) or completely ignore
unknown (c) in the open set problem, the proposed EOD
can well locate and identify the unknown objects (b, d).

Introduction
Thanks to the powerful learning representation ability, deep
neural networks have achieved great success in object detection (Girshick 2015; Ren et al. 2015; Redmon et al. 2016)
under the closed world assumption, i.e., training and testing
sets follow the same class distribution. However, in the deployment of real-world detector, unknown objects that were
not seen during training (even in the background) may appear. Although object detector is trained to reject objects
of no interest as background, deep neural networks tend to
misclassify some unknown objects into one of the known
classes since they have not been presented during training
(Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune 2015; Dhamija et al. 2020).
This could lead to disastrous results in safety-critical applications such as autopilot. Therefore, the concept of Open Set
Object Detection (OSOD) is proposed, which aims to detect
the objects of interest correctly and recognize the unknown
objects during testing.

Compared with previous OSOD works (Miller et al. 2018;
Du et al. 2022; Han et al. 2022), e.g., simply augmenting the
K-way classifier to the K+1-way classifier based on comparatively simple and heuristic decision rules, thus causing
to suffer from mistaking high probability scores for model
certainty. Our method draws inspiration from the Evidential
Deep Learning (EDL) theory and estimates epistemic uncertainty from the perspective of model confidence, which has
better mathematical basis and interpretability. However, as
the EDL theory was initially validated in relatively simple
experiments, its direct application to real-world tasks often
faces challenges of sensitivity to initialization and approximation difficulties. To address these problems, we further
introduce task-specific customized modifications for OSOD.
In this paper, we propose Evidential Object Detector
(EOD) for the OSOD task. More specifically, we estimate

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5572

