The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Responsibility in Extensive Form Games
Qi Shi*
University of Southampton
qi.shi@soton.ac.uk

Abstract

b

Two different forms of responsibility, counterfactual and
seeing-to-it, have been extensively discussed in philosophy
and AI in the context of a single agent or multiple agents acting simultaneously. Although the generalisation of counterfactual responsibility to a setting where multiple agents act in
some order is relatively straightforward, the same cannot be
said about seeing-to-it responsibility. Two versions of seeingto-it modality applicable to such settings have been proposed
in the literature. Neither of them perfectly captures the intuition of responsibility. This paper proposes a definition of
seeing-to-it responsibility for such settings that amalgamate
the two modalities.
This paper shows that the newly proposed notion of responsibility and counterfactual responsibility are not definable
through each other and studies the responsibility gap for these
two forms of responsibility. It shows that although these two
forms of responsibility are not enough to ascribe responsibility in each possible situation, this gap does not exist if higherorder responsibility is taken into account.

1

g
E

D

G

F
g

w1

F
w2

b
u1

G
w3

(a) Montana situation

D
u2

E
u3

(b) Switched action order

Figure 1: Executive clemency procedure
Section 9). With time, the law, the name of the board, and the
way it grants approval changed (Montana Board of Pardons
and Parole 2023), but the Board maintained the ability to
constrain the Governor’s power to grant executive clemency.
The executive clemency procedure that existed in Montana
by 2014 is captured by the extensive form game depicted in
Figure 1a. First, the Board (agent b) can either deny (action
D) the clemency or recommend (E) it. If the Board recommends, then the Governor (agent g) might grant (G) or not
grant (F) the executive clemency.
The executive clemency procedure in Montana is a typical multiagent system where the final outcome is determined
by the decisions of all agents in the system. Such multiagent
systems widely exist in both human and machine activities
and have been studied from multiple perspectives. Responsibility is one of the topics in those studies. Although there
is no commonly acknowledged definition of responsibility,
we usually have some vague intuition about the responsibility of an agent when we think of the agent being praiseworthy for a positive result or blameworthy for a negative
result, especially if the agent is undertaking moral or legal
obligations. It is also usually assumed that responsibility is
connected to free will of an agent to act. Note that, an agent
can act to prevent or to achieve a certain result. This gives
rise to two forms of responsibility commonly considered in
the literature: counterfactual responsibility and responsibility for seeing to it, respectively. In this paper, I study these
two forms of responsibility in the multiagent systems that
can be modelled as extensive form games.
The rest of this paper is divided into four major sections.
In Section 2, I give a review of the two forms of responsibil-

Introduction

In the United States, if a person is found guilty by a state
court and all appeals within the state justice system have
been exhausted, the person can petition the Governor of the
state for executive clemency. The US Supreme Court once
described the clemency by the executive branch of the government as the “fail safe” of the criminal justice system (US
Supreme Court 1993). This was the case with Barry Beach,
who was found guilty of killing a 17-year-old high school
valedictorian Kim Nees and sentenced in 1984 to 100 years
imprisonment without parole (Associated Press 2015). In
2014, after a court appeal, a retrial, and a negative decision
by the Montana Supreme Court, Barry’s attorney filed a petition for executive clemency.
To prevent corruption and favouritism by the Governor,
many states in the US have boards that must support the decision before the Governor can grant executive clemency. In
Montana, such a board has existed since the original 1889
Constitution (Constitution Convention 1889, Article VII,
* The full version of this paper includes an appendix, which can
be found at arXiv:2312.07637.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19920

