The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

VLM2Scene: Self-Supervised Image-Text-LiDAR Learning with Foundation
Models for Autonomous Driving Scene Understanding
Guibiao Liao1, 2 , Jiankun Li3 , Xiaoqing Ye3 *
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Baidu Inc., China
gbliao269@gmail.com, lijiankun02@baidu.com, yxq@whu.edu.cn
Abstract

cality within real-world autonomous driving scenarios. Consequently, self-supervised learning for 3D scene understanding, which harnesses the power of unlabeled data and defines
the pretext task as semantic segmentation, arises as a promising and meaningful realm of study (Fei et al. 2023).
Vision and language foundation models (VLMs), including Contrastive Vision-Language Pre-training (CLIP)
(Radford et al. 2021), Bootstrapping Language-Image Pretraining (BLIP-2) (Li et al. 2023), and Segment Anything
(SAM) (Kirillov et al. 2023), have recently gained significant attention. CLIP, utilizing large-scale web-crawled
image-text data, constructs powerful vision-language embeddings that show promising performance in zero-shot image classification. Effectively training on extensive imagetext web data through image-text contrastive and matching
losses, BLIP2 showcases an impressive ability for zero-shot
image-to-text generation. In addition, SAM trains on a vast
amount of image data (11 million images, 1 billion masks),
revealing robust zero-shot segmentation capabilities. While
these methods exhibit remarkable zero-shot image understanding abilities within open-world scenarios, their direct
suitability for 3D tasks poses a challenge due to the scarcity
of massive 3D annotations and large-scale 3D-text data.
To address this challenge, the recent effort (Chen et al.
2023) explores the utilization of CLIP for self-supervised
3D scene understanding. It begins by employing template
text prompts alongside the annotation-free segmentation
model MaskCLIP (Zhou, Loy, and Dai 2022) to generate
image pixel predictions. Subsequently, a pixel-point contrastive learning scheme is proposed to transfer these image
pixel predictions to 3D space through projection. Despite
these advancements, some limitations may hinder its suitability for comprehensive 3D scene understanding. First, the
mentioned textual embeddings are directly extracted from
the dataset’s categories (e.g., car, bus, pedestrian, etc.) using brief templates (e.g., a photo of a {}, there is a {}
in the scene, etc.). Yet, these text descriptions may fail to
provide a fine-grained depiction of the scene. Second, in
outdoor autonomous driving scenes, the inherent sparsity
within LiDAR-generated point clouds is a pronounced characteristic. This inherent sparsity magnifies the difficulty of
employing the point-level contrastive learning method, because this mode of point-level learning might be susceptible
to challenges arising from restricted receptive fields, limited

Vision and language foundation models (VLMs) have showcased impressive capabilities in 2D scene understanding.
However, their latent potential in elevating the understanding of 3D autonomous driving scenes remains untapped. In
this paper, we propose VLM2Scene, which exploits the potential of VLMs to enhance 3D self-supervised representation
learning through our proposed image-text-LiDAR contrastive
learning strategy. Specifically, in the realm of autonomous
driving scenes, the inherent sparsity of LiDAR point clouds
poses a notable challenge for point-level contrastive learning methods. This method often grapples with limitations
tied to a restricted receptive field and the presence of noisy
points. To tackle this challenge, our approach emphasizes
region-level learning, leveraging regional masks without semantics derived from the vision foundation model. This approach capitalizes on valuable contextual information to enhance the learning of point cloud representations. First, we
introduce Region Caption Prompts to generate fine-grained
language descriptions for the corresponding regions, utilizing the language foundation model. These region prompts
then facilitate the establishment of positive and negative textpoint pairs within the contrastive loss framework. Second,
we propose a Region Semantic Concordance Regularization,
which involves a semantic-filtered region learning and a region semantic assignment strategy. The former aims to filter the false negative samples based on the semantic distance, and the latter mitigates potential inaccuracies in pixel
semantics, thereby enhancing overall semantic consistency.
Extensive experiments on representative autonomous driving
datasets demonstrate that our self-supervised method significantly outperforms other counterparts. Codes are available at
https://github.com/gbliao/VLM2Scene.

Introduction
3D scene understanding from LiDAR point clouds is a crucial perception component in autonomous driving. Most existing deep learning-based methods have yielded noteworthy progress with massive labeled data in this area (Qi et al.
2017a,b; Guo et al. 2020; Gao et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2021;
Hou et al. 2022). However, the manual annotation of point
clouds is a resource-intensive endeavor, impeding its practi* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3351

