The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

M ULTI S CRIPT: Multimodal Script Learning for Supporting Open Domain
Everyday Tasks
Jingyuan Qi* , Minqian Liu* , Ying Shen, Zhiyang Xu, Lifu Huang
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech
jingyq1@vt.edu, minqianliu@vt.edu, yings@vt.edu, zhiyangx@vt.edu, lifuh@vt.edu

Abstract

Multimodal Script Generation
Input:
Task Goal: How to Make Toast in an Oven?
Video:

Automatically generating scripts (i.e. sequences of key steps
described in text) from video demonstrations and reasoning about the subsequent steps are crucial to the modern
AI virtual assistants to guide humans to complete everyday
tasks, especially unfamiliar ones. However, current methods
for generative script learning heavily rely on well-structured
preceding steps described in text and/or images or are limited to a certain domain, resulting in a disparity with realworld user scenarios. To address these limitations, we present
a new benchmark challenge – M ULTI S CRIPT, with two new
tasks on task-oriented multimodal script learning: (1) multimodal script generation, and (2) subsequent step prediction.
For both tasks, the input consists of a target task name and
a video illustrating what has been done to complete the target task, and the expected output is (1) a sequence of structured step descriptions in text based on the demonstration
video, and (2) a single text description for the subsequent
step, respectively. Built from WikiHow, M ULTI S CRIPT covers multimodal scripts in videos and text descriptions for over
6,655 human everyday tasks across 19 diverse domains. To
establish baseline performance on M ULTI S CRIPT, we propose two knowledge-guided multimodal generative frameworks that incorporate the task-related knowledge prompted
from large language models such as Vicuna. Experimental
results show that our proposed approaches significantly improve over the competitive baselines.

Output:
Text Script:
1. Lay slices of bread on a baking sheet.
2. Move a rack to the middle of the oven and preheat the oven to 350 °F.
3. Put the sheet in the oven and heat the bread for 5 minutes.
4. Flip the toast over and heat it for 5 more minutes.
5. Take the toast out of the oven and butter it.

Subsequent Step Prediction
Input:
Task Goal: How to Make Toast in an Oven?
Video:

Output:
Subsequent Step:
1. Take the toast out of the oven and butter it.

Figure 1: An example from MultiScript. In order to generate
the subsequent step, the model needs to understand the key
steps from the video and gain sufficient instructional knowledge about “how to make toast in an oven”.

demonstrations, how to automatically acquire it and apply it
to support the wide variety of everyday tasks is still an open
research problem.
Existing studies on script learning can be categorized into
two task formats: (1) multiple-choice question answering,
which is to select the most plausible subsequent step from
a few candidates by giving a task goal and a preceding
step (Yang et al. 2021a). Though such candidate-based formulation is a reasonable way to test models’ capability of
selecting the correct steps, it is not feasible for real-world
scenarios as the candidates are usually not available. (2) generative script learning, which requires the model to generate
a future step given a task goal and a sequence of preceding steps described in text and/or images (Lyu, Zhang, and
Callison-Burch 2020; Wang et al. 2022b). While this setup
is more challenging, it assumes that the preceding steps are
well-structured, which is not realistic either for actual AI assistants as in many use cases, they can only access preceding

Introduction
Recently, there has been an increasing focus on studies
aimed at enabling AI assistants to better assist individuals
in completing daily tasks, and two crucial aspects of these
studies are to automatically: (1) provide a well-structured
script, i.e., a sequence of standardized steps, as guidance for
the target task; and (2) reason about the subsequent steps
based on what has been done by the individual. Taking the
task “Make a toast in an oven” as an example, a script for
achieving this task can be illustrated as: preheating the oven,
putting the sheet in the oven and heating the bread, flipping
the toast over, and taking the toast out of the oven and buttering it. While such script knowledge is typically authored
by humans based on their experience or by watching video
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18888

