The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CEDFlow: Latent Contour Enhancement for Dark Optical Flow Estimation
Fengyuan Zuo1 , Zhaolin Xiao1, 2 * , Haiyan Jin1, 2 , Haonan Su1, 2
1

2

Xi’an University of Technology, China, 710048
Shaanxi Key Laboratory for Network Computing and Security Technology, China, 710048
xiaozhaolin@xaut.edu.cn, jinhaiyan@xaut.edu.cn

Abstract
Accurately computing optical flow in low-contrast and noisy
dark images is challenging, especially when contour information is degraded or difficult to extract. This paper proposes
CEDFlow, a latent space contour enhancement for estimating
optical flow in dark environments. By leveraging spatial frequency feature decomposition, CEDFlow effectively encodes
local and global motion features. Importantly, we introduce
the 2nd-order Gaussian difference operation to select salient
contour features in the latent space precisely. It is specifically
designed for large-scale contour components essential in dark
optical flow estimation. Experimental results on the FCDN
and VBOF datasets demonstrate that CEDFlow outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in terms of the EPE index and produces more accurate and robust flow estimation. Our code is
available at: https://github.com/xautstuzfy.

Figure 1: Flow estimation in a challenging low-light condition. The proposed CEDFlow outperforms state-of-the-art
methods RAFT (Teed and Deng 2020), GMA (Jiang et al.
2021a) and AGFlow(Luo et al. 2022b).

Introduction
Optical flow estimation is a crucial technique of numerous
computer vision applications, such as autonomous driving
(Takumi et al. 2017), object tracking (Peng et al. 2020),
video enhancement (She and Xu 2022), etc.. Under a global
scene smoothness assumption, researchers propose to estimate the optical flow by solving a global energy minimization problem (Horn and Schunck 1981). If assuming the key
points have brightness constancy, the flow estimation can
also be formulated as a local energy minimization (Lucas,
Kanade et al. 1981). However, in dark illumination scenarios, these assumptions can be violated due to low contrast,
strong noise, and deterioration of brightness constancy. As
shown in Fig. 1, the contour information in low-contrast dark
images is degraded by intense noise, leading to ambiguous
contour matching. This presents a significant challenge in
achieving precise flow estimation in such conditions.
Pre-stage image feature enhancement has emerged as a
promising approach to address the challenge of Dark Optical
Flow Estimation (DOFE). While deep learning-based solutions have made remarkable progress in enhancing low-light
or dark images (Li et al. 2021), existing methods primarily
focus on improving visual perceptual quality by adjusting
brightness and contrast. Nevertheless, these enhancements

often introduce inconsistencies and blurry boundaries, providing limited benefits to specific vision tasks. In contrast,
task-specific feature-level enhancement has shown effectiveness in applications like face detection (Wang et al. 2022),
image deblurring (Zhou, Li, and Change Loy 2022), and image or video super-resolution (Chan et al. 2021). This paper
proposes a novel feature enhancement framework explicitly
designed for DOFE, distinguishing it from existing low-light
image enhancements.
Large-scale background motion poses challenges for
DOFE, where both local and global features play crucial
roles. Global feature extraction usually requires a larger
receptive field size, which is computationally expensive.
Meanwhile, local feature extraction is scale-sensitive, especially in the presence of low-light noises. Therefore, choosing an appropriate receptive field size that enables the simultaneous extraction of local and global motion features is
difficult. Furthermore, large-scale salient contour semantics
are very important for precise DOFE, but accurately picking the salient contour semantics from a low-light image is
also challenging. To address these issues, we propose CEDFlow, an efficient latent contour encoding and enhancement
in DOFE. Our contributions can be summarized as follows.

* Corresponding author:Zhaolin Xiao, Haiyan Jin
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• A spatial frequency decomposition for local and
global motion encoding. We propose encoding
frequency-based features through local and global

7909

