The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Review-Enhanced Hierarchical Contrastive Learning for Recommendation
Ke Wang1,2 , Yanmin Zhu1 * , Tianzi Zang3 , Chunyang Wang1 , Mengyuan Jing1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
{onecall,yzhu,wangchy,jingmy}@sjtu.edu.cn, zangtianzi@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract

While my rating would be 4 or 5 stars if I was 9

𝑢1 to 12 , it is 2 star as an adult fantasy reader…

Designed to establish potential relations and distill high-order
representations, graph-based recommendation systems continue to reveal promising results by jointly modeling ratings
and reviews. However, existing studies capture simple review
relations, failing to (1) completely explore hidden connections between users (or items), (2) filter out redundant information derived from reviews, and (3) model the behavioral
association between rating and review interactions. To address these challenges, we propose a review-enhanced hierarchical contrastive learning, namely ReHCL. First, ReHCL
constructs topic and semantic graphs to fully mine review relations from different views. Moreover, a cross-view graph
contrastive learning is used to achieve enhancement of node
representations and extract useful review knowledge. Meanwhile, we design a neighbor-based positive sampling to capture the graph-structured similarity between topic and semantic views, further performing efficient contrast and reducing
redundant noise. Next, we propose a cross-modal contrastive
learning to match the rating and review representations, by
exploring the association between ratings and reviews. Lastly,
these two contrastive learning modes form a hierarchical contrastive learning task, which is applied to enhance the final
recommendation task. Extensive experiments verify the superiority of ReHCL compared with state-of-the-arts.

Classical sci-fi at it's best. I have read tons of sci-

𝑢2 fi and fantasy over last 20 years…

This is truly an amazing work, and is a very well-

𝑢3 known story…

LDA
Topic
similarity
(a) Topic Graph

Of course, this is classic. The book is of course

𝑢4 amazing…

This book is about love …and you appreciate

𝑢5 wonderful writing, you will love this book…

This is an old fashioned, but passionate love story.

𝑢6 I can't believe how much I LOVED this book…

BERT
Semantic
similarity
(b) Semantic Graph

Figure 1: Six review comments written by different users in
the Book domain. Two types of graphs are constructed from
topic and semantic views via LDA and BERT, respectively.

focus on studying topical links (Wang et al. 2023) or semantic similarity (Liu et al. 2020c) between users (or items)
derived from reviews, alleviating the sparsity of user-item
interactions. Despite exhibiting satisfactory performance,
these technics suffer from the following limitations.
• Incomplete Relation Extraction. Existing GRS either
extract the key topic factors at word level to discover
highly interpretable textual cues, or capture implicit semantics at review level to search for contextual clues
between users (or items), while ignoring that usergenerated reviews carry both topic and semantic properties (Chin et al. 2018). In fact, the critical topics and
whole contexts jointly affect latent relations from different views, especially when users expound local topics
and holistic contexts simultaneously.
• Redundant Review Information. Although review texts
can provide detailed descriptions of users’ interests,
sometimes they also contain too much redundant or repeated information, thus introducing unnecessary noise
while extracting review knowledge (Wang, Cai, and
Wang 2022). However, existing GRS are often not specifically designed to consider how to extract useful review
knowledge and make the obtained review representations
more effective (Liu et al. 2020a).
• Consistent Interaction Behavior. Different behavioral

Introduction
Recommender systems have become an indispensable part
of e-commerce services (e.g., Amazon and Yelp). They often model rating interactions to capture user preferences and
item characteristics (Do et al. 2022; Wang, Cai, and Wang
2022). However, numerical ratings are often sparse, and only
modeling single interactions fails to learn enriched representations of understanding users’ intents. Therefore, recent efforts (Liu et al. 2019, 2020c) adopt reviews to alleviate the
sparsity. Review-based methods absorb additional knowledge to enhance generated representations by modeling freeform textual reviews (Wang et al. 2022).
Recently, Graph-based Recommender Systems (GRS)
(Gao et al. 2020; Shuai et al. 2022; Ren et al. 2022) capture
potential relations existing in reviews, and leverage graph
neural networks to learn node representations. Several works
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9107

