The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Count What You Want: Exemplar Identification and
Few-Shot Counting of Human Actions in the Wild
Yifeng Huang1 * , Duc Duy Nguyen2 * , Lam Nguyen2 , Cuong Pham2,3 , Minh Hoai1,2
1

Stony Brook University, NY, USA
2
VinAI, Hanoi, Vietnam
3
Posts & Telecommunications Institute of Technology, Hanoi, Vietnam

Abstract

However, in many real-world scenarios, our interest might
not lie in counting actions from the dominant class. For instance, in sports training and skill evaluation, the objective
is often to detect specific and infrequent mistakes within the
prevalent data. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the action of interest may occur only briefly within the entire data sequence.
These factors pose significant challenges when applying existing methods effectively.
Confronting the challenge presented by real-world data,
which often contains undesired actions, we propose to develop an exemplar-based counting method, where an user
can provide exemplars of what they want to count. However, the development of such a method poses two significant
technical challenges. Firstly, devising a convenient exemplar provision scheme is nontrivial. Secondly, once we have
some exemplars, the question remains how to effectively
leverage them. In this paper, we address both of these challenges to develop a novel exemplar-based counting method.
For the first challenge, we propose an intuitive and nonintrusive approach for specifying exemplars using vocal
sounds. The exemplars are conveniently provided by verbally counting out loud “one,” “two,” “three” at the onset
of the counting process as shown in Fig. 1. Each utterance
corresponds to one repetition. To accurately detect the positions of these counting utterances in the audio sequence,
we develop an efficient algorithm that solves a constrained
optimization problem with the two constraints on the temporal ordering and the temporal distance between the identified
positions. Once the positions of the counting utterances are
identified, we extract the exemplars from these locations.
For the second challenge, we propose a novel model that
jointly processes the exemplars with the whole data sequence as shown in Fig. 1. More concretely, we first generate per-window embeddings for both the exemplars and
the whole data sequence. Subsequently, we compute a similarity map between the exemplar and data sequence embeddings, using Soft-DTW (Cuturi and Blondel 2017) and correlation measures. This similarity map serves as the basis for
generating a sequence of exemplar-infused embeddings for
the data sequence. The initial embedding sequence and the
exemplar-infused embedding sequence are then fed into a
density estimation module for moment-by-moment density
estimation, from which the final count is obtained by summing the density values.

This paper addresses the task of counting human actions of
interest using sensor data from wearable devices. We propose
a novel exemplar-based framework, allowing users to provide
exemplars of the actions they want to count by vocalizing predefined sounds “one”, “two”, and “three”. Our method first
localizes temporal positions of these utterances from the audio sequence. These positions serve as the basis for identifying exemplars representing the action class of interest. A similarity map is then computed between the exemplars and the
entire sensor data sequence, which is further fed into a density estimation module to generate a sequence of estimated
density values. Summing these density values provides the
final count. To develop and evaluate our approach, we introduce a diverse and realistic dataset consisting of real-world
data from 37 subjects and 50 action categories, encompassing
both sensor and audio data. The experiments on this dataset
demonstrate the viability of the proposed method in counting
instances of actions from new classes and subjects that were
not part of the training data. On average, the discrepancy between the predicted count and the ground truth value is 7.47,
significantly lower than the errors of the frequency-based and
transformer-based methods. Our project, code and dataset can
be found at https://github.com/cvlab-stonybrook/ExRAC.

Introduction
Counting human actions of interest using wearable devices is a crucial task with applications in health monitoring (e.g., Baghdadi et al. (2021)) and performance evaluation (e.g., O’Reilly et al. (2018)). However, the majority of
existing counters are often designed for a limited set of action categories, such as walking and a few other physical exercises. These class-specific counters (e.g., Genovese, Mannini, and Sabatini (2017)) are incapable of handling classes
beyond those they have been explicitly trained for. Consequently, relying solely on class-specific counters becomes
impractical and unscalable when dealing with a diverse set
of action categories. For scalability, a promising alternative
to class-specific counters is class-agnostic counters, capable
of tallying repetitions from any arbitrary class, as long as
this class represents the dominant activity within the sensor
data being analyzed.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10057

