The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Rethinking Two-Stage Referring Expression Comprehension: A Novel Grounding
and Segmentation Method Modulated by Point
Peizhi Zhao1 , Shiyi Zheng1 , Wenye Zhao1 , Dongsheng Xu1 , Pijian Li1 , Yi Cai3,4 , Qingbao Huang1,2 *
1

School of Electrical Engineering, Guangxi University, Nanning, China
Guangxi Key Laboratory of Multimedia Communications and Network Technology
3
School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
4
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot (SCUT), MOE of China
2212391086@st.gxu.edu.cn, qbhuang@gxu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Darrell 2016; Liu et al. 2017) separates the foreground and
background of the image based on the referring expression.
As a fundamental cross-modal task, REC focuses on mining
fine-grained visual and linguistic information, which facilitates numerous downstream studies, such as autonomous
driving (Kim et al. 2019), image captioning (Chen et al.
2020), and visual question answering (Wang et al. 2020b).
Depending on the solution process, existing REC methods
can be broadly divided into one-stage and two-stage frameworks as shown in Fig. 1. The one-stage approaches (Sun,
Xiao, and Lim 2021; Deng et al. 2021) treat the REC as an
object detection with online classification, i.e., using referring expressions to define categories instead of a predefined
set of categories. By extending object detectors, the conventional one-stage approaches (Sun, Xiao, and Lim 2021;
Huang et al. 2021) utilize multi-head networks to model
the comprehension (cross-modal confidence) and localization (instance detection) processes, cf., Fig. 1 (a). Inspired
by DETR (Carion et al. 2020), transformer-based approaches
(Deng et al. 2021) have recently received widespread attention as a flexible and effective framework. Leveraging
the attention mechanism, these methods achieve deep crossmodal alignment and query-based localization, cf., Fig. 1
(b). One-stage methods, regardless of grounding or segmentation, are multi-objective implicitly coupled processes, i.e.,
the ability to comprehend abstract concepts is measured indirectly by their performance in the physical visual space
(bounding box or segmentation mask). Although the onestage framework achieves significant improvement by sufficiently exploiting the visual and linguistic context, these
methods are limited by computation and data resources due
to their complex optimization.
Two-stage approaches (Yu et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2021)
attempt to build a matching and ranking process, which is
a more natural scheme. As shown in Fig. 1 (c), conventional two-stage approaches usually merge the results of a
pre-trained detector and cross-modal matching module at
region-level, and search for the most relevant region proposal via a ranking process. Unfortunately, the conventional
framework suffers from two inherent defects: 1) Sparse region proposals destroy the complete spatial context. 2) The
ground-truth used during training and the proposals predicted by the detector form a gap, which leads to a sub-

As a fundamental and challenging task in the vision and language domain, Referring Expression Comprehension (REC)
has shown impressive improvements recently. However, for a
complex task that couples the comprehension of abstract concepts and the localization of concrete instances, one-stage approaches are bottlenecked by computing and data resources.
To obtain a low-cost solution, the prevailing two-stage approaches decouple REC into localization (region proposal)
and comprehension (region-expression matching) at regionlevel, but the solution based on isolated regions cannot sufficiently utilize the context and is usually limited by the quality of proposals. Therefore, it is necessary to rebuild an efficient two-stage solution system. In this paper, we propose a
point-based two-stage framework for REC, in which the two
stages are redefined as point-based cross-modal comprehension and point-based instance localization. Specifically, we
reconstruct the raw bounding box and segmentation mask into
center and mass scores as soft ground-truth for measuring
point-level cross-modal correlations. With the soft groundtruth, REC can be approximated as a binary classification
problem, which fundamentally avoids the impact of isolated
regions on the optimization process. Remarkably, the consistent metrics between center and mass scores allow our system to directly optimize grounding and segmentation by utilizing the same architecture. Experiments on multiple benchmarks show the feasibility and potential of our point-based
paradigm. Our code available at https://github.com/VILANLab/PBREC-MT.

Introduction
Referring Expression Comprehension (REC) aims to predict a referred target in an image according to a corresponding expression, which can be regarded as a coupling of the
comprehension of visual and linguistic abstract concepts and
the localization of concrete visual instance. Depending on
the prediction paradigm, the comprehension of the referring
expression has two manifestations: 1) Referring Expression
Grounding (REG) (Yu et al. 2016; Mao et al. 2016), where
the referred instance is localized by a bounding box. 2) Referring Expression Segmentation (RES) (Hu, Rohrbach, and
* Corresponding author: Qingbao Huang
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7487

