The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On the Role of Server Momentum in Federated Learning
Jianhui Sun1 * , Xidong Wu2 * , Heng Huang3 , Aidong Zhang1
1
Computer Science, University of Virginia, VA, USA
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
3
Computer Science, University of Maryland College Park, MD, USA
js9gu@virginia.edu, xidong_wu@outlook.com, heng@umd.edu, aidong@virginia.edu
2

Abstract
Federated Averaging (FedAvg) is known to experience convergence issues when encountering significant clients system
heterogeneity and data heterogeneity. Server momentum has
been proposed as an effective mitigation. However, existing
server momentum works are restrictive in the momentum formulation, do not properly schedule hyperparameters and focus only on system homogeneous settings, which leaves the
role of server momentum still an under-explored problem. In
this paper, we propose a general framework for server momentum, that (a) covers a large class of momentum schemes
that are unexplored in federated learning (FL), (b) enables a
popular stagewise hyperparameter scheduler, (c) allows heterogeneous and asynchronous local computing. We provide
rigorous convergence analysis for the proposed framework.
To our best knowledge, this is the first work that thoroughly
analyzes the performances of server momentum with a hyperparameter scheduler and system heterogeneity. Extensive
experiments validate the effectiveness of our proposed framework. Due to page limit, we leave all proofs to the full version
https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.12670.

1

Introduction

Federated Averaging (FedAvg) (McMahan et al. 2017), which
runs multiple epochs of Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
locally in each client and then averages the local model updates once in a while on the server, is probably the most
popular algorithm to solve many federated learning (FL)
problems, mainly due to its low communication cost and
appealing convergence property.
Though it has seen great empirical success, vanilla FedAvg
experiences an unstable and slow convergence when encountering client drift, i.e., the local client models move away
from globally optimal models due to client heterogeneity
(Karimireddy et al. 2020). On the server side, FedAvg is in
spirit similar to an SGD with a constant learning rate one and
updates the global model relying only on the averaged model
update from the current round, thus extremely vulnerable to
client drift. Note that in non-FL settings, SGD in its vanilla
form has long been replaced by some momentum scheme
(e.g. heavy ball momentum (SHB) and Nesterov’s accelerated gradient (NAG)) in many tasks, as momentum schemes
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15164

achieve an impressive training time saving and generalization
performance boosting compared to competing optimizers
(Sutskever et al. 2013; Wilson et al. 2017), which promises a
great potential to apply momentum in FL settings as well. Incorporating server momentum essentially integrates historical
aggregates into the current update, which could conceptually
stabilize the global update against dramatic local drifts.
Though various efforts have been made to understand the
role of server momentum in FL, e.g. (Hsu, Qi, and Brown
2019; Rothchild et al. 2020), it is still largely an underexplored problem due to the following reasons:
(1) Lack of diversity in momentum schemes. Most existing
server momentum works only focus on SHB (e.g. FedAvgM
(Hsu, Qi, and Brown 2019)). It is unclear whether many momentum schemes that outperformed SHB in non-FL settings
can also perform better in FL, and there is no unified analysis
for momentum schemes other than SHB.
(2) No hyperparameter schedule. Properly scheduling hyperparameters is key to train deep models more efficiently
and an appropriate selection of server learning rate ηt is also
important in obtaining optimal convergence rate (Yang, Fang,
and Liu 2021). Existing works either still employ a constant
server learning rate one or consider a ηt schedule that is uncommonly used in practice, e.g., polynomially decay (i.e.,
ηt ∝ t1α ) (Khanduri et al. 2021). Moreover, it is known that
increasing momentum factor β is also a critical technique in
deep model training (Sutskever et al. 2013; Smith, Kindermans, and Le 2018), while to our best knowledge, there is no
prior work considering time-varying β in FL.
(3) Ignoring client system heterogeneity. Existing works
make unrealistic assumptions on system homogeneity and
client synchrony, e.g., clients are sampled uniformly at random, all participating clients synchronize at each round t, and
all clients run identical number of local epochs, none of which
holds in most cross device FL deployments (Kairouz et al.
2021). System heterogeneity (i.e., the violation of above assumptions), alongside with data heterogeneity, is also a main
source client drift (Karimireddy et al. 2020). Thus, ignoring
it would provide an incomplete understanding of the role of
server momentum.
To address the above limitations, we propose a novel formulation which we refer to as Federated General Momentum
(FedGM). FedGM includes the following hyperparameters,
learning rate η, momentum factor β, and instant discount fac-

