The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DiffRAW: Leveraging Diffusion Model to Generate DSLR-Comparable Perceptual
Quality sRGB from Smartphone RAW Images
Mingxin Yi1 , Kai Zhang1,3∗ , Pei Liu2 , Tanli Zuo2 , Jingduo Tian2 *
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
2
Media Technology Lab, Huawei, China
3
Research Institute of Tsinghua, Pearl River Delta
ymx21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhangkai@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, {liupei55,zuotanli,tianjingduo}@huawei.com
Abstract
Deriving DSLR-quality sRGB images from smartphone
RAW images has become a compelling challenge due to
discernible detail disparity, color mapping instability, and
spatial misalignment in RAW-sRGB data pairs. We present
DiffRAW, a novel method that incorporates the diffusion
model for the first time in learning RAW-to-sRGB mappings.
By leveraging the diffusion model, our approach effectively
learns the high-quality detail distribution of DSLR images,
thereby enhancing the details of output images. Simultaneously, we use the RAW image as a diffusion condition to
maintain image structure information such as contours and
textures. To mitigate the interference caused by the color and
spatial misalignment in training data pairs, we embed a colorposition preserving condition within DiffRAW, ensuring that
the output images do not exhibit color biases and pixel shift
issues. To accelerate the inference process of DiffRAW, we
designed the Domain Transform Diffusion Method, an efficient diffusion process with its corresponding reverse process. The Domain Transform Diffusion Method can reduce
the required inference steps for diffusion model-based image restoration/enhancement algorithms while enhancing the
quality of the generated images. Through evaluations on
the ZRR dataset, DiffRAW consistently demonstrates stateof-the-art performance across all perceptual quality metrics
(e.g., LPIPS, FID, MUSIQ), while achieving comparable results in PSNR and SSIM.

(a) RAW image (visualized)

(b) LiteISPNet

(c) DSLR sRGB image

(d) DiffRAW(ours)

Figure 1: Comparison of results on ZRR dataset. The images
generated by our method exhibit richer detail and higher
clarity, rivaling the visual quality of DSLR images.

Introduction
To extract natural sRGB images from RAW sensor images,
a meticulously engineered image signal processing (ISP)
pipeline is usually needed. This encompasses a range of
manually crafted low-level vision operations such as demosaicking, white balance, color correction, denoising, gamma
correction, among others (Ramanath et al. 2005).
With the rapid advancement of mobile photography,
smartphones have become the primary devices for photo
capture, owing to their portability. However, due to hardware constraints of smartphone cameras, such as the size of
the aperture and sensor, images captured by smartphones exhibit a significant quality gap compared to those taken with

professional DSLR cameras. To address this issue, the academic community has begun to explore end-to-end ISP algorithm research based on smartphone RAW to DSLR sRGB
data pairs (Ignatov, Van Gool, and Timofte 2020; Liang et al.
2021; Schwartz, Giryes, and Bronstein 2018).
To convert smartphone RAW images into DSLR-quality
sRGB images, there are three challenges: First, the inherent
hardware constraints of smartphones induce a loss of detail
in RAW images relative to DSLR sRGB counterparts, making the task of fully reconstructing DSLR sRGB imagery
from smartphone RAW an ill-posed problem. Second, the
collection of smartphone RAW images and DSLR sRGB images from different devices inevitably leads to a non-precise
alignment problem within the data pairs. Third, as the data
pairs are collected under varying environmental conditions

* Kai Zhang and Jingduo Tian are the corresponding authors of
this paper.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6711

