The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A General Search-Based Framework for Generating Textual Counterfactual
Explanations
Daniel Gilo, Shaul Markovitch
Department of Computer Science, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
{danielgilo,shaulm}@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract

Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell (2017) presented the
problem of generating counterfactual explanations for
black-box classifications as an optimization task, where a
counterfactual is an object that is classified differently from
the original object by the black-box classifier, but is similar to it according to a chosen distance metric. Various algorithms have been proposed to address different forms of
this optimization problem (e.g. Karimi et al. 2021; Mothilal,
Sharma, and Tan 2020; Galhotra, Pradhan, and Salimi 2021).
The vast majority of them generate the counterfactuals by
perturbing the input example in the feature space, yielding a
feature vector. Such an approach is not applicable, however,
in the textual domain, where objects are usually represented
as vectors in some latent embedding spaces which are not
comprehensible by humans.
To overcome these difficulties, several works have introduced an alternative approach that is based on generative models, yielding textual counterfactuals that are understandable by humans (e.g. Yang et al. 2021; Wu et al.
2021; Madaan et al. 2021). This approach, however, has
a fundamental limitation. Generative models are trained to
minimize a specific loss function that is tailored to fulfill
certain requirements for the generated texts. The challenge
arises when these requirements need to be altered or modified across different use cases. For instance, there might be
a shift from the need for visually similar counterfactuals to
semantically similar ones, or from a requirement for fast response times to situations where more time is available. To
accommodate such changes, generative methods often necessitate costly retraining processes to minimize a different
loss function whenever the settings are modified.
In this paper, we present TCE-S EARCH1 , a general
search-based framework for generating counterfactual explanation for text classification. Our new method can adapt
to a range of user-specified constraints and preferences with
no retraining required. These may include the distance function to be minimized, the required confidence threshold for
counterfactual classification, and time constraints on the
method’s operation.
Our method is based on modeling the counterfactual generation task as a search problem. The initial state is the classified text whose classification needs to be explained, and

One of the prominent methods for explaining the decision
of a machine-learning classifier is by a counterfactual example. Most current algorithms for generating such examples in
the textual domain are based on generative language models.
Generative models, however, are trained to minimize a specific loss function in order to fulfill certain requirements for
the generated texts. Any change in the requirements may necessitate costly retraining, thus potentially limiting their applicability. In this paper, we present a general search-based
framework for generating counterfactual explanations in the
textual domain. Our framework is model-agnostic, domainagnostic, anytime, and does not require retraining in order to
adapt to changes in the user requirements. We model the task
as a search problem in a space where the initial state is the
classified text, and the goal state is a text in a given target
class. Our framework includes domain-independent modification operators, but can also exploit domain-specific knowledge through specialized operators. The search algorithm attempts to find a text from the target class with minimal userspecified distance from the original classified object.

Introduction
An important feature of automatic decision making systems (DMS) is the ability to provide human-understandable
explanations for their decisions. Such explanations can be
helpful for ensuring bias-free operation, for debugging the
DMS, and for avoiding legal issues (Madaan et al. 2021;
Doshi-Velez et al. 2017).
Many DMS are based on models generated by machinelearning algorithms. Some of the algorithms are based on
interpretable models, such as decision trees. Others, however, are based on opaque models, such as deep neural networks or randoms forests, that, due to their complexity, are
practically being used as a black box, making explanation
generation a challenging task.
From research done in the social sciences (Miller 2019),
it is apparent that human-generated explanations are, often,
contrastive. People do not explain why an event occurred
per se, but rather explain why it had occurred compared to
some other event which did not occur. Such explanations are
called counterfactual explanations.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

18073

Textual Counterfactual Explanation using Search

